The ``big quake'' struck on Sept. 19, 1985, killing at least 6,000 people and destroying or badly damaging thousands of buildings. 

``I thought I was getting faint, but then realized it was a quake,'' said Francisco Garrido Flores, who was selling orange juice from a street stand. 

``This gave me a tremendous scare,'' said Araceli Guerrero, a 21-year-old receptionist with bank Banorte. 

The quake struck at 9:37 am (1537 GMT), lasted about two minutes and was followed by two small aftershocks. 

There were no immediate reports of casualties or major damage from the second powerful quake to hit Mexico in amnth. 

Most Mexican quakes occur along a long swath of coastline from the Guatemalan border to a point near Puerto Vallarta, where the Cocos Plate of the earth's crust is thrusting under the North American Plate. 

BC-Mexico-Quake, 3rd Ld-Writethru,0427|Quake Shakes Mexico City|Eds: UPDATES with quotes and color. 

Trading on Mexico's stock market came to a halt but resumed 40 minutes later. 

Her nerves, she said, were shook up by the Sept. 14 quake across central Mexico that killed five people and was felt in Mexico City. 

``It was horrible, horrible. 

The National Seismological Service said Monday's quake had a preliminary reading of 7.5, and that the epicenter was 3 miles (5 kilometers) off the Pacific Coast between the states of Colima and Jalisco. 

They jiggle like jelly when quake waves hit. 

ADDS byline and photo tag.|AP 

Most of the casualties were in Mexico City. 

At first, the quake's side-to-side motion sent people swaying. 

The tremor was also strongly felt in Michoacan, Jalisco and Puebla states. 

``I was a student in 1985 when the big quake hit us and I can't stand any kind of shaking now.'' 

MEXICO CITY (AP) A strong earthquake shook Mexico City and southern Mexico on Monday, causing high-rise buildings to sway and sending frightened people rushing into the streets. 

``It makes you worry that there could me more, a series.'' 

While Mexico City is often hundreds of miles (kilometers) away from the epicenters, it is vulnerable because much of it sits atop the muddy sediments of drained lake beds. 

I just went running down the stairwell,'' said Aurera Villa, a secretary in a high-rise office building on Reforma Avenue, the main thoroughfare. 

People in Mexico City bolted from their homes and workplaces, but traffic in the capital was normal. 

Photos MO101-103|By SARA SILVER|Associated Press Writer. 

