The airplane's right wing was found in a tree approximately 120 feet prior to the airplane main wreckage. 

Debris from the airplane and broken tree branches were scattered along a 035 degree magnetic heading between the tree and the airplane main wreckage. 

This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. 

At 2019, the aviation routine weather report (METAR) for Park Rapids, Minnesota, 19 miles north of the accident site, was ceiling 400 overcast, 3 miles visibility and mist, temperature 43 degrees Fahrenheit (F), dew point 42 degrees F, winds 310 degrees at 11 knots, and altimeter 30.03 inches of Mercury. 

The propeller showed no damage. 

The engine and cowling were bent and twisted up and right. 

The airplane's fuselage was resting against trees on the edge of a swampy area and ran upward 30 degrees to the ground. 

The pilot sustained minor injuries in the crash. 

The right horizontal stabilizer and elevator were bent and broken aft. 

According to FAA airman records, the pilot held a private pilot certificate with single engine land rating. 

A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane at the accident scene. 

The cross-country flight originated at Park Rapids, Minnesota, approximately 1940, and was en route to Pine River, Minnesota. 

An examination of the engine and other airplane systems revealed no anomalies. 

Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. 

The airplane main wreckage was found resting on the ground on its right side cabin. 

Any errors in this report will be corrected when the final report has been completed. 

On November 7, 2001, approximately 2000 central standard time, a Taylorcraft F19, N20002, piloted by a private pilot, was substantially damaged during cruise flight when it struck a tree and subsequently impacted into a wooded area 9 miles west of Backus, Minnesota. 

Flight control continuity was confirmed. 

The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan. 

