In a setback to one of the larger initial public offerings scheduled this year, Northwest Airlines Corp. is slashing the asking price of its 20 million-share IPO to between $13 and $14 a share from an earlier range of between $19 and $21 a share, people familiar with the deal said.
Wall Street individuals said potential investors' response to the original range was so poor that underwriters were forced to sharply lower their target.
They cited a weak overall stock market and a softening IPO market in the wake of the Federal Reserve Board's Feb. 4 decision to raise short-term interest rates.
Northwest, the nation's fourth-largest carrier, is attempting to return to the stock market for the first time since 1989, when it was taken private in a $3.6 billion leveraged buyout.
The move comes after the company last year reached an agreement with its pilot union, restructured its debt and posted two consecutive profitable quarters after years of struggling to remain solvent.
Still, the airline's sizable debt load and the sensitivity of highly leveraged carriers to economic downturns raised serious questions among analysts and money-managers about whether the offering would be successful.
Lehman Brothers is the issue's lead underwriter, with BT Securites, CS First Boston, Salomon Brothers and Smith Barney acting as comanagers.
Northwest declined to comment, citing SEC regulations prohibiting it from discussing the IPO.
The one-third cut in the price range also comes amid escalating price wars in the airline industry, weakening share prices of comparable carriers, and a continuing recession in Japan, one of Northwest's major markets.
Airline stocks are down around 15% since Northwest filed for its offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Jan. 18.
People on Wall Street said the deal will be priced, subject to clearance by the SEC, as early as tonight or early next week.
The stock will trade on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
"Even at the lower price range, we still would avoid this IPO," said Robert Natale, new-issues analyst for Standard & Poor's in New York.
"The lowering of the price confirms that there's a lot of risk," he said, adding: "Northwest is still going to be very financially leveraged."
Mr. Natale said the recent decline in the share prices of publicly traded competitors, such as Continental Airlines, would have forced the offering price down to at least $16 a share in any event.
Any price below $16 a share reflects weakness in the offering itself, he said.
Other analysts and money managers said that while the lowering of the price target will probably ensure the Northwest offering gets off the ground, the slashing of the target range can only heighten concern about the quality of the issue.
"It makes you think they've got a turkey.
I don't want it," said Gil Knight, managing director of ASB Capital Management Inc. in Washington, D.C.
"The lower price suggests that a lot of institutional backing is just not there" for the offer.
Mr. Knight, a veteran stock-picker in the volatile IPO market, said he's been leery of the deal from the outset.
"The airline industry is a dog-eat-dog business right now.
There's a lot of potential leverage out there that can go against you if the global economy turns down."
But Kathleen Smith, an analyst at Renaissance Capital Corp., an institutional IPO research firm in Greenwich, Conn., said the price cut should spark interest among investors.
"I think they can get the deal done," she said.
"There was interest before but not enough.
People are looking for a better price to play."
At the new offering price range, Northwest would be raising as much as $280 million before underwriting fees, as opposed to a maximum $420 million at the original range.
The company has said it plans to use the proceeds to reduce debt, to upgrade its aging fleet and for general corporate purposes.
Northwest, which posted a loss of $115.3 million in 1993, has about $5 billion in long-term debt and capital lease obligations.
Some industry observers attribute the high initial asking price to Northwest's earnings gains the past two quarters, which exceeded Wall Street's expectations.
For the fourth quarter, Northwest posted net income of $10.5 million, compared with a year-earlier loss of $695.2 million.
In the typically strong third-quarter, the carrier posted its first profit in two years, a healthy $112.3 million.
"After those two quarters, they probably got too aggressive and felt they could price the IPO that high," said Raymond E. Neidl, an analyst with Furman Selz, New York.
Northwest Co-Chairmen Alfred Checchi and Gary Wilson would have made a profit of nearly $400 million on their $40 million investment at an asking price of $20 a share.
"They may have let greed overcome this deal," said Rob Symington of MD Sass Investors, New York.
Mr. Checchi, a Los Angeles investor who engineered the leveraged buyout of Northwest in 1989, owns 14.8% of Northwest stock.
After the offering, that amount would drop to 10.4%.
Co-Chairman Wilson owns a like amount.
Even with the IPO, Northwest's plans for two private placements (valued at $400 million) and public debentures (another $400 million), the company would only raise a little over $1 billion for the year.
As a result, analysts seemed to regard the IPO as more of a symbolic entrance into the public market rather than a significant injection of capital.
The IPO "was so small, so insignificant," says Mr. Neidl, "it was really just a tiny drop in the bucket."
He adds, "It wasn't the funds that were important, but the fact that they re-establish themselves with the public equity community."
Analysts are looking for Northwest to continue to perform well in the coming quarters.
They expect the carrier to turn a profit of $300 million to $400 million for 1994.
If its solid growth continues, observers expect the airline to announce a larger, more substantial public offering sometime in the third or fourth quarter.
Of course, not everyone is as optimistic.
Others say that with the rash of problems plaguing the industry right now, Northwest is too vulnerable to changing market conditions to make their stock a smart investment.
The airline is neither a powerhouse carrier like UAL Corp.'s United Airlines nor an efficient short-haul carrier like Southwest Airlines -- leaving them with no real niche.
The largest shareholder is KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, which owns 21% of the stock before the offer and 14.8% after the IPO.
Northwest forged an alliance with KLM in 1989 which, among other things, resulted in a large cash infusion by KLM.
Scott Reeves contributed to this article.
