While Washington waits for Tokyo to take action against Japan's huge trade surplus, Japanese leaders instead are turning their attention to a domestic power struggle.
The conflict, which is about personalities as much as policy, centers on apparent discord between Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and his chief Cabinet secretary, Masayoshi Takemura.
Japan's press is rife with speculation that Mr. Hosokawa will remove Mr. Takemura from his post as soon as this week, as part of his first cabinet reshuffle since taking office last summer.
Though the immediate impact of such a shuffle probably would be limited, observers say Mr. Hosokawa's fragile coalition eventually may be shaken by political squabbling.
And for the U.S. and other trading partners, the coalition infighting may mean a longer wait for measures to boost Japanese imports.
Mr. Hosokawa "has no room to consider seriously U.S.-Japan relations," says Takao Toshikawa, editor of a political newsletter.
Because of the turmoil, Mr. Toshikawa adds, "the Hosokawa government hasn't talked about coming up with specific concessions to present the Clinton administration."
Japan's huge trade surplus and its policies for reducing it have come under even closer scrutiny since U.S.-Japan trade talks broke down earlier this month.
In meetings in Germany this weekend, Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii failed to convince U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen that Japan's recently announced economic stimulus measures will spur domestic demand enough to substantially boost imports.
The package includes a one-year, 5.47 trillion yen ($52 billion) personal income-tax cut.
Japanese leaders promise to extend the tax break later this year, but a debate over financing could delay it, or derail their plans.
Japan may soon have some more explaining to do.
The International Monetary Fund estimates that the economic measures will reduce Japan's current-account surplus only marginally this year, to $130.3 billion from $131.4 billion in 1993.
What's more, Japan's budget plan submitted for the fiscal year starting April 1, includes an increase in the national pension contribution made by workers and their employers.
A leading business daily, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, reported this weekend that the increase, slated for October, would produce a net tax increase of 1.3 trillion yen.
A tax increase of that scale would equal roughly one-fourth the size of the tax cut-and would presumably cancel some of the package's stimulative effect.
Japanese pension officials couldn't be reached to comment on the newspaper's estimate.
Japan has made some overtures to the U.S., but they probably won't break the stalemate.
Last week, a number of leaders backed the idea of setting a nonbinding target for cutting the current account surplus in the coming year.
But the goal being bandied about -- 2.8% of the nation's gross domestic product, from 3.1% -- would represent a very small decline.
On Friday, Mr. Takemura said that by the end of March, the government wants to present a set of unilateral market-opening measures.
The same day, Japan's trade minister called on auto companies to help boost imports.
And the Transport Ministry said it will dispatch an official to Detroit to ease the burdensome import-inspection process that U.S. and other foreign cars face when they enter Japan.
For the most part, however, Japan's politicians have been distracted by the intrigue within the Hosokawa administration.
The Hosokawa-Takemura rift could be a sign of trouble ahead for the seven-party coalition.
The government has been unified by a single belief, the need for political reform.
Now that a reform package has been worked out, the glue that binds the seven coalition parties is weakening.
To be sure, the alliance has weathered worse crises since it came together last summer.
Mr. Toshikawa and other analysts believe Mr. Hosokawa could postpone a Cabinet shuffle to avoid splitting the coalition.
And even if Mr. Hosokawa were to dump Mr. Takemura, members of Mr. Takemura's own party have said they would still remain with the coalition.
The breach between Mr. Hosokawa and Mr. Takemura stems partly from personalities and partly from policy differences.
On policy, Mr. Takemura's small moderate party, Sakigake, wants to see the forthcoming realignment of political parties bring about a three-party system, and it wants to ally with the Socialists.
Mr. Hosokawa appears to be leaning toward a two-party system, under which the current coalition would unite against a conservative opposition group.
