In response to your Feb. 25 article "South Korea Loses Ground in Asia's Race":
The Republic of Korea's impressive comeback from the devastation of the Korean War earned it a reputation as an "economic miracle."
Korea has also become America's eighth-largest trading partner, and Korean brand names are well-known to U.S. consumers.
Yet, for American companies wishing to invest in Korea, our markets long have been regarded as difficult to enter.
One reason for this was the myriad restrictions placed on direct foreign investment.
The Korean public's attitude toward foreign investment has changed dramatically in recent years and, more important, so have the policies of the Korean government.
This is paving the way for new opportunities for U.S. companies.
Korea's history explains why foreign investment there was once discouraged.
A small country surrounded by major powers, the nation's sovereignty has been repeatedly threatened.
We even experienced a period of outright colonization by a powerful neighbor.
Thus, foreign investment was regarded as economic encroachment that might eventually lead to political domination.
When the Korean government began an economic-development drive in the early 1960s, it encouraged domestic businesses to borrow from abroad to build industries, rather than use foreign investment as the springboard to growth.
The Chinese offer a study in contrast.
For millennia, the sovereignty of their vast and powerful nation was unassailable.
In Taiwan, this led to a very different approach to foreign investment and, in turn, a markedly different economic development path.
The Taiwanese and their government had no particular aversion to foreign equity ownership.
So, whereas Korea used foreign borrowing as its engine of economic growth, Taiwan actively courted foreign direct investment.
Times have changed.
As one of the world's 15 largest economies, Korea is a seasoned player in the international trading system.
The Korean public's aversion to outside investors has been replaced by an understanding that national economies are becoming increasingly interdependent and that protectionism carries a high cost.
Now that our once-profitable labor-intensive companies are losing their competitiveness, Korean businesses are setting their sights on high-technology industries.
However, borrowing from abroad, once the key to our growth, cannot produce the new technologies we require.
Direct foreign investment, new joint ventures with foreign partners and technology transfers are what Korea needs to continue its economic growth.
With this in mind, President Kim Young Sam, who took office just one year ago, has embarked upon an ambitious economic deregulation program.
He is phasing out strict government control over business and returning the economy to market forces.
He has said publicly that it has long been too difficult to do business in Korea.
He is dismantling virtually all barriers to foreign participation in our markets, and is particularly keen on removing obstacles to investment and joint ventures.
Reforms have already been introduced to make it easier for foreign companies to buy land and build factories.
The Pacific Rim is the region of the future for American industry, and Korea intends to be a central player in this regard.
Here are five good reasons why Korea should be attractive to American investors:
-- Korea is already a formidable economy.
Its GNP ranks 15th in the world, and it is the 12th-largest trading power.
The Korea-U.S. economic alliance is strong and profitable, with annual two-way trade topping $36 billion.
-- The Korean market is large and affluent, with a population of 43 million and an annual per-capita income of about $7,000.
Thus, Korea is a dynamic consumer society, and American products and services are well-regarded there.
-- Korea has a solid manufacturing base and a well-educated and highly skilled work force with an enormous capacity to assimilate sophisticated technology.
We want to match these assets with America's high-technology prowess.
-- Korea is strategically located at Asia's crossroads.
Seoul is a two-hour flight from Tokyo, Shanghai and Beijing, and about one hour from Vladivostok.
Korea is a stable springboard from which American businesses can advance more effectively throughout the Pacific Rim.
-- Political stability is a precondition for sustained economic expansion and international exchange, and Korea provides exactly that.
It is a stable, flourishing democracy.
Korea has reached a turning point in its national development.
In order to advance and prosper, we are liberalizing our markets and expanding our international cooperation.
In a press conference on Feb. 25 marking the first anniversary of his inauguration, President Kim said, "Our goal is to make Korea one of the best places in the world for foreigners to do business, and we believe it is very important to make Korea secure and attractive for foreign investors."
Korean Ambassador to the U.S.
