Police Sgt. Joseph Smit's men arm themselves with revolvers, then boost their firepower with some odd weapons: gas masks, computers and greenish bottles for taking samples.
They're on the prowl for a motley band of crooks -- scofflaws who dirty the air with noxious fumes and foul the water with heavy metals.
But the odds are stacked against Antwerp's Environment Police, who patrol some 13,000 companies with just five full officers and two squad cars.
"We've been trying for a third car for three years," shrugs Sgt. Smit, a strapping man dressed in a golf shirt despite the icy rain outside.
He could use five more officers, too, but "the city says there's no money for it."
Sgt. Smit's plight is common for Europe.
Though the European Commission -- the executive arm of the European Union -- has pumped out reams of green legislation, EU members spend less than 2% of their gross domestic product on all environmental efforts combined.
"Enforcement would be a fraction of that -- a small fraction," says EU Environment Commissioner Yannis Paleokrassas.
As a result, most enforcement groups in the EU are overwhelmed and underfunded.
But they might also consider themselves fortunate.
"At least there is an environmental police" in Antwerp, Mr. Paleokrassas says.
"In most member states there is no environmental police."
One explanation for the EU's patchy enforcement efforts can be found in the way the union's single house is being constructed: Blueprints are handed down from the highest political rafters, but enforcement is hammered together by local authorities on the ground.
Not surprisingly, it's proving difficult to turn the architects' grand vision into something that works.
Just how difficult can be seen at Antwerp's Environment Police.
In a bare office partly furnished with old chairs brought from home, inspector Walter Van Mieghem flips through a thick book listing emissions permits held by thousands of local companies.
The fine print covers everything from one-man auto-paint shops to sprawling petrochemical plants.
Sgt. Van Mieghem and his co-workers are supposed to keep tabs on them all, plus ferret out operators who hold no licenses.
It's a complicated beat, and it's not getting any simpler.
Despite efforts to consolidate some EU green laws, there are some 200 pieces of such legislation and more are in the pipeline.
But those measures say surprisingly little about enforcement, which remains the responsibility of each member state.
The commission's environmental directorate is in no position to police the laws anyway.
With a permanent staff of about 350 people, it has no enforcement personnel and relies on worried citizens and environmental groups to report problems.
The environmentalists themselves lack the manpower for collecting comprehensive statistics in all 12 member states.
"It's just not something we have the resources to do," laments Susan Leubuscher of Greenpeace in Brussels.
Enforcement varies greatly throughout the EU.
The star performers are Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany, where each federal state has its own environmental authorities.
Enforcement also varies from town to town, region to region.
Belgium, for example, is considered to have a poor enforcement record compared with its green neighbors.
Yet Antwerp's efforts compare well with those made in Ghent, which doesn't carry out systematic inspections.
And both cities surpass their home region of Flanders, where some 100 inspectors struggle to monitor thousands of small factories and potential dump sites dotting the flat landscape.
Out in the countryside, Flemish locals often spot apparent violations: Tons of plastic waste show up in vacant lots; pig manure fouls canals; dyes turn brooks red or orange, depending on what local factories are making.
"We would be more effective if we had 200 inspectors," says Marc Pallemaerts, a cabinet member in Flanders's Environmental Ministry.
Back in Antwerp on an icy morning, worried citizens begin phoning the Environment Police before the officers have tasted their coffee: Somebody has dropped a truckload of trash in the street outside a city dump.
A new dry cleaner doesn't have a permit.
Such incidents can turn out to be more serious than they seem.
One complaint about bedding dumped near a smelter turned up mounds of sand laced with arsenic, cobalt and other heavy metals.
The shop without a permit reflects another reality: Here as elsewhere, small operators are notoriously tough to patrol.
Many don't know the laws; others say they can't afford to obey them.
Sgt. Van Mieghem winces as he recalls the times he has told mom-and-pop operations to clean up their acts or shut down.
British environmental consultant David Gilbert has visited the Antwerp team and similar forces as part of an enforcement study for the Dutch government conducted by his firm, Environmental Resources Management.
His findings seem to raise more questions than answers.
Can you trust laboratory tests of emissions?
After all, two labs using different techniques will draw different conclusions from the same sample.
What is an inspector?
An inspector may -- as in Britain -- be a local "environmental health officer," who monitors the quality of food sold in shops as well as environmental matters.
And what happens when a case comes to court?
"You might prosecute a lot of people, but they might still be kicking stuff out into the environment," Dr. Gilbert says.
This galls Sgt. Smit's men, partly because they used to put alleged polluters behind bars without going through the courts.
Police and environmental groups say a spate of such "preventive detentions" in the late 1980s shocked many managers in Antwerp into investing in green programs.
But the campaign ended in 1990 when Belgian legislators cut back the use of preventive detention.
Rampant enforcement problems prompt many observers to pin their hopes on the EU's new Environment Agency, an institution created in June 1990 but inaugurated only last month after bickering EU leaders finally agreed on a site for the agency, Denmark.
With an annual budget of eight million European currency units ($7.2 million), the agency will initially limit itself to collecting and evaluating information -- no mean task, considering the EU's lack of environmental data.
But many observers also expect the agency to do serious teething in its first two years and end up as a watchdog with a firm bite.
The agency will create standard criteria for all national inspectors, and within two years a review will determine whether its powers should be extended to monitoring.
Eventually, that could pave the way for a European version of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Monica Houston-Waesch in Bonn contributed to this article.
