OOSTVAARDERSPLASSEN, the Netherlands -- Standing calf-deep in a pool of mud beneath the prow of a 17th-century galleon, the film extras look like infantry-men in a Rembrandt painting.
"Action!" shouts the assistant director.
A smoke bomb wreathes the ship in a black cloud.
One soldier hurls a torch into the hold; others lumber away with trunks, jugs and other booty.
"Stop!" cries the assistant, motioning toward a stout soldier whose face has turned crimson.
"His breeches have fallen off!"
So it goes on the set of "The Flying Dutchman," where Dutch director Jos Stelling and his crew are unapologetically out to concoct a box-office hit that producers hope will win an Oscar in 1996.
Despite the Academy Award nominations of several films with European funding, including the French-subsidized hit "The Piano," -- which won three awards -- the odds against him and other European movie makers are high.
Europe's film industry faces a crisis.
As more and more European cinemagoers flock to Hollywood hits, the U.S. share of the feature-film market in Europe has shot up to an estimated 80% from 60% in 1984.
That's more than popcorn money: Europeans now spend more than $10 billion a year on feature films, British consultancy London Economics estimates.
The crisis has prompted prominent European film figures, including David Puttnam and Wim Wenders, to argue that only a strong "dose of reality" can rescue European cinema from "an arthouse ghetto," trapped in small, highbrow cinemas.
Along with other members of the European Film Academy, they argue that the deterioration of Europe's share of its own market is too severe to be cured just by new infusions of the old nostrums, government grants and loans.
Instead, they prescribe tough therapy meant to wean filmmakers from subsidies and to a market-oriented approach.
A recent study by the academy and Screen International, a trade journal, calls for scripts with stronger story lines, more European actors with famous names and faces, bigger budgets and better marketing.
The study also suggests that Europe should restructure the network of national and pan-European subsidies that prop up the business.
"The Flying Dutchman" has followed the prescription: It features a finely honed script, a star actor, a bigger budget, more marketing, and a slice of funding from a big outside investor, Invesco MIM PLC of Britain.
But the production also shows how long and painful the proposed cure may be.
Set in the 17th century during Spain's occupation of the Low Countries, the film offers a new variation on the old maritime legend of a captain doomed to sail the seven seas until Judgment Day.
As the film crew's day begins in this nature reserve in the Dutch province of Flevoland, some 40 extras don burlap-brown uniforms in a park building lined with canoes.
Outside, a makeup artist coats them with mud before sending them down an asphalt lane that leads through a field of reeds to the set.
There's no need to rush, for Mr. Stelling seems in no hurry.
A short man with a grizzled beard and a dab of mud on his bald spot, he watches paternally as his 45-member crew plods around the swamp in baseball caps and waders, adjusting the set and testing pyrotechnics.
A European film crew, he confides later, is like "a big family that is making a thing.
You need that family feeling."
That's not so easy with this film, he concedes.
For one thing, his family is as besieged as the House of Windsor today.
A gaggle of journalists mills around the set with cameras, notepads and videocams.
Although many European producers are beginning to incorporate such media visits into their marketing strategy, it's a new -- and slightly unsettling -- experience for Mr. Stelling.
"If you have too much publicity too early, people will think it's an old film" when it reaches the cinema, he worries.
He's especially concerned about the presence of photographers on the set.
"They are stealing from me," he says.
Such fears highlight the wide gulf that separates Europe's modest film marketing efforts from the global blitz of T-shirts, toys and advertising that surround "Jurassic Park" and other U.S. blockbusters.
For most European producers, the key to promotion is still a screening at big film festivals such as Cannes and Berlin, which are known in the business as "markets."
Advertising doesn't start until the film is finished, a fact partly explained by how state subsidies work: With the prominent exception of Spain, producers say, most EU governments refuse to allow state funds to be spent on marketing.
Mr. Stelling paces up and down in the mud.
Up to now, he has been his own boss.
Working with low budgets, small crews and little-known actors, he has created impressionistic films such as "The Illusionist" and "The Pointsman," which have won critical acclaim but failed to draw a big following outside Holland.
They used no special effects, little dialogue and relied more on character development than on a traditional plot.
This time around, the budget is 200 million Belgian francs ($5.8 million), says Belgian co-producer Alain Keytsman.
Although that pales in comparison to the $30 million lavished on the French film based on Emile Zola's "Germinal," it's roughly on par with the budget of "The Crying Game," the quirky British production that took America by storm.
But the bigger budget means Mr. Stelling is no longer the master of all that his camera surveys.
Three co-producers -- the men who raised 77% of the budget from several state television channels, private firms and subsidies in Belgium, Germany and the Netherlands -- hover at the edge of the set, chatting with reporters and watching Mr. Stelling's every move.
"Jos is very adaptable," says Mr. Keytsman.
He rubs his scruffy beard and points up at the mock ship, where a carved lion arches across the bowsprit.
"He allowed us to build half a ship instead of a whole one."
Scaffolding alone makes up the starboard side of the replica East Indian Company trading vessel, which cost two million Belgian francs to build.
While that may be common in Hollywood, Mr. Keytsman says many European directors would have demanded a complete ship.
He estimates that the compromise saved them three million Belgian francs.
Back out on the marsh, another scene is taking shape.
A modest army -- a score of men with helmets, pikes and horse-drawn wagons -- marches away from the camera.
Dressed in rags, the Dutchman, portrayed by Dutch actor Rene Groothof, is bound and blindfolded.
Two helmeted guards lead him away by ropes looped around his neck.
As Mr. Wijngaarde looks on, the talk turns again to whether film is a business or an art.
"In the States, this is considered an art film," he observes, recalling talks about the film he has held with New York media executives.
Although he declines to give many details of the discussions, he says the executives argued that the film's historical setting and languages would put off U.S. viewers.
Another barrier to the film is its lack of big-name actors.
The study by the European Film Academy and Screen International argues that high-profile stars provide a crucial link between an unknown new film and the public.
In a clear acknowledgment of this, "The Flying Dutchman" marks the first film in which Mr. Stelling has been willing to work with a big-name actor -- in this case Nino Manfredi, who has appeared in at least 68 films since 1956, including "Bread and Chocolate."
Mr. Stelling's willingness to compromise by using a big-name actor won't necessarily draw big crowds to the Dutchman, however.
Mr. Manfredi draws crowds in Italy, and is well-suited to his pivotal supporting role as an aging Italian troubadour.
But he's hardly a household name outside Southern Europe.
As evening approaches, the crew begins hauling away props and equipment.
Mr. Keytsman, the Belgian producer, lingers on the set to discuss the subsidy problem.
"I lose a lot of time looking for money," he shrugs wearily.
Fund raising is a big part of his job, he concedes.
But he longs for the day when he can spend less time raising a budget and more time on figuring out how to spend the money effectively.
He's also tired of cutting through red tape, especially at a time when Belgian subsidies are declining and film costs are rising.
He and his colleagues are supplementing the budget of "The Flying Dutchman" with money from private sources.
Although 57% of the budget still comes from subsidies and contracts with state-run television channels, Invesco is putting up 10%, while Mr. Stelling and the three co-producers are picking up a combined 23%, or 46 million Belgian francs.
Mr. Keytsman expects a big film distributor to pick up the remaining 10% in exchange for world distribution rights.
"The day that I don't have to get subsidies to get a film made," he insists, "I will do it."
But when that day comes, he may ask the director for a quid pro quo.
"I want the final cut," he declares.
Maureen Kline in Milan contributed to this article.
