Inflation in Brazil's major cities slowed somewhat in January, but the rate remains alarmingly high and has far to drop before the country emerges from its devastating grip, economists say.
"Inflation is lower," said former Finance Minister Mailson da Nobrega, "but it's not a trend.
It's more a factor of seasonal adjustments."
Economist Carlos Longo agreed.
"There is no reason for inflation to go away.
The fundamental reasons are still causing it."
The inflation news on Friday came two days after congressional approval of an emergency fund to help the government balance its budget.
Deficit spending is considered the leading cause of inflation, and the vote was hailed as a major step toward combating it.
Few expected good news so soon.
"This was a surprise," said Jose de Menezes Berenguer Neto, vice president of capital markets at ING Bank in Sao Paulo.
"We were expecting higher inflation."
The government's National Institute of Geography and Statistics said the inflation rate in Sao Paulo was 39.7% from Jan. 7 to Feb. 4, down from the 40.5% reported between Dec. 30 and Jan. 28.
The institute said inflation in Rio de Janeiro for the corresponding period was 40.8%, down from 42.8%.
Meanwhile, the University of Sao Paulo's Economic Research Institute reported inflation at 38.5% from Jan. 8 to Feb. 7, down from the 40.3% registered from Jan. 1 to 31.
Economist Antonio Correa de Lacerda said the lower rates are "certainly positive psychologically.
But they're really a bit of a fluke."
Economists say inflation was fueled in December and January by a variety of seasonal causes, including holiday bonuses that resulted in higher spending, speculation caused by expectations of higher inflation, and higher food prices caused by a smaller harvest.
In the absence of those factors, the rate subsided somewhat, said Juarez Rizzieri, head of the Economic Research Institute.
Brazil is averting even worse inflation, contends Mr. Lacerda, the economist, because of congressional passage of the $16 billion emergency fund last week.
"If it hadn't been approved, things would be worse than ever," he said.
He thinks that if it hadn't passed, Foreign Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso probably would have resigned, resulting in economic "uncertainty."
Mr. Cardoso insisted that the emergency fund is a fundamental stepping stone to building an economy free of the inflation that has steadily worsened for a generation.
Most economists expect to see inflation over 41% again in March after the Reserve Value Unit, or URV, is installed.
The URV will replace 11 inflation indexes that adjust prices, wages, taxes, interest rates and contracts.
Everything in Brazil's economy is indexed to account for inflation.
"A lot of companies will raise prices because they don't know how the URV is going to work," ING Bank's Mr. Berenguer says.
But he adds that once the URV and the rest of the government's plan are in effect, inflation could drop significantly.
