In an effort to quell escalating violence in Israel and the occupied territories following Friday's massacre in a Hebron mosque, the Israeli cabinet ordered the arrest of five leaders of a Jewish extremist group and said it would begin disarming radical settlers.
Following a stormy five-hour discussion yesterday, the cabinet decided to set up a government commission to investigate the circumstances surrounding the killing early Friday morning by a Jewish gunman of at least 39 Palestinians praying in the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron, which the Bible says is the burial place of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their wives.
The commission will look into the conduct of the Israeli army during the massacre, focusing in particular on how the gunman was able to enter the compound undetected by soldiers who usually guard the site, and why he was able to fire so many bullets without being stopped.
Israeli army officials said a preliminary inquiry found that the 111 bullet casings inside the cave all came from the Galil rifle of Dr. Baruch Goldstein, a resident of Kiryat Arba adjacent to Hebron, who was seized by the crowd and beaten to death after his gun jammed.
But Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat accused Israeli soldiers of helping Dr. Goldstein, and said that eyewitnesses inside the shrine reported the killings were the work of as many as 12 men.
Mr. Arafat contends Israeli soldiers opened fire on Palestinians trying to evacuate the wounded to hospitals.
Army officials say the two soldiers standing at the entrance to the cave fired seven shots in the air.
The PLO leader stopped short of calling for an end to peace talks, but he said they cannot proceed without protection for Palestinians living in the occupied territories.
He called for an international peacekeeping force to be deployed in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, a demand that Israel emphatically rejects.
Meanwhile, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon cut short a round of peace talks with Israel that was to end on Wednesday, a U.S. official told Reuters.
The executive council of the PLO was scheduled to meet in Tunis late last night in order to discuss President Clinton's invitation to Israeli and Palestinian negotiators to move the peace talks to Washington.
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has said that Israel will attend if the Palestinians also agree to go.
Israeli Minister of the Environment Yossi Sarid called the decisions by the 14-member cabinet "unprecedented," but Palestinian leaders said the government did not go far enough and that all Jewish settlers living in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip must be disarmed.
In a meeting yesterday in Hebron, leaders of the local Palestinian community told Israeli President Ezer Weizman that the Kiryat Arba settlement must be removed and that Friday's massacre proved that coexistence between Palestinians and Jewish settlers in Hebron is impossible.
While the cabinet decision empowers the army to restrict extremist settlers from entering the occupied territories, including the Hebron area, it stopped short of banishing them outright because of legal complications, Mr. Sarid said.
The cabinet decision came as violence in Israel and the occupied territories continued following the massacre.
The army has sealed off the West Bank and Gaza Strip for an indefinite period, barring Palestinians from entering Israel to go to work.
Residents of Kiryat Arba have been prevented from entering or leaving the settlement without the army's permission and must travel with an army escort.
Violent confrontations broke out in Jaffa, near Tel Aviv, and in many Israeli Arab towns.
In scenes recalling the worst days of the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories, Israeli Arabs were shown on Israeli television burning tires in the middle of roads and throwing rocks at police.
In rioting in an Israeli Arab town near Beersheba, one man was killed and three others injured as police tried to break up demonstrations.
Twenty-four Arabs have been killed in rioting in the occupied territories and in Israel since Friday.
Other steps taken by the Israeli cabinet yesterday include releasing 1,000 Palestinians from Israeli prisons.
The cabinet has also ordered the Justice Ministry to examine the possibility of outlawing extremist Jewish groups.
While the exact number of such extremists is not known, Israeli experts estimate they probably number no more than 100.
The main focus of yesterday's crackdown is Kach, a militant anti-Arab group founded by Rabbi Meir Kahane, who was assassinated in New York in 1990.
But even as the government moved against radical settlers, its actions were criticized by some Israelis as coming too late and not going far enough.
Focus on Settlers Ehud Sprinzak, a Hebrew University professor who is an expert on Israeli radical right-wing groups, warned the government months ago that action must be taken against extremist settlers.
"The government has been soft on the settlers," Mr. Sprinzak said.
"It never gave the extremists the sense that the government is the one running the show."
Mr. Sprinzak said that radical settlers have stockpiled arms and possess sophisticated equipment that allows them to track the army's movements and therefore avoid detection when conducting actions against Palestinians.
Four of the Kach leaders wanted for arrest have gone into hiding; one has been brought into custody.
While early news reports indicated that some members of Kiryat Arba knew in advance that Dr. Goldstein intended to commit the massacre, it is still unclear whether the Kach leaders are believed to be connected in any way to the killings.
Friday's massacre raised again the question of whether it will be possible to successfully implement Palestinian selfrule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip without discussing the future of Jewish settlements there.
Under the agreement reached between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization in September, the settlements are to remain in place during a five-year interim period.
Despite calls by several left-wing cabinet ministers to remove Jewish settlers from Hebron, the government decided against such a step.
"After Friday, it's hard to believe how the settlers and the Palestinians will survive together for five years," says Yoel Marcus, a commentator for the Ha'aretz newspaper.
"But the government is basically weak.
It has only a 57-member base parliament has 120 members and it is not in a position to do anything daring."
