The U.S.-Japan trade dispute sent the dollar plunging almost 4% against the yen.
Traders and investors speculated that the Clinton administration will try using a stronger yen to prod Japan to open its markets more expansively to U.S. goods.
Following the collapse of last week's trade talks, U.S. officials said they didn't intend to jawbone the yen higher.
But traders and analysts retorted that it didn't matter.
"The U.S. doesn't have to talk the dollar down; the currency market implicitly believes this is what Washington wants.
So the administration has to just sit back and let this happen," said Michael R. Rosenberg, an international economist at Merrill Lynch & Co. in New York.
On Monday night, on the heels of the dollar's sharp fall, the U.S. Treasury said that exchange-rate policy was unchanged.
The dollar showed little immediate response in Tokyo trading, however.
Unless the market comes to believe that the administration feels the dollar has fallen far enough, some traders and economists predicted the U.S. currency could tumble below 100 yen.
"I think there is a good possibility the dollar could fall below 95 yen," said Lawrence A. Veit, an international economist at Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. in New York.
"We have an extraordinary nonmeeting of minds on the trade issue: The Japanese don't feel they are responsible for the U.S. trade deficit.
The U.S. feels the Japanese are responsible.
But anybody with experience in doing business with Japan knows their markets aren't as open to us as ours are to them."
He added: "One of the few levers the U.S. can use to put pressure on Japan is to cause the dollar to depreciate against the yen."
In late New York trading Monday, the dollar was quoted at 102.65 yen, well below 106.85 yen late Friday.
The post-World War II low was 100.40 yen to the dollar, set Aug. 17.
So far this year, the dollar is off 8% against Japan's currency.
The dollar also fell to 1.7273 marks in New York Monday from 1.7543 marks late Friday.
Almost all major currencies rose against the dollar Monday.
The pound strengthened to $1.4840 from $1.4625 before the weekend.
The dollar began falling Friday after trade talks in Washington between President Clinton and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa collapsed.
The U.S. wants to reduce its huge trade deficit with Japan by setting specific numerical trade targets, something the Japanese refuse to do.
On Monday, Laura Tyson, the head of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, said the dollar's decline shouldn't have a significant impact on U.S. prices.
Traders interpreted her remarks as meaning that the administration had no problem with the U.S. currency's plunge.
During the New York trading day, the Clinton administration watched passively as the dollar fell against the yen.
It didn't show unusual concern.
The administration's strategy was determined to maintain "radio silence" and not comment on the yen's activity, a Treasury official said.
On Monday night in Washington, however, the Treasury issued its statement.
Hoping to calm the foreign-exchange markets, the statement, attributed to a senior Treasury official and released just in time for the Tuesday opening of the Tokyo markets, said: "Our exchange-rate policy is unchanged from that already articulated by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen: We do not believe in artificially manipulating exchange rates."
At midday Tuesday in Tokyo, after the statement's release, the dollar stood at 102.48 yen, off slightly from the New York quote of 102.65 yen.
The steepness of Monday's decline "caught the market by surprise; the bad weather in New York prevented people from selling dollars on Friday," said Julian Symmons, head trader at Citibank in London.
He warned that many institutional investors that had been funding their purchases of foreign non-Japanese bonds by borrowing yen at low interest rates could be hurt by the sudden, steep rise in Japan's currency.
But the biggest damage could be to Japan's economy.
"It's going to hurt the Japanese economy," predicted Merrill Lynch's Mr. Rosenberg.
"Trade adjustment -- if it's going to succeed in the long run -- has to cause pain.
If there's no pain, there's no adjustment."
He added that to ameliorate the impact of the stronger yen on Japan's economy, the country's central bank might cut its key discount rate 1.25% or even 1% from its current 1.75%.
"Anywhere that Japan competes globally -- either in Japan or abroad -- the stronger yen is going to hurt Japanese competitiveness," said Mr. Veit of Brown Brothers Harriman.
"It's going to severely damage the manufacturing sector."
Referring to Tokyo's recently announced $140 billion to $150 billion program to stimulate its moribund economy, Citibank's Mr. Symmons said: "All the benefit Japan hoped to get via fiscal stimulus by pumping money into the economy is negated by the strong yen."
The mightier yen also is devaluing the portfolios of Japanese institutional investors, which since January 1986 have made net purchases of about $570 billion of foreign stocks and bonds, according to High Frequency Economics, a New York economic consulting firm.
"That means that each one yen rise against the dollar equals roughly a loss of $6 billion to these institutions" in the value of their foreign securities holdings, said Carl Weinberg, the firm's chief economist.
Thus, Japan's life-insurance companies, trust banks and other big investors have seen their portfolios shrink by more than $30 billion just since Thursday.
Theoretically, a stronger yen should eventually help reduce Japan's huge trade surplus with the U.S. by increasing the costs of Japanese products and lowering the prices of U.S. goods -- especially in "third markets" (neither the U.S. nor Japan).
"A stronger yen is the equivalent to higher tariffs on Japanese exports to the U.S. and is the equivalent to a subsidy on U.S. exports to Japan," said Mr. Rosenberg of Merrill Lynch.
Inflation Factor for U.S.
Although not an immediate concern, a weak dollar could also contribute to U.S. inflation.
That's because American manufacturers might use the higher prices on Japanese products as an excuse to raise their own prices.
A weaker dollar could also have a significant impact on U.S. and Japanese stock prices, corporate earnings and the value of U.S. investors' holdings of Japanese stocks and bonds.
By making them more competitive -- and by making their sales and earnings in Japan worth more when translated into dollars -- a falling dollar can fatten U.S. companies' bottom lines.
Improved earnings, in turn, can boost stock prices of some major U.S. multinational corporations.
A weaker dollar also increases the value of a U.S. investor's Japanese portfolio; that's because Japanese stocks and bonds will be worth more when translated into U.S. currency.
By contrast, a weaker dollar can damage the earnings of Japanese companies by hurting sales and making those sales worth less in yen terms.
That can lead to lower stock prices.
That's exactly what happened yesterday, when the Tokyo stock market fell 1.63%, as measured by the Japanese portion of the Dow Jones World Stock Index.
But because of the yen's steep ascent, Tokyo shares were up 2.45% in dollar terms.
So far this year, the Dow Jones Equity Market Index for Japan is up 10.1% in yen and 19.9% in dollars.
Major support for the yen comes from Japan's trade surplus, which Mr. Weinberg of High Frequency Economics estimates is running at about $120 billion a year.
Roughly half is attributable to the U.S., he says.
In addition, he noted that "Japanese institutions have cut back their purchases of foreign securities," purchases that otherwise would have helped to weaken the yen.
What's more, says Mr. Rosenberg of Merrill Lynch, the yen has fallen below its 200-day moving average against the dollar.
That means the many traders and investors who use charts to predict currency movements will be buying the currency.
Nonetheless, some traders warned investors against betting that riding the yen higher was a smooth journey to fatter profits.
"Any statement by Fed or Treasury officials that they don't want the yen to climb any further could get you a quick reversal, because there are lot of people short dollars out there," said Pat Magill, chief corporate dealer at Daiwa (Europe) Bank Ltd. in London.
Traders said that the Bank of Japan sold yen and bought dollars during early Asian trading to try to halt the yen's rise, but analysts disagree about how serious was the intervention effort.
They also disagree about whether Japanese central bank intervention can have any lasting impact on the dollar-yen exchange rate.
Last year, the Treasury intervened in April and in August to stop a rise in the yen.
The coordinated summer intervention by Japan and the U.S. came when the yen hit a postwar high.
Traders are betting the U.S. won't be as quick to intervene this time, though.
"At this point, given the administration's disappointment with Japan, I think they'll be much slower to move against a high yen," says Stephen Roach, senior U.S. economist at Morgan Stanley & Co.
Kenneth H. Bacon contributed to this article.
