Viacom Inc. agreed to sell its one-third stake in Lifetime cable network for $317.6 million to partners Hearst Corp. and Capital Cities/ABC Inc., and is separately discussing a possible business combination involving Viacom cable systems and Tele-Communications Inc.
According to people familiar with the situation, Viacom, which recently acquired Paramount Communications Inc. for $9.6 billion, is discussing a cable systems deal with TCI as part of settlement talks in the $2.5 billion antitrust suit Viacom filed against TCI during the takeover battle for Paramount.
Those settlement talks are expected to include new longterm agreements by TCI to carry Viacom cable networks like MTV and Showtime.
Yesterday, Wall Street traders and cable industry brokers speculated that TCI might buy Viacom cable systems serving 1.1 million subscribers, for $2.2 billion, or about 12 times cash flow.
But a person close to TCI said the "probability of TCI buying at that price is remote," and said a more likely scenario is some kind of joint venture between Viacom and TCI "that would be helpful to Viacom" if the two sides "could agree on values."
He added that the two sides are "far from a deal."
Viacom declined comment on the reports of the talks with TCI.
A deal with TCI could help Viacom ease the $7 billion in combined debt it took on with the Paramount merger.
Viacom is also attempting to complete a separate merger with Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., but Blockbuster has indicated that the steep drop in Viacom's stock price that has followed the Paramount merger could jeopardize that deal.
Viacom Class B shares closed yesterday unchanged at $27.75 on the American Stock Exchange.
If Viacom does a cable deal with TCI that helps ease or restructure its debt from the Paramount merger, it could help boost Viacom's stock price and thus help in completion of the Blockbuster merger, analysts noted.
And even if the Blockbuster deal doesn't go through, a Viacom-TCI cable deal could still help Viacom improve its balance sheet.
One industry executive familiar with the talks said that under one plan being discussed, Viacom and TCI would form a joint venture in which they would combine virtually all of Viacom's cable systems -- in Seattle, San Francisco and Nashville, Tenn. -- with TCI systems in the same areas.
Such a venture would give the combined entity a lock on the markets in those metropolitan areas, reaching 75% of the San Francisco market, 90% of the Seattle market and about 50% of the Nashville market.
Viacom could shift some of its debt to the joint venture; the joint venture could also issue new debt.
Viacom's sale of the Lifetime interest to its longtime partners Capital Cities and Hearst fits with Viacom's stated strategy to seek to sell assets in which it has only a partial ownership.
Viacom is also grappling with the issue of how to resolve the future ownership of USA Network, which it jointly owns with Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s MCA Inc. unit.
Analysts estimate USA's value at about $1 billion, and the complex partnership agreement includes a provision that could compel one partner to sell its interest or buy out its partner in the event of a change in control of the other.
The USA partnership agreement specifies that Paramount can't do anything new in the advertiser-supported cable entertainment network business unless it partners with MCA.
Viacom's main business is cable networks such as MTV, and MCA's position is that the acquisition of Paramount by Viacom puts Paramount in breach of the USA agreement.
Viacom has argued to MCA that the two sides can continue to work together on future projects.
Sidney J. Sheinberg, MCA president, said there are currently no discussions on the matter.
But MCA is clearly concerned that Viacom's cable networks compete directly with USA Network for advertisers and viewers.
If Viacom decides it wants to sell its 50% interest to MCA, MCA might be interested in buying, but it will likely want a bargain price.
Meanwhile, under the agreement to buy Viacom's Lifetime interest, Capital Cities/ABC and Hearst would increase their stake in Lifetime to 50% each, up from one-third each.
The deal values Lifetime, a cable channel aimed at women that reaches some 58 million subscribers, at about $1 billion.
The network was formed in 1984 when Viacom merged its Cable Health network with Hearst's and Capital Cities' Daytime women's channel.
Viacom said in a statement that it determined that "a minority interest in the network does not fit into our strategic objectives.
We are pleased that we were able to sell this nonstrategic holding at an attractive price, while leaving Lifetime in strong hands."
