I found Al Hunt's Feb. 3 Politics & People "Coelho on Congressional Reform" amusing and a little bit ironic.
I am tempted to say, as Victor Laszlo said to Rick in Casablanca: "Welcome to the fight.
This time, I know our side will win."
But Tony Coelho has never been a disinterested bystander in the battle for true congressional reform.
In my view, he has been on the other side of the debate, working to preserve the status quo under the Democratic majority.
As majority whip, he worked to strengthen the Democrats' grip on the House, skillfully manipulating votes to insure that politics won out over policy.
He also revolutionized the way special interests played a part in debates, making certain that no vote came without a price.
This is where reform should start.
He advocates a term limit on Congressional committees.
Republicans agree with the concept of term limits for senior members on committees, which is why we made a rules change to that effect in our own Conference Rules.
Regrettably, Mr. Coelho's former colleagues in the Democratic leadership have resisted our efforts to get this reform implemented in the House.
His leadership colleagues also resisted my effort to include tax bills for the line-item veto, another reform advocated by Mr. Coelho.
By allowing the president to strip out special-interest tax loopholes, as well as special-interest appropriations, the first steps to fiscal sanity could be taken.
Unfortunately, my amendment that passed the House overwhelmingly was snuffed out by the House leadership with a technical procedural maneuver.
Mr. Coelho says he believes Congress should be reorganized automatically every decade.
That's not a bad idea, but surely Mr. Coelho knows the biggest obstacle to reform comes with his former colleagues in the House Democratic leadership, as our experience with the Joint Committee on the Organization of the Congress proved.
Finally, he believes that the campaign financing system should be overhauled, to give legislators a break from fund raising.
Coming from the man who had more to do with the current system than anyone else, this is quite an admission.
Republicans have a comprehensive campaign finance reform package that bans PACs, bans soft money, and requires that most of a candidate's funds come from the district.
When Mr. Coelho endorses our plan, I know he will be serious.
Maybe Tony Coelho has changed.
Maybe he now really believes that Republicans have been right all along.
In that case, I would say: Welcome to the fight.
This time, I know our side will win.
Rep. Robert H. Michel (R., Ill.)
