Equities in Tokyo skidded 1.3% Thursday, as jitters about Japanese political reform continued.
London shares drifted down to end at the day's lows in uninspired dealings.
But many other Asian and Pacific bourses posted solid gains, several in technical rebounds following recent losses.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.45, up 1.01, reflecting higher markets in all regions.
Plantations stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 220.62, up 21.46, or 11%, with United Plantations of Malaysia posting a 24% gain in its local currency.
Precious metals stocks trailed at 152.52, down 3.20, or 2.1%, with Homestake Mining of the U.S. sliding 7% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which surged 489.85 points Wednesday, sputtered 246.42 to 18891.79, after retreating from the day's highs when the big drops recorded earlier this week had been temporarily regained.
In trading Friday, the Nikkei eased 22.20 points to close the morning session at 18869.59.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 430 million shares, up from 396.7 million shares a day earlier.
Decliners outnumbered gainers, 674-355.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which jumped 30.94 points Wednesday, fell 13.82 to 1536.50.
Investors fretted about signs the Japanese government may face difficulty in getting a political reform bill passed.
News reports at midday indicated the government and the opposition Liberal Democratic Party continued to disagree on details of a compromise.
The work had begun the previous day by a joint committee of the Diet, or parliament, and the market's nervousness about the politicians' progress led to an afternoon sell-off of shares paced by institutions, following two days of rumor-driven gains.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index declined 8.8 points to 3427.3.
The FT 30-stock index fell 13.9 points to 2627.3.
Volume was 972.6 million shares, up from 829.3 million shares a day earlier.
Little news surfaced to give investors a trading theme, and prices of many issues moved aimlessly.
Most fund managers were marking time until British corporations begin reporting their financial results next month.
Retailing stocks were hit hard yesterday on disappointing sales reports.
Food makers faced the same fate on flat sales indications, while many financial and banking stocks fell as investors switched to issues that are considered to offer better value.
In Frankfurt, stock prices closed mostly higher after a patchy session.
The DAX 30-stock index added 5.97 points to 2125.14 points, taking this week's gain to 2.4%, though the finish was near the session low.
Of the DAX issues, advancers led decliners only 17-12.
The market got quieter after sharp volatility earlier in the week.
The equities market has been moving in tandem with Germany's bond market recently, which was somewhat firmer yesterday.
In Paris, prices eased on disappointment about French monetary policy.
Stocks opened higher, helped by speculative buying on a long-shot bet that France's central bank might trim interest rates prior to any reduction by Germany's central bank.
But when the Bank of France left its rates unchanged, Paris stocks followed the French bond market back down.
In Milan, shares climbed across the board, as investors picked up issues left behind in this week's rally, such as insurers, which had been abandoned in favor of cyclical issues; telecommunications and cement stocks also performed well.
In Madrid, prices ended narrowly higher, after falling from higher levels on futuresrelated trading and a slight technical correction from this year's sharp gains.
In Stockholm, equities rose solidly and broadly, as positive corporate news and rumors about earnings and orders boosted blue chips.
In Zurich, equities finished mixed to slightly higher after giving up gains as investors took profits late in the day; the sell-off may have stemmed from sagging hopes for quick reductions in European interest rates, but it was also viewed positively as containing the Swiss market from overheating.
In Brussels, stocks firmed, taking the benchmark index up to a record, passing the mark set Jan. 19.
The biggest price swings were in smaller stocks, while blue chips were little changed in heavy turnover; the market shrugged off poor corporate earnings news.
In Mexico City, equities chalked up their second record high this week, climbing 2% as foreign investors focused on buying in the telecommunications sector, which is expected to expand rapidly.
In Sydney, share prices surged 1.3%, buoyed by a firmer gold price, lower-than-expected Australian inflation data and some foreign buying.
Many large stocks, which had fallen this week because of nervousness about Tokyo's big drops, rebounded and helped push the broad market up.
In Hong Kong, stocks climbed 2.1% in a strong technical rebound amid moderate turnover, following two sessions of losses that had taken the main index down 3.1%.
In Singapore, equities extended the previous session's late recovery, rising steadily to close 1.4% higher.
Sentiment was boosted by a recovery in Malaysian over-the-counter shares, which had weakened sharply and pulled the Singapore bourse down with them.
And in Kuala Lumpur, shares also extended Wednesday's brisk rebound in active trading, soaring 4.4% as bargain-hunting spread and blue chips won support.
In Taipei, shares rallied 3%, down even so from the day's highs.
The strong showing was largely a technical rebound, as many investors reappeared after being sidelined for several days by liquidity worries.
Confidence was boosted by news that the Taiwan government might increase to $20 billion from $5 billion the ceiling on foreign investment funds allowed to enter the country, and by enthusiasm about tomorrow's local elections.
In Seoul, stocks climbed 1.5%, as sentiment was buoyed by news reports that the South Korean Finance Ministry won't initiate stabilizing measures to cool the market, though institutions made late sales, rumored to be urged by the government.
In Bangkok, after choppy dealings, the market finished with a 2.7% gain.
In Wellington, prices gained 1.1% in quiet trading, with investors reluctant to sell holdings while the market continues its bull run.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
