In the latest blow for the nation's second-largest city, a blue-ribbon panel appointed by Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan concluded that the city "is headed toward a serious financial crisis" and urged major changes in municipal management.
A report issued yesterday by the panel urged reductions of more than 10% in the city's 44,000 employees and the capture of funds from lucrative but financially independent city agencies.
Without "massive re-engineering," Los Angeles faces a bleak era, both in its management and in its economy, said the panel, a special advisory committee comprised of business leaders and lawyers, whose makeup reflects the business-oriented interests of Mayor Riordan, a multimillionaire lawyer and investor who was elected last July.
Members of the seven-member panel described Los Angeles's fiscal future in the bleakest terms.
"In the coming months, the citizens of Los Angeles are going to be faced with some very harsh realities; Los Angeles truly is in financial jeopardy," warned Eli Broad, the chairman, president and chief executive officer of SunAmerica Inc., a Los Angeles-based financial services concern.
"It's now high noon."
For the near term, the panel said that under the most optimistic conditions, Los Angeles will post a $197.7 million deficit in the next fiscal year, ending June 30, 1995, with some $66.1 million of that reflecting projected revenue losses from the city's Jan. 17 earthquake.
By law, California cities must produce a balanced budget, implying cost cuts or revenue increases needed for the core city budget of about $4 billion.
In the longer run, said the group, the city will face further declines in services from budget cuts unless fundamental changes are made in the city's administration and operations.
Rocked by riots, fires and an earthquake in the recent past, Los Angeles has seen a sharp slowdown in what was once soaring growth in revenues for the city.
Revenues from major tax sources this fiscal year are expected to decline slightly from year-earlier levels -- a striking reversal for a city whose revenue growth has ranged between 6% and 10% annually for the last two decades.
Political analysts were quick to warn that the panel faces an uphill climb with its proposals, which aren't officially binding on any part of the city government.
Among other things, the plutocratic makeup of the panel -- unusually narrow in a city with a diverse ethnic and racial population -- may act against it.
However, it appears that Mayor Riordan may use the report as an important stepping stone.
In a statement, he called the report "an important blueprint to make city government function efficiently and effectively."
Mr. Riordan added that "the real genius will be taking action to implement the recommendations."
From the outside, at least, there appears to be breathing room for the city.
Los Angeles bonds are rated double-A by both Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard & Poor's Corp.
Moody's last year downgraded the issues from Triple-A.
S&P has added a "negative outlook" to its rating, meaning that it may decline in future.
Panel members said they were struck as they looked closely at the city's inner financial workings.
"What we found, I think, surprised all of us," said Michael E. Tennenbaum, chairman of the panel and a senior managing partner at Bear, Stearns & Co.
The panel rejected tax increases as "self-defeating" and recommended instead steps that it said would add between $1 billion and $1.15 billion annually in savings and additional revenue to the city's general fund within five years.
Some $370 million of the total gains would come from normal, projected revenue growth.
The rest, however, would come from a variety of sources, including about $240 million in annual savings from declines in city personnel and $118 million in increased transfers from the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, which is the nation's largest municipally owned utility.
Also on the panel's list is a projected $60 million to $130 million annually from a proposed leasing of the Los Angeles International Airport to private interests -- a campaign suggestion of Mayor Riordan that has already prompted substantial debate and that faces legal hurdles.
On the other side of the ledger, the group said the city should increase outlays for police and for basic city facilities and equipment.
Such new outlays would total about $849 million annually within five years, the panel said.
