The pound surged against the dollar and the mark after some bullish U.K. employment news pleased investors banking on a strong recovery there.
The dollar slipped against the mark, which benefited from signs that German interest-rate cuts could be slow in coming.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7337 marks, down from 1.7416 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 112.20 yen, down from 112.40 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.5035, up strongly from $1.4905.
About midday Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 112.26 yen and at 1.7332 marks.
The pound jumped in European trading after Britain's Employment Department reported an unexpectedly large drop in the ranks of the unemployed.
This was widely viewed as reassurance that the British economy is on the road to recovery.
The report showed that the number of jobless in the U.K. dropped 46,800 during December, almost double the decline of 23,500 most analysts had expected.
Traders pushed up the pound to a key psychological level at 2.60 marks for the first time since Britain quit the European Monetary System's Exchange Rate Mechanism in September 1992.
And when traders saw that the pound was able to surpass that point without sparking intervention by the Bank of England to halt the rise, they continued to pour into the currency, pushing it briefly above 2.61 marks before profit-taking emerged to trim the gains.
Late in New York, the pound traded at 2.6063 marks, up from 2.5959 marks Tuesday.
Traders looked upon the unexpectedly strong jobs numbers as "extra confirmation that a long sterling-mark position is a good idea," said Belal Khan, senior customer dealer at Bank of Tokyo in New York.
The United Kingdom "is a good bet for the future," said Lynn Tierney, vice president of Shawmut Bank of Boston.
"Interest rates aren't going lower and inflation isn't a problem."
Traders added that yesterday's strong move appeared to dispel lingering concerns that the Bank of England would step in to halt any steep rise in the pound against the mark, because of potential damage to Britain's exports.
Indeed, the U.K. Treasury noted in its latest monthly report on monetary conditions that while the pound has recently risen against the mark, its trade-weighted index against the currencies of all Britain's major trading partners has shown little movement.
That comment appeared to play down the importance to British authorities of the pound's recent gains against the mark.
Meanwhile, the dollar moved lower against the mark as traders reversed their expectations on the near-term movement of interest rates in the U.S. and Germany.
Traders said U.S. Labor Department statistics released yesterday indicating the producer price index declined a seasonally adjusted 0.1% in December -- atop last week's weaker-than-expected employment figures -- absolved the U.S. Federal Reserve from having to raise interest rates any time soon.
Late last year, many were predicting that the Fed would raise interest rates during the first quarter to stem inflationary pressures.
Traders also had been expecting the Bundesbank to lower rates in January because of continuing recession and high unemployment.
But yesterday, Guntram Palm, a member of the central bank's policy-making panel, said he was "rather skeptical" that the bank would take such action soon.
