There's no escape.
ATV, Codec, edutainment, HDTV, synthespian. . . .
You want to scream, you want to tell them all to go away.
But you can't.
It's the future, and you may as well get used to it.
So, to ease your way, here's a list of words that are bound to come up.
Memorize them.
You'll be part of the in-crowd.
Advanced television (ATV): A catchall term for high-resolution, large-screen TV sets.
High-definition television is one form; wide-screen standard TV sets are another.
(See high-definition television.)
Air mouse: A sophisticated remote-control device that, rather than simply zapping to a new channel, will let a viewer point to a particular spot on the TV screen and log an order or request for more information.
It may not be ready for several years.
Analog: An all-but-obsolete means of storing or transmitting information by treating it as a continuous wave form.
The problem with analog is that the wave tends to degrade once it leaves the origination point.
(That's why some cellular phone calls sound so faint on the receiving end).
Digital, the emerging alternative to analog, doesn't have that problem.
(See digital.)
The beast: Anthing that's totally cool.
As in: "Video-on-demand is the beast."
Blendo: The combination of different media from different sources-computer graphics, scanned images, animation, video.
Akin to multimedia, but with a more kitchen-sink approach.
Box: As in "set-top box," a reference to the device that sits atop a TV set to link viewers to cable systems and, in the future, to all manner of interactive video services.
Codec: Short for coder/decoder, it refers to the compression equipment used in video conferencing and other data-compressed delivery systems.
Content: The multimedia term for anything that can help fill those 500 channels that cable operators keep threatening to deliver.
"Casablanca" used to be a Hollywood classic; "I Love Lucy" was vintage television.
Now both are "content."
Convergence: The blurring of lines between publishing, telecommunications, consumer electronics, computers and entertainment, due to advances in technology.
It's the reason some Baby Bell executives are doing the Hollywood air kiss and calling each other "Babe."
Cyberpork: Government money that flows to well-connected information-highway contractors.
Not to be confused with regular government pork, which tends to get doled out for decidedly low-tech projects such as (real) highways.
Dance partner: Term used by some top Baby Bell executives to describe potential cable partners.
A few of the regional Bell companies will probably wind up as wallflowers, because many of the most attractive partners are already taken.
Dark fiber: The portion of fiber-optic cabling that isn't being used yet.
The amount of data beamed over fiber-optic networks is rising exponentially every year, yet only 0.1% of fiber capacity is in use.
Regional Bell companies and other providers lay tons of more fiber every year.
Digital: A means of storing and transmitting data by reducing it to electronic signals in a series of digits -- ones and zeros -- and then reassembling them for an exact reproduction.
Once everything traveling the "highway" has been "digitized" -- the voices on a telephone call, musical recordings from a compact disk, video images, newspaper listings -- it could be interchangeable and compatible.
One snag: The standards for digitizing haven't been finalized.
(See analog and MPEG.)
Digital film: The electronic manipulation of film images.
"Aladdin" and "Jurassic Park" are among the movies that have used digital film techniques to score big at the box office.
Dogs watching television: Phrase that describes how some Hollywood people look when they hear multimedia pitches from technology executives.
When dogs watch television, they bark or cock their heads, but you never know whether they have any idea what's going on; tech types say that the same thing goes for movie brass -- and the press, for that matter.
Edutainment: A hybrid to describe media products that combine educational and entertainment components.
A cousin of infotainment, the cross between information and entertainment that typically shows up as extended advertisements on cable TV.
Flame: To post a message on a public electronic network that is designed to insult or incite others.
Do enough flaming and you get a reputation as a flamer, someone who likes to agitate others.
Full-motion video: The standard video transmission of 30 frames a second.
Anything less than full-motion appears jerky, sort of like most video-conferencing sessions.
Future-proof: Refers to technology that supposedly won't become outdated anytime soon.
(Note: In the fast-moving world of multimedia, "soon" can refer to virtually any period of time following announcement of a new product or service.)
Hand mouse: A device that allows the user to browse through catalogs and the like the old-fashioned way -- thumbing through the pages by hand.
The hand mouse is frowned upon by purveyors of multimedia, which are spending billions in the belief that people really want to browse through catalogs through their (soon-to-be) interactive television.
Head end: An origination point on a network.
In cable parlance, it refers to the distribution center from which cable lines fan out.
High-definition television (HDTV): High-resolution TV that offers picture quality roughly two to four times that of standard television.
The U.S., leap-frogging Japan, has embraced fully digital HDTV standards, but the cost of installing HDTV could run $50 billion to $100 billion -- in addition to similar spending for interactive services.
Interactive: Refers to a two-way, viewer-controlled electronic process that allows consumers to select among a range of information, entertainment, educational and shopping options.
Internet: A web of interconnected computer networks that sprang from a U.S. government effort to connect government and academic sites.
It currently links about 15 million people world-wide who use it for everything from serious scientific research to simple E-mail.
Meltomedia: A variation on "multimedia."
Sometimes called "muchomedia."
(See multimedia.)
Mouse potato: The interactive-TV generation's version of the couch potato.
MPEG: A set of technical standards for compressing digital video and audio, set by the Moving Picture Experts Group.
Its first effort, MPEG-1, is already used to store video clips on CD-ROMs and may be used for delivering movies-on-demand.
Coming soon: MPEG-2, the sequel, which offers much higher picture quality and has been picked for high-definition TV.
Standards-mongers already are envisioning MPEG-4, covering wireless video transmission.
Problem: These standards aren't entirely compatible; today's hardware may not play tomorrow's video.
Multimedia: The blending of different types of media-audio, video, data-into a single product or service.
In practice, however, the term is used to refer to practically anything that dazzles the senses and has moneymaking potential, from Disney's "It's a Small World" boat ride to Bell Atlantic's video-on-demand tests in northern Virginia.
(See video-ondemand.)
Navigator: A software program that allows people to browse more easily through interactive services, programs and information.
Several companies are developing navigators in the hopes their approaches will become the industry's single, de facto standard.
NYM-ROD: Refers to a person or group that insists on turning everything into an acromyn.
(See ATV, Codec, HDTV.)
Pipes: Catchall term for the actual network -- the fiber-optic lines, copper and coaxial cabling -- used to transmit programming into the homes and businesses of customers.
Repurpose: Multimedia's version of recycling, it's the converting of content -- Hollywood movies, TV programming and so on -- into a digital format so it can be zapped across the (digital) information highway.
Road kill: As in, "Nobody wants to become road kill on the superhighway," it is an unflattering reference to companies getting left behind in the multimedia gold rush.
Server: A computerized storage system used to zap movies and other data to customers, using cable, phone lines or other networks.
May include disk and tape storage devices, a network interface, signal processing and compression capability, operating system and filing software.
The fancy innards frequently come with a fancy price tag, in the millions of dollars.
Signal compression: Using software and hardware to squeeze information into a tiny electronic package.
The idea is to condense as much information as possible to jam it down a pipe.
Like an electronic Nerf ball, the information -- be it a movie or a concert recording -- springs back to its normal "shape" when it is decompressed.
Sociomedia: Using the computer to raise the consciousness of society.
According to Wired magazine, the idea was suggested by hypermedia theorist Edward Barrett in his book of the same name.
Synthespian: A synthetic actor created by 3-D computer animation.
The Synthespian Hall of Fame would no doubt include synthespian great Max Headroom.
Technopolis: Refers to the sum total of the technological infrastructure of society.
No kidding.
VHS quality: Refers to a video-picture quality that is generally acceptable to consumers.
A benchmark for rating compression and transmission technologies.
Betamax quality actually was better, but consumers rejected it anyway because more "content" was available on VHS.
Video dial tone: An oxymoron that refers to the use of the telephone system as a video-distribution system.
Video-on-demand: A service that offers any program you want to see, anytime you want to see it.
That means no more shuffling around the video store poring over leftovers, and no more fiddling with the VCR, trying to figure out how to record a show that's going to be on when you aren't home.
With video-on-demand, you control the programming schedule.
Ms. Cauley is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
This glossary relies, in part, on information from Wired magazine, the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences and "The New Hacker's Dictionary."
