In a move that could trigger another round of confrontation between Russia's president and parliament, the State Duma voted a sweeping amnesty that pardons leaders of the attempted August 1991 coup and hard-liners who led the armed rebellion in Moscow in October.
The amnesty passed by a vote of 253-67, with 28 abstaining, indicating that many reform-oriented and centrist parties backed it.
Konstantin Zatulin, deputy chairman of the centrist Party of Unity and Accord, said his party, along with the conservative Agrarian Party and others, were the initiators of the proposal.
"The idea behind this agreement was to start over, to revive Russia after the adoption of the constitution," Mr. Zatulin told reporters.
"We have tried to do everything humanly possible so that as a result of this decision the past will stop influencing the present and the dead will stop influencing the living."
But reformers who opposed the bill, primarily from the Russia's Choice bloc, warned that it would heighten tension and bring political confrontation back to the streets.
As the voting was concluded, one member of the Duma shouted out from the floor, "Thank you, gentlemen.
Now you've opened the way to civil war."
The amnesty covers men under arrest for inciting mass disorder last autumn, including former Parliament Chairman Ruslan Khasbulatov, former Vice President Alexander Rutskoi and militants Ilya Konstantinov and Viktor Anpilov.
It also covers former Soviet top officials now on trial at the constitutional court for leading the August 1991 attempted coup, as well as organizers of a hard-line demonstration in May 1993 in which there were violent clashes with police.
It also frees hundreds of businessmen who were convicted during the Soviet era of "economic crimes," including buying and reselling goods and other commercial activities that today are considered ordinary.
The amnesty passed on the eve of a major address by President Boris Yeltsin on conditions in the country and his plans for further reforms.
The speech is widely expected to be conciliatory and to focus on the need for stability and unity.
However, presidential aide Emil Paine told the Itar-Tass news service that the amnesty decision is "an open symbolic challenge" to the president.
It "puts a constructive dialogue between the president and the parliament under big doubt," he added.
The constitution says that the State Duma has the right to grant amnesty while the president has the right to grant pardons.
It does not explain what the distinction is between the two words and no one is certain what the writers of the constitution intended.
Thus, it is unclear whether Mr. Yeltsin's approval will be needed or not.
According to parliament members, the amnesty goes into effect as soon as it is published in the Russian press.
Itar-Tass reported that it will be implemented in six months.
The decision cancels the investigation by a parliament committee into the events of Oct. 3 and 4, when diehards took up arms and refused to leave the parliament building, and the president's decision two weeks earlier to ban the parliament.
Dozens of people died in armed clashes during those events, and both sides are generally seen as having contravened the constitution.
The decision also puts an end to the trial of alleged plotters of the attempted August 1991 coup, which has been limping along for the past two years, with sessions often delayed on procedural grounds or due to the ill health of the accused.
Political analysts have long said that almost no one has a real interest in resolving the case because so many people have skeletons in their closets.
Some political analysts say the overwhelming vote in favor of amnesty reveals the political self-interest of today's leaders.
Most of the leaders of parliament factions, whether reformist or conservative, have their eyes on Mr. Yeltsin's job and reckon that undermining him in any way will serve their purposes, said Alexei Pushkov, deputy editor of the weekly Moscow News.
"I'm afraid various voices coincided because everyone wants Yeltsin out, not because of particular sympathy for the August coup plotters," Mr. Pushkov said.
But the decision is more likely to boost the power of extremists than moderates.
