After decades of running their businesses like riverboat gamblers, small Texas energy producers are starting to hedge their bets.
Burned by wild oil price swings, Texas independents are turning to the futures markets for protection.
Joining larger oil and gas companies -- not to mention farmers and cattle ranchers -- they're learning hedging techniques to bring some stability to their finances.
But critics warn that small producers could get in over their heads with such sophisticated trading.
And they caution that the timing now may be wrong for betting against the oil markets.
Though nobody keeps exact statistics, experts say hedging by small producers has surged recently, especially since December, when the price of oil plummeted to a five-year low of $13.75 a barrel.
Enron Corp., Houston, says business from producers has quadrupled in the past year in its risk-management trading operation.
A spokeswoman for the New York Mercantile Exchange says oil producers' increased interest contributed to a 27% jump in the volume of crude-oil futures trading in December from a year earlier.
"Five years ago, everyone grumbled about the market in New York setting the price of crude oil in West Texas," says T. Boone Pickens, whose Dallas-based Mesa Inc. has used hedges for years.
"Today, if you have five producers sitting around a table, two or three will be using market hedges, or at least be familiar with them."
Meanwhile, Texas Railroad Commissioner Barry Williamson is doing his best to see that the practice spreads further.
After watching hedging during a recent tour of the New York Merc trading floor, he launched plans to make an educational mailing to about 8,000 Texans, mostly energy producers, in the next few weeks.
"A lot of producers don't know a lot about it or understand how it works," he says.
But that's just the problem, say skeptics, who warn that people can lose their shirts if they mess with some of the more complicated hedging techniques.
Indeed, the German engineering and metals conglomerate Metallgesellschaft AG recently said it may have lost $1 billion in an energy-derivatives trading scheme.
And even the most basic hedging transaction -- in which a producer agrees to sell a commodity at today's price on a future date, thereby hedging against any price drop -- may offer scant benefit now.
Oil prices are so low, goes the argument, there's little downside risk left.
"It's kind of like closing the barn door after the cow has gotten out," says John J. Esslinger, president of Enron's Gas Services Group.
He says it makes more sense to hedge on natural-gas production, where prices are still relatively high.
There are dozens of different hedges, nearly all of which are "derivatives," or financial instruments whose value is derived from underlying assets, in this case the price of crude oil or natural gas.
Some are traded publicly on the New York Merc; others are offered through brokerage houses or "risk-management" providers.
Often the transaction takes place only on paper, with no actual delivery.
In the best case, a hedge works like Mr. Pickens's decision to hedge his entire 1986 oil output -- four million barrels -- before the market crashed.
By taking a "short" position on the futures market when oil prices were at $26 -- meaning he agreed to sell the commodity at that price at a later date -- and liquidating his position when they hit $16, Mesa made $30 million.
Mr. Pickens now argues: "Hedging isn't speculative.
If you don't hedge, then that's speculation."
But if one's timing isn't as good as Mr. Pickens's, hedging can be a costly way to buy price insurance.
After oil prices plunged last fall, Henry Petroleum Co. of Midland spent $20,000 through a brokerage firm to buy a price floor of $14.50 a barrel for 12,000 barrels a month of its production from January to April, says company President James Henry.
But the strategy has done little good so far, as oil prices have mostly risen lately.
Guy Farmer, vice president of finance at Midland Resources Inc., is more worried about natural-gas prices.
In its first hedge, the Midland company used a "swap" through Enron to lock in a price of $1.92 a cubic foot of gas from December through April.
In this swap, Midland Resources must pay Enron for every cent the price goes above the set price, and Enron must pay the company for every cent it goes below the price.
"We look at it as an insurance policy to maintain minimum cash flow," Mr. Farmer says.
But gas prices have since jumped to well over $2 a cubic foot.
Midland isn't benefiting from the rise, while its competitors who didn't hedge are.
Perhaps a bigger danger, says David Hall, a broker at Merrill Lynch's Houston office, is that producers will move from hedging to speculating, trading frequently to gamble on price swings rather than being content to lock in a price for a commodity they actually plan to sell.
"These independents drill oil wells for a living.
They are gamblers at heart," says Mr. Hall, who says he has unsuccessfully tried to prevent several of his producer clients from speculating.
Another problem independent energy companies have with hedging is credit.
Many hedges require producers to put up either cash or a letter of credit to prove they can meet their obligations if the market moves against them.
That forces companies such as Equinox Oil Co. of Houston to limit their hedging.
When oil prices jumped after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990, Equinox hedged half its crude-oil output with a swap, locking in a price of $23 a barrel for 18 months and eventually reaping a big profit.
A three-year deal would have made it more, but it thought the credit demands were too high.
If the same opportunity arose today, however, Equinox might fare better.
Banks are becoming more willing to offer unsecured or semi-secured letters of credit for producers.
The reason: The hedge makes producers more stable.
