Clenching his fist, Peter Middleton, chief executive officer of Lloyd's of London, gives vent to a sense of frustration.
"The people who are saying Lloyd's is finished are wrong," he says.
"Just wrong."
Lloyd's, which isn't a company, but a 306-year-old insurance market, has been wallowing in red ink.
Its members (investors), known as Names, are locked in legal battles with their agents and the market's central organization.
Earlier this week, a coroner's court in southern England heard accusations that losses at Lloyd's were responsible for the suicide of a 64-year-old former admiral.
Amid toughening worldwide competition, doomsayers are raising doubts whether Lloyd's can survive.
But Mr. Middleton, a gritty 54-year-old former monk who came to Lloyd's from running the Thomas Cook travel agency, will have none of such pessimism.
In just over a year at the market's helm, in tandem with its chairman, David Rowland, he has piloted major changes -- from tighter accounting practices to the introduction of limited-liability investment funds to back Lloyd's insurance policies -- and he plans plenty more.
"We have already quite significantly transformed this market," he asserts.
"We know it will come through."
Following a run of heavy losses, Lloyd's appears at last to have returned to profitability in 1993.
In the third quarter of last year, Mr. Middleton says, income from premiums booked at Lloyd's exceeded payments made on claims for the first time in 2 1/2 years.
For the market as a whole, he adds, "on all the evidence available, there is a belief that 1993 was profitable."
The improvement, to a large extent, reflects a world-wide upturn in the cyclical insurance market.
Reacting to their heavy losses of the past few years, Lloyd's underwriters, like insurance companies, have begun charging higher premiums.
But the upturn also reflects the impact of a drive to revamp the market's old-fashioned, club-like milieu.
Chores such as the calculation of investors' trading results and tax obligations, previously carried out in a decentralized manner by members' agents, are now being centralized, cutting costs and improving efficiency.
Later this year, for the first time, Names will get unified statements relating to all their Lloyd's business.
At underwriting firms, increasingly sophisticated technology is producing some surprising innovations.
One firm, for example, has developed a computerized map of Britain providing geological and other data useful for mapping subsidence risks for household insurance.
Another uses a computerised road map, complete with details of garage-repair facilities, to assist car drivers in the event of accidents or breakdowns.
Such changes, Mr. Middleton says, are part of a process of bringing greater professionalism to the market.
Though Lloyd's still employs a doorman in a top hat and a scarlet coat at the front entrance to its trading floor, most of the frock-coated ushers, known as "waiters," who formerly presided over the interior of its headquarters, have gone.
As part of an austerity drive, spending by the Corporation of Lloyd's, the market's central body, fell last year to #120 million ($178.6 million) from #152 million in 1992.
The corporation's payroll, meanwhile, shrank to 1,800 employees from 2,200.
In parallel, the arrival of corporate capital at the start of this year, in the form of limited-liability investment funds, has helped to reverse several years of declines in Lloyd's' capacity for taking on new business.
Though many Names have been forced by their losses to withdraw from the market, those that remain have increased their participation, raising to #560,000 from #480,000 the average value, calculated in terms of premium income, of the business they underwrite.
Such positive developments mark a welcome change to three years of deepening gloom.
In its three most recently closed reporting years -- 1988, 1989 and 1990 -- Lloyd's ran up losses totaling #6 billion.
Under the market's system of drawing up accounts three years in arrears to give time for claims to come in, it's set to unveil another heavy deficit for 1991, possibly of as much as #2.5 billion.
Results for 1992 aren't due out until next year, but they are expected to be bad as well.
Some commentators are estimating a 1992 deficit of around #1 billion.
Ironically, the size of the losses has been exaggerated by an accounting process introduced 10 years ago as part of a promotional drive.
A process of double counting helped to magnify profits when Lloyd's was earning money.
But it has had the opposite effect amid the recent losses.
(Double counting occurs, for example, when a syndicate or an individual loses money on a given insurance transaction, but then transfers part of that loss elsewhere by claiming on a stop-loss insurance policy.)
According to Mr. Middleton, Lloyd's' 1990 loss of #2.9 billion probably included #600 million of losses that had been counted twice.
In a bid for greater clarity, Mr. Middleton says he is trying to switch to a system that will reflect the market's actual cash flow, as premiums come in and claims are paid out.
With that in view, Lloyd's underwriters are now being asked to provide quarterly figures, starting with the first quarter of this year.
In parallel, Lloyd's is developing a screen-based computerized trading system to replace the present paper-based system of underwriting insurance business.
Due to become operational by the end of 1995, the new system, coupled with the changes in accounting procedures, should give both traders and Lloyd's central authorities a much better overview of market developments.
To be sure, there are plenty of hurdles still to be overcome.
On the legal front, continued skirmishing between Names and their agents and Lloyd's itself poses a worrisome threat to the market's credibility.
More than 30 "action groups" representing 17,000 of Lloyd's 32,000 investors, are suing their agents for alleged negligence and mismanagement.
A #900 million settlement plan, offered by Lloyd's in a bid to end the wrangling and partly financed by money from its central fund, was rebuffed last month by a majority of Names, who apparently thought they could get a better deal in court.
Hearings in the first of the suits, relating to the Gooda Walker group of syndicates, are due to open next month.
Lloyd's, meanwhile, has made it clear that it won't make an improved settlement offer.
But Mr. Middleton says he isn't pessimistic about the chances of some sort of out-of-court settlement between Names and their agents in the not-too-distant future.
Some action groups clearly want to test their claims in court, he says, "but I don't detect any appetite among the action groups for three to four years of litigation."
Once there have been "a couple of rulings on liability," action groups that are still waiting for their turn in court may be tempted to seek out-of-court settlements to their suits, he predicts.
At that point, "if they need help from the center to bring that about, we'll be very happy to help," he says, "though I can't say we would be happy to supply money from the central fund."
