Congressional hearings this week will give Republican lawmakers their first chance to grill Clinton administration officials about legal issues related to a failed Arkansas thrift.
The Senate Banking Committee scheduled a hearing for Thursday on the performance of the Resolution Trust Corp., which is a Treasury Department unit and the government's savings-and-loan cleanup agency.
Republicans, led by Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York, promise to delve into how the RTC is handling an investigation into any wrongdoing linked to failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
Various news accounts and GOP allegations have linked Madison, which failed in 1989, to helping Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton finance their investment in Whitewater Development Co., an Arkansas land-development venture, and to fundraising for Mr. Clinton's gubernatorial campaign debts.
An independent counsel is investigating such claims.
The GOP will get a crack at witnesses including Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen; Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman, who is also interim RTC chief; acting Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
Chairman Andrew Hove; and Jonathan Fiechter, acting head of the Office of Thrift Supervision.
The FDIC and OTS also have S&L regulatory powers.
Under GOP pressure, Banking Committee Chairman Donald Riegle (D., Mich.) set the Thursday hearing to receive a report of the Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board, which monitors the RTC.
Mr. Bentsen is chairman of the oversight board, and Messrs. Altman, Hove and Fiechter are among its members.
Rep. Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas), chairman of the House Banking Committee, has agreed to hold a similar hearing, where Rep. Jim Leach (R., Iowa) plans to raise Madison questions.
Messrs. Riegle and Gonzalez had rebuffed GOP demands for broader hearings into the Whitewater-Madison issue itself.
Mr. Altman, a college classmate of the president and a longtime friend of the Clintons, is expected to get special GOP attention Thursday.
"We intend to fully explore the actions of the RTC and its interim leader in the Madison/Whitewater controversy, including the delayed and incomplete responses to congressional requests for information as well as the question of Mr. Altman's recusal," Sen. D'Amato said.
Sen. D'Amato has called for Mr. Altman to remove himself from overseeing matters involving Madison.
Sen. D'Amato, the banking panel's ranking Republican, also has accused the RTC of dragging its heels in the probe.
Mr. Altman has said the RTC is conducting a vigorous investigation.
The Senate and House, by 95-0 and 390-1 tallies, have voted to extend the RTC's statute of limitations for fraud and gross negligence in civil claims against S&L wrongdoers.
The statute of limitations, which would otherwise run out for Madison and several hundred other thrifts on Monday, will be extended until the end of 1995, when the RTC itself expires.
Sen. D'Amato said Banking Committee Republicans also will question last week's FDIC report that exonerated the Rose Law Firm in Arkansas, where Mrs. Clinton and several administration officials were partners, of violating any conflict-of-interest rules in its dealings with Madison.
Some have called the report a "whitewash," Sen. D'Amato said.
About two weeks ago, Ricki Tigert, the president's nominee to head the FDIC, recused herself from matters involving the Clintons and Madison.
Ms. Tigert, also a friend of the Clintons, faced possible GOP efforts to block Senate confirmation of her nomination.
