Shares of American Medical Electronics Inc. plunged 22% after its president and chief executive officer refused the board's request that he resign and instead asked the company's four outside directors to quit.
Neither side provided details of the rift at the maker of medical devices, or indicated any willingness to compromise.
In an interview, Chairman Arthur W. Schwalm said the board will continue to seek the resignation of Joseph Mooibroek, president and CEO, who has led the company since 1982 and is its only inside director.
"We just feel that there is a necessity for a change of leadership," Mr. Schwalm said adding, however, that there is no dissatisfaction with the company's recent results and that Mr. Mooibroek has not been accused of any wrongdoing.
Mr. Mooibroek said he has no intention of resigning.
"For the last five years, this company has put together almost 35% compounded revenue growth," he said.
"People may question my leadership, but they certainly can't question my results."
Nor can the board inexpensively fire Mr. Mooibroek, who earns $210,000 a year.
According to his employment contract, termination without cause would entitle him to severance equal to twice his earnings over the past two years.
Industry analysts were at a loss to explain the sudden turmoil at the company, which makes electronic stimulation devices used to treat broken bones.
"You would expect to see this kind of thing from a company that is struggling," said Charles Olsziewski, an analyst with Prudential Securities Research, "but this seems to be the opposite situation."
Indeed, the company seemed to be on an upswing in recent quarters, diversifying into new business areas and watching its stock trade in the $16 range, up from around $6 a share in late 1992.
In 1993, American Medical's net income rose 39% to $5.3 million, or 74 cents a share, from $3.8 million, or 49 cents a share, in 1992.
Revenue rose 20% to $39.3 million from $32.7 million.
In trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market yesterday, American Medical shares closed at $13 a share, down $3.75.
