Procter & Gamble Co. and Syntex Corp. won Food and Drug Administration approval to market a nonprescription pain reliever based on the prescription drugs Naprosyn and Anaprox.
This marks one of the few times the FDA has overruled an advisory committee.
In June, two FDA advisory committees meeting jointly recommended against approving the marketing of a nonprescription form of the drugs.
In issuing its approval yesterday, the FDA said it addressed the advisory committees' concerns by asking P&G and Syntex to lower daily dosage levels, increase the recommended time between pills and include label warnings for children and elderly users.
The new pain reliever, called Aleve, will challenge established analgesic brands such as Johnson & Johnson's Tylenol, American Home Products Corp.'s Advil and Upjohn Co.'s Motrin IB.
Tylenol contains acetaminophen, and Advil and Motrin contain ibuprofen.
Aleve will be the first nonprescription pain reliever containing a new analgesic ingredient to enter the approximately $2.3 billion market since the FDA approved ibuprofen in 1984.
It will be available in the spring.
P&G, which is based in Cincinnati, and Syntex, of Palo Alto, Calif., formed a 50-50 joint venture in 1988 to make and market the product.
Aleve will contain 200 milligrams of naproxen and 20 milligrams of sodium.
Naproxen is the main ingredient in Syntex's Naprosyn, the nation's top-selling prescription nonsteroidal, anti-inflammatory pain reliever, which is used primarily to treat arthritis symptoms.
Anaprox, another Syntex prescription pain reliever, contains naproxen sodium.
Analysts said FDA approval gives Syntex a needed boost at a time when sales of its prescription drugs are sluggish and its stock has taken a beating.
However, James P. Keeney, an analyst with Mabon Securities Corp., said the product won't boost Syntex's earnings until fiscal 1996 at the earliest.
Approval is also a boost to P&G, which has been trying to enter the analgesics market for years to supplement its lineup of over-the-counter products.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading, P&G stock fell 37.5 cents to $58.50, and Syntex rose 37.5 cents to close at $16.375.
Aleve's labels will recommend the drug for the temporary relief -- in adults and children age 12 and over -- of pain related to the common cold, headaches, toothaches, backaches, muscle aches, minor arthritis and menstrual cramps and for fever reduction.
This broad positioning will help it gain users, although the analgesic market is very crowded, said Mr. Keeney, the analyst.
"I don't think it will be a runaway success, but they might get a respectable 10% to 20% market share."
Edwin L. Artzt, chairman of P&G, said "the over-the-counter opportunity for this drug is significant" because Naprosyn's total annual sales "are four times the total sales of ibuprofen" before it was approved as a nonprescription drug.
Mr. Artzt said initial advertisements will appeal to three groups seeking temporary pain relief: those who suffer from headaches, people with muscle aches and pains from sports and strenuous labor, and those feeling minor arthritis pain.
"This brand will be competing really frontally with the major brands in the analgesic market -- Advil, Tylenol and aspirin," Mr. Artzt said.
