PENNY-PINCHERS ARE OUT, visionaries in, as companies seek new executives.
After hiring "belt-tighteners" through the recession, companies now look for executives who can build businesses and "take them to the next plateau," says Alan Neely, managing director of Korn/Ferry International in Atlanta.
Companies are finally launching new product lines and divisions, which call for new leaders.
Search firms say their business has increased by at least 40% in the past year.
One-third of available executive jobs are for newly created positions, search firms say.
Candidates with expertise in finance, marketing or engineering are now more desirable than those with experience managing entire divisions.
The most highly sought managers also have overseas experience, particularly in Latin America, the Far East and Eastern Europe.
Executives spent 3.8 months finding new jobs in 1993, down from six months in 1991, says Drake Beam Morin, a consulting firm.
ART OF LYING: Here's how to write recommendations for lousy job candidates.
Excerpts from "The Lexicon of Intentionally Ambiguous Recommendations" (LIAR) by Lehigh University economist Robert Thornton whiz around the Internet.
For a candidate with interpersonal problems, he suggests saying: "I am pleased to say this person is a former colleague of mine."
For the lazy worker: "In my opinion, you will be very fortunate to get this person to work for you."
The book, published by Meadowbrook Press in Deep Haven, Minn., also suggests recommendations for the criminal: "He's a man of many convictions" and "I'm sorry we let her get away."
For the untrustworthy candidate: "Her true ability is deceiving."
And for the inept worker: "I most enthusiastically recommend this person with no qualifications whatsoever."
SECURITY GUARDS are hired increasingly to fight crime on the streets.
With police forces understaffed, merchants hire private security firms to patrol their blocks.
Guards sometimes monitor entire downtowns, watch parking lots and escort customers to their cars.
The private security-guard business will grow to $14 billion in 1994 from $12.7 billion last year.
The bulk of the increased demand comes from businesses, says Pinkerton's Inc.
Some businesses pool money to pay for neighborhood guards.
New York City lets companies form "business districts" that pay special taxes earmarked for private security.
In Houston, even the police department hires guards, who patrol the department's auto-theft storage lot, letting officers devote more time to protecting citizens.
Pinkerton's says its business jumped by 8,000 guard-hours a week after the earthquake, as California companies added security to deter looters.
HI-TECH INTERVIEWS: Job seekers in Pic'n Pay shoe stores must dial an 800 number and answer a 100-question interview via phone mail.
A computer compiles responses to the yes/no questions, even measuring how many seconds it takes to answer such queries as "To get a job, would you lie?"
Pic'n Pay says the system allows it to centralize personnel operations and ensure no one is asked illegal questions.
DEATH AT WORK: The rate of work-related homicides for black employees was more than twice that of white workers during the 1980s, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health says.
Black taxi drivers and gas-station attendants have especially high homicide rates.
Blacks may work in more dangerous neighborhoods than their white counterparts, experts speculate.
NOTHING COULD BE FINER than to employ in Carolina.
North Carolina cuts unemployment-insurance taxes by more than one-third; its unemployment-insurance trust fund has grown to $1.5 billion because its unemployment rate has been low.
But more than half of the states have had to raise unemployment taxes in the past year; Connecticut's fund is expected to run a $721 million deficit this year.
LAUGHTER IS big business, as companies seek ways to break office tension.
Companies are increasingly hiring humor consultants to help reduce employee stress and burnout.
"Everyone uses the expression `Someday we'll laugh about this.'
Why wait?" says Joel Goodman, director of the Humor Project in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He suggests workers pretend they are Allen Funt, of Candid Camera fame, for five minutes a day to find humor in stressful situations.
Businesses put cartoon bulletin boards near elevators and play funny videotapes in staff lounges.
Some managers wear "Save Time: See It My Way" buttons, while some workers keep props on desks like medicine bottles labeled "Extra Strength Screw-It-All."
Ben & Jerry's, which has celebrated Barry Manilow's and Elvis's birthdays, maintains an employee committee dedicated to increasing workplace happiness.
It is called the Joy Gang.
More than 1,000 managers, educators and others are expected to attend the Humor Project's Power of Positive Humor and Creativity Conference in Saratoga Springs from April 15-17.
THE CHECKOFF: Among the resume bloopers that have crossed the desk of personnel expert Robert Half: "I am a rabid typist." . . .
"Thank you for your consideration.
Hope to hear from you shorty." . . .
And "Here are my qualifications for you to overlook."
