Intel Corp., moving to stake out turf in a potentially big new business while bolstering its own microprocessor line, will unveil today new products that allow users of disparate personal computers to work on documents together and see each other while doing so.
The Santa Clara, Calif., chip-making giant said one product, called ProShare Document, is a software program that allows users of PCs in separate locations to edit the same document.
"In its most basic element, you get a PC document on your screen, send it over the wire to another person and you both see the same document," said Andrew Grove, Intel's president and chief executive officer.
"You can change it, annotate it, point at it, rearrange the document -- all the while conversing over the telephone."
Another product, called ProShare VideoSystem 200, allows PC users to see one another on their respective computer screens -- while at the same time working over a document, Intel said.
The products are set to appear in U.S. retail stores today, with a suggested retail price of $99 for ProShare and prices ranging from $1199 to $2499 for VideoSystem 200.
The video system's price will vary, depending on which local telecommunications provider is used to start it up.
Intel said American Telephone & Telegraph Co., BellSouth Corp. and Pacific Telesis Group's Pacific Bell unit, among others, have agreed to work with Intel on the conferencing products.
Intel's strategy in jumping into the fledgling PC conferencing market is twofold: It wants to get in on a $70 million industry that some analysts think could explode into the billions of dollars by decade's end.
And, since the video system requires high computing power, Intel wants to persuade users to quickly upgrade to its newest Pentium chip as it faces impending competition from a rival PowerPC chip developed by Apple Computer Inc., International Business Machines Corp. and Motorola Inc.
"Our whole business strategy depends on increasing volume of higher-powered chips, so we have been looking for applications that take advantage of the computing power that is available," Mr. Grove said.
Intel's launch of products in the market comes after it recently assembled a group of companies that plans to create rules for how PCs work together to hold conferences on their machines.
While the conferencing technology has developed, there hasn't been a single dominant standard that would allow companies to ensure that their products all work together in such conferences.
Other problems have dogged the growth of computer conferencing.
One has been the technology's relative high cost, because video-conferencing systems can run into the tens of thousands of dollars.
The costs have been high because companies such as PictureTel Corp., Danvers, Mass., provide a separate computer to power the conferencing arrangements.
Although Intel's prices are far lower, the company's PC products won't supplant the elaborate video-conferencing systems that PictureTel and other competitors provide for large gatherings such as in a board room without personal computers.
Another question mark on the technology, analysts say, is how many people will really want to see each other rather than conversing over the telephone.
Analysts say there appears to be more potential in collaboration of work over PCs.
