In the tony suburban enclave of Rye, N.Y., a small sign hangs in the doorway of Anthony Francella's art-supply store.
It reads: "Shoplifters Will Be Shot!
Survivors Will Be Prosecuted."
About 25 miles south in the heart of Harlem, Rafael Taveras, manager of the Neighborhood Food Market, grapples with crime differently.
Frightened by his weekly clashes with shoplifters, Mr. Taveras is trying to help the owner sell the establishment on Manhattan's 125th Street.
Small-business owners in the economically disparate locations of Rye and Harlem seem worlds apart.
But they share a financial and psychological burden common to small businesses in every part of the country: combating crimes, such as shoplifting and burglary, that imperil their profitability or even their survival.
Shoplifting takes an especially heavy toll on small businesses.
Nationwide, shoplifting costs businesses between $5 billion and $8 billion a year, according to figures compiled by the Better Business Bureau of Western New York after analyzing the problem locally.
Small businesses bear a disproportionately large share of these losses, the BBB says.
Most small businesses carry comprehensive insurance policies that cover losses from theft or burglary, but many say they don't report such incidents for fear that the cost of their policies will rise.
The U.S. government has begun to heed entrepreneurs' growing anxiety about crime.
Last month, Democratic Rep. John LaFalce of New York, chairman of the House of Representatives' Small Business Committee, asked the Small Business Administration and the Justice Department to draft proposals for fighting crime against small businesses.
So far, crime doesn't threaten the viability of the thriving business districts in Rye and Harlem.
But a recent visit to the main commercial thoroughfares in both places suggests that, at best, crime confronts store owners with a constant and worrisome threat without simple solutions.
At worst, crime forces small enterprises out of business.
Purchase Street winds lazily through downtown Rye, its sidewalks filled with well-dressed shoppers and its curbs lined with expensive foreign cars.
Charming boutiques dominate the thoroughfare.
Rye is clearly a town where violent crime is not a problem.
Crime of any kind has been rare -- until lately, at least.
There are no gates on storefronts.
The police department doesn't even compile annual crime statistics.
Even Mr. Francella, whose warning graces the door of his Rye Art store, admits that "crime isn't a big problem."
But other storekeepers disagree.
They note that shoplifting has become a real problem lately and that burglaries, once unheard of, are now common.
Rye Smoke Shop, a tiny store selling periodicals and tobacco products, recently suffered its first break-in in its 24-year history.
"There have been a lot of late-night break-ins here in town, but the media here don't report it," says Patrick Corcoran, who has owned the Lighthouse Bookstore for 11 years.
"People in Rye don't want to acknowledge there's a crime problem."
One night last year, thieves ripped the lock off the bookstore's door and stole about $240 from the cash register.
Mr. Corcoran now leaves the register's drawer open and empty at night so would-be robbers can see there's nothing inside.
Mr. Corcoran also is concerned about the increasing incidence of shoplifting.
To prevent pilferage, he plans to install electronic tracking devices on the books and a security gate at the door.
He doesn't know how much these measures will cost or how much he loses to shoplifters.
"If I thought about it hard enough, it would ruin my day," Mr. Corcoran says.
Greeley House, a bridal-gift shop in Rye, put all of its items behind glass two years ago after a group of shoplifters made off with three small crystal lamps worth $300 each.
Four security cameras, which cost $10,000 to install, now scan the store for shoplifters.
Tom Nordmann, owner of the Rye Liquor Store, laments changes in the community.
One night last summer, he says, thieves stole about $4 in change and a $3,000 cash register from his store.
"It wasn't like this when I started out," says Mr. Nordmann, who has worked at the store for 40 years and owned it for 22 years.
In Rye, he adds, "crime is more of a problem now."
Nonetheless, Rye storeowners don't fear attacks or daytime holdups -- unlike storeowners on Harlem's 125th Street, where high-school students enter shops with guns under their coats, and drug dealers operate out of store doorways.
At the Neighorhood Food Market, Mr. Taveras says that gangs of teenagers come in once a week to shoplift.
In one recent incident, an armed teenager ordered him to be quiet while others stole merchandise from the shelves.
"I've been here two months and there are too many problems," he complains.
"There are a lot of nice people around here, but these kids hold you up every day.
There's nowhere around here I want to work anymore."
Mr. Taveras is trying to sell Neighborhood Food Market, at what he says is a substantial loss to the owner, who bought it only nine months ago.
The manager says the market loses $15 to shoplifters out of every $100 of merchandise sold.
Despite crime fears, guns and drugs, 125th Street bustles with shoppers.
The street, which spans the breadth of upper Manhattan, buzzes with chaotic automobile traffic and is crammed with hundreds of tiny retailers.
The western half of 125th Street, particularly between Broadway and Lenox Avenue, has the highest concentration of commercial activity in Harlem.
Here are the landmark Apollo Theatre as well as numerous grocery stores, restaurants, hair salons and pharmacies.
An enlarged police presence seems to be curbing reported crime a bit, long-time residents say.
The New York Police Department says that in 1993 there were 91 robberies and 88 burglaries involving commercial establishments in the precinct covering most of the 125th Street business area.
That represents a decline of 47% and 39% respectively from 1988.
"It's a great location here," says Alexandria Orama, manager of Harlem Music Hut, a music store that opened on 125th Street last year.
"On a nice spring day, it's beautiful around here for the businesses because everybody's walking around."
But Music Hut is losing about $150 a month to shoplifters and already has weathered two break-ins.
Both times, thieves unsuccessfully tried to drill through the ceiling of the store's basement.
Music Hut owner Philip Orama says he spent almost $2,000 securing the basement doors and installing an alarm system after the second break-in.
To deter shoplifters, he pays a guard $200 a week to sit by the door.
Like most Harlem storeowners, Mr. Orama lowers a heavy metal gate over his storefront each night.
"It's a good block.
But we hear about stores being held up all the time," says Marie Runyon, director of Harlem Restoration Project Inc.
The project is renovating a nearby warehouse that will offer small businesses low rents and shared office services.
Ms. Runyon vows, "We will take every measure that we can to make sure the tenants are secure."
