Hearst Corp. said it is launching a series of multimedia services on home-oriented topics, called HomeNet.
One of the first projects of Hearst's year-old New Media & Technology Division, HomeNet will serve as an umbrella designation for a variety of electronic products, including CD-ROMs and on-line computer services.
Many of the products will be tied into areas covered by Hearst's magazines, including Popular Mechanics, House Beautiful and Good Housekeeping, and will carry the magazines' names as brands.
There could, for example, be a House Beautiful CD-ROM on home decorating.
All the major media companies are racing feverishly toward the electronic future.
Already, parts of many magazines can be read on computer screens through on-line services.
The Hearst effort stands out, however, because it isn't wedded to a single format and because it appears to be ready to market products faster than some competitors' efforts.
Alfred C. Sikes, former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission and head of Hearst's New Media division, said HomeNet plans to launch about 10 products in the next 12 months.
He said the average investment for each product is expected to be between $250,000 and $400,000.
"It is our strong view that just putting magazines on line isn't the way to go," said Mr. Sikes.
"We see Popular Mechanics, House Beautiful and the rest as bringing us expertise, brand names and a subscriber base," but the products created will be much more than just electronic versions of the magazines, he said.
Mr. Sikes said HomeNet will deliver interactive information on such topics as home renovation, decorating and recipes for entertaining.
HomeNet will distribute products from independent producers, as well as ones developed by Hearst.
Hearst said it plans to launch an on-line computer service under the HomeNet name late this year, probably through Prodigy or America On-Line, and will begin marketing CD-ROM titles under the HomeNet name by fall.
In addition to computers, Hearst plans to deliver HomeNet products to consumers' television sets.
Recently, Hearst announced a joint project with a number of Canadian companies to distribute on-line consumer services through a cable television company.
Called UBI, the service is scheduled to start on a small scale in the spring of 1995.
Hearst said HomeNet will provide a service on UBI when that project begins.
Industry reaction to Hearst's plans was generally positive.
"This sounds like the first major media company going in a multimedia direction that has instant returns," said Christopher Meigher, a former Time Inc. magazine executive who recently started his own multimedia company.
"They are going after a boomer audience, as we are, and these people like using the new media when it gives them personalized information."
Bruce Thorp, media analyst for Provident National Bank in Philadelphia, said, "This is clearly the direction a company like Hearst ought to be going.
But the big question continues to be: Who is the audience for this, and when will it be financially worthwhile to spend the big bucks required?"
