Manufacturers are the most optimistic over short-term business conditions since Dun & Bradstreet Corp. began polling them monthly more than four years ago.
In addition, construction executives surveyed continued to report strong optimism for near-term increases in new orders and employment.
"February conditions could be called manufacturing utopia: new and unfilled orders increased, while finished-goods inventories decreased," said Douglas P. Handler, manager of econometric analysis for D&B.
"These conditions resemble those during the last few months of 1993 and imply strong industrial production growth should continue into the first half of 1994," he added.
The monthly survey of 1,000 manufacturers nationwide includes a variety of sectors and small, medium and large companies that aren't weighted by size, Joseph Duncan, vice president and chief economist for D&B, said.
"When the recovery began three years ago, nobody felt good about it," Mr. Duncan said, adding that manufacturers in the past have hesitated to increase production.
"Now we're seeing sustained demand," he added.
D&B's industrial-sentiment index in February for the coming three months rose for the third consecutive month to 28, the highest level since January 1990.
The index represents the percentage of responding companies expecting increases in orders, production and other facets of manufacturing, minus the percentage expecting decreases.
"Manufacturers' expectations are for bigger backlogs and stable finished-goods inventories," Mr. Handler said.
"Given that situation, it's no wonder that the majority of firms are planning to increase production."
The construction survey found that for the coming three months, the order books index rose 14 points from last year's levels, while the employment index was up three points from a year ago.
The increase in construction optimism is "particularly noteworthy since the survey was conducted after the U.S. Federal Reserve Board raised interest rates in early February," Mr. Handler said.
"Construction executives believe conditions are so good that interest rates are not going to choke off growth in the industry."
