The dollar was beaten down to a four-month low against the mark yesterday on rumors concerning the Whitewater investigation.
Panic selling sent the dollar on a downward spiral beneath a key psychological support level of 1.7000 marks to an intraday low of 1.6755 marks.
That level was previously surpassed Oct. 29, when the dollar hit 1.6696 marks.
Late in New York yesterday, the dollar was quoted at 1.6825 marks, well down from 1.7025 marks late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 105.25 yen, down from 105.80 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.5040, up from $1.4944.
About noon Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.10 yen and at 1.6843 marks.
Reports of grand jury appearances by White House officials -- mixed with breathless rumor-mongering surrounding the case -- sparked a "dollar liquidation," said Mark Schwartz, vice president at Lehman Brothers Inc.
The pressure on the dollar was intensified by another tumble on the U.S. bond market, where the yield on the bellwether 30-year bond jumped to a recent high of 6.95%, traders said.
"There was a huge sell-off of dollars and dollar assets," Mr. Schwartz said.
"It's like a liquidation, and when people are liquidating -- and everyone wants to sell -- it's hard to know where the bottom is."
Margaret Williams, chief of staff for Hillary Clinton, yesterday was the first of six subpoenaed White House officials to appear before a federal grand jury to testify on the Whitewater affair.
The grand jury is looking into allegations surrounding Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton's involvement in the soured Whitewater Development Co., an Arkansas real-estate venture tied to a collapsed savings-and-loan association.
Questions surrounding the real-estate deal have gone beyond the Clintons' original investment, which occurred long before Mr. Clinton's November 1992 election victory, and now center on speculation about a White House cover-up.
The dollar's plunge began early in Asian trading, prodded in part by a report from the Washington-based consultancy Johnson Smick International Inc., that described, without substantiation, new evidence on Mr. Clinton's ties to the failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan and raised new questions about the circumstances of the suicide of former White House attorney Vincent Foster.
The White House dismissed the report.
Nevertheless, the market remained rumor-driven.
"There is enormous nervousness on the Whitewater situation and rumors about Hillary Clinton and about the Foster suicide have been building up all day," Lehman's Mr. Schwartz said.
Then, too, there were the technical aspects of the drop.
As major support levels gave way, "we hit a lot of stop losses and people began running for cover," said Peter Iversen, vice president at Shawmut Bank of Boston.
The dollar made a mild recovery late in New York trading, as bargain-hunters swept into the market, traders said.
"It should be a rosy picture for the dollar with the U.S. economy performing well, but it's a stick in the wheel when the administration comes under fire on moral and ethical issues," Mr. Iversen added.
