Grumman Corp. agreed to deliver this week to Northrop Corp., its unwanted suitor, the same detailed financial information that it has given to its preferred partner, Martin Marietta Corp., according to Northrop officials.
The Northrop statement followed a lengthy meeting of Grumman directors yesterday afternoon.
A spokesman for Grumman, based in Bethpage, N.Y., declined to comment.
Northrop demanded the proprietary financial details Thursday when it made its surprise hostile offer of $60 a share, or about $2.04 billion, for Grumman.
The bid topped Martin Marietta's offer of $55 a share, or about $1.93 billion, which was part of a negotiated transaction between executives of Martin Marietta and Grumman, a maker of defense-electronics systems with expertise in building naval aircraft.
"Our choice all along has been to work with the people at Grumman on a level playing field," said Kent Kresa, Northrop's chairman, in a statement.
He called Grumman's agreement to provide information "a step in the right direction.
We look forward to continuing to hold discussions."
As Northrop began its official tender offer for Grumman shares, much of the focus was on Martin Marietta.
While it could walk away from the battle and permit Northrop to proceed, many analysts expect the Bethesda, Md., defense contractor to sweeten its offer during the next few days.
They suggest another possible move is for Martin Marietta to initiate a takeover of Northrop, or to encourage another company to do so, to derail the Los Angeles-based concern's bid for Grumman.
One investment banker called such a maneuver "the nuclear-war strategy."
The stock market continued to support the trading price of Northrop's shares, despite its plans to leverage itself heavily for the takeover.
The stock closed in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday at $42.25, up 87.5 cents.
That closing price was up about 4% from the trading price before Northrop announced its bid.
Also on the Big Board, Martin Marietta shares closed at $44.875, up 37.5 cents; Grumman's closed at $65.375, up 62.5 cents.
In its filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday, Northrop noted that it hadn't yet been provided with "non-public" financial information from Grumman, nor had Northrop been permitted to perform a due-diligence review.
On March 10, Northrop said in a letter to Renso Caporali, Grumman's chairman, that it wanted a confirmation that it would get the information by the close of business yesterday.
Northrop quietly courted Grumman for about a year before it was frozen out of negotiations by Martin Marietta.
One person close to Grumman's deliberations said that the company's directors appeared to have little choice but to disclose the information Northrop sought, because to decline to do so would have invited legal action.
Grumman already has been hit with three lawsuits by shareholders who say that the Martin Marietta offer is too low; they seek class-action status for their complaints.
In its own filing yesterday with the SEC, Grumman said that each of the plaintiffs had alleged that the consideration to be paid is inadequate and unfair.
The filing by Northrop, a maker of aircraft, missiles and defense electronics, noted that a previously announced takeover financing package of $2.8 billion includes a five-year revolving credit facility and a five-year term loan.
Northrop also said that after merging the two companies into a new entity to be called Northrop Grumman Corp., it would "conduct a review" to determine the status of the merged entity's holdings.
The issue of how Grumman operations, assets and employees would be treated under any acquisition has been of particular concern to the employees, who control a third of Grumman's stock through a savings plan administered by trustees who also are Grumman executives.
