Home-building stocks have been hot for more than a year, and most indicators portend continued vigor.
But if Katherine Hensel is right, home builders could get hammered soon.
Wait, home builders?
These are the companies that over the past year watched their backlogs of homes-to-be-constructed balloon, while their earnings mushroomed on the strength of a home-buying spree spurred by historically low interest rates.
These are the companies whose stock prices soared in response to their newfound earnings spunk, and which are basking in what one analyst recently labeled the "great bull market" in housing.
But if you foresee a market correction in Wall Street's near future, as Ms. Hensel does, you might consider taking a profit in these companies now.
The strength demonstrated by home builders such as D.R. Horton, Centex and U.S. Home could get them nailed in a downdraft.
Ms. Hensel, chief strategist for equities at Lehman Brothers in New York, reached her conclusion as part of a study in which she looked for industries that best weather a market correction of as much as 15%.
Thanks to the Federal Reserve's recent increase in short-term interest rates, Ms. Hensel expects such a stumble by September.
Her rationale: "The type of increase the Fed recently imposed has always led to this sort of correction in the past."
The study, which examined the nine market corrections of 5% or more that have occurred since 1962 but that weren't followed by a recession, found that certain cyclical industries -- particularly hotels, semiconductors and home builders -- get lashed in such a sell-off.
"Obviously, home builders' fundamentals have been excellent in the past year; that's why their prices are up," Ms. Hensel notes.
"But in a market correction, they don't fare well, according to our criteria."
Those criteria include two measures of a stock's susceptibility in a market slump.
The first is called "beta," which compares a stock's volatility with that of the market.
The market's beta is 1.00, while the homebuilding industry's beta is 1.93, meaning home builders are nearly twice as volatile.
Thus, in a downturn, home-building stocks can be expected to fall nearly twice as much as the market.
The second measure is what Ms. Hensel labels "hot stocks," shares that performed well the year before a correction.
Such stocks, she says, typically get hit hard in a correction.
Last year, the Dow Jones index of home-building stocks gained about 25%.
On an individual basis, D.R. Horton and Centex are up 77% and 41%, respectively, from their year-ago lows, while U.S. Home is up 42% since emerging from bankruptcy-law protection last summer.
Thus, if Ms. Hensel's study proves accurate, home-building stocks could skid.
Of course, home builders have their admirers on the Street, particularly with the fundamental strength these shares have shown in recent months, and the fact that the builders are expected to report increased earnings for 1994.
Houston's U.S. Home reports that in the past year, its backlog of homes-to-be-constructed jumped 44%.
The company is confident that 1994 should show "another year of strong performance."
Likewise, at D.R. Horton in Arlington, monthly net sales contracts have been increasing by huge double-digit amounts in year-to-year comparisons -- up 72% in January.
And at Dallas-based Centex, profit for the nine months ended Dec. 31 rose 38% from a year earlier to $63.4 million.
"With affordability the highest it's been in 20 years, with an improving job base and improving consumer confidence, there's going to be a protracted increase in housing purchases and housing starts for the next two to three years," says Timothy L. Jones, senior vice president at Southeast Research Partners in Boca Raton, Fla., who has reported on housing trends since 1968.
Nevertheless, despite these strengths, some analysts are cutting their exposure to the home builders.
Just last week, prominent housing industry analyst Barbara Allen at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette lowered her opinion of D.R. Horton to "neutral" from "moderately attractive," noting that, although business trends remain favorable, "we are unwilling to raise our valuation parameters in the midst of rising investor concerns about the direction of long-term interest rates."
Last month, Prudential Securities downgraded the builder to "hold."
Wyatt Williams, president of the regional brokerage firm Williams MacKay Jordan in Houston, currently rates Centex "neutral," noting that the stock has had a healthy gain and that better opportunities are available elsewhere.
Mr. Williams says that if long-term interest rates begin a steady climb, home builders' shares would be vulnerable, because mortgage rates typically are tied to long bonds.
In such a case, he says, "earnings expectations for the home builders could drop off" as housing purchases throttle down.
Even Mr. Jones ranks both Centex and D.R. Horton as "holds," saying "they're too expensive relative to what they're going to earn" in 1994.
He rates U.S. Home a "buy" because it is underfollowed and, based on its price-to-earnings multiple, is trading at a 20% to 25% discount to its peers.
Home builders also are confronting inflationary pressures in the cement, lumber and wallboard industries, all of which are running up against capacity limits.
As such, companies in these industries have raised prices, or are looking to do so, which tends to pinch home builders' profit margins.
One bright spot: If Ms. Hensel is correct, a sell-off in home builders could prove an opportune time to buy, since many analysts contend, as Mr. Jones does, that housing trends should bolster profits for the next few years.
Alamo Group, the Seguin maker of ground-maintenance equipment, traded four times its average volume and gained $3.25, or 20%, on news of stronger earnings.
For the fourth quarter, Alamo reported profit of $1.3 million, or 16 cents a share, up from $943,000, or 16 cents a share, a year earlier.
Optical Data Systems surged more than 30% to $14, after reporting stronger-than-expected profit.
The Richardson maker of computer-networking products had fourth-quarter profit of $1.9 million, or 23 cents a share, compared with $1.7 million, or 21 cents a share, a year earlier.
Analysts had projected 14 cents.
Although Dual Drilling jumped 11%, NatWest Securities lowered its rating of the company to "accumulate" from "buy."
NatWest said the current environment "will make it difficult for the stock to outperform the market to any large degree."
Last week, Dual also reported fourth-quarter earnings of $1.8 million, or 11 cents a share, compared with a loss of $300,000 last year.
NatWest had estimated seven cents a share.
50-Off Stores, the San Antonio discounter, dropped 15% to $5.50.
The company said it will report a $9 million loss for fiscal 1994 ended Jan. 29.
The company cited "soft apparel sales," which required higher-than-expected markdowns, and a $2.1 million accounting charge.
An investment group including Dallas's GHS Management reported in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it has accumulated a roughly 7.5% stake in Babbage's, the Dallas computer-software chain.
The group purchased about 404,500 shares between Jan. 4 and Feb. 8 at prices ranging from $11.125 to $11.628.
For the week, Babbage's fell 8% to $11.25.
