COLLEGE RECRUITING begins surging after a long drought.
"It feels like we're coming out of a major depression," says Barbara Euresti, a University of Texas placement official.
The number of firms recruiting on campus is up 11%, and more jobs are being offered, although it is still "an employers' market," she says.
Colleges say modest signs of improved employer interest last year have given way to a solid hiring rebound, especially by small companies.
Students are getting more offers at Rice and the University of California, where the job-hunting season will be longer this year.
Employers plan more interviews at Michigan State University.
The first employer interest in petroleum engineers in several years has University of Oklahoma officials "real excited," says one.
Schools say employers wait longer to fill staffing needs because they can't anticipate them far ahead anymore.
HISPANIC BASEBALL PLAYERS lose out in salary arbitration.
John Fizel, associate professor of economics at Penn State University at Erie, analyzed arbiters' decisions for 121 major-league players and found that Hispanic players had a 33% less chance of winning cases.
Any bias "is all the more striking because professional baseball is otherwise free of salary discrimination," he says.
Arbitration winners had an average 138% salary boost, and even losers got an average 59% increase.
While owners complain that arbitration favors players, Mr. Fizel says 77% of the players who went to arbitration got less than their market value, figured by multiplying players' contributions to their teams times the team's gate revenue.
SMOKING BANS: Many employers impose them carefully to lessen protests.
National City Corp. reimbursed workers to take quit-smoking classes.
Nynex expanded such classes to include smoking spouses.
Citicorp and Cincinnati Gas & Electric still allow smoking in some designated areas and in private offices; CG&E says smokers blame the crackdown on "the times," not the company.
Rochester Telephone tried smoking areas and smoking-cessation training before banning smoking outright; some smokers supported the ban.
Coddling smokers is the best way to make bans succeed, says Jerald Greenberg, business ethics professor at Ohio State University.
He studied attitudes of 732 clerical workers at a big financial-services firm.
Smokers, while not eager to accept a ban, were more agreeable when the president gave detailed reasons and showed he cared that smokers might suffer.
The study will appear in the Journal of Applied Psychology in April.
Some Nynex smokers grouse they will "get pneumonia" from having to smoke outside; Estherann Grayzel, a Nynex doctor, tells them smoking is a bigger health hazard.
DEFENSE CONVERSION in Russia gets outside help.
The European Union is spending $13.6 million to retrain 16,000 former military officers to be business executives, under an Olivetti-run program.
Meantime, the World Bank approves $300 million to help Russia repair 11,500 kilometers of crumbling roads and bridges.
THE WINDY CITY has avid sports fans, in case you didn't notice.
In a poll at 100 large companies by Replica Corp., which sells sports and investment games, 55% of Chicago employees join in office fantasy leagues, compared with 30% in New York and 32% in Los Angeles.
Chicagoans spend an average 14 minutes of company time a week on such games.
DOES HE DO WINDOWS?
Wilton Connor Packaging in Charlotte, N.C., employs Leroy Henderson to fix faucets, paint walls, patch ceilings, repair floors and do other odd jobs at employees' homes.
Employees buy parts, but the company pays Mr. Henderson's wages and transportation, and buys his tools.
"He has more than 40 hours a week of work," says Wilton Connor, the company's owner.
JOBS RESURRECTION: Employers take on ex-workers as contractors.
AT&T uses former employees for clerical, computer programming and supervisory jobs; former staffers know the "lingo" and need less hand-holding, a spokesman says.
American Express brings back employees for tasks like public-relations projects.
Compaq Computer sometimes taps pared staff workers, targeting ones with specialized skills.
But Bechtel signed up only eight former workers at its 2,000-person Houston unit last year; it prefers full-time hires.
IBM says it expects the number of redrafted employees to decline amid cost trimming.
AT&T foresees a contractor drop, too, a result of its work-force cuts and "tons" of available talented, unemployed college students.
Some firms let workers leave to join consulting firms and then contract with them to work on their accounts.
Arthur Andersen's Steve Samek says his firm hired 30 of an audit client's staffers.
THE CHECKOFF: Members of the Composting Council, an industry group, are offered four free issues of the Sludge Newsletter. . . .
Rep. James Traficant (D., Ohio) introduces a bill to close a loophole letting some employers pay blind workers a subminimum wage as low as $2.75 an hour. . . .
Taco Bell, the Mexican-food chain, expects to recruit 150 M.B.A. grads this year to be restaurant managers, double the number last year and triple the 1992 total.
