When Wandee Sidhikongsak and her husband moved into a new apartment here in 1991, they got the water and electricity turned on right away.
Telephone service was a different story.
The couple waited for a year, hoping to get one of Thailand's precious phone lines.
But they finally gave up and bought a cellular phone, which they started using immediately.
"There is no choice," says Mrs. Wandee, a 30-year-old buyer for American Standard Co.
"It's just too long to keep waiting."
As more people draw the same conclusion, Thailand and many other developing countries are moving rapidly into wireless telecommunications before they are even close to fully wired for conventional phone service.
While cellular technology remains a luxury in the West, people in these nations are using it to connect to the world and to one another more extensively, more quickly and more economically than they could through the laying of cable to every office and household.
"The technology is the driving force," says Prasit Prapinmongkolkarn, director of telecommunications research at Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok.
"The new systems are much quicker to install and can allow Third World countries to catch up very fast."
What's happening in Thailand provides an outline of changes unfolding elsewhere, though the details may vary.
Thailand has a moderate number of conventional phone lines, for instance, but some of its less-developed neighbors are making the jump to cellular communications more directly, bypassing traditional lines almost entirely en route to the wireless age.
In Thailand, the supply of regular lines has been flat for years because the country's unstable coalition governments have had trouble agreeing on infrastructure projects.
After extended haggling, the government last year allowed two private companies to begin installing three million lines.
But even when the project is completed in 1997, it will leave Thailand, whose population today stands at 57 million, with just 4.6 million lines.
While the supply of lines has been stagnant, Thailand's rapid economic growth since 1988 has sent demand surging.
The waiting list for phone lines stood at 1.5 million in the second half of last year, and the waiting time for installation was as much as three years, says Chesada Lohaunchit, managing director for Tara Siam Business Information Ltd., a research firm in Bangkok.
The Thai government figured that cellular phones, already popular in more advanced Asian capitals like Hong Kong and Singapore, could ease Thailand's shortage of conventional lines.
Cellular companies would only have to install transmission stations in key areas, rather than lay new phone lines and route them through already inadequate and aging switching stations.
That makes cellular systems cheaper just about everywhere in Thailand, though the cost savings are biggest in places with little or no conventional telephone infrastructure.
After a year of wireless struggles by Thailand's two state-owned phone enterprises, cellular phones took off in 1989 when the government granted two longterm private concessions to Thai companies: Advanced Info Services Pcl, a publicly listed subsidiary of Shinawatra Computer & Communications Co.; and Total Access Communications Co., a subsidiary of United Communications Industry Pcl, which was expected to be listed last month on the Stock Exchange of Thailand.
In just seven years, cellular phones have grabbed 20% of all phone service in the country.
Their numbers jumped more than 60% last year, to 456,300, says Phatra Thanakit Co., a Thai brokerage company.
And Thailand will add 200,000 cellular phones a year through 1996, according to S.G. Warburg Group PLC, a British merchant bank.
The two private networks are hooking up new customers as rapidly as they can.
"We cannot build the infrastructure fast enough to keep up with the demand," says Boonchai Bencharongkul, chief executive officer of United Communications.
(So far, though, waiting lists for cellular service are short.)
Falling prices for both service and equipment are feeding the growth.
Competition between Thailand's two private-sector cellular service providers has been intense, reducing connection fees to $16 from about $500 in 1989, a fraction of the official $200 installation charge for a phone line.
Most cellular customers now pay about the same in monthly and perminute charges as do people with regular phones.
Prices of cellular phones also have plunged by two-thirds since 1989, to an average of about $1,200 -- a bit less than the going black-market rate of $1,400 for conventional phone lines.
Despite the jump last year in unit sales of cellular phones, makers say revenue was flat because of the price cutting.
"We see strong growth, but it is a difficult market," says Erik von Essen, manager of the Bangkok office of the Swedish company Telefon AB LM Ericsson's local subsidiary.
In many places in Asia, cellular phones are more of a status symbol than a business tool.
Not so in Thailand.
Businesspeople and analysts say the country couldn't have sustained its recent rapid economic growth without cellular phones.
Asawin Chintakananda, deputy chief executive officer of Sahaviraya Group, a Thai company that makes steel and office products, says work on a new steel factory the company is building in southern Thailand would have slowed markedly without cellular phones.
Thailand's conventional phone system, built on dated technology, requires operator assistance for many domestic long-distance calls, and long-distance lines become jammed nearly every day.
Dr. Asawin says it is cheaper and easier for him to call the factory site by cellular phone than on the regular phone in his office.
"The mobile phone is not a luxury, it's a necessity," he says.
Bangkok's horrendous vehicular traffic amplifies the need for reliable communications.
"Salespeople just can't physically get to all the places they need to go," says Thomas Beddow, managing director for Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co.'s Thai subsidiary.
He arranged for the company to provide interest-free loans for all its sales staff to buy cellular phones.
Wanpan Pukwilaikiat, a 34-year-old accountant, bought a cellular phone last month out of personal necessity.
Ms. Wanpan often spends more than two hours commuting each way and doesn't arrive home until late in the evening.
Because of her time spent in traffic and a recent job change, people had trouble reaching her, and she lost touch with family and friends.
Now she carries the cellular phone and a pager everywhere.
"It's impossible to speak with anyone without it," Ms. Wanpan says.
But if cellular phones weren't essential, Mr. Beddow says, many people would scrap them because the quality of service is spotty.
He and his family, who live in northwestern Bangkok, have phones from three different cellular networks, but they are lucky if they can get one of the three to connect at any given time.
Once on the line, Mr. Beddow says, he must usually talk over other conversations.
The service providers promise improvements.
By June, Advanced Info Services and Total Access Communications will begin offering digital as well as analog lines.
They say the digital lines, which will cost subscribers more to use, will clear up much of the static and allow them to expand service more rapidly.
Growing competition also may spur better service.
The two private operators control 80% of the Thai cellular-phone business, and their share is still growing because the state enterprise-owned networks aren't expanding.
But the government is widely expected to allow new entries in the next few years.
"The competition is very keen, and it is going to get stronger," says Mr. Prasit of Chulalongkorn University.
The three million new conventional lines to be installed by 1997 will stimulate rather than damp demand for cellular phones, if Thailand follows the pattern of other countries.
"The more fixed lines you have, the more telephone traffic you generate, and the more you have to be reachable," says Mika Vehvilainen, country manager for Oy Nokia of Finland, which sells cellular phones in Thailand.
Neighboring Laos and Cambodia, which have virtually no infrastructure, have seen Thailand benefit from cellular communications.
To speed their own development, the two countries have each approved contracts with Thai companies to set up cellular networks.
In Cambodia, Shinawatra won a contract to install as many celllular hookups -- 5,000 -- in Phnom Penh as the city now has regular phone lines.
The government decided to skip to cellular because installing wired lines could take years in a country with no telephone or electric poles and where all the equipment would have to be imported.
Shinawatra hopes to do the same thing in Laos, but the details have yet to be worked out.
United Communications also installed cellular-phone service in Cambodia last year.
Cellular lines now outnumber traditional lines in the country by a 2-to- 1 margin.
Ms. Owens is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Bangkok bureau.
I didn't take a poll on the matter, but I'd wager that before that hit man whacked Nancy Kerrigan on the knee Jan. 6, not one in 10 Americans was more than dimly aware that another Winter Olympics was scheduled for the next month in this ruddy-cheeked burg north of Oslo.
Winter Olympics have a way of sneaking up on people, and this one -- XVIIth in the order -- was sneakier than most, coming just two years after the last one instead of the usual four.
That's because, back in 1986, the folks at the International Olympic Committee decided that continuing the practice of staging both the Winter and Summer Games in the same quadrennial year was putting undue stress on the wallets of the television networks and corporate sponsors that make these extravaganzas possible.
The IOC's solution was to uncouple the two by popping in a winter quicky and go from there.
So to the question "Didn't we just do this?" the answer is "Uh-huh."
There are, of course, other questions to be answered during the 16 days of torch-lit competition that begin tomorrow, but the one that interests most Americans has nothing directly to do with the doings on the slopes or rinks.
It's about the status of figure skater Tonya Harding, whose manager/live-in ex-husband and bodyguard engineered the attack that knocked chief-rival Kerrigan out of the U.S. Nationals a month ago and cleared the way for Ms. Harding to win one of the two Olympic berths.
The U.S. Olympic Committee will decide this, even as the Games go on.
Tonya has dug in her toes and flanked and fronted herself with lawyers.
Suddenly, everybody in the U.S. is an expert on due process.
Should she compete as things stand right now?
Why not?
She hasn't been indicted, cry the many who accept the Bart Simpson standard of innocence ("you didn't see me so you can't prove I did it").
How about if she is indicted?
That ain't proof.
What if she's convicted?
Give her a parole!
It'll be tough to tear away from that gripping stuff, but if we can, we'll find many familiar faces among the athletes.
Indeed, coming so close after the last one, these shape up as the "Deja Vu Games," with many of the champions from the 1992 outing in Albertville, France, returning.
In this category are three of the four Americans who won gold medals at that affair -- speed skater Bonnie Blair, short-track skater Cathy Turner and free-style skier Donna Weinbrecht -- as well as Alberto Tomba, the fun-loving Italian slalom ace, Georg Hackl, the mustachioed German luger, plus Vegard Ulvang and Bjorn Dahlie, heroes of the cross-country-skiing-loving Norwegians.
Additionally, the field in figure skating will be swelled by that sport's new "law of return" that permits one-time reprises by ex-Olympians who've turned professional.
Brian Boitano of Sunnyvale, Calif., the 1988 men's champ, will be back.
So will the German Katarina Witt, women's gold medalist in 1984 and '88, and the 1984 ice dance winners, Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean of Britain.
In alpine skiing, all the contestants are pros, all the time, but don't try to make sense of such things.
These Games will break ground (oops, ice) in at least one respect: They will, finally, transport the New World Order to sports by ratifying the breakup of the old Soviet Union team.
The Sovs, per se, didn't compete in either of the 1992 Games, but, their sports organizations surviving, were represented under such euphemisms as the "Commonwealth of Independent States" or "Unified Team."
This time they'll be competing as Russians, Ukrainians, Georgians and so on, and the division will boost the number of competing nations to a record 69.
In 1992, though, athletes from only 14 of the 64 competing nations won gold medals, showing what a small world the Games of Ice and Snow really encompass.
Other things about the Lillehammer Games won't be changed from past fests.
Most winter sports possess an element of danger, and in some it is considerable.
This was brought home by the death of Ulrike Maier, a top member of the Austrian women's alpine team, in a crash during a World Cup downhill race in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
The accident has prompted some to ask whether speeds in that sport have become excessively high.
Paradoxically, though, much of the drama is drained from Winter Olympic speed sports by the fact that in some the hardware shares the spotlight with the humans, and by formats that match contestants against the stopwatch or measuring tape more than one another.
To hear the experts tell it, the winners on the luge and bobsled runs are determined as much by their vehicles as their own skill.
How competitively satisfying would the Summer Games' 100-meter dash be if the runners ran singly against the clock?
But that said, these proceedings are shaping up to be better than satisfactory.
Weather was a problem at the past two Winter Games, but not in the way you'd expect: It was too warm and dry rather than too cold or snowy.
Based on the armpit-high snow in every unplowed area, there'll be no shortage of the white stuff hereabouts until June.
And stylized or not, Winter Olympics events still are capable of producing athletic thrills of the highest order.
Recall, if you will, 1976 at Innsbruck, Austria, when home-teamer Franz Klammer, a slim 22-year-old from the village of Mooswald, clattered pell-mell through the downhill course to overtake the Swiss veteran Bernhard Russi for the gold.
U.S. television must have replayed it 100 times, and it was breathtaking every time.
"I remember everything about that run from beginning to end, very clear," says Mr. Klammer, who still lives in Mooswald and still skis competitively, albeit at the masters' level.
"I wanted the No. 3 start position because it was my favorite, but Russi, he got it.
I got No. 15, which was very bad because I knew the snow would be rutted by then.
"Russi made a great run.
He was about a half-second in front of everyone, which is a lot.
To beat him I knew I had to take a different, straighter line than I'd taken in practice.
"It was bumpy, but I stayed in my tuck.
I didn't chicken out.
Yeah, I suppose it was dangerous, but I didn't think of that.
I had no worry except to go faster.
I was in control of everything.
That's how it is when you're young and in shape."
At least, that's how it can be.
