A confidential report prepared for the Internal Revenue Service indicates that tax-refund fraud could be costing the government billions of dollars, IRS Commissioner Margaret Richardson told Congress.
Ms. Richardson was questioned about the report during a House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee hearing, which focused on fraud in electronic filings.
At the hearing, a convicted tax-scam perpetrator described defrauding the IRS with bogus electronic tax filings as quite easy.
"Easy as pie," concluded Subcommittee Chairman J.J. Pickle (D., Texas).
The IRS commissioner declined to discuss specifics of the confidential report, which was prepared by an outside consultant, "in open session."
But she said the thrust of the report is that the IRS badly needs to come to grips with refund fraud related to electronic tax filings.
While she described the problem as "terribly serious," Ms. Richardson made it clear she isn't subscribing to any particular loss estimate at this time.
After the hearing, IRS officials declined to provide more-specific figures.
Ms. Richardson said the IRS has asked the Los Alamos National Laboratory in Los Alamos, N.M., to employ artificial intelligence in fighting electronic filing fraud.
"Through Los Alamos's Advanced Computing Lab, we can place the resources of the world's most powerful high-performance computers to work on the problem of fraud detection," she said.
The IRS chief also said the agency has assembled specialists, known in tax enforcement circles as "tiger teams," to challenge the tax-filing system with their own scam techniques.
Rep. Pickle, who said he will recommend suspending the IRS's electronic tax-return filing program unless the agency gets a handle on the fraud problems by this fall, said the IRS paid $25,000 to a consultant to prepare the report.
He urged the agency to make it public as soon as possible.
Ms. Richardson declined to identify the consultant who prepared the report, and seemed displeased that it was brought up at a public hearing.
The report deals with tax-refund fraud related to both electronic and paper filings.
The General Accounting Office told the House panel that electronic filing fraud requires "urgent" IRS attention, saying that in the first 10 months of 1993, the IRS identified a 105% increase in fraudulent electronic returns, compared with the year-earlier period.
The issue will become "more critical as the IRS moves toward its goal of 80 million electronic returns by 2001," the congressional watchdog agency said.
What makes electronic filing an attractive target to con artists is the quick turnaround time for refunds.
Two men now serving prison terms for tax-return violations told the subcommittee of their fraud techniques and volunteered to serve on the IRS tiger teams when they're released.
Frazier Todd Jr., who operated an electronic tax-return fraud primarily out of Atlanta, told the House panel that the IRS didn't detect his fraudulent scheme on its own but was tipped off by an informant.
The IRS's Ms. Richardson told the subcommittee that the agency already has detected "200 schemes involving approximately 3,000 attempts to file fraudulent claims on returns" in the first six weeks of the 1994 tax-filing season.
She said most of the more-sophisticated fraud schemes are devised by people skilled in computer programs and techniques.
