WINTER STORMS sharpen businesses' discount strategies.
Pittsburgh's Dingbats Restaurant plans beer promos and deals to recoup sales lost to the foul weather.
Chiam in New York counts on specials such as a prix-fixe Presidents Day meal, while some retailers, like AnnTaylor, hold impromptu sales to boost traffic.
Expect deeper markdowns in the short term, says New York consultant Alan G. Millstein.
"You'll see extraordinary sales this Presidents Day weekend," he adds.
But economist Donald Ratajczak of Georgia State University doubts businesses can do much catching up this quarter because bad weather "is lasting a bit longer than expected."
The storms and the California quake have cut his estimate for first-quarter gross domestic product growth to 1.5% to 2.5% from 3.5% to 4.5%.
Restaurants are among the hardest hit: Rick van Warner of Nation's Restaurant News predicts "more failed restaurants than usual" this year.
Business, meanwhile, rose 25% at the four New York Joseph Cione hair salons, located in office complexes, as stranded workers opted for manicures and cuts.
PC KARAOKE: Disk products bring sing-alongs from bars to home offices.
The popular pastime of karaoke takes on a cyber-tinge with some sing-along products on computer disks.
Kap'n Karaoke, due in April from Utah's WordPerfect Corp., will come with a mike to hook into a computer.
The computer plays instrumentals of songs (like "Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star") as words are lit up in time to the music.
Sirius Publishing in Arizona touts a similar "Elvis the King" CD-ROM disk.
Meanwhile, Voyager Co.'s CD-ROM disk of "Macbeth" offers theater karaoke: Users choose a role and read from lines on-screen while the scenes are acted out.
Ron White, contributor to PC Computing magazine, says software firms are guessing at uses for computers with video and sound capabilities.
Will karaoke fit the bill?
There may be "a lot of closet karaoke singers" willing to belt out a tune in the privacy of their basement, he says.
A HAPPY MEDIUM?
New package sizes gain clout following the jumbos' success.
Warehouse clubs and other outlets selling giant-sized goods and bulk items have trained shoppers to connote value with size.
Packaging Magazine says a probable offshoot of that tactic is the creation of more intermediate sizes -- bigger than standard supermarket items but smaller than warehouse size.
H.J. Heinz's Ore-Ida Foods unit creates a flexible option with its "saddlebag" of frozen Tater Tots that simply links two four-pound pouches.
Some consumers do not want -- or have room for -- 24 rolls of paper towels, notes Mona Doyle of Consumer Network in Philadelphia.
"Warehouse-size has proved to be extreme for many people," she says.
Still, such shoppers may find four paper-towel rolls to be a bargain in a grocery store where many towels are sold in two-packs.
Ditto for 12-packs of soda or beer over six-packs.
"Value is in the eye of the beholder," says Ms. Doyle.
Differing sizes are one form of "niche-niche" marketing, says Design North Inc. in Racine, Wis.
HAVE GLOVES WILL TRAVEL on the shuttle, says Delta Air Lines.
Round-trip passengers over the Presidents Day weekend can bring a companion on Delta's New York, Boston and Washington shuttles in exchange for mittens, scarves and hats, which will be given to charities in those cities.
DENMARK'S THE BEST place in Europe for companies to be owed money.
A Grant Thornton survey says small and midsize firms there wait an average 36 days for payment on invoices.
The worst places?
Spain and Italy, where companies wait 80 days and 90 days, respectively.
HUMILITY IN ADVERTISING: "The Mets are going nowhere but up," declares a Pollyanna-toned mailing to season ticket holders by the New York Mets baseball team, which finished at the bottom of its league last year.
"The availability of quality seating is better than it has been in many years," the club assures customers.
SECURITY FIRMS draft industry standards to quell false burglar alarms.
Security-device makers are close to completing their first standards aimed at curbing the number of false alerts, which are on the rise.
"The police respond to about 14 million alarms a year," 95% to 98% of which are false, says Michael Shanahan of the International Association of Chiefs of Police.
In some communities in Canada, the police no longer respond after a certain number of false alarms from a particular location.
Houston plans to implement a similar policy in June.
The new standards, drafted by the Security Industry Association, Washington, recommend improved control panels, acoustic detectors and motion detectors.
Some specify designs aimed at making it easier to verify alarms or abort false ones; others detail installation procedures.
But these standards are only a partial solution, Mr. Shanahan says.
"You'll still have a huge clientele" with old equipment.
The burglar-alarm business totaled nearly $6 billion in 1993, says STAT Resources Inc., Brookline, Mass.
BRIEFS: Pine Valley Golf Club in Clementon, N.J., bans smoking on the course to curb litter and prevent brush fires. . . .
Harmon's Grain Products Inc., McCook, Neb., offers ruminant duffers mint-flavored golf tees in place of toothpicks.
