Silver futures prices led a broad-based rally as big investors poured money into precious-metals markets.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, silver for May delivery was up 17.3 cents to $5.615 an ounce, while the actively traded April gold futures contract rose $3.40 to $389.70 an ounce.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, platinum for April delivery climbed $2.90 to $405.90 an ounce.
Since mid-September, the price of silver has surged 40%.
"We've seen a lot of hedge-fund business, the speculative managed money business," said Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man.
"Silver is not quite as liquid as gold, so it's easier for them to get the market to move.
Also, there's no central bank selling in silver to depress prices."
Among the big investors mentioned as participants in the silver market lately are George Soros's Quantum Fund, said Ted Arnold, London-based metals analyst at Merrill Lynch.
"Funds appear to have already invested $1 billion in the silver market by taking delivery of metal and storing it in Delaware warehouses," Mr. Arnold said.
London, Zurich and New York dealers are reporting that large buyers of silver entered the market as buyers weeks or months ago, when the price was hovering between $5 to $5.20 an ounce.
But the director of one large London bullion house says that $1 billion worth of silver at average prices of $5 an ounce amounts to 200 million ounces.
A position of that size, the dealer said, would be almost as big as when the Hunt brothers tried to corner the silver market in late 1980s.
Thus, the dealer is skeptical about the report.
Meanwhile, Mr. Demler said, silver inventories have been dropping at the Commodity Exchange.
Yesterday, for instance, Comex stocks dropped 3 million ounces to 242 million ounces, he said.
Funds are confident about silver's price prospects because of estimates that physical demand exceeded supplies by 58 million ounces last year, Mr. Arnold says.
They also note that India, a notable consumer of silver over the years, imported 90 million ounces last year.
Yet there are still large silver stocks held by silver investors who bought at higher prices in the 1980s.
According to CRU International, a London consultancy, exchange inventories in New York, Chicago and Tokyo amount to about 268 million ounces, while silver inventories in London and Zurich could also be around those levels.
If the price of the precious metal surges, investors who have held silver for years in Swiss, London and U.S. vaults would sell substantial quantities, Mr. Arnold said, which could promptly push prices down again.
ENERGY: Crude oil and petroleum product prices finished mixed in cautious trading ahead of Friday's meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Some market participants took profits in the crude pits as the April contract went off the board.
Light sweet crude for April delivery settled at $15.20, down 17 cents a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Heating oil and gasoline contracts rose, however, as traders covered some short positions.
Some traders said that with the coming OPEC meeting, few large market players would make big moves in the absence of news.
Many believe OPEC won't do anything substantive to curb the current oversupply of oil.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Grain futures prices continued to fall as traders took profits from earlier price runups.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, soybeans for July delivery were down 2.75 cents to $6.8675 a bushel, while the July corn futures contract also fell 2.75 cents to $2.8625 a bushel.
Expectations of a record Brazilian soybean crop continue to tug at futures prices, despite lingering shortages of highquality grain in the U.S.
For the next few weeks, traders will watch the progress of early grain planting in southern U.S. growing regions.
