The Texas attorney general filed lawsuits against five large fast-food chains, demanding better protection for children against second-hand smoke.
The move, which follows months of wrangling among attorneys general in several states and the fast-food industry, steps up pressure on the companies to ban smoking following findings that secondhand smoke causes cancer.
The companies named in the suit are: McDonald's Corp., KFC, Taco Bell, Long John Silver's Restaurants Inc. and Burger King.
Texas Attorney General Dan Morales said nonsmoking sections don't sufficiently protect customers from environmental smoke.
The suit focuses specifically on children who, Mr. Morales claims, are targeted by the fast-food chains's advertising and are more susceptible to smoke hazards.
The fast-food chains and the Tobacco Institute said the suit came as a surprise in light of recent talks between the industry and a coalition of 16 attorneys general to resolve the issue.
The group is expected to issue its final recommendations to the industry in the next month or two.
Arby's Inc., a unit of Triarc Co., and Minneapolis-based International Dairy Queen Inc. have already announced plans to become smoke-free in anticipation of the report.
The suit comes amid growing pressure to ban smoking in public places.
Last year, the Environmental Protection Agency concluded that "passive" tobacco smoke is a human lung carcinogen and is responsible for about 3,000 lung cancer deaths each year in the U.S.
The report said that for young children, exposure to passive smoke increases risk of bronchitis, pneumonia, asthma and disturbances in the middle ear and lungs.
In his suit, Mr. Morales seeks a temporary restraining order against the companies to prevent them from advertising "smoke-free" eating areas.
He said the restaurants should either ban smoking or build separate ventilation systems for smoking and nonsmoking areas.
With smoking banned in most movie theaters, planes, churches and workplaces, he said diners can easily accept a ban on smoking in fast-food restaurants, where the average stay is 20 minutes.
Representatives at KFC and Taco Bell, both units of PepsiCo Inc. of Purchase, N.Y., and at Burger King, a unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC of London, said they were surprised by the action, given their previous talks with state officials.
Both Taco Bell and Burger King said they hadn't seen the suit.
McDonald's, based in Oak Brook, Ill., also said it hadn't seen the suit.
A spokesman at Long John Silver's, based in Lexington, Ky., said he hadn't seen the suit but that he believes it is without merit.
