A new study supports the notion that a "wait-and-see" strategy is as valid as surgery or radiation for treatment of early-stage prostate cancer.
The report is the latest effort to address a growing dilemma in the management of the disease, which is expected to kill 38,000 U.S. men this year.
A new diagnostic test and aggressive screening campaigns are helping to increase early detection and treatment of prostate cancer, but there is little statistical evidence that such efforts prolong survival.
Since aggressive treatments, especially surgical removal of the prostate, are costly and carry significant risks, and since doctors can't predict reliably which patients are likely to benefit from surgery, or which could be harmed by a conservative "watchful waiting" approach, urologists are embroiled in controversy over the best strategies for treating early-stage disease.
"The message of our study is that watchful waiting is a reasonable alternative to surgery and radiation," said Gerald W. Chodak, professor of surgery at the University of Chicago and director of the Prostate and Urology Center at Weiss Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
But he warned that doctors and patients shouldn't read the findings as a broad recommendation against aggressive treatment.
"Deciding what is the best approach depends to a great extent on the preferences of the individual patient," Dr. Chodak said.
"This is about trade-offs."
Dr. Chodak is lead author of the report, which appears in today's New England Journal of Medicine.
But the report drew sharp criticism from William Catalona, chief of urology at Washington University Medical School, St. Louis, whose research has led to widespread use of a blood test known as the PSA test to detect prostate cancer in its early stages.
"These researchers are presenting a terrible picture of active treatment and a rosy picture of watchful waiting and they're misleading the public," Dr. Catalona declared.
As a result of the PSA test, more than 200,000 U.S. men are expected to be diagnosed with prostate cancer this year, many of them when the disease is confined to the prostate and considered treatable.
"These men will have a brief window of opportunity to get cured" through surgery, he said.
"If they get cured, they're clean for the rest of their lives."
He also maintained that the subjects in the study were dominated by older men with low-grade tumors -- the kind of men for whom watchful waiting is already often recommended.
They aren't representative of a changing population of patients with prostate cancer, he said.
The study is based on an analysis of six other reports involving 828 men from Israel, Scotland, Sweden and the U.S.
All were believed to have cancer confined to the prostate gland and none were treated initially, though many were given hormone treatments later in the course of their disease.
Dr. Chodak and his colleagues found that 87% of those considered to have either grade 1 or grade 2 tumors, considered less aggressive when they were diagnosed, were still alive 10 years later.
Just 34% of men with grade 3 tumors survived with the disease for 10 years.
The figures don't include men who died of other causes.
Dr. Chodak said some other studies indicate that 10-year survival rates for surgery and radiation are about 94%.
But Joseph E. Oesterling, a urologist at the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn., said that a valid comparison with the results of Dr. Chodak's study isn't possible because of differences in study methods and groups of patients.
A study published last year showed that surgical removal of the prostate as a cancer treatment increased sixfold between 1984 and 1990, provoking concern that many patients were risking such complications as impotence and incontinence with limited evidence of benefit.
Dr. Oesterling said increased use of the procedure, known as radical prostatectomy, partly reflects new surgical techniques that can reduce chances of complications.
He said the new study provides more evidence to support conservative approaches for older men or those with other debilitating illnesses.
"For people that have less than 10 years to live, watchful waiting could give you results similar to what you would get with radiation or surgery," Dr. Oesterling said.
But Dr. Chodak maintained that few urologists feel comfortable recommending watchful waiting even in such cases, because previous studies have been flawed and because there aren't any reliable data comparing the results of surgery, radiation and watchful-waiting head-to-head among patients with similar levels of disease.
He argued that the study should give doctors confidence that simply monitoring the course of disease is a valid approach for many patients.
The report also found that cancer had spread beyond the prostate gland after 10 years in 19% of patients diagnosed with a Grade 1 tumor and 42% of those with a Grade 2 tumor.
Those results "clearly demonstrate that prostate cancer is a progressive disease when managed conservatively," the researchers wrote.
Dr. Chodak said both patients and their doctors can weigh such chances in considering a choice of treatment.
"We can't predict for sure who will do well with watchful waiting and who will do poorly," he said.
"Each individual has a dilemma: What is he willing to risk in order to gain a benefit?"
While the findings don't point clearly to one option or another, he added, they "will make it easier to counsel patients about what happens to those who choose watchful waiting."
