Several doctors are urging the Food and Drug Administration to withdraw approval of a narcotic lollipop, given to children entering surgery, that may cause nausea and severe breathing difficulties.
In letters this week to FDA commissioner David Kessler, some anesthesiologists and other physicians expressed concerns the lollipop could lead to deaths if properly trained hospital personnel aren't present when it's administered.
The lollipop contains fentanyl, an opium-like sedative and painkiller that is far more potent than morphine.
Abbott Laboratories, of North Chicago, Ill., has the marketing rights for the lollipop under license from Anesta Corp. of Salt Lake City.
An Abbott spokeswoman said the criticisms of the product were raised at the time the FDA approved the lollipop in October, and that it will be sold to hospitals or physicians with strict limitations on its use.
Because the drug can slow or even stop a patient's breathing, a product warning label says the lollipop "should be administered only in monitored settings and by persons specifically trained in the use of anesthetic drugs."
The candy is designed for children who can't otherwise be calmed down before being given an anesthetic by injection.
"Without a high level of vigilance I am concerned that the outcome could be tragic," Allen J. Hinkle, a Dartmouth Medical School anesthesiology professor, wrote FDA commissioner David Kessler.
"I do not believe the fentanyl lollipop has any benefits especially when we begin to look at the patient safety risk."
James F. Arens, vice president for clinical affairs at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, termed the lollipop a "cute solution to a nonproblem" and a "truly dangerous product."
By contrast, Myron Yaster, director of the pediatric pain service at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, said in an interview that the lollipop "fills a niche that needed to be filled.
It's a way to help stop pain without inflicting pain."
Fentanyl, when used in patches for chronic cancer and other pain, has been associated with more than 50 deaths reported to the FDA.
An FDA spokesman said the deaths were caused by abuse of the patch, excessive dosing, or the cancer itself.
Nevertheless, the spokesman said the agency will consider whether the approval of the lollipop should be reversed.
The lollipop hasn't yet been marketed, and the FDA currently is discussing with Abbott how the delivery and use of the product will be controlled.
Citing the deaths associated with fentanyl in patch form, Sidney Wolfe, director of the consumer-oriented Public Citizen Health Research Group, called the FDA's approval of the lollipop "dangerous and ill-conceived" and called on Dr. Kessler to reverse the marketing approval.
Dr. Wolfe said that in one use of the fentanyl patch, a 17-year-old Florida boy went to an oral surgeon, had a tooth extracted and died after being given the product for post-operative pain.
Doctors have raised other concerns about the lollipop, such as the nausea sometimes associated with fentanyl, and the possibility that the lollipops could be obtained by drug abusers through illegal means.
Dr. Hinkle noted in his letter to Dr. Kessler that "anesthesia in a child who is vomiting increases the risk" of the entire procedure.
Treating "anxiety by inducing vomiting in children seems counterproductive to me," Dr. Hinkle wrote.
