This may seem like a strange time for another book on the Japanese economic miracle.
Miracles are in short supply in Japan just now.
But "Strategic Capitalism: Private Business and Public Purpose in Japan" (Princeton University Press, 373 pages, $35) is timely nonetheless.
Interest in successful economies runs high in wannabe economic miracles such as China, India and Vietnam.
And whatever Japan's problems of the moment, it is still the ultimate role model: the only new country in the past 100 years to make the final big jump into the advanced-nation club.
Kent Calder's explanation of how Japan did it will displease both industrial-policy gurus and free-market mavens.
Mr. Calder, an associate professor at Princeton University, argues that Japan's postwar capitalism was "neither state dominated nor laissez-faire."
He's unfortunately more persuasive when describing what Japanese capitalism hasn't been than what it has.
The book focuses on how scarce capital was allocated to industries in the years after World War II.
Who ensured that loans flowed to Japan's winner industries, such as automobiles and consumer electronics?
It wasn't brilliant bureaucrats, Mr. Calder argues with considerable force.
The book marshals plenty of evidence of how passive and "regulatory" the Japanese state frequently was, and how powerless its industrial strategists were against bureaucratic, business and political foes.
But it also wasn't the invisible hand of the free market, Mr. Calder maintains.
The private sector led Japan's industrial development, but "strategically."
What he means by that gets fuzzy, however.
Sometimes it's a pluralistic bargaining process, a "hybrid public-private system, driven preeminently by market-oriented private-sector calculations, but with active public-sector involvement to encourage public spiritedness and long-range vision."
Other times Mr. Calder portrays private lenders playing the "para-public" role of industrial planner.
The heroes of his story are general trading companies and banks, in particular the long-term credit banks and most prominently the Industrial Bank of Japan, which Mr. Calder says "has consistently lent much more aggressively to emerging sectors than has the government's own Japan Development Bank."
For example, Mr. Calder says Japan's private sector was able, "especially during the high-growth period, to identify promising sectors and firms in the capital-intensive portion of the economy and aggressively to mobilize the financial resources, the marketing skills and the technology to foster international competitive success through large capacity increases and market-share gains at key moments in the industrial life cycle."
The problem is that the book never clearly defines "strategic" or explains how strategic capitalism differs from any other capitalism.
How can we tell when a bank is making loans with an eye to the nation's long-term competitiveness and when it is simply picking a good credit risk that will make it some money?
The book doesn't confront this question directly, but it implies that loans are strategic if made to especially promising industries.
Mr. Calder cites compelling evidence that private banks made critical loans to Japanese manufacturers of autos and consumer electronics long before anyone knew they would become world beaters -- and at a time when government planners had other priorities.
But while demonstrating that the private sector led, this evidence begs the question of whether it did so as part of any vision.
Did banks lend to the auto and electronics industries because they were strategic?
Or did these industries become strategic because banks lent to them?
Mr. Calder never inquires in any detail what the private lenders thought they were doing as they made these loans.
The Japanese model Mr. Calder sketches would be hard for others to follow even if it were somehow more "strategic."
The long-term credit banks, general trading companies and interlinked corporate groupings grew organically out of Japan's economic history and could not easily be duplicated to the same effect elsewhere.
In the end, the book's real message is not how much Japan was like Germany but how little it was like dirigiste France.
"Strategic Capitalism" is full of interesting case studies and statistics questioning conventional wisdom about the role the Japanese government played in channeling loans to industries.
It shows how successful companies were able to obtain loans in defiance of government wishes by lining up popular and political support and how government-channeled lending often went to loser industries such as mining and shipping.
One of the most telling episodes in Chalmers Johnson's "MITI and the Japanese Miracle" is Ministry of International Trade and Industry mandarin Shigeru Sahashi wresting technology from American computer makers in the early 1960s as the price of permission to manufacture in Japan.
"Strategic Capitalism" details the same Mr. Sahashi's failure in the '60s to get the Diet to give MITI the kind of sweeping powers over industrial lending that French bureaucrats enjoyed at the time.
Today's potential economic miracles will find much to contemplate in these differing portraits of Mr. Sahashi.
Mr. Lehner is editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal.
