As we reported yesterday, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. decided Webster Hubbell had no conflict of interest representing the government suing auditors over the failure of Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, though the Rose Law Firm had itself presented the said audit to regulators in representing the said thrift.
Not to rest on its laurels, the FDIC has also cleared Hillary Clinton of conflict in representing the government against Dan Lasater, her drug-felony friend.
Mrs. Clinton's case first came to light in the Chicago Tribune earlier this month.
In a story that received less attention than it deserved, the Tribune reported that while at the Rose Firm she had represented federal regulators in a 1980s lawsuit against Mr. Lasater arising out of the failure of First American Savings and Loan Association of Oak Brook, Ill.
Mr. Lasater was a Clinton family friend and political ally, a one-time Arkansas high-flyer like Whitewater figure James McDougal.
Mr. Lasater gave a job to Mr. Clinton's half-brother, Roger, helped the younger Clinton pay off drug debts, and was a big contributer to Mr. Clinton's campaigns.
After he was elected governor, Mr. Clinton lobbied the Arkansas legislature to let Lasater & Co. handle state bond issues.
The deals earned the Lasater company millions in commissions, according to published reports.
As it turned out, those contracts were awarded to Mr. Lasater while he was being investigated for cocaine distribution.
He was convicted and sentenced to 30 months in prison in 1986.
His business affairs were then handled by Patsy Thomasson, who was also one of the three White House aides who secretly searched Vincent Foster's office within hours of his death last year.
First American S&L sued the Lasater firm over the $361,000 it claims it lost in unauthorized trades in Treasury bond futures.
The suit originally asked for $3.3 million in damages, and was eventually settled for $200,000 when the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. (FSLIC) continued it after the thrift's failure.
The suit was handled by a Chicago law firm that in turn hired the Rose Firm, where the case has handled by the late Vincent Foster and Mrs. Clinton.
The FDIC, which absorbed duties of the now-defunct FSLIC, concludes that all of this is no big deal.
All Mrs. Clinton did, it subsequently told the Tribune, was to sign an amended complaint reducing the damages sought to $1.3 million from the original $3.3 million.
She was not involved in the final settlement for $200,000, it said, and under conflict-of-interest rules of the time had no obligation to disclose that she and the defendant were personal friends.
FDIC spokesman Alan Whitney said that the FDIC people found that "Mrs. Clinton's involvement was confined to two hours reviewing the amended complaint."
This was not extensive enough to be a conflict, the agency decided, though it did not interview Mrs. Clinton.
While none of this looks like a hanging offense, Ed Meese would no doubt have been hanged if he'd done something comparable.
Imagine that as a private attorney he'd represented the government in signing papers slashing the damage claims against E. Bob Wallach.
And even if Mr. Foster rather than Mrs. Clinton was the lead attorney, somehow the Rose Firm ended up handling the case against another member of the Clinton circle.
Much of what's going on at the FDIC, of course, is bureaucratic self-protection.
In the Hubbell case, the agency's memo lamented the lack of developed procedures and the "enormous increase in workload due to the rapidly expanding duties of the FDIC."
So "in hindsight documentation regarding the retention of the Firm is more limited than would ideally be hoped for."
That is, the bureaucrats don't want to admit they might have missed one.
This bureaucratic instinct, though, corresponds directly with the personal interest of the First Lady, the Associate Attorney General and ultimately the President.
We very much doubt that Hillary Clinton ever took Arkansas Securities Commissioner Beverly Bassett Schaffer aside to tell her to go easy on Madison, but after the Rose Firm invoked the name, the approval letter came back addressed "Dear Hillary."
Mrs. Clinton's friend Ricki Tigert had not yet taken the reins at the FDIC, but when we see the agency going out of its way to make excuses for powerful political figures, we suspect it's got the message already.
