THE HOUSE VOTED to hold hearings on the Whitewater affair, but set no dates.
The 408-15 vote followed the example of the Senate and instructed House leaders to design a format and schedule that won't interfere with a special counsel's inquiry into financial dealings by President and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Congress's Passover-Easter recess, which begins this week, could delay arrangements, but Senate Republicans are set to push for creation of a special panel.
The Clintons have denied any impropriety.
David Hale, a former Arkansas judge, pleaded guilty to two felony charges in a plea bargain that will allow him to testify before a Whitewater grand jury.
Israel and the PLO reached a tentative agreement that could revive peace talks stalled since the Hebron massacre, officials from both sides said.
Under the pact, which must be ratified by Israeli Prime Minister Rabin, Israel would allow U.N. troops in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and Israeli settlers would be moved from Hebron.
South Africa's transitional council took control of the black homeland of Ciskei after its leader quit and asked the central government for help.
It was the second of the homeland governments, set up in the apartheid era, to fall in the past two weeks.
In Natal, Zulu militants attacked homes of black opponents, killing at least three.
Christopher said "progressively stronger measures" may be needed to persuade North Korea to open suspected nuclear-arms sites to inspectors.
China, while warning sanctions could be counterproductive, didn't reject the idea.
Meanwhile, the dispute is pushing Japan to consider adjusting its defenses.
A U.N. relief plane landed in Tuzla, marking the first use of the Bosnian city's airport for aid flights since it was shut by a Serb siege two years ago.
U.N. officials also said trucks were reaching the city with little trouble.
In Sarajevo, U.N. officials said Serbs began pulling back heavy arms found inside an exclusion zone around the city.
Mexico's Camacho ruled out a bid for the presidency that would have split the party that has ruled for 65 years.
His announcement sent shares soaring on the Mexican stock exchange.
Camacho, a former foreign minister, achieved prominence recently as government negotiator in peace talks with rebels in Chiapas.
Premier Li Peng said China would make "great efforts" to improve relations with the U.S., a marked departure from recent rhetoric by Beijing.
In Washington, senior White House officials met to reaffirm the U.S. position that China will lose its favorable trading status if it doesn't improve its record on human rights.
The Supreme Court affirmed two state death-penalty convictions, but expressed concern that judges' instructions to juries in the cases may have been confusing in defining the term "beyond a reasonable doubt."
Justices found, however, that the problem wasn't grave enough to overturn the convictions.
Russia agreed to a series of budget-balancing measures, paving the way for $1.5 billion IMF loan.
Moscow's draft budget, which runs a deficit equal to 9% of GDP, was supported by IMF officials.
But it appears certain to boost friction with big industrial and farm lobbies demanding larger government subsidies.
Iraq is making threatening moves against a U.N.-protected Kurdish enclave in retaliation for U.N. refusal to lift sanctions against Baghdad and allow it to sell oil, U.S. and Kurdish officials say.
The officials say Iraq recently has moved elite Republican Guard units to the northern enclave and escalated efforts to destabilize it.
The U.S. proposed that the U.N. Security Council be expanded to 20 members and repeated its call for permanent seats for Germany and Japan.
The council now has 15 members, five of which are permanent.
The U.S. didn't make any recommendations on possible changes in veto powers.
Only permanent members can now veto resolutions.
Nicaragua's military chief was ordered restricted to Managua by an army prosecutor presiding over an investigation of a 1990 killing.
The case has become a focal point for criticism of Humberto Ortega, brother of the country's former Sandinista president.
