Your Feb. 18 editorial in support of "three-strikes-and-you're out" legislation was, as usual, brilliantly stated and right on target.
I must, however, defend my state of Louisiana, which was years ahead of the curve on this issue.
The editorial says that the three-time loser law "was an initiative first proposed in a sophisticated, liberal state in the northwest corner of the country, not some bayou. . . .
Then Bill Clinton grabbed it and shoved it onto the federal anti-crime bill."
The truth is that it was the bayou state itself, Louisiana, which first implemented "three strikes."
That was way back in 1978, when the state legislature passed a bill by my friends Ron Faucheux and Emile "Peppi" Bruneau, which puts serious three-time offenders in jail for life without parole.
Then, emboldened by word of Washington State's grass-roots efforts to get a "three strikes" referendum on its ballot in 1992, I introduced my LIFER bill in Congress in July of that year.
LIFER -- which is bayou lingo for "Life Imprisonment for Egregious Recidivists" -- would apply only to three-time violent felons, so it is aimed squarely at those 6% of such felons who commit 70% of all violent crimes.
I reintroduced LIFER in January 1993 and in March, with some fanfare, enlisted Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi to introduce the same bill in the U.S. Senate.
In November, just after the good people of Washington state passed their three-strikes bill in a 76%-24% referendum landslide, Sen. Lott offered LIFER as an amendment to the Senate crime bill.
It passed 91-1, without any help from President Clinton, whose attorney general was at the time proselytizing against mandatory sentencing of any kind.
The president jumped on board in January, after my bill already had attracted 187 co-sponsors in the House.
(It currently has 204.)
So please give us bayou folks some credit along with those heroic sphisticates in Washington state.
As for the president, I welcome his support for my bill -- and when it passes, I hope he invites Messrs. Bruneau and Faucheux to the signing ceremony.
Rep. Robert L. Livingston (R., La.)
