As a doctor who sees many patients with Repetitive Strain Injury (RSI), and a patient with RSI who co-authored a book on the topic, we must respond to some points in Eugene Scalia's Jan. 13 editorial-page article "OSHA to Business: Slow Down, You Work Too Fast."
Skepticism that RSI exists as a diagnosable condition is typical of the cynical attitudes most RSI patients face with their hidden disability.
RSI (also known as cumulative trauma disorder) most certainly can be diagnosed by a competent physician, but it cannot be cured by addressing only one contributing factor, which the article implies is a simple choice between working and unemployment.
RSI is a widespread, serious and complex problem that requires many levels of treatment.
Mr. Scalia asserts that hard work is "tiring and uncomfortable."
RSI is hardly a matter of simple discomfort: people can become so severely injured that they can no longer work -- much less perform simple acts like eating, washing their hair or pressing a telephone button without intense pain and effort.
Furthermore, it is the most highly motivated workers who get injured first -- precisely because they work so hard and fast.
Many of these people become very depressed when they can no longer hold a job.
Mr. Scalia labels as "pseudo-scientific" ergonomists' suggestion that workers take rest breaks, but any physician knows that if you subject a muscle to repeated stress, you will eventually damage it, so the work itself must be changed.
Rather than requiring workers to repeat the same movements over and over, jobs should be expanded to include more variety.
That way people could be productive all day without overstressing any single body part.
We fail to understand why Mr. Scalia would object to making work stations adjustable, and therefore comfortable.
However, adjustable work stations alone will not improve workers' posture.
People can slouch in the best chair, and state-of-the-art work stations will not prevent RSI if people employ dangerous typing techniques.
Like athletes, computer users keep just their upper bodies fit to work at the keyboard.
No serious runner would jog eight or more hours a day, for example, but many computer users think nothing of typing for that long, then playing video games at home for a few hours at night.
The reason ergonomists cannot determine at what point repetition and force become hazardous is because that measurement differs for each person.
Many factors contribute to RSI: age, heredity, bad working conditions, stress, double-jointedness, poor physical condition, other medical ailments, poor posture and -- most of all -- faulty typing technique.
To come up with uniform standards is akin to predicting how many tennis players will get injured next year.
To answer this, you would have to take many variables into account, such as: How fit are they?
How many years have they played tennis with poor form?
Have they suffered previous injuries that could affect their current ailment?
Mr. Scalia correctly notes that some forms of RSI may be attributable to (or complicated by) causes other than work, and we lament that more physicians are not capable of making accurate diagnoses in these cases.
Because of doctors' lack of awareness about RSI, many people cross the line between reversible and permanent injury.
Emil Pascarelli, M.D.
St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital
