In the ever-turbulent world of retail, last week was another series of ups and downs.
The specialty chain Merry-Go-Round capsized after navigating the treacherous waters of youth apparel.
An earlier bankrupt, Macy's, was the darling of suitors amid speculation of a comeback by department stores.
And overall sales in the U.S. closed the year strong enough to send the bond market back into a funk.
In Dodgeville, Wis., meanwhile, the barely interrupted climb of catalog clothier Lands' End accelerated, too.
Its November-December holiday orders were up 26% over the previous year, and for the fiscal year to date the gain is 19%.
If something is going right in the larger consumer economy, it is decidedly copacetic in mail order.
Many of the other houses -- Spiegel is the only apparel-specializer bigger than Lands' End -- also are doing well.
Department stores, here and abroad, are chucking ballast as part of their revival, but Lands' End, along with other direct marketers, set the lean scene.
Sales per each of its 5,681 employees exceed the retail-industry average by 20%.
After some stumbles in the early 1990s, Lands' End appears to be approaching its torrid growth of 1987-90, when sales more than doubled.
At the current rate, the company will easily exceed $850 million in orders when fiscal 1994 ends this month.
In pursuing expansion, Lands' End flouts a cardinal principle of the contemporary marketplace: It builds inventory.
This shows how "markedly different" the mail-order trade is from regular retailing, says William T. End, whose appointment a year ago capped his emergence as leader of a new management team at the 30-year-old company.
(Despite the name, Mr. End is no scion; he came from rival L.L. Bean.)
Complete inventory is vital to cementing customer loyalty, Mr. End says.
And at Lands' End, "if we don't keep the customer for several years, we don't make money.
We need a long-term payback for the expense of coming up with a buyer."
He mostly means the cost of flooding our mailboxes with catalogs (more on that in a bit).
Whereas a department-store shopper may be resigned to missing sizes and colors, the mail-order market isn't so forgiving.
So Lands' End makes good on back orders at its own mailing expense.
A raft of those three years ago shaved the corporation's profit margin to 4.1%.
The inventory pullback that may have saved so many skins in the last recession didn't work at Lands' End.
Determined to be in stock 90% of the time, Mr. End says, he authorized more than $20 million (or nearly 10%) extra in inventory for this Christmas season.
With the consumer rush, Lands' End still missed the 90% target "by a couple of points."
With U.S. producers accounting for a shrinking share of Lands' End merchandise (although still 80%, according to Mr. End), it is "tougher, for sure" to maintain supplies, "but doable" with the always-improving control systems available.
Mr. End expects department stores to continue to lose "a point or two a year" of market share to competitors including the catalog sellers, which he figures now command 6% to 7%.
Notwithstanding the demise of the Sears book and a general lull until lately, direct marketing is a likely winner in the "value" decade, Mr. End says.
The big new presence, of course, is home-shopping by television -- now only $2.5 billion against nearly $55 billion by mail catalogs, but gaining.
And if electronic sales are the big growth field, Mr. End suggests, Lands' End is readier than most.
It is used to taking orders in a way that stores are not.
And it's trying on six digital venues for displaying goods.
Results there are "not earth-shattering to date," Mr. End admits.
The new marketing mode poses two big challenges, as Lands' End sees it.
The first is going from flat print to motion in its presentation.
It has dabbled in television ads, but infomercials or "true interactive" selling is another matter: "Putting together 30 minutes is more like a documentary, compared to 30 seconds.
It requires more projection of a story, a message," Mr. End says.
The second difficulty involves retrievable data-base catalogs.
The worry here is "how to trigger a response" from the target consumer.
A full-color mailing is difficult to ignore, but Mr. End wonders how to prompt the technophile to "call up" that critical first look.
The telecommunications age already has helped mail-order enormously.
The onset of widespread, instant credit (via Visa, MasterCard, etc.) and the 800 number revolutionized the business.
Add overnight delivery services, and the wait to "touch" the product has virtually vanished.
A more contentious factor is increasing state sales taxes, which most mail-order customers avoid.
Like most in the industry, Mr. End discounts the effect these levies have, particularly after higher delivery costs negate much of the savings from buying tax-free.
(Catalog operations are always fearful that Congress will accede to state requests for nationwide collection.)
But the amounts involved are not trivial when seen cumulatively.
Based on a projection from 1988 figures, Californians (who pay more than 8% sales tax in some jurisdictions) are saving $500 million a year buying by mail.
And for some individual purchases, such as jewelry or computers, the difference is substantial.
A 1990 analysis in the Journal of Retailing found the absence of a sales tax quadruples catalog market shares for expensive items.
Mr. End maintains that value pricing is what matters.
He can sell a $12 wholesale shirt at $23 and make his margin, while a retail store might price it at $45.
What happened over the past five years, however, is that those shops were cutting that figure, deeply and regularly.
That bloodletting in the malls, combined with the recession and the big postal increases that (believe it or not) pared the number of catalogs each mail-order seller could afford to send, probably accounted for the pause that the Lands' Ends of America endured.
In a sense, then, the fates of the stores and the direct merchants may be linked.
Any comeback by the department chains, along with a thinning of their ranks, could restrain the red-tagging of merchandise and keep the price-conscious coming to Dodgeville.
In the meantime, Mr. End will shore up inventory, look for a way to sell in bits and bytes, and maybe -- just maybe -- hope the tax-hungry states will keep inching their sales levies toward the double digits.
Last week, I put the number of U.S. construction-trade jobs at 3.8 million.
Better numbers arrived from the Bureau of Labor Statistics: Make it 4.3 million, not counting supervisors.
All the more reason to expect big employment gains if the union lockhold on training can be broken.
