The maverick filmmakers at tiny Miramax Films are discovering a drawback to being owned by entertainment giant Walt Disney Co.
Miramax said yesterday that it lost the rights to distribute "You So Crazy," a sometimes raunchy NC-17 rated film starring comedian Martin Lawrence, because the producers wanted to have it released without a rating.
Independent film companies are permitted to release unrated films, but major studios and their subsidiaries that are members of the Motion Picture Association of America aren't.
Miramax, which was acquired by Disney last May, said Disney's reputation as a purveyor of all-family entertainment wasn't a factor.
The film's producer, Time Warner Inc.'s HBO Independent Productions, said yesterday the film will be released on April 27 by independent film company Samuel Goldwyn Co.
Goldwyn isn't a MPAA-member company and frequently releases art-house movies like "The Wedding Banquet" without ratings.
Executives at Goldwyn, which bid for the film but lost out to Miramax last fall, cheered the move as a victory for the shrinking ranks of Hollywood's independent film companies.
"The luxury of being a true independent is that we are free to release movies as we see fit," said Tom Rothman, president of world-wide production.
"We love this movie, it's hilarious and we think it'll make a lot of money."
When Disney acquired Miramax, executives at both companies insisted that Miramax would be free to continue to release controversial films.
But this incident suggests that being a part of an MPAA company has its drawbacks.
Over the years, Miramax has gained an enormous amount of publicity from exchanging barbs with the MPAA.
After its films "Tie Me Up, Tie Me Down" and "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover" received X ratings, for example, Miramax released them both without ratings.
Bob Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax, said the company realized it would lose the powerful option of releasing unrated films when it was acquired but felt the benefits it gained by joining the Disney family were more important.
"In this instance I thought we would be hurting the filmmaker if the film was released with a rating and I didn't want to do that," he said.
"You So Crazy," a concert-style film similar to the Eddie Murphy film "Raw," is the first Miramax film to get an NC-17 rating since the Disney acquisition.
Mr. Lawrence, who is the star of the "Martin" TV show on the Fox network, found himself at the center of a controversy in February when he made several off-color remarks on the air as a guest host on NBC's "Saturday Night Live."
Citing the film's language, the Motion Picture Association of America last month slapped "You So Crazy" with the rating that prohibits anyone under the age of 17 from admission to the film.
Miramax appealed the rating and staged a news conference in New York in which Mr. Lawrence extolled the virtues of freedom of speech.
The film at that point was scheduled to open Feb. 25, but Miramax moved it to March 4 because of the appeal.
When the MPAA said it refused to change the rating, Miramax postponed the opening of the film indefinitely.
While it is unquestionably difficult to market movies rated NC-17, it is also tricky to market controversial ones that are unrated.
Goldwyn, which hopes to release the film in about 400 theaters, faces a battle in persuading theaters to play the picture and TV stations to air commercials for it.
The company plans to put advisories in its newspaper and TV ads warning that the film includes strong language.
Says Mr. Rothman: "It's a challenge, but it's the kind of challenge that has always been the lifeblood of the independents."
