Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, and Robert Bartley, editor of the newspaper, asked a federal court to force the release of reports on White House lawyer Vincent Foster's death.
In a lawsuit against the Justice Department filed Friday in U.S. District Court in New York, Dow Jones and Mr. Bartley, who oversees the editorial and related pages, said the agency has "constructively and improperly denied" their Freedom of Information Act request for the documents.
Mr. Foster was deputy White House counsel when he apparently shot himself in a park outside Washington on July 20.
The U.S. Park Police ruled it a suicide.
Using the FOIA, Mr. Bartley on Aug. 18 requested reports prepared by the police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The reports are "records of substantial public interest and should be available to the press and public for review and discussion," the suit contends.
Last week, the New York Post reported that emergency personnel responding to Mr. Foster's death said the way they found him -- how he was lying, the location of the gun and the amount of blood -- wasn't necessarily consistent with suicide.
Federal officials said the death was probed by the police, and a torn-up note, apparently written by Mr. Foster and found in his briefcase, was investigated by the FBI.
That note, which showed Mr. Foster upset by a variety of things, included the sentence "The WSJ editors lie without consequence."
The Journal had run several editorials criticizing Mr. Foster's role in the White House.
Since his death, White House officials have revealed that his office contained papers concerning the Whitewater Development Corp. investment by Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Those papers have been subpoenaed by the Justice Department, and matters relating to the investment are being investigated by an independent counsel appointed by the attorney general.
Justice Department spokesman Carl Stern said the agency is "doing the best we can" to comply with FOIA requests.
"Some of the material was close to being released," Mr. Stern said, "but the appointment of an independent counsel required us to ascertain from him whether the material might be evidence in his investigation and whether its release would interfere with his work."
