Aided by strong marketing and expanded distribution, Sega of America Inc. captured nearly two-thirds of the most crucial segment of the U.S. market for video-game players during the Christmas season, as the share of once-dominant Nintendo of America Inc. accelerated its slide.
A study by NPD Group Inc.'s Toy Retail Sales Tracking Service showed that the big Christmas gain for Sega boosted the Redwood City, Calif., company to a 57% share of 16-bit game-player sales last year, compared with a 43% share for Redmond, Wash.-based Nintendo.
The companies are units of Japan's Sega Enterprises Ltd. and Nintendo Co., respectively.
In both November and December, the research firm found, Sega earned a 63% share of the 16-bit game-player market, compared with 37% for Nintendo.
The numbers, released by Sega and confirmed by NPD officials who collected sample data from major retailers, seem to validate Sega's claims that it is on the verge of wresting control of America's overall $6 billion video-game industry from Nintendo, which as recently as three years ago held a virtual monopoly over the market.
"Clearly, Sega has made some very big strides coming out of 1993, and Nintendo has struggled," said Bill Lucas, president of the syndicated-services division for NPD, a Port Washington, N.Y., market-research firm.
"Whether the trend will continue is anyone's guess."
NPD didn't give a dollar estimate for total sales, but Mr. Lucas said Nintendo appeared to have led Sega somewhat in overall U.S. sales by virtue of its lead in sales of hand-held players and that it maintained virtually sole control of the diminishing market for old eight-bit game players, in which Sega doesn't compete.
But Nintendo may be in danger of losing even its overall-sales edge to Sega.
The research firm of Gerard Klauer Mattison & Co. recently estimated Nintendo's 1993 U.S. sales would slightly exceed $3 billion with Sega at about $2.5 billion.
For this year, Gerard Klauer predicted Sega would surge to more than $3 billion in sales and Nintendo would slip below $3 billion.
"Nintendo is still a powerhouse, but Sega has encroached on their territory," said Steve Eskenazi, principal in Alex. Brown & Sons in San Francisco.
Nintendo has lost ground, analysts say, because it reacted too slowly when Sega came out with its more powerful, 16-bit Genesis player to compete against the eight-bit Nintendo Entertainment System about three years ago.
By the time Nintendo got its 16-bit Super Nintendo Entertainment System to market about 18 months later, Genesis sales already were snowballing.
Nintendo still managed to edge out Genesis sales because it distributed in more retail stores.
However, analysts say the distribution advantage all but disappeared last July when Kmart and Wal-Mart agreed to carry Sega products.
Mr. Eskenazi said Sega sales also began to soar after it executed a slick advertising campaign aimed at teenagers and young adults.
"They seem to be, right now, the hipper, cooler system," he said.
Tom Kalinske, Sega of America's president and chief executive officer, agreed that marketing was important, saying, "We are obviously pretty aggressive marketeers, and we have done a better job of promoting our products than the competition."
Nintendo officials were not immediately available for comment, but they have conceded in recent interviews that the competition in the 16-bit market has been tough.
They also have attributed Sega's sales gains to that company's willingness to market more violently explicit games on Genesis, such as the uncensored version of Acclaim Entertainment Inc.'s "Mortal Kombat."
Nintendo, hoping to appease parents, released a nonviolent version of that game, but analysts say the Sega version far outsold Nintendo's.
Nintendo is banking heavily on a turnaround with its powerfully upgraded new 64-bit system, code-named Project Reality, that is being developed with technology from Silicon Graphics Inc., Mountainview, Calif.
Project Reality is to reach arcades this fall, with world-wide launch to homes next year.
Sega will meet this offensive with a machine called Saturn, which is being developed with Hitachi Ltd. and Yamaha Corp. and, according to Sega officials, will be powered by "more than one" 32-bit microprocessor.
Saturn is to be introduced in Japan this fall, with analysts expecting U.S. distribution within six months thereafter.
