The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether Strong/Corneliuson Capital Management Inc. improperly shifted securities among its funds, helping one fund to the detriment of another.
People familiar with the inquiry said company officials have been talking with the SEC in an effort to negotiate a resolution.
The Milwaukee firm is headed by veteran mutual-fund manager Richard Strong, who didn't return phone calls yesterday.
A spokeswoman for the money-management firm said, "We will not comment on speculation about regulatory matters."
The SEC said that it wouldn't confirm or deny an investigation.
One issue is whether the company, while its performance was sagging in 1989-1990, pulled poorly performing junk-bond investments out of certain favored institutional funds and switched them into other funds, such as mutual funds catering to small investors.
It's understood that an area of scrutiny is the company's flagship mutual fund, Strong Total Return Fund, an income and capital-appreciation fund where some of the poorly performing junk bonds may have been dumped in 1989 and 1990.
"If an adviser manipulates securities to improve the performance of one fund over another -- you don't need to be a securities lawyer to know that could be fraudulent," says Woodrow Campbell, a lawyer with Debevoise & Plimpton in New York.
Under SEC rules, he says, mutual funds can engage in securities transactions with each other only under very limited circumstances, and independent directors of a mutual fund must adopt and monitor a procedure for such transactions.
The Strong funds had a tough time in 1989 and 1990, after posting stellar returns for much of the 1980s.
In 1989, the problem was investments in junk bonds and takeover stocks.
When the junk-bond market dived in September 1989 and a UAL Corp. buyout deal fell apart that October, Strong Total Return Fund was pummeled.
In 1989, Strong Total Return Fund had a return of only 2.62%, underperforming the market by 29 percentage points.
"That was a difficult time for the Strong organization," says John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds in Chicago.
"The junk bonds were causing problems, there were growing pains from having all those assets under management.
Dick Strong was wearing a lot of hats as portfolio manager and CEO of the company."
The Strong funds endured withdrawals by departing investors through 1990 and much of 1991.
Even today, Strong Total Return Fund has assets of less than $700 million, well below its heyday in 1989, when the fund had more than $1 billion in assets.
Strong/Corneliuson currently manages $10 billion, including $7.8 billion in mutual funds.
The company had relied more heavily on its institutional money-management business before its mutual funds took off in the 1980s.
In 1991, Richard Strong began to turn around the struggling mutual-fund group by luring away top talent from other mutual-fund companies.
His biggest coup was the hiring of stock pickers Richard Weiss and Carlene Murphy, who together used to manage the top-performing SteinRoe Special Fund.
Today, they run the Strong Common Stock Fund and co-manage the Strong Opportunity Fund.
Mr. Strong achieved wide acclaim for his resiliency after the stock market crashed in late 1987.
In the months immediately after Black Monday, when other fund groups were encountering mass redemptions, the Strong funds were actually pulling in new money.
"Dick Strong is a forthright person and has always had the appearance of a high moral ethical code -- he's one of those guys who walks with a straight back," Mr. Rekenthaler says.
In April 1993, Mr. Strong gave up the helm of Strong Total Return Fund.
He hired a successor, Ronald Ognar, to manage that fund.
All told, the Strong operation has more than a dozen mutual funds.
Mr. Strong, 51 years old, continues to run the Strong Discovery Fund, which invests in smaller "growth stocks" and had almost $250 million in assets as of last fall.
The fund is up 0.4% for the year to date; its average annual return for the past four years was 20.6%.
In August 1992, William Corneliuson, a co-founder of the investment firm, relinquished the post of chief operating officer.
Andrew Ziegler was named to succeed him.
At the time, Mr. Corneliuson said his doctors advised him to "slow down."
