Lazard Freres & Co. and Merrill Lynch & Co. defended their municipal-bond business relationship as a totally open one that provided for disclosure to Lazard's financial advisory clients.
But Ellen O'Connor, the chief financial officer of the District of Columbia, told the district's City Council that she didn't know the details of the relationship.
"I wish I had," she said.
The district last week fired Lazard as its financial adviser, citing "a continuing cloud" over the firm as federal investigators look into whether Lazard and Merrill violated any conflict-of-interest, disclosure or other rules in their financial dealings with various jurisdictions that issue municipal bonds.
Lazard had a contract with Merrill to help develop the market for interest-rate swaps, which enable bond issuers to convert fixed into floating-rate debt, or vice versa.
The contract provided for a flat fee as well as fee-splitting on certain specific transactions on which the two firms worked jointly.
A Merrill spokesman said his firm paid Lazard $2.8 million in flat fees under the contract but didn't have details on money flows under the fee-splitting arrangement.
Merrill Lynch earned some $3.6 million in fees for doing two swap transactions for the district in 1991 and 1992.
The district is one of many bond-issuing jurisdictions that have been contacted by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. attorney in Boston in connection with their investigations.
Merrill Lynch said its agreement with Lazard was prepared by the law firm of Rogers & Wells, "is entirely legal," wasn't secret and was disclosed to the district.
Lazard Freres said that the contract "had no applicability whatsoever" to transactions with any of its financial advisory clients, and that it received no fees from Merrill in connection with any Washington transactions.
Moreover, Lazard said that it specifically instructed Mark Ferber, its former partner who handled the district's account, to make prescribed disclosures to the district and that Mr. Ferber acknowledged in writing he would do so.
Mr. Ferber couldn't be reached for comment.
Ms. O'Connor, the district's deputy mayor for finance, told the City Council that Mr. Ferber told her Lazard had an agreement with Merrill.
But she said she didn't know the contents of that agreement.
She said it didn't occur to her that the agreement involved financial remuneration.
"He didn't tell me they had a fee-sharing agreement," she said.
If she had known, Ms. O'Connor said, "My instinct is I would have steered clear of it."
