ComputerLand Corp., making a clean break from its retailing roots, said it is changing its name to Vanstar Inc. and will focus solely on computer services.
The privately held Pleasanton, Calif., company -- the granddaddy of the storefront computer retailing business -- is expected to announce the name change today, along with technology-outsourcing contracts from Microsoft Corp. and the ISSC Corp. unit of International Business Machines Corp.
Those deals, which call for Vanstar to take over the companies' in-house buying and installation of personal computers, are valued at about $100 million each, Vanstar said, effectively doubling the size of the company's existing services business.
William Y. Tauscher, Vanstar's chairman, said the new long-term contracts, along with the sharpened focus on computer services, reflects the increased complexity of PCs, which today take on many of the jobs once handled by much larger mainframe machines.
"One of the dirty little secrets about PCs is that the service and support for computers and networks is a disaster," Mr. Tauscher said.
Indeed, analysts estimate that the "true" cost of a PC -- including installing it, maintaining it, training people to use it and updating it if necessary -- could approach $40,000 over five years, or more than 10 times the cost of a high-end machine.
"The costs are growing significantly," said Jeff Kaplan, an analyst at Dataquest Inc.
He blames the increase on the trend toward cobbling together dozens of PCs into advanced networks.
Mr. Tauscher's new Vanstar is hoping to handle that work for companies, as well as run their employee-training programs and in-house technical "help" desks.
Mr. Tauscher began transforming ComputerLand last year, after the company ran into a cash crunch following a PC price war and a boom in the number of places companies could buy the machines.
After steadily reducing the number of ComputerLand storefront outlets, the company last month sold its franchised retail system to Merisel Inc. for $110 million.
The 100 remaining company-owned ComputerLand outlets are being transformed into "branch offices" for Vanstar's computer-services business.
Although the deal effectively reduced ComputerLand's size by half -- to $1.1 billion in revenue from more than $2 billion in 1993 -- analysts say it enabled the company to bail out of the commodity business of reselling machines and to focus on more profitable computer services.
The question now, the analysts say, is whether the company will be able to market its new name and strategy and beat out competitors like CompuCom Systems Inc., Electronic Data Systems Corp. and Merisel Inc. for a share of the $69.3 billion computer services business.
"They've turned their business around 180 degrees," said Lee Levitt, an analyst at International Data Corp., Framingham, Mass.
"They've wiped the slate clean."
