Pacific Bell is expected to announce plans today to test a new service that would take the film out of movies -- literally.
The regional telephone company is slated to begin transmitting digitized movies directly to a few neighborhood theaters, in the industry's most extensive test so far.
Dubbed the "Cinema of the Future," the service ultimately would aim at letting Hollywood studios cut millions of dollars out of the cost of distributing new releases to theaters nationwide.
In two years, the phone company hopes to be beaming digital flicks across fiberoptic lines to 2,000 to 3,000 theater screens.
PacBell has talked with Ameritech Corp., the Chicago-based Baby Bell that covers the Midwest, and Bell Atlantic Corp., which provides phone service to six mid-Atlantic states, about extending the service in their respective regions.
While the new-fangled films will face the same box office uncertainties of all Hollywood releases, the new service is a techno-thriller in its own right.
The typical two-hour movie amounts to eight trillion bits of data, which will be compressed by a factor of 25 to 1 for a still-bulky 320 billion bits (about 40 gigabytes).
Equipment at the film studio will digitize the fare, then zap it along PacBell's fiber-optic lines to a video server, which will deliver it to still more gear for recompiling the drama and comedy and feeding it to high-definition film projectors in the local theater.
In theory, at least, the service would be so entirely automated that it could avoid even the glitches of a sleepy projectionist who dozes off between reels.
"Theoretically, you could have one guy sitting in a closet anywhere in the world, programming all 25,000 theater screens in the country," says Richard Mizer, Pacific Bell's technical manager for advanced video services.
PacBell is well positioned to try out the new effort.
It provides local phone service in California and so is well acquainted with Hollywood clientele.
It also has experience in the digital realm.
Last summer as director Steven Spielberg was filming "Schindler's List" in Poland, he was also editing "Jurassic Park," relying on PacBell's Advanced Broadcast Video Services to move a digital version over intercontinental phone lines.
Executives at PacBell and Alcatel-Alsthom, which will provide most of the digitizing and transmission gear for the test, contend such a service could let Hollywood sharply reduce some $300 million a year in distribution costs.
The average film budget is $15 million to $20 million, and about 25% of that covers distribution currently, as studios make hundreds of copies and ship them by courier to hundreds of theaters.
It is a latter-day Pony Express, says Howard Gunn, a marketing vice president Alcatel's North American subsidiary, Alcatel Network Systems.
Putting in place an all-digital system, however, would have sizable costs, as well.
Some industry executives say the cost of digitizing so many movies would be huge.
It also could cost up to $100,000 to equip each theater screen, or $2.5 billion to link up every screen in America.
