Wondering whether to plunge into Russia?
Here's advice from economist Vladimir Kvint, a transplanted Siberian who is a consultant to Arthur Andersen & Co. in New York:
"Invest early and move as fast as you can. . . .
Benefit from the firesale prices in the largest market in the world."
To put it mildly, that is not the dominant mood in Western business circles these days.
Corruption, crime, xenophobia, legal uncertainty and policy confusion -- to name a few of Russia's maladies -- are driving out many foreign companies that otherwise would like to be there.
They find risks so high that they're unwilling to put new money into Russian projects until Moscow makes sensible economic decisions and shows signs of carrying them out.
That day is not imminent, so many companies just take a look and leave.
"Actually, I think most about not getting a hole in my head when I go there," says one German executive.
Yet some -- while they don't share Mr. Kvint's exuberance -- are making fresh investments despite such problems.
These companies find Russia too big and too (potentially) wealthy to ignore as they craft their global strategies.
They want to be there whenever the economics do go right; some fear they may be barred by a streak of political chauvinism later if they don't act now.
"If you're a billion-dollar company, and you're not putting in $10 or $20 million now, the learning curve won't get any easier," warns Lou Namansky of the Moscow office of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Among those learning now are General Electric Co. and Honeywell Inc.
GE is in a joint venture near St. Petersburg; it will make turbines for use along Russia's many huge gas pipelines.
"This does not involve significant sums but it lays foundations for the future," explains Ron Pressman, a company vice president.
So too at Honeywell, which soon will manufacture low-tech controls such as thermostats for use in energy-saving programs -- an overdue Russian campaign.
Russia "is too big a market to be ignored and too strategic," says Alfredo Maselli, vice president for marketing.
Yet, he notes, "it takes a lot of confidence and commitment to go through these times and wait for the moment when business will explode."
More corporate courage, in fact, than many can muster.
Worries abound -- personal safety, soaring inflation, the declining influence of economic reformers, among them.
Such concerns convince some would-be investors that they'd rather be in Poland, or almost anywhere else.
German companies "recognize the future market," says Martin Hufner, chief economist for Bayerischen Vereinsbank of Munich, "but practically nobody is doing any really serious investing."
Even maintaining the current trickle can be hard work for the European Bank and the International Finance Corp., two international institutions whose missions are to pull private investors into risky, troubled economies.
The institutions offer equity and loan funds on favorable termsbut aren't overwhelmed by qualified applicants.
"There clearly are not enough of these companies; we could do a lot more deals," says the European Bank's Mr. Namansky.
But to find willing investors "takes lots of work, more than we have to do elsewhere," agrees Roger Gayle of the IFC's Moscow office.
Yet the European Bank is putting $750 million into 25 Russian ventures with total planned investment exceeding $2 billion, and has an additional 60 ventures in the pipeline.
The IFC has committed $94.5 million to four projects worth $500 million.
U.S. companies may show more interest once the U.S. government completes plans to expand its lending role there.
But the overall mood remains somber.
Unclear Russian policies and onerous taxes deter foreign oil and gas investments, for example.
Even so, a few companies have added a dash of optimism to their overall caution.
Westinghouse Electric Corp., for example, is seeking local partners to upgrade existing power plants -- a dire need in some areas.
One Westinghouse executive calls doing business in Russia like competing in track: you run hard only to find yourself back where you began.
But, he adds, "this year we expect a little new terrain."
