Grain traders are betting that the February doldrums will give way to a spring rally.
Prices of grain futures contracts at the Chicago Board of Trade usually flounder this time of year because the action is in the Southern Hemisphere.
Futures prices slumped across the board yesterday, for example, in part because grain exporters, such as South Africa and Brazil, are preparing for big harvests.
Traders are speculating that South Africa will produce a near-record corn crop of roughly 500 million bushels.
Such a large crop in South Africa, which is rebounding from a drought two years ago, could mean the U.S. faces more competition in major markets such as Japan.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for March delivery sank six cents a bushel to settle at $2.8824 a bushel.
Soybean prices fell in Chicago as word spread that heavy rains across southern Brazil did little damage to fields in the richest soybean growing region.
Richard A. Loewy, president of AgResource Co., Chicago, said he continues to expect Brazil to harvest a record 933.3 million bushels over the next few months.
Such a large harvest also signals stiff competition for U.S. soybeans in the world market.
The soybean contract for March delivery at the exchange fell 7.25 cents a bushel to settle at $6.74 a bushel.
U.S. grain prices are expected to jump after the foreign harvests end because traders will focus once again on the thin domestic grain supplies left behind by last year's flood-related crop disaster in the Midwest.
Joe Victor, director of marketing at Allendale Inc., Crystal Lake, Ill., said his firm sees the soybean contract for July delivery climbing to $7.36 a bushel this spring.
The July contract settled yesterday at $6.8275 a bushel.
Mr. Loewy at AgResource said he expects the May corn contract to hit $3.15 a bushel by the end of April.
The May contract settled yesterday at $2.9450 a bushel.
Grain prices usually gyrate in the spring as weather forecasts signal whether Midwest farmers can plant their fields in time.
The market will be particularly sensitive this spring because U.S. grain supplies are the tightest since the mid1970s.
Some meteorologists are already predicting a wetter-than-normal spring -- which would slow planting.
Many Midwest fields are still saturated from last year's record rainfall.
According to Mr. Loewy, U.S. farmers will have to harvest a bumper crop of 8.8 billion bushels of corn next autumn in order to return U.S. supplies to normal levels.
Such a harvest would be 39% larger than the 1993 crop.
In other farm markets, analysts expect a monthly Agriculture Department survey, slated for release after the close of trading today, to show feedlots are fattening more cattle for slaughter.
Dan Vaught, a livestock trader at A.G. Edwards & Sons, St. Louis, said he expects the government to report that 9.19 million cattle were on feedlots in the seven major ranch states on Feb. 1, up 2% from the same 1993 date.
PRECIOUS METALS: Gold futures prices settled lower after a topsy-turvy trading day.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery settled at $384.30 an ounce, down $1 on the day.
Early yesterday, gold's price rose on fears of inflation and speculative buying after a decline in bond prices, said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
Late in the day, however, prices retreated amid selling by Middle Eastern investor syndicates.
As long as inflation remains subdued, Mr. Savaiko said, gold is likely to encounter resistance when it moves toward $390 an ounce.
ENERGY: After watching prices slide for three sessions in a row, bargain-hunters pushed prices higher yesterday in petroleum futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Crude for March delivery gained 30 cents a barrel to finish at $14.23.
April crude was up by a similar amount and other months were also higher.
The gains came despite a persistent pessimism in oil markets about the current oversupply of crude oil and the lack of any real progress toward production cuts.
Petroleum products futures were higher, too.
March heating oil tacked on 0.22 cent a gallon to close at 45.24 cents and March gasoline gained 1.17 cents to settle at 43.06 cents a gallon.
