The four armies that have occupied this city since 1945 all go home this year.
The Soviets, who raised the Hammer and Sickle on the Reichstag's roof, march away in August under the flag of Russia.
The French, the British and the Americans, who flew the Berlin airlift and kept vigil at the Berlin wall, follow in September.
Life was cozy here in the eye of the Cold War's storm.
It's hard to find a soldier in town, east side or west, who is happy to leave.
A few want to stay.
For Americans, never numbering more than 10,000 in democracy's celebrated redoubt, this is a question of choice.
For ex-Soviets, it can be a matter of desperation.
"We have a rule," an officer says at the gate of the Russian compound in the district of Karlshorst.
"You must go back."
Down the road, tenements where Soviet families once lived are boarded up.
With 1990's unification, all foreigners agreed to withdraw from Germany's east.
The NATO allies will remain in western Germany, but the 550,000 Soviets were ordered out -- to the last man.
"Everybody has different plans," says an officer on his way home for lunch.
"There is no chance to stay."
But Grigori did have a chance, and he is staying.
"In my soul, I don't consider myself a military man," he says.
"In principle, yes, I was a patriot.
But I never thought of the other side as the enemy.
The Cold War was someplace else.
Maybe, if we got the order, I'd have followed it.
But we didn't get the order."
He is 37, dark and squarely built, a native of a village in what is now Belarus, educated in what is now Latvia.
Grigori is here legally, but fear nags him; he prefers to tell his story on a late night in a west-side restaurant, and to leave his last name out.
He was drafted in 1977, and trained in the Baltics to fix tanks.
In 1988, as a sergeant, he got the transfer of a lifetime to what was then the East Bloc's richest country.
"It was prestigious to serve in Germany," he says.
"Everyone tried to get here."
Based near Potsdam, he had a nice apartment and freedom to roam East Berlin.
His wife and daughter joined him; a son was born here.
They had Soviet television, visits from singers and dancers, shops full of caviar and vodka.
"After a while," he says, "I got the feeling I wanted to stay."
Before he could extend his tour, revolution spoiled the fun.
"When the wall came down," Grigori says, "they built a wall for us."
His commanders declared all Berlin off limits.
He couldn't mix with German friends.
The wife of one soldier he knew was caught in an East Berlin shop and sent back to Russia in 24 hours.
Then, in 1991, Grigori's whole unit was sent backto Siberia.
He wouldn't go.
After 14 years, not long enough to rate a pension, he quit the army.
Germany has spent billions to house returning ex-Soviets, yet many still end up in tents.
For Grigori, though, comfort was only one reason.
"I didn't like the destruction of the Soviet Union," he says.
"I knew there would be fighting; my intuition didn't fail me."
With his wife and children, he traveled to Riga.
Latvia was free by then, trying to expel Russian troops of its own.
In two weeks, Grigori saw that no returning Red Army officer would find an apartment there, or a job.
But at the German consulate, he learned that by the grace of a stamp in his papers that identified him as a Jew, Berlin would have him back.
For a second time, Grigori and his family are beneficiaries of this city's tortured history.
They live on the west side now.
The state pays for an apartment, the children's school, German lessons.
Without work, Grigori works on his chess.
Unless a Russian soldier is Jewish, and few are, he must marry a German to stay legally, and few do.
His one other chance is to desert and claim asylum, risking deportation and arrest at home.
The head of Berlin's foreigner's office, Barbara John, figures a hundred ex-Soviets have tried that.
Most have failed.
"I don't know what happens to them," she says.
"I reckon nobody cares."
Gennadi Fedorov cares plenty.
He's one of them.
Just as Berlin is kicking his comrades out, he is trying to kick his way in.
On a cool afternoon, he stands opposite an asylum office in Spandau.
Trim and tense, he has an ugly scar on his right temple.
His wife, Elena, has gone inside.
Their visas are expiring.
They must extend them, but he doesn't dare go in with her.
He has had a minor brush with the police, and is sure he could be handcuffed and put on a plane to Moscow.
Mr. Fedorov has nothing more to lose by giving his full name.
He never knew the luxury of a posting to Berlin, as Grigori did, and is anything but a beneficiary of the Cold War's end.
"There's no escape," he says.
"If I go back, they'll get me at the airport.
For sure, I'll be in prison."
In a Turkish takeout place, he orders a black coffee.
He is 25, a professional soldier.
"I served in a special division," he says.
"When anything happened, we were brought there by plane."
In 1990, as the Soviet Union came unglued, he was flown to Moldova and on to Azerbaijan, fighting wildcat wars.
On the Iraqi border, his tank was ambushed.
It flipped and burned.
He was shot in the leg.
The first chance he got, Mr. Fedorov quit active duty.
He found work as a bodyguard for a Georgian businessman "ordinary mafia," as he puts it.
But the mafia was no help when the army called him up again.
"I didn't want to fight anymore," Mr. Fedorov says.
So he bolted.
With his wife and baby son close behind, he fled to Poland, crossed illegally into Germany and homed in on his city of hope.
In September 1992, the Fedorovs applied for asylum in Berlin.
The door of the takeout place opens, and Elena appears.
She has no visas.
The officials have kept their papers.
"They wouldn't talk to me," she tells her husband.
"They need you."
She is also 25.
An army kid, like her husband, she was raised on bases from Leipzig to Sakhalin.
Her skin is pale, her hair thin.
At a Berlin hospital, she receives chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease.
She has hidden her son with a friend, believing the Germans wouldn't deport a husband and wife while leaving their baby behind.
"I've got to go in," Mr. Fedorov says.
But Elena won't let him.
She runs back to the office to try once more.
He retreats to a corner bar, and recounts the story of his battles, his escape, and that scar on his temple: a memento from a neo-Nazi who asked for a match near a Berlin building site.
Between Cokes, Mr. Fedorov jumps up and goes outside to look for his wife.
"I've lost her," he says after an hour.
But then she's back.
Smiling, she lays their papers on the table.
The freshly inked stamps are good until September.
Yes!" her husband shouts.
If their claim for asylum is finally rejected, the soldier and his family may yet be sent back to Russia.
For the moment, though, they have found a sanctuary in the peacefulness of Berlin.
