TEMPORARY-HELP CHARGES start to rise, spurred by climbing demand.
Temporary-help firms say orders zoom, as employers use temps for much of their increased workplace needs.
Fourth-quarter placements by Babich & Associates, a Dallas temp firm, were double the year-earlier level.
At Hart-Merrell Personnel Consultants, Rochester, N.Y., revenue has grown threefold since September.
D.R. Horton, a Texas home builder, uses three part-time or temporary office workers, up from one a year ago.
The Dallas Federal Reserve Bank says demand for temps -- and resulting price hikes -- are "particularly strong" in its area.
Firms like Pancoast Temporary Services, Pittsburgh, blame higher workers-compensation costs for some price boosts.
But price hikes often mean improved profit margins, even as wages rise, says the National Association of Temporary Services.
Portland General Electric and Bank of America trim temp use.
Many California companies aren't hiring workers, temporary or otherwise, grouses Thor Group, a Los Angeles temp firm.
WAGES IN THE FREEZE: Auto-maker policies vary on makeup pay.
Most GM and Ford workers, who were idled by the recent severe cold snap in Michigan, Ohio and elsewhere, got 80% of their basic pay under UAW contracts.
Mitsubishi-owned Diamond Star Motors let employees do maintenance work, or take vacation.
Some 70% of workers who showed up decided to go home.
Nissan paid workers at its Smyrna, Tenn., plant 80% or more if they showed up, and counted absences as vacation time.
Toyota won't pay workers for five days of lost work at Georgetown, Ky., but considers giving them loans.
Honda offers as options vacation pay, Saturday makeup work or a $350 loan at 1% interest, arranged by credit-union people placed in plant cafeterias.
Subaru Isuzu has not decided what to do.
BEHOLDEN TO NONE, free-lance "communicators" proliferate.
Gerald Bastarache, whose public relations job was cut at a trade group, is a short-term writing consultant to the Intelligent Vehicle Highway Society, while he seeks permanent work.
"When you downsize your staff, the work still has to be done," he says.
Gardner Bates left a tire company two years ago; he has written some newsletters, speeches and news releases.
Like their forebears -- lance-bearing knights who fought for any king they wished -- modern free-lancers are more objective and creative than staff writers, says Fluke Corp., which rehired some fired writers as contractors.
Many writers enjoy the independence.
"The more I free-lance, the more I'm happy," says Charles Snyder, a former Kiplinger editor who writes business publications.
Citing surging demand for writers from payroll-slashing employers, Michael Ban's Chicago-based Paladin Cos. opened a second temps office in San Francisco in November.
EXPLOITED IN THE U.S., a group of Mexican workers start collecting back pay.
The Labor Department has begun distributing funds to some 400 former Mexican immigrants who were smuggled into the U.S. in the 1980s by the Griffith-Ives flower ranch, Somis, Calif.
They worked long hours, sometimes without any wages, and were docked for food and other charges.
Edwin Ives, the ranch owner, got a prison sentence and had to pay more than $1 million in restitution.
A RIGHT TO KNOW: Making good on a Clinton campaign pledge, the federal Centers for Disease Control this month will issue guidelines urging hospitals to notify fire fighters, paramedics and other emergency-response workers if they are exposed to AIDS and other infectious diseases.
A UNION OF THEIR OWN: Workers at Electromation Inc., Elkhart, Ind., voted for Teamsters representation.
The NLRB, acting on a Teamsters complaint, ruled in December 1992 that the company's "action committees," whose worker members were picked by management, were illegal.
RAISING UNION DUES: A Teamsters proposal raises a ruckus.
Reformist President Ron Carey sets off a firestorm with his plan for a rank-and-file vote on boosting dues 25% to replenish depleted funds.
The hike would raise $50 million a year in strike money; with richer strike benefits these days, the fund is projected to go broke in June.
The plan would also restock the union's general fund, partly to finance increased organizing.
Two Teamsters board members voted against the formula.
Other opponents insist the Teamsters constitution requires a special delegates' convention to vote on a dues hike.
Otherwise, "a small percentage of members who could not know the truth" might vote "unnecessarily" for a dues increase, says Michael Moroney, deputy trustee of Local 295, in New York.
R.V. Durham, a North Carolina Teamster beaten by Mr. Carey for president two years ago, accuses him of excesses that drain the union's coffers.
THE CHECKOFF: The AFL-CIO says it will withhold renomination endorsement of Rep. Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.), a longtime union friend who voted for Nafta. . . .
"Out-tasking" (using specialized vendors) is more widespread than "outsourcing" (using a single, full-service vendor), the International Facility Management Association reveals.
