The Canadian government warned that it is prepared to intercept "pirate" fishing boats operating in the high seas of the Northwest Atlantic.
Such action would be an unprecedented use of Canadian naval power outside Canadian waters in peacetime, a government official said.
The warning was issued by Fisheries Minister Brian Tobin at the conclusion of a visit to Europe to try to win support for tougher action to protect hard-pressed fish stocks off Canada's east coast.
Canada is enforcing tough restrictions on fishing for cod and other species within its fisheries jurisdiction, which extends 200 miles from the Canadian coast.
But the government said foreign fishing boats are undermining Canada's conservation efforts by hauling away fish just beyond Canada's 200-mile limit.
Some of these boats are owned by Europeans, but registered in countries such as Panama, Honduras and Belize, the government said.
Mr. Tobin said these flag-of-convenience vessels are "modern day pirates."
He said Canada is prepared, if necessary, to act alone against such boats "if that's what it takes to stop the destruction of fish stocks."
The minister said "we're satisfied what we are proposing is perfectly in keeping" with the international Law of the Sea.
The government intends to serve notice in Parliament next week of its intention to seek legislation authorizing action against stateless or flag-of-convenience vessels outside Canadian waters.
David VanderZwaag, a Dalhousie University Law School professor, said it isn't clear whether Canada would be violating international law if it took action against fishing vessels on the high seas.
"Beyond 200 nautical miles it's clearly very controversial in terms of what any coastal state can do," he said.
"International law is a very creative arena."
The Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization was formed in 1978 to manage international waters off Canada's Grand Banks fishing ground.
The organization's members include Canada, the European Union, Bulgaria, Cuba, Estonia, Iceland, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania and Russia.
The European Union has committed itself to ensuring that its member-state vessels respect NAFO fishing quotas and regulations.
Mr. Tobin said: "Our quarrel now is targeted against vessels that have no legitimate international quotas in the NAFO area.
They are undermining conservation and international fisheries rules to the detriment of all NAFO members."
The decline in fish stocks off Canada's coast has crippled the fishing industry in the Atlantic provinces.
More than 35,000 fishermen and fish-plant workers have lost their jobs since 1991.
