Ending a five-session losing streak, prices of longer-term U.S. Treasury notes and bonds eked out moderate gains in quiet trading yesterday.
Corporate debt securities generally edged up in price alongside Treasurys, but owners of many R.H. Macy & Co. bonds took it on the chin.
The retailer's unsecured debt traded down dramatically on news that the company has been negotiating a reorganization plan with Fidelity Investments and General Electric Capital, a unit of General Electric Co.
Macy previously was negotiating with bondholders, and the fact that it switched allies raised prospects that a "cram down" plan could be in the works.
(In a cram down, an unpalatable reorganization plan is forced upon creditors with the least amount of clout.)
Late yesterday, a federal bankruptcy judge appointed a mediator to help negotiate a settlement, and prices recovered slightly.
Macy's 14.5% senior subordinated debentures maturing in 1998 were bid as low as 37.5 yesterday, down from 45 on Friday, when the market closed early in advance of the Presidents Day weekend.
As the market closed yesterday, those securities were bid at 40.5, down 4.5 points from Friday.
Among disappointed holders are many small investors who had rushed to snap the bonds up in the hope that Federated Department Stores Inc.'s recent investment in Macy's secured debt signaled the beginning of a bidding war.
The yield on the benchmark 30-year Treasury fell to 6.60% yesterday.
That's down from 6.62% Friday.
Its price, which moves inversely to yield, ended at 95 13/32, up 5/16, or $3.125 for a bond with a $1,000 face amount.
The big price driver was Congressional testimony by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan.
In his semiannual talk before a House Banking subcommittee yesterday morning, he said the Fed is likely to continue boosting short-term interest rates, but he played down fears that inflationary pressures are now present.
Instead, he emphasized signs that inflation is well under control, such as muted wage increases.
"Prior to his speech, many investors thought the Fed's earlier action to increase the federal-funds rate confirmed inflationary expectations," said Alan Kral, a portfolio manager for Trevor Stewart Burton & Jacobsen Inc.
Trevor Stewart is a money-management firm with $1 billion in assets and has recently been buying longer-term Treasury debt.
"Hopefully, the idea gets across now that the Fed is trying to knock down expectations before they get started," Mr. Kral said.
While talking tough on inflation, the Fed chairman provided no clues as to the timing of the next Fed tightening.
His hints of future interest-rate hikes kept pressure on the prices of shorter-term Treasury maturities.
Those are the securities most affected by a Fed tightening.
The benchmark two-year note ended slightly down in price, while the three-year note ended unchanged.
At the same time, longer-term issues attracted scattered buying as traders and investors were reassured by Mr. Greenspan's anti-inflation stance.
"We saw good interest in securities maturing in five years and out, and we couldn't sell anything that was under five years," said John Costas, manager of government-securities trading at CS First Boston Inc.
"Greenspan sent a solid message, saying that the Fed's tightening is a rational approach and that its goal is to truly be pre-emptive."
But traders said much of the buying came from professional traders closing out "short" positions.
In a short trade, an investor sells a borrowed security in the hope of replacing it later with a cheaper security and pocketing the difference.
"I didn't see any fundamental buyers, just professional traders," said Mead Briggs, manager of risk trading for Deutsche Bank Government Securities Inc.
The test for whether "this modest recovery is viable" comes as the government auctions two-year Treasury notes today and five-year notes tomorrow, he said.
Even some of the few remaining bond bulls are hesitant about declaring that a rally -- however modest -- is in the works.
"Some of the bounce yesterday reflects the virulence of the sell-off at the end of last week, which, after all, was not based on any economic news of importance," said John Lipsky, chief economist for Salomon Brothers Inc.
"But it's going to take more action by the Fed among other things to convince investors that they don't face a resurgence of inflationary pressures as the economy uses up its cushion of excess capacity."
Mr. Lipsky believes yields on the 30-year bond will fall back below 6% later this year, provided that growth remains moderate, inflation is stable and fiscal policy is restrictive, among other things.
Ed Labenski, president of IDS Fixed-Income Advisors, Minneapolis, noted that some of yesterday's buying likely was the "completion of the digestion of the last 30-year bond auction.
Some people bought, panicked, sold and now the debt is finding a more permanent home."
He anticipates that more-telling Treasury price movements will be determined by employment numbers to be released March 4 and the producer price index on March 15.
With Mr. Grenspan's testimony now history, many traders' attention is now focused on this week's auctions.
The Treasury is slated to sell $17 billion of two-year notes and $11 billion of five-year notes.
In when-issued trading late yesterday, the two-year note yielded 4.58%, and the five-year note yielded 5.50%.
Meanwhile yesterday, the Treasury sold $24.61 billion of three-month and six-month bills at its regualr weekly auction.
The three-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.33% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.41%.
The six-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.53% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.64%.
Here are the results of the auction:
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon-equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated Feb. 24.
The 13-week bills mature May 26, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature Aug. 25, 1994.
R.H. Macy bonds saw active trading in an otherwise mostly quiet day in the corporate debt market.
Early yesterday, Macy bonds plummeted in price by about eight points -- or $80 for a bond with a $1,000 face value -- on the report in The Wall Street Journal that the retailer, which is in bankruptcy proceedings, has been negotiating a reorganization plan with Fidelity Investments and General Electric Capital.
Such a plan likely would call for full repayment of bank-debt holders Federated Department Stores, Prudential Insurance Co. of America and Fidelity.
That would probably leave little value for the bondholders, making the possibility of "a cram-down plan at least plausible," said Max Holmes, high-yield strategist at Salomon Brothers.
However, the bonds reversed direction later, after a Macy attorney denied that a deal had been struck involving Fidelity and GE Capital.
The bonds also benefited when the bankruptcy judge announced that he would appoint a mediator in the protracted bankruptcy case.
With the mediator, bondholders expect to be consulted on a reorganization plan, making an unpalatable cram-down less likely.
That was why the bonds traded up from lows earlier in the day.
Trading in the investment-grade market was light with spreads over Treasurys widening by 0.01 to 0.02 percentage point, traders said.
Telecommunications companies' bonds barely reacted to news that the Federal Communications Commission reworked its re-regulation equations, effectively cutting the industry's revenues by about 7%.
The news was expected, and most of it had been priced into the market already, said Robert Waldman, a director in the corporate-bond research department at Salomon Brothers.
Generally, trading in the junk bond market was light, with prices down by about 1/4 point.
Prices of municipal bonds stabilized after declines in the previous two trading days.
Prices ended unchanged to 1/2 point lower.
Among actively traded munis, the Reedy Creek Improvement District of Florida's 5.00% bonds of 2019 finished 1/4 lower at 92 to yield 5.53%.
There were no big sales yesterday.
Tax-exempt bonds are expected to benefit from the muni supply scenario this week.
This week's holiday-shortened pricing list contains less than $1 billion of negotiated issues.
In the week ended late Thursday, more than $2 billion of negotiated offerings were priced.
The largest issue expected this week is the Hawaii Housing Finance & Development Corp.'s $269 million of mortgage-purchase revenue bonds.
A Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. group plans to price the issue today or tomorrow.
Prices of mortgage securities ended mostly firmer after a quiet session.
In secondary trading of 7% mortgage securities for March delivery, Government National Mortgage Association issues ended at 100 22/32, 2/32 above Friday's finish.
The market was closed Monday for Presidents Day.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues and Federal National Mortgage Association issues finished with 3/32 gains, at 100 24/32 and 100 19/32, respectively.
Not only was the secondary mortgage market listless, there was little action to speak of in the primary sector.
No new real estate mortgage investment conduit deals were announced, thus limiting the collateral demand that typically boosts secondary market prices.
