GE Capital Corp. asked Kemper Corp. for a list of its shareholders, setting the stage for what could be a lengthy battle for control of Kemper.
The request came in response to Kemper's rejection last week of the General Electric Co. unit's $2.2 billion offer to buy Kemper.
Kemper's annual meeting is May 11.
GE Capital recently bought Kemper stock, which gives it the right to offer a rival proxy to Kemper's.
GE Capital could ask shareholders to elect its own nominees for director as well as approve a resolution asking that the company put itself up for sale.
Four of the company's 13 board members come up for election this year, including the seat held by Kemper Chairman David Mathis.
GE Capital said it wants to go directly to shareholders to "let them make the determination regarding our proposal," wrote GE Capital President Gary Wendt in a letter sent yesterday to Mr. Mathis.
Kemper said it would comply with the request as long as GE Capital was a legitimate shareholder.
GE Capital has no current plans to tender for the company's shares in what would be an outright hostile offer, say people close to GE Capital.
If it ultimately decides to go that route, it would also need the shareholder list.
Traders, who were hoping that GEC would simply raise its $55-a-share bid to a price that Kemper couldn't refuse, said the request for the list marks the beginning of a protracted battle for the Long Grove, Ill., financial services company.
"It's a very hostile battle now," said one trader.
"This makes it a lot messier."
GE Capital has hired a proxy solicitation firm, D.F. King & Co., to handle its communications with shareholders.
If it receives the list, GEC could begin mailing proxies to shareholders as soon as its document gets reviewed by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Although GEC could, at best, win four of Kemper's 13 board seats, a GEC victory would be a tremendous vote of no confidence in Kemper.
The fact that Mr. Mathis, who took the helm 13 months ago, is up for election makes the vote even more critical.
"It's bad when you lose four seats," said one trader.
"It's really tough when the chairman is up."
In his letter, Mr. Wendt said GE Capital had no choice but to take its campaign to shareholders.
"You leave us no choice but to proceed unilaterally and communicate directly with our fellow shareholders who surely will feel the time-sensitive urgency to consummate this transaction as promptly as possible or risk seeing their values decline," he wrote.
Although Kemper stock has risen about 50% since GEC announced its offer, Kemper maintains GEC's offer represents a "low-ball" bid for the company.
In composite trading Friday, Kemper rose 37.5 cents to $61.125.
Kemper's contention that it is undervalued is supported by a research report released in early February by Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst Allen Nadler.
When the report came out, Kemper stock traded at $40.875.
But Mr. Nadler argued that the company's mutual-fund business alone is worth $37 to $39 a share, and its other businesses are worth $20 to $23 a share, suggesting a valuation as high as $62 a share.
"Management has done a fine job of creating real value, which someone noticed," Mr. Nadler said, referring to GEC.
In addition to running mutual funds, Kemper has a life-insurance business, a real-estate business and a string of brokerage firms.
The biggest question hanging over the company is the condition of its $2.5 billion real-estate portfolio.
But, over the last two years, Kemper has written down or put up reserves equal to 37% of the portfolio's book value, which Mr. Nadler believes is sufficient.
GE has said it would consider raising its bid if Kemper gives it additional information about the real estate, and it finds the portfolio to be in good condition.
While many on Wall Street believe the company will ultimately fetch between $65 and $70 a share, or $2.6 billion to $2.8 billion, "why would GE up its bid without looking at the books," said one individual close to GEC.
Another key factor in what Mr. Nadler calls the turnaround at Kemper was the sale of its reinsurance company to its former parent, Lumbermen's Mutual Casualty Co.
The sale helped make Kemper's earnings less volatile.
But because it reduced Lumbermen's ownership in Kemper to 4% from 40%, it made Kemper vulnerable to a takeover.
"We would agree with management that $55 a share does not reflect the value of Kemper," said Brian Walton, senior equity analyst at NationsBank Corp., which owns substantially more than 500,000 shares of Kemper stock.
"The concept of the fit makes sense.
Now it's just a matter of getting the two parts of the equation together."
