Kendall Square Research Corp. reported audited results for the past two years that showed much bigger losses and lower revenue than previously estimated.
Kendall Square, a seven-year-old maker of supercomputers, has been wracked by an accounting scandal that led to dismissal of several top executives late last year.
The company hadn't previously announced its 1993 results but had warned they would be worse than once expected.
In Kendall Square's 10-K filed late Friday with the Securities and Exchange Commission, its new auditors, Coopers & Lybrand, warned that "recurring losses" and legal problems "raise substantial doubt about the company's ability to continue as a going concern."
Kendall Square said it doesn't expect to be profitable for the current year.
However, William Koch, who is chairman, chief executive and the company's largest investor, said in an interview, "We have the company on a good course for a turnaround."
The stock closed unchanged on Friday at $4.75 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
The financial results were announced after the close of trading.
Kendall Square said that for the fiscal year ended Dec. 25, 1993, it had a net loss of $67.1 million, or $5.03 a share, including $45.6 million in one-time charges.
That loss was widened from a restated net loss of $21.6 million, or $2.10 a share, in 1992.
The 1992 loss was almost twice as large as previously reported.
Revenue for fiscal 1993 rose 79% to $18.1 million from a restated $10.1 million.
Revenue for 1993 includes $7.1 million that previously had been improperly booked in 1992.
Kendall's accounting problem involved counting as sales supercomputers that university users didn't have any way to pay for.
Kendall's 1993 revenue was lower than the $20.7 million previously reported for 1992.
At one time, Kendall had predicted 1993 revenue of around $60 million.
Mr. Koch said that Kendall is negotiating with various universities for payment for computers valued at $20 million.
He said the company doesn't have any assurance of receiving cash for the machines.
Kendall also disclosed that last Dec. 8, the SEC entered a "formal order directing an investigation" of the company and its current and former officers and directors.
The investigation covers both public reports and trading in Kendall stock.
As reported, former president and founder Henry Burkhardt sold 50,000 shares last summer when the stock was around $25 a share.
Kendall said previously that the SEC had requested information.
Mr. Koch, the multimillionaire industrialist and yachtsman who stepped in as chief executive in December as the scandal broke, said: "We have addressed many of the problems that have plagued the company and are working on any that remain."
He said that sales had ground to a halt because of customer concerns about the accounting scandal and the fact that the KSR2 computer unveiled last fall "wasn't really ready to ship until late February."
He declined to break out quarterly results.
As previously announced, Kendall Square recently reached an agreement to settle 11 class-action lawsuits brought by shareholders over the misleading financial reports.
Under the agreement, plaintiffs will receive $5.4 million in cash, 3.5 million common shares and warrants to buy an additional 1.4 million shares.
The 1993 net loss includes a one-time charge of $25.5 million for the settlement, although $21.9 million of it is noncash stock and warrants.
Settling the suits was crucial to Kendall Square, because it was running out of money, and Mr. Koch said he wouldn't invest more without a settlement.
He has promised a $25 million investment when the settlement is complete and a bridge loan in the meantime.
The investment will be used to buy a new issue of preferred stock that will give Mr. Koch the right to elect a majority of the board.
In its 10-K, Kendall disclosed that an additional class-action suit was filed recently by other shareholders.
The company said it can't determine whether that suit will be consolidated with the others in the settlement.
Mr. Koch characterized it as a "nuisance suit designed to try to extort a little more money."
Besides the suit settlement, one-time charges for 1993 include an $11 million write-down of inventory, a $6.5 million write-down of capitalized software and a $2.6 million charge to terminate a lease on a new larger facility that Kendall has decided it doesn't need.
