Vandals, thieves and teenagers routinely "crack" the Internet, an experimental computer network with 20 million users world-wide.
They eavesdrop, and what they hear they use to masquerade as authorized computer users.
They then silently connect to distant computers, take control, and thereafter copy, change or destroy whatever information they want.
Until now much of the information insecurely stored on the Internet has been of little value, already public, or both -- and so no big deal.
But suddenly the Internet is Vice President Al Gore's favorite example of a superhighway in the national information infrastructure.
Mr. Gore is leading us to invest billions in this to advance commerce, education and health care, which all involve a lot of information that is both valuable and private.
So Mr. Gore had to do something about Internet security, and he just did.
It's called Clipper.
Unfortunately, Clipper is a bad idea, as we shall see.
But much of the Internet community objects to it for the wrong reasons.
Last month Mr. Gore announced the government's decision to go ahead with Clipper, a new U.S. Federal Information Processing Standard for data encryption.
Computer chips containing the secret Clipper encryption algorithm -- code-named SKIPJACK at the National Security Agency -- will very thoroughly scramble data packets sent through the Internet, thereby protecting them from unauthorized access.
Clipper chips at receiving computers unscramble packets so they can be read only by their intended recipients.
The U.S., however, will hold a secret decryption key for each Clipper chip manufactured, so national security and law enforcement agencies can wiretap Clippered connections on the Internet.
Clipper has been greeted with outrage by the Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, the American Civil Liberties Union, and the Electronic Frontier Foundation, whose co-founder John Perry Barlow has written in the April issue of Wired Magazine that "Clipper is a last-ditch attempt by the United States, the last great power from the old Industrial Era, to establish imperial control over cyberspace."
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, seeking to protect us from our own government, has started an Internet petition drive against Clipper.
Clipper outrages these organizations because they see it as a direct attack on the rights of Americans to privacy.
With Clipper chips in wide use, the National Security Agency, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency, Secret Service, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms -- Big Brother -- would be able to read our Internet mail.
This threatens democracy and freedom in America, they say.
At the risk of agreeing with the Clinton administration, I must say that privacy protection is the wrong reason to oppose Clipper.
Our Constitution proscribes only unreasonable search and seizure -- so our right to privacy has never been absolute.
After obtaining a search warrant, postal inspectors can open your mail when they suspect drug trafficking, for example; law enforcement authorities can get permission to tap your phone.
And there are laws about who can eavesdrop and when.
I am against Clipper simply because it will not work, and it will cost an unnecessary amount of tax money to outfit government computers with the chips.
The success of Clipper will depend on its wide adoption, which is unlikely, and the secrecy of its SKIPJACK algorithm.
This secrecy will make the chip expensive and inflexible, and I'm willing to bet someone will figure out SKIPJACK eventually.
Besides, most users, because of laziness, expense or complacency, will choose no encryption at all.
The few that do will choose alternatives to Clipper that are faster, better and/or cheaper, such as those implemented in software.
Even if the feds insist by law that everybody build Clipper into their computer and telephone hardware, which would send even me to the ACLU, smart criminals can easily get around Clipper by using additional encryption.
Stupid criminals will continue to do stupid things and get caught.
On the day the Clipper standard was announced, I was with 200 Internet security experts at their symposium in San Diego.
They discussed the ways in which encryption-based technologies could solve most of the Internet's security problems, and repeatedly expressed great frustration that computer and communication companies and Internet users were not embracing such technologies.
One expert stood up to suggest darkly that it would probably take some network terrorism to awaken people to the seriousness of Internet security problems.
Within an hour of that suggestion the Internet's Computer Emergency Response Team in Pittsburgh reported that the Internet had again been cracked, this time on a grand scale, exposing tens of thousands of computers to unwelcome intrusion.
What a coincidence that the Internet security symposium, the latest major Internet security breach, and the Clipper announcement all happened within the same few days -- or am I just being paranoid?
The important thing is to get on with securing the Internet so that it can be commercialized.
And this is threatened by getting it overly politicized.
So let's choose the right reason for opposing Clipper -- it just won't work.
Mr. Metcalfe invented the Ethernet LAN technology in 1973, founded 3Com Corp. in 1979, and is now publisher of InfoWorld, a personal computer trade weekly.
He can be reached on the Internet at: bob -- metcalfe@infoworld.com.
