Southeastern Asset Management, a Memphis, Tenn.-based money manager, disclosed that it holds an 8.1% stake in Kemper Corp., and put pressure on Kemper to consider an unfriendly $2.2 billion takeover offer from GE Capital Corp.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Southeastern said it may seek to have discussions with Kemper's management or board, any potential acquirer of Kemper, or other Kemper shareholders to "enhance shareholder value."
Southeastern declined to comment further.
The management at Kemper, a money-management, brokerage and insurance company, has rejected GE Capital's $55-a-share offer, saying it was not in the best interest of its shareholders.
Following the rejection, GE Capital went public earlier this week with its offer in an effort to bring shareholder pressure to bear on Kemper's management and directors.
Southeastern's carefully worded statement suggests that this "bear hug" of Kemper is working.
After meeting informally last night, Kemper's directors will meet today to formally review the offer from GE Capital, the financial-services unit of General Electric Co.
Yesterday, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Kemper stock fell $2 to $59.75, after soaring the past two trading days from $40.75 a share.
Southeastern, which manages $3.3 billion, said in its filing that any talks with Kemper or others "are intended to enhance shareholder value and to be supportive of its clients' inherent interests and rights as owners of the securities."
A spokeswoman for Kemper said a meeting with Southeastern might be premature because the board hasn't considered the GE Capital offer yet.
People close to GE Capital expect Kemper's board will reject the offer.
One person familiar with GE Capital said that the company currently has no plans to launch a hostile tender offer for Kemper, especially with Kemper's annual shareholders meeting coming up in May.
New SEC proxy rules allow greater communications among stockholders.
Previously, any discussions among more than ten shareholders would be subject to regulatory oversight.
"This is frankly the sort of pressure which rightfully should emerge here," said one person familiar with GE Capital.
"Let's see how real institutional activism is."
Southeastern Asset said it spent about $107 million to acquire Kemper shares purchased between Jan. 25 and March 11 at prices ranging from $37.33 to $41.32 each.
Its timing couldn't have been better.
GE Capital Chairman Gary Wendt visited Kemper Chairman David Mathis on Jan. 26.
Four shareholder lawsuits have been filed against Kemper this week in Delaware Chancery Court, charging that the company breached its duty to shareholders by not considering GE Capital's offer.
Kemper declined to comment.
Analysts believe that if a takeover battle ensues, Kemper's stock could ultimately rise to $70 a share.
GE Capital already has said it would consider raising its bid if it had additional financial information, in particular about Kemper's holdings of real estate.
Investment bankers have been scrambling to find other potential suitors or friendly "white knights" to offer a higher bid for Kemper.
Some bankers have suggested the idea of a "consortium bid," in which a group of buyers would acquire the company.
But a friendly white-knight rescuer could be hard to find.
One of the insurance companies strong enough to mount a challenge to GE's offer would be American International Group Inc.
While the company has been open about its desire to expand its annuity and life insurance operations, people on Wall Street say AIG Chairman Maurice Greenberg is unlikely to get into a bidding war.
AIG declined to comment.
