Tort reformers smell blood.
Over the past year, critics of Texas' civil-justice system have scored some impressive victories in their fight against huge jury awards.
The latest coup: a Texas Supreme Court ruling earlier this month that is expected to severely limit the size and number of punitive-damage awards.
But now a new coalition of business executives and professionals is determined to speed up the pace of change.
And they are mounting a million-dollar campaign aimed at a top-to-bottom restructuring of the tort system.
"The system is broken," says Richard Weekley, a commercial real-estate broker from Houston and leader of the coalition.
Unless there is significant change in the next session of the Legislature, he says, his members fear "they might not be here in five years."
Mr. Weekley's coalition, which includes state Realtor and accountant associations, hopes to raise about $1.2 million for research and polling, including about $500,000 for supreme court and legislative races.
Their goal: A comprehensive bill that would further cap punitive damages, bar deceptive-trade-practices lawsuits against professional services, and limit campaign contributions in judicial races.
This is a far different approach from the one taken by the Texas Civil Justice League, the primary business tort-reform group.
The league gets credit for several successes -- most notably a 1987 law that limits punitive damages in personal-injury cases to four times actual damages, and last session's product-liability bill, which curbed some suits over faulty products.
Both groups play down any rift, but they clearly disagree on tactics.
For instance, while Texas Civil Justice League President Ralph Wayne welcomes the allies, he worries that it "would be harmful to have two separate groups working on tort reform."
He adds that sweeping legislation is unrealistic; his group unsuccessfully tried such an approach in 1987.
"In the real world of politics, that doesn't happen," Mr. Wayne says.
"If we're ever going to get anything done, we're going to have to do it piecemeal."
Mr. Weekley sees things a bit differently.
"I guess Ralph is . . . trying to work with the existing system," he says.
"We thought maybe if there was more of a grass-roots effort, we could augment his efforts."
Both groups, however, agree on one thing: This month's Supreme Court ruling, while helping in personal-injury cases, doesn't do much to reduce big awards in disputes between businesses.
The closely watched decision establishes a two-part trial when punitive damages are at issue -- one to determine liability and the second to set damages -- and gives appeals courts more power to overturn awards they consider unreasonable.
It also makes it harder to win punitive-damage awards against insurers in deceptive-trade-practices lawsuits, by setting a higher standard for determining a defendant's gross negligence.
The reformers want to see this standard extended to all punitive-damage cases, such as last fall's $417 million jury award against Amoco Corp. in favor of tiny Rubicon Petroleum Inc. of Houston.
(The judge hasn't yet entered a judgment in the case.)
"I don't think it makes any sense to have the standard applied in personal-injury cases, and not have it applied when one business is suing another business," says Shannon Ratliff, an Austin attorney.
