The trick for Bill Clinton today will be to find a way to nurture Boris Yeltsin's economic reform instincts -- while at the same time protesting Russia's nastiness toward its neighbors.
Mr. Clinton has to accept that Russian foreign policy will not always dovetail with American preferences.
But he also has to define limits and show where Russian policy could endanger the U.S.-Russian friendship.
Those vital points of concern have to include the Baltics, the Balkans, Poland and Ukraine.
Last month, the Russians published a revised military doctrine -- apparently written with limited civilian input -- that was a nettlesome document indeed.
It revealed that Russian military leaders do not regard the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union as real countries.
The document reiterated Russian claims for special powers to intervene in its neighborhood, and showed that imperial thinking is undiminished.
The Russians are primarily concerned about the nations to their south.
But the generals are also fiercely attached to their proprietorship of Kaliningrad and other parts of the Baltic coast.
Mr. Yeltsin seems to have let the imperialists determine policy toward the near abroad, figuring that it is an easy place to give ground while he sides with Westernizers on other matters.
Of course words are not deeds, especially in Russia.
But Russian troops already have involved themselves in disputes outside Russia's borders.
Their operations look particularly nasty in Georgia, given the recent deal with Eduard Shevardnadze and the subsequent mysterious death of his rival Zviad Gamsakhurdia.
Yeltsinites claim that these are free-lancing operations by rogue generals, but this is hard to believe, given the breadth of such operations.
In Ukraine and the Baltics, there has been no military action, but the countries feel threatened nonetheless.
Russian troops are out of Lithuania but remain in Latvia and Estonia.
A half-million Russian soldiers are stationed in Kaliningrad, a Russian Baltic enclave surrounded by Lithuania and Poland.
Baltic leaders complain of covert destabilizing operations, and Ukraine is being harassed.
The danger is that Russia will once again act like an empire abroad, which would in turn foster authoritarianism at home.
The Clinton administration has been less than forthright about all this.
After the ludicrous Directive 13, in which the Clintonites bandied the idea of U.N. peacekeeping in former Soviet republics, the U.S. has uttered hardly a peep.
Surely, Mr. Clinton doesn't want to stoke anti-American passions by publicly attacking the military.
But there is no way these generals can be appeased or brought round with sweet consideration.
The U.S. has to insist that Moscow respect the sovereignty of post-Communist nations and leave them at peace.
That insistence can be directed only at Russia's president.
{See related article: "REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial): A Hard Look at Boris Yeltsin" -- WSJ Jan. 13, 1994}
