What do you call the king and queen of the moguls?
Maybe all of those things, but, certainly, Jean-Luc Brassard and Stine Lise Hattestad.
They won the Olympic moguls competitions here yesterday, meaning that they bumped and jumped down the bump-strewn, 230-meter course quicker and slicker than anybody else.
Further information, however, was harder to come by.
Like, why do they call the knee-high-sized bumps moguls?
And why would anyone want to subject his or her sacroiliac to the stresses involved in the strange exercise?
A definitive answer to Q1 was not attainable, or at least, not here.
"That's what they call them," said most of the people I asked who did not simply shrug.
One person thought it was a Norwegian word, like "slalom" or "ski."
Another volunteered that in France they call them "bosses."
That means, moguls, I guess.
Answers to the second question varied, too.
"It suits my personality better than regular skiing," said bronze medalist Edgar Grospiron of France, whose training regimen is heavy on sky diving, windsurfing, mountain biking and playing hockey.
"These are people who like a special challenge," said Peter Judge, coach of the Canadian team.
Yes, Peter, but did they consult their sacroiliacs?
There are things I can tell you for sure, however.
Moguls are part of the genre called "freestyle" skiing whose other components are aerials and ballet.
Aerials is like high diving without water; it makes its debut on the Olympic calendar beginning Monday.
Ballet is a lower-flying discipline of other stunts that weren't meant to be performed on skis, either.
It is not an Olympic sport.
Moguls are the senior member of the gang; they went Olympic the last time around, in 1992.
The sport's origins are in dispute.
Americans claim they developed it in the 1950s as an offshoot of the hotdog skiing movement that was just beginning to terrorize the recreational slopes.
Norwegians, who claim to have invented everything connected with skiing, say that their two Ruud brothers (that's pronounced "rude") had begun doing that same stuff in shows 20 years earlier.
Either way, trying it yourself is a good way to get your lift ticket lifted.
As might be expected, the Olympization of bump-skiing meant putting a lot of judges -- i.e., "officials" -- into the act.
The course crawls with them: five to judge the form of the racers' turns and two to grade the two jumps that punctuate the runs.
Turn-form scores (you're supposed to keep your shoulders level, knees together and skis down) contribute 50% to a skier's score and the jumps 25%.
Plain old gettin'-down time also counts for 25% under a formula too complex to explain here.
One of the best things about moguls is its glossary of terms.
The "heliocopter" is a 360-degree turn in the air.
When a skier soars high for a jump, he or she is said to have achieved "big air."
To ski a course skillfully is to "shred" it.
Routines are performed to what the sport's handbook calls "loud rock music," although I didn't know there was any other kind.
Having passed the finish line, competitors don't weep or clutch floral bouquets but leap about and wave their ski poles.
If their equipment-manufacturer sponsors permitted it, they'd probably spike their skis.
And the activity gets points for political correctness: Men and women perform under the same format over the same course, although yesterday, at least, the archaic form of ladies first was practiced.
The scene at yesterday's run was festive, indeed.
It began with a NASA-style countdown starting at 30 seconds.
When it hit single digits the announcer interspersed "Ignition! ...
Engines on!" with the digits.
At zero, as first-skier Elena Koroleva launched her run, the loudspeaker system emitted a cock's crow, R&R blasted and a lot of the 12,000 or so spectators yelled "Woo!"
"Why do they use a cock's crow?
That's unusual for the Olympics, isn't it?" said a fellow standing near me.
I said I didn't know why, and thought that, yes, it was unusual.
A good time was had by all, especially the winners.
That was partly because both outcomes qualified as upsets.
Mr. Brassard, a 21-year-old from near Montreal, defeated Mr. Grospiron, the 1992 gold medalist and the sport's longtime male No. 1.
He finished third.
Among the Norwegian Hattestad's victims was Donna Weinbrecht of West Milford, N.J., whose credentials matched Mr. Grospiron's.
She finished seventh, her worst showing in a half-dozen years.
"I just got numb," Ms. Weinbrecht said later.
"It was like an out-of-body experience."
Both winners professed to be more down to earth.
"I'm not much of a showoff.
I like moguls because you don't just ski, you jump, too," said the 27-year-old Ms. Hattestad, who listed her favorite drink as mineral water.
Mr. Brassard said he took up the sport because the Laurentian "mountain" on which he learned to ski, Mount Olympia by name, was no higher than a moguls run, and "downhills that take about 10 seconds are no fun."
Reminded that he had the third-slowest time in the run but prevailed on form he shrugged, "Speed isn't everything."
But the two winners will never pass for sticks in the snow.
The nicest thing about winning?
Mr. Brassard was asked.
"The show.
It was great, huh?" he replied.
And what was Ms. Hattestad saying to herself at the starting gate?
"I don't know.
I always talk to myself there, but I never remember what I say."
