The $1,000 or $2,000 cash-back promotion for buying a new car probably will all but disappear this year, auto executives and dealers say.
That's because the strengthening economy is expected to continue to spur rising demand for new cars and light trucks and because leasing promotions have largely supplanted rebates as a marketing tool.
Moreover, each of the domestic manufacturers is unveiling a series of new products this year that are expected to sell without rebates.
The fadeout of rebates is clearly good news for car companies, which during the past year have begun cutting back on the incentives and carrying the extra dollars they don't pay out in rebates straight to their bottom lines.
Generally Higher Prices For car buyers, this means generally higher prices, and some dealers report selling certain high-demand models above sticker prices.
But industry officials and car dealers attending the National Auto Dealers Association annual convention here say stiff competition among dealers is likely to keep prices from getting too far out of line.
J. David Power, the president of consulting group J.D. Power & Associates, is warning dealers here for that reason not to expect the sort of fat profits they were able to rack up during past recoveries.
Another part of the equation, executives and dealers maintain, is that the industry is moving to set more realistic sticker prices in the first place, making rebates and deep discounts less necessary.
Over the weekend, General Motors Corp. disclosed that a statewide experiment in California with such pricing helped it win market share from the Japanese auto makers in the fourth quarter of 1993.
To be sure, there are still a few sizable rebates around.
They are mostly on older models that are being phased out and on some slower-selling vehicles imported by Japanese auto makers, which because of the strong yen face price disadvantages of about $2,000 a car.
But the expected decline of rebates marks a sharp switch from the marketing strategies of recent years, particularly for the rebate-happy Big Three auto makers.
"We trained people to expect rebates," concedes Roy Roberts, a General Motors vice president who is general manager of the GMC truck division.
"Now we will have to untrain them."
His division already has dropped almost all its cash-back promotions.
So has GM's huge Chevrolet division.
"We used to put $750 on the hood of every full-sized pickup," says Jim C. Perkins, the Chevy general manager.
"But we haven't had a rebate on them in over a year."
He adds that after Chevy introduces its new Cavalier subcompacts, Monte Carlo coupes and Lumina sedans later this year, buyers will be hard-pressed to find a rebate on Chevies.
"The big cash-back incentives are dwindling away this year," says Robert L. Rewey, Ford Motor Co.'s sales and marketing chief.
Adds Alex J. Trotman, Ford's chairman, president and chief executive officer: "Last year, we had five vehicles with no incentives on them.
This year, we hope it'll be 10."
Car dealers say they are very happy to see rebates disappearing.
"We're getting away from the enormous discounts and rebates, which have hurt our credibility," says Gerald J. Seiner, a Salt Lake City dealer who sells GM, Nissan, Mitsubishi and other products.
That is the thinking behind the industry's experiments with "value pricing," the practice of offering cars equipped with a popular package of optional equipment for a lower sticker price than if a customer ordered each item separately.
Such packages typically have a lower dealer profit margin built into the price, on the theory that customers will view the sticker price as a bargain and do very little dickering.
In an effort to reverse its slide in the California market, GM last year launched a broad experiment with such pricing, offering 46 value-priced car and truck models in California, compared with 23 nationally.
During the final three months of 1993, GM said, its retail sales (excluding fleet sales) in California rose 30.6%, compared with a total-industry rise of just 7.5%.
GM said its retail sales nationally rose 18.1% during the same period.
"I couldn't be more pleased with the way it has started," says J. Michael Losh, a GM vice president who is GM's chief of North American sales, service and marketing.
"We're convinced this is the way to go; that is showing up in our results nationwide."
GM said its share of the California retail market in the fourth quarter rose 3.8 percentage points, to 21.5%.
Ford gained just over one percentage point to 25%; Chrysler lost less than a point, to 9.9%; and imports as a group (mostly Japanese) dropped 4.2 points, to 43.6%, according to GM.
