Investors are already recycling some of last year's ideas.
Like buying cable stocks on the possibility that those companies will be acquired by regional telephone companies.
That idea, at least, may have improved with age.
Over the last several weeks, cable stocks have drifted downward, chiefly on uncertainty about what the Federal Communications Commission has in store for the industry at a hearing on cable rates set for the end of this month.
This week, the FCC extended its existing freeze on cable rates until May 15.
Such jitters may have opened a window of opportunity, these investors reason.
"Cable stocks don't have any takeover premium in them right now," says Scott Billeadeau, a portfolio manager with Pacific Century Advisers in San Diego.
"We're pretty constructive on the group," he says.
Mr. Billeadeau and a handful of other pros mention Cablevision Systems, Comcast, Adelphia and Century Communications as the most likely targets of takeover bids over the next six months or so.
If such bids materialize, says Mr. Billeadeau, these stocks will soar like rockets.
The theory is this: In its planned merger with Bell Atlantic, Tele-Communications Inc. is valued at 11.75 times cash flow.
By contrast, most cable companies are now trading at multiples of just eight to nine times their 1994 cash flow, which makes them relative bargains.
Since most cable deals apply multiples of about 12 times cash flow to acquisition targets, a takeover offer could spur a big gain in the stock prices of cable companies.
For example, Mr. Billeadeau figures that Comcast could jump to about 30 from its closing price yesterday of 19 1/4, which was unchanged.
Century, meanwhile, could jump to 17 from its closing price of 10 3/8 yesterday, also unchanged.
A multiple of 12 times cash flow would raise Adelphia's stock price to 35 from yesterday's close of 20 1/2, down 1 1/8.
Betting on takeover targets is a highwire act under any circumstances.
It is especially so with cable stocks because of potential bad news lurking in the corridors of Washington.
Investors are predicting a wide range of outcomes from the FCC hearing, scheduled for Feb. 22.
One of the more benign results would be a ban on complicated pricing structures, known as "a la carte" pricing, that have allowed cable companies to boost rates for about 30% of all customers, despite an order by the FCC to cut such rates last spring.
A more damaging outcome for cable companies would be if the FCC were to mandate additional rollbacks in rates.
That would no doubt anger cable companies, which have already seen a dip in their cash flow as a result of last year's rate cuts.
(The possibility of another rate rollback is further complicating the completion of Bell Atlantic's merger with TCI, which is based on TCI's cash flow.)
However, investors may have already discounted even the worst possible denouements, as cable stocks have tumbled about 25% from last fall when they were riding high.
In comments to clients two weeks ago, Dennis Leibowitz, an analyst with Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette in New York, said, "We believe that the stocks have already largely reacted to this pending review, which has accounted for the recent weakness among cable operators."
And, he points out, uncertainty about what regulators would do didn't stop investors from plowing money into the group last summer.
"Last year, in the face of uncertainty from regulation, merger-related activity had an overriding effect on the stocks," says Mr. Leibowitz.
If there is another rate rollback, he says, it probably won't amount to more than 3% to 4% of revenue, or 6% to 8% of cash flow.
Mr. Leibowitz has a "buy" recommendation on Comcast.
Indeed, investors are betting that Comcast will soon sell a large equity stake to a regional telephone company, perhaps BellSouth, to raise cash to acquire new cable systems.
According to one big investor, Comcast's strategy is to increase the number of its subscribers to about five million.
That's the minimum number many pros believe is necessary to survive the intensifying rivalries in the telecommunications business.
Perhaps the best candidate for a takeover continues to be Cablevision, whose market includes the coveted New York area.
Other regional telephone companies, the theory goes, would relish the opportunity to take on Nynex, which is considered one of the weakest regional operators in the Bell system.
The announcement this week that Cablevision President James A. Kofalt plans to resign only added fuel to that speculation.
In the announcement, Mr. Kofalt said it was time for he and the company "to move in new and different directions."
