Ukrainians will go to the polls Sunday in the country's first democratic elections since voting for independence in 1991.
But the choice voters make this time may determine if Ukraine remains a viable independent state or if it remains sovereign in name only.
"The results of this campaign is a telling sign of where Ukraine will go in the future," says Myron Wasylyk, executive director of the Council of Advisers to the Ukrainian Parliament.
"The elections will test the country's ability to remain an ethnically tranquil and regionally cohesive state . . . that is a stabilizing factor in east Central Europe," or if it merely ebbs back into the arms of Russia, he says.
The election process so far has shed little light in which direction Ukraine is headed.
Some 5,833 candidates representing the extreme left to the extreme right are vying for 450 seats in the country's legislature.
But no political party or block has emerged as the clear leader in the elections.
Instead, the elections have become a hodgepodge of conflicting ideas and opinions.
Blatant violations by a number of candidates have hampered the election process, leaving many citizens disgusted and confused about who they should vote for.
Adding to Ukraine's troubles are two regional opinion polls, also to be held on Sunday.
Both polls have been declared unconstitutional by the authorities here, but Western and Ukrainian observers say the results will be important in determining the country's future.
In the Crimea, residents of the autonomous region will be asked about their attitudes towards dual citizenship and the relationship with Ukraine.
In the eastern Ukrainian coal-mining Donetsk region, voters will be polled on whether or not they favor having two state languages, whether or not Ukraine should sign on to the economic union of the Commonwealth of Independent States as a full member (Ukraine has associate member status now), and whether the country should be a unitary or federal state.
"What we have right now is a mess," says Serhei Holowaty, a parliamentarian from Kiev who is running for re-election.
"But a lot depends on these elections. . . .
Will we lose everything or not?"
Ukrainian and Western analysts generally agree if pro-reformers like Mr. Holowaty or former Deputy Prime Ministers Victor Pynzenyk and Volodymyr Lanoviy, considered to be part of a center-right "Ukrainia" Democratic coalition, have a healthy showing in the elections and gain at least 100 seats, Ukraine's territorial integrity will be maintained and economic reforms will begin.
The West can also expect to see a continued movement by Kiev towards integration into Europe.
If, however, candidates from the Interregional Block of Reforms, a coalition founded by former Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma and the former first deputy chairman of parliament, Volodymyr Hrynev, win the majority, it would be the first step in a slow movement back towards Russia, the analysts say.
The block favors economic integration with Russia, Ukraine's full membership in the CIS, and the liquidation of customs barriers between Kiev and Moscow.
"We've never said we want to return to the Soviet Union," Mr. Kuchma said at a recent news conference.
"Ukraine cannot exist without Russia."
But, says Volodymyr Cherniak, an economist for the pro-democracy movement Rukh, Ukraine's already heavy dependency on Russia is part of the country's problem.
"The pro-Russian bias of both these candidates are dangerous for our country and its statehood. . . .
I'm also for normal relations with Russia . . . but you can't renew all the economic ties like they're propagating.
You have to find new economic partners.
That's the only way a nation can grow," he says.
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk has said he hopes the electorate will use "common sense" on Sunday, and he has been urging people to vote for candidates who favor economic reform.
"In creating a nation, you have to have a hot heart and a cool head," he told a news conference this week.
But many here say that despite his improved international image, Mr. Kravchuk is part of Ukraine's political problems.
Critics say his lack of vision has pushed Ukraine to the brink of economic ruin and is undermining its sovereignty.
"Kravchuk and his nomenklatura have been the destabilizing force in Ukraine.
He's made no attempt to initiate reforms.
Our abyss is Kravchuk's fault," says Mr. Holowaty.
Some politicians speculate that Mr. Kravchuk is silently praying Sunday's elections are invalid so he can later declare a legislative crisis, introduce presidential rule and therefore not face presidential elections, which are scheduled for June.
Mr. Kravchuk denied that he had any such ambition and re-affirmed he won't run for re-election.
The one thing that is likely at this point is that Sunday's election will result in few winners.
Under the current election law, 50% of the registered voters must vote for the election to be valid.
The good news is that a number of independent surveys show that as many as 70% of the electorate nationwide will go to the polls.
To win a parliamentary seat, however, a candidate must receive 50% plus one vote.
"There are too many candidates for that to happen on Sunday," says a Western observer, who asked to remain anonymous.
"We'll have a better idea of where Ukraine is headed after April 10.
That's the day of the parliamentary runoffs."
