Ford Motor Co. is expected to unveil next week a big push into leasing used vehicles, which could mark another significant change in the way Americans buy cars.
Ford's aggressive lease promotions have given it five of the 10 best-selling vehicles in America and were a crucial factor in its 1992 drive to make the Taurus the top-selling U.S. car.
Now Ford is expected to expand its leasing efforts into the huge used-car arena, according to Ford dealers who have been told of the initiative.
Company officials declined to comment.
If the program catches on -- and industry analysts, Ford dealers and some competitors think it may -- some Ford customers may never buy another car or truck again.
They would just lease them.
"Maybe Ford will always own the vehicle," says Christopher Cedergren, an industry consultant for AutoPacific Inc., based in Santa Ana, Calif.
"They will lease it six times . . . and then send it to the scrap heap."
Some other auto makers, principally in the luxury end of the business, have experimented with used-car lease programs, but Ford's would be the first major program by a high-volume car maker.
General Motors Corp.'s finance arm announced a used-car lease program last summer, but a spokeswoman acknowledges that it hasn't been marketed extensively.
She declines to disclose how many used cars have been leased under it.
"I don't know if used-car leasing will go anywhere, but it sounds as if it should work," says Pete Gerosa, the general sales and service manager of GM's Cadillac division.
For Ford, the used-car lease program could help answer a question that the company's dealers have begun asking: What to do with the more than 250,000 two-year-old leased Fords that are scheduled to come back into their hands this year?
That figure is expected to rise to more than 300,000 next year, according to CNW Marketing/Research, a Bandon, Ore., concern that tracks leasing trends.
Art Spinella, vice president of CNW Marketing/Research, says that in a few years, leasing could account for nearly half of all Ford's vehicle transactions.
In recent years, leasing has risen in popularity to grab a significant share of the industry's sales activity.
Last year, leasing accounted for 20% of all light vehicle sales, according to CNW Marketing/Research.
Ford accounted for nearly 30% of the leasing activity-tops in the industry.
Growth was also aggressive in 1993 with Ford's leasing activity jumping 32.3%, while the industry's rose 35.2%.
Ford dealers say current strong demand for used automobiles ensures that a market exists for cars and trucks coming off leases offered by the company.
The re-leased Fords should be attractive, they add, because new cars are growing increasingly expensive and re-leased Fords should carry lower payments than what one might typically pay under an installment loan.
Industry reaction to Ford's plan isn't expected to be swift.
Ford holds a financing advantage over GM and Chrysler Corp. because it has a higher credit rating and can therefore be more aggressive in leasing.
Chrysler is a smaller player in new-car leasing and doesn't offer a used-car lease.
Ford's expanding stake in leasing does pose some risks.
The auto maker is essentially gambling that it can accurately predict the resale value of its used vehicles -- a factor that plays a direct role in determining the lease payments on used and new cars.
Industry analysts aren't sure what impact, if any, miscalculations could have on Ford's balance sheets, or on the prices of its new vehicles.
On the other hand, the benefits may outweigh the risks.
Customers are likely to change cars more frequently because of Ford's preference for two-year deals.
Dealers are likely to see repeat business soar as consumers turn in vehicles at the end of their lease terms.
And Ford is likely to establish a strong presence in the used-vehicle market, where it has typically lost sales to individuals and independent dealers.
The initiative also helps Ford to tackle the affordability question.
As new-car prices keep rising, auto makers in the past have had to resort to rebates or "value-priced" specials.
Ford, however, is betting that leasing will do a better job of appealing to the "monthly payment" mind-set of most car buyers.
