While Aviall's purpose is to keep commercial jets flying, the company has yet to get its stock off the tarmac.
In some ways, that's good news.
Aviall, the world's leading independent provider of turbine-engine overhaul and parts distribution, was spun out of Miami-based Ryder System in December at $15.
Since then, the company's stock has traded in a narrow $15 to $18 range.
Life could be worse.
Spinoffs of behemoth Standard & Poor's 500 companies frequently see their stock slide precipitously from their initial-offering price, because they don't attract much following from analysts.
Also, money managers of funds that focus on S&P 500 stocks frequently dump the newly acquired shares.
But those things haven't happened to Aviall, and that's an indication of what analysts think of its potential.
Paul Schlesinger, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, notes that the company's trading volume has been only about half of the 19.3 million shares distributed to Ryder shareholders, meaning "there are obviously some fund companies that apparently like the stock and that there is a greater willingness to hold onto it."
Indeed, the NAIC Growth Fund, a mutual fund run by the National Association of Investors Corp., the Royal Oak, Mich., umbrella group for investment clubs, kept the 1,200 shares it gained in the spinoff.
"We have considerable confidence in the people running the company," says Thomas O'Hara, an adviser to the fund.
Dallas-based Aviall isn't set to soar just yet -- although at its current price many consider it undervalued.
The company is in the midst of a restructuring during which Aviall will dispose of its business-aviation engine-overhaul operations to focus instead on servicing commercial, regional and commuter-airline engines.
The company's largest customers include Southwest Airlines, Federal Express and Continental Airlines.
Because of the restructuring, Aviall's fourth-quarter earnings report was extremely complicated, including charges of $156,700, several adjustments for businesses held for sale and other accounting modifications.
"It's really going to take a year or so before you can tell how things are going," Mr. O'Hara says.
In the meantime, it's apparent that the airline industry's wretched economic conditions have affected Aviall's business.
Not only are there planes in service, but demand for aviation parts, which account for 50% of Aviall's business, has been curbed.
All told, the company reported pretax earnings from continuing operations of $6 million for 1993, down from $7.5 million the year before.
Moreover, excess capacity in the engine-overhaul business has spawned price competition among Aviall and its rivals.
The pricing pressure, which has pinched Aviall's gross profit margins by about one percentage point, should last through the first half of 1994.
But despite these drawbacks, supporters argue that the restructuring will solidify Aviall's leading role in jet-engine maintenance.
With airlines searching for ways to reduce costs, outsourcing maintenance needs has become more cost-effective than operating in-house repair shops.
Because Aviall is the largest player, and because of the restructuring, "Aviall is well-positioned in terms of cost," says Thomas Galvin, an analyst at C.J. Lawrence in New York.
Additionally, contract-price increases for overhaul services will take effect in the second half of the year, which should bolster Aviall's profit margins.
Charles Ronson, a money manager at Balestra Capital in New York, and publisher of the Spin-Off Report newsletter, considers Aviall shares undervalued.
At its current price, Aviall trades at about 3.5 times its projected 1994 cash flow (earnings before income taxes, depreciation and amortization).
"That's low in terms of any company," says Mr. Ronson, who snapped up shares for his personal account when Aviall was at $16.
"The Street has mistakenly priced this company as if it were some distressed little subsidiary up for sale."
Mr. Galvin, noting that coverage of the stock "has fallen through the cracks on Wall Street," expects the price to move up to about $25 within the year as news of the company spreads.
The analysts contend that Aviall's restructuring will significantly boost its bottom line.
Every one percentage point management trims from operating expenses should add 25 cents a share in earnings, they say.
Also, the company has growth potential that is masked by its complicated earnings statements.
Aviall currently is booking the interest expenses it incurs on the businesses it's trying to sell, but isn't recognizing the income from them; that has the effect of muffling its true performance.
Once those operations are sold, Mr. Ronson says, "you'll see a substantial pickup in earnings, and substantial growth in the stock price."
Aviall Inc.
Year ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Revenue: $894.7 million
Net income: Loss of $145.3 million*
Fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Net income: $3.92 million, vs. $6.1 million**
*Includes $156.7 million in restructuring charges and losses related to businesses held for sale.
**Includes pretax earnings of $2.3 million from businesses held for sale
Note: Per-share figures not applicable.
When last we left U.S. Long Distance in October, the San Antonio telecommunications and information-services company was riding high at $21 a share.
At that time, analysts projected rapid growth, thanks to a wave of purchases by the company and the heated merger market in the telecommunications industry.
Someone forget to let U.S. Long Distance in on the news.
Since the report, the company has been buffeted by one problem after another.
In December, the Securities and Exchange Commission announced an informal inquiry into the company's accounting practices, after which U.S. Long Distance abandoned plans for a secondary stock offering.
Charlie Johnson, executive vice president and chief operating officer, stepped down on Feb. 1 to "pursue other career objectives"; a week later, Stephen Deaton, senior vice president and financial chief, resigned his posts, just seven weeks after joining the company.
To top it off: Last week, the company announced that for the first quarter ended Dec. 31, it posted a loss of $679,000, or five cents a share, compared with a gain of $548,000, or five cents a share, a year ago, excluding extraordinary items.
The stock is down about 50% to $11.
But all is not lost.
Most analysts who participated in the company's conference call on Feb. 10 still rate the stock a "buy."
Michael Elling at Oppenheimer in New York says he would be an "aggressive buyer" below $10.
"They'll work out of their problems and be a $16 stock by the end of the year," he says.
U.S. Long Distance's problems: Aggressive expansion in recent months resulted in an overbuilt network, which didn't have the supporting revenue because two contracts to provide operator services for a group of pay-telephone owners failed to produce the income the company had anticipated.
All told, margins were squeezed by about five percentage points, which translates into a revenue loss of roughly $2 million.
Although analysts expect the company will post weak second-quarter results because of efforts to scale back its network, they say U.S. Long Distance should have a strong second half, ultimately posting revenue for the year of $180 million, up 34% from last year.
The analysts also believe the company's contention that recent management departures had nothing to do with the SEC inquiry.
And most analysts are convinced that the SEC inquiry will be resolved without damaging the company.
Stay tuned.
Western National, the Houston insurance concern recently profiled in this column, went public last week with its initial public offering priced at $12 a share, less than the $15 to $17 analysts had expected.
Analysts blamed the price weakness on a recent swoon in the interest rate-sensitive life-insurance industry.
Though priced at $12, Western first traded at $12.625, and rose, closing the week at $13.50.
Houston's NL Industries gained 24% to $9.125 last week, even though it reported a wider fourth-quarter loss.
For the quarter, NL reported a loss of $49.6 million, or 97 cents a share, including a one-time charge and a small gain.
A year earlier, the chemical company reported a loss of $17.3 million, or 34 cents a share.
The stock's strength apparently stemmed from a Dow Jones News Service report noting that specialty-chemical companies such as NL and Houston's Sterling Chemicals have "reaped the benefits of Wall Street's rotation back into cyclical chemical stocks."
Sterling popped up 18% to $5.625.
Stewart Information Services, a Houston title-insurance holding company, led active stocks, trading nine times its average daily volume and gaining $1.125 to $30.50.
The company reported fourth-quarter profit of $9.43 million, or $2.30 a share, compared with year-ago net of $6.14 million, or $1.51 a share.
Tecnol Medical Products, Fort Worth, fell more than 9% to $14.75 after David Tice, head of the research service Behind the Numbers, noted in Barron's Weekly that the maker of disposable-medical products is overvalued at current levels.
