Alan Gover, of Weil, Gotshal & Manges, who was Zale's lead counsel during its recent bankruptcy, has apparently completely missed the point (Letters, Feb. 23 ) of my Jan. 19 "Macy's Debtor Paradise."
My article pointed to the Zale bankruptcy as an example of how ending a debtor's exclusive period in which to file a plan expedited a company's emergence from bankruptcy.
The article contrasted the successful efforts made (by Mr. Gover among others) to quickly get Zale out of bankruptcy with the seemingly interminable effort being made in the Macy bankruptcy where Weil, Gotshal & Manges is also company counsel.
Apparently Mr. Gover does not recognize an accolade when he sees it.
Instead, his agenda appears to be to discredit my argument against extending exclusivity in the Macy bankruptcy by recollecting how well exclusivity advanced the Zale bankruptcy.
Mr. Gover writes:
1. "The debtor {Zale} proposed . . . a fast track schedule for the resolution of the case."
In fact, this fast track schedule was essentially imposed on Zale by the court in response to a motion made by a creditor (Barre & Co.) to end exclusivity.
2. "The debtor exclusivity period was extended by the bankruptcy court until Zale . . . gave antagonistic groups the option of filing competing plans. . . ."
This is just blatantly untrue.
In September 1992, the court, against Zale's wishes, decided to let any creditor file a plan for Zale.
3. "Without the exclusivity period, {Zale} could never . . . have achieved a consensual plan."
Zale maintained exclusivity for only nine months, and it was not until after exclusivity was ended that a consensual plan was arrived at.
Macy's has had exclusivity for more than two years and has yet to even file a plan.
Rather than attempting to raise the legitimate counterargument to my article of why the Macy bankruptcy might be distinguishable from the Zale bankruptcy (I do not believe that it is), Mr. Gover instead on the one hand attacks my motives and on the other hand says that in the Zale case I was "an opponent of case resolution."
If refusing to accept an inferior offer to settle litigation makes me "an opponent of case resolution" then I plead guilty.
However, in the Zale case my constituents received about 20% more than the proposal Mr. Gover so indignantly implies the Zale Credit Corp. creditors should have accepted.
Mr. Gover also insinuates that the presiding judge in the case was somehow critical of my conduct.
Let me simply note that the court found that "Dickstein & Co. made a substantial contribution to the case" and as a result directed Zale to reimburse Dickstein & Co. for $98,000 in legal and other expenses.
As for my motives in writing the article, I plead guilty to the charge of being "a purchaser at sharp discounts of claims against financially distressed entities" and my firm is in fact a Macy creditor by virtue of owning a small amount of Macy trade debt.
Mr. Gover tries to somehow imply an ulterior motive on my part.
Well, I also plead guilty to wanting Macy's to emerge from bankruptcy expeditiously, a sentiment that Mr. Gover (and Weil, Gotshal & Manges?) apparently does not share.
