Manatt, Phelps, Phillips & Kantor, the Democratic powerhouse law firm, didn't really feel the loss when it became Manatt, Phelps & Phillips.
That's because, over the past year, while U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor has negotiated trade deals worth billions of dollars for U.S. industries, his old law firm, which didn't have much of a trade practice before, has been busily signing up new trade clients that could be worth millions of dollars to Manatt Phelps.
Call it the reverse revolving-door phenomenon.
In Washington, when lawyer-lobbyists leave high-prestige federal jobs, they often make a bundle because of the connections they still have inside the government.
Manatt Phelps, taking a different route, gained luster and new trade profits in the wake of Mr. Kantor's departure for a big government job.
Manatt Phelps is headed by Charles Manatt, a former Democratic Party chairman who has long exploited his political contacts to build up the firm's offices in Los Angeles and Washington.
But the law firm was principally known for corporate and entertainment work and had just a few trade clients including NEC Corp., the big Japanese electronics company.
That changed in December, just after Mr. Kantor had sewn up a victory with passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Manatt Phelps mailed out embossed announcements trumpeting "the addition of an international trade and customs practice group" with two new partners, three new associates, counsel in Monterrey, Mexico, and a senior trade consultant in Mexico City.
It also ran the announcement in Legal Times, a Washington trade publication for lawyers and lobbyists.
Gordon Bava, managing partner at the firm's Los Angeles headquarters, worries that the sudden burgeoning of Manatt Phelps's trade work could be "misconstrued" as a "crude attempt to capitalize on our relationship with Mickey."
It isn't, he insists.
For his part, Mr. Kantor has recused himself from dealing with Manatt Phelps clients.
"We adhere to the letter and detail of my recusal letter," Mr. Kantor says in his office near the White House, his arms tightly folded across him.
But that hasn't stopped his former partners from trying to get his attention.
The recusal doesn't bar Mr. Kantor from meeting with clients the firm has snagged since he left, but Mr. Kantor has gone a step further and said he will meet with those clients only if they are part of industry coalitions.
Manatt Phelps used this loophole to get one of its new trade clients, Dole Food Co., in to see the trade representative.
After Mr. Kantor said he wouldn't meet alone with Dole to discuss banana issues, he agreed to meet with an industry group that included Dole.
On June 8, he met with officials from Dole, Chiquita Brands International Inc., the American Farm Bureau Federation and a growers' association.
Last month, June Walton, a partner at Manatt Phelps, tried a different approach.
She called Mr. Kantor's chief of staff, Thomas Nides, to ask about Mr. Kantor's policy about meeting with a new Manatt client such as Vitro SA, a giant Mexican manufacturer and distributor of glass products.
U.S. rival Guardian Industries Corp. had met with Mr. Kantor last May, albeit on trade issues with Japan.
Vitro, whose $3 billion in annual sales ranks it as one of Latin America's biggest companies, is locked in a bitter trade dispute with U.S. glass makers such as Guardian; the U.S. companies have been pushing Mr. Kantor's office to negotiate a faster reduction of tariffs Mexico imposes on glass imports.
Mr. Nides told Ms. Walton that such a meeting wouldn't be possible.
He sent her a copy of Mr. Kantor's recusal statement and noted in a letter: "As you can see from Point No. 3, it seems that Mickey will be unable to personally meet with the firm."
In Point No. 3, Mr. Kantor says he won't have "any professional contact with members or employees of my former law firm."
Ms. Walton insists she wasn't asking for a meeting, but rather inquiring generally about Mr. Kantor's policy.
Mr. Kantor says that now that Vitro is a Manatt Phelps client, he wouldn't meet again with Guardian, based in Northville, Mich.
Some Manatt lawyers privately fret that Mr. Kantor's stringent recusal policy could, in fact, put their clients at a disadvantage in terms of access.
But that hasn't stopped companies from hiring the firm.
In early 1993 Manatt Phelps registered with Congress to lobby for NEC USA Inc., a subsidiary of NEC.
In June, it filed to lobby for Dole in connection with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Geneva-based group that monitors world trade.
In July, it filed for Sharp Manufacturing Co. of America, the U.S. subsidiary of Japanese electronics company Sharp Corp., over international trade law and regulation.
And this past October, Costa Rica's ambassador to the U.S., Gonzalo Facio, signed his country on as a Manatt Phelps client.
The law firm was retained to represent Costa Rica on matters involving duty-free status under a program called the Generalized System of Preferences, for an estimated fee of $10,000 to $20,000.
Manatt Phelps signed up to do congressional work for Vitro on Nafta in October.
In November, the firm added Royal Wine Corp., based in New York, to its client list, lobbying for them on trade issues affecting the wine industry.
Royal Wine is a unit of Kedem Royal Wine Co.
None of these clients would speak about their decision to hire Manatt Phelps and, because these retainers are too new to show up in government filings, it's not clear how much the firm is being paid.
Tom Pernice, a Dole Food vice president, didn't return repeated calls.
An official at Sharp didn't respond to questions.
Mr. Facio and a Royal Wine official didn't return phone calls.
Then in December, Manatt Phelps added a stable of trade-related clients when Irwin Altschuler, a partner at another Washington firm, Brownstein, Zeldman & Lore, moved his practice uptown to Manatt Phelps's suite.
With Mr. Altschuler came work for big Mexican clients, including additional work for Vitro and various of its subsidiaries: Vitrocrisa; VVP America Inc., a Memphis, Tenn., fabricator and distributor of glass products; and Anchor Glass Container Corp., another U.S. glass maker.
Mr. Altschuler also brought along Kimberly-Clark de Mexico SA, the Mexican subsidiary of the U.S. consumer-products company Kimberly-Clark Corp.
Manatt Phelps had some trade work before.
NEC, one of its largest trade clients, has paid the firm at least $1.78 million since 1987.
The firm represented the government of Cyprus until 1992, collecting at least $993,845, partly for trade issues, and it represented L.A. Gear Inc., the Los Angeles footwear company, on legislation affecting footwear and apparel imports.
The firm's ties to Mr. Kantor have also attracted controversy before.
In the fall of 1992, Mr. Manatt gathered current and potential clients for a pre-election briefing in which Mr. Kantor spoke about Bill Clinton's election campaign.
After news reports about the briefing were published, Mr. Kantor lost his bid to become the Clinton transition chief.
Mr. Kantor feels the reports of his role in this affair were misleading and even now he bristles at being described as an ex-lobbyist.
Mr. Bava says the firm has been interested in expanding its trade practice since 1990.
"We're not out to sell influence," he insists.
"We've always been scrupulous."
NEC Corp., L.A. Gear, Appraisal Institute
NEC Corp., NEC USA, Dole Food, Sharp Manufacturing Co. of America, Government of Costa Rica, Vitro SA, Royal Wine, Vitrocrisa, VVP America, Anchor Glass Container, Kimberly-Clark de Mexico, Appraisal Institute
Sources: Latest filings at Justice Department and Senate Office of Public Records, and Journal interviews.
