One of the many differences between Robert L. James, chairman and chief executive officer of McCann-Erickson, and John J. Dooner Jr., the agency's president and chief operating officer, is quite telling: Mr. James enjoys sailboating, while Mr. Dooner owns a powerboat.
Now, Mr. James is preparing to sail into the sunset, and Mr. Dooner is poised to rev up the engines to guide Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson into the 21st century.
Yesterday, McCann made official what had been widely anticipated: Mr. James, 57 years old, is stepping down as chief executive officer on July 1 and will retire as chairman at the end of the year.
He will be succeeded by Mr. Dooner, 45.
It promises to be a smooth process, which is unusual given the volatile atmosphere of the advertising business.
But Mr. Dooner has a big challenge that will be his top priority.
"I'm going to focus on strengthening the creative work," he says.
"There is room to grow.
We can make further improvements in terms of the perception of our creative work."
Even Alan Gottesman, an analyst with PaineWebber, who believes McCann is filled with "vitality" and is in "great shape," says that from a creative standpoint, "You wouldn't pay to see their reel" of commercials.
While McCann's world-wide billings rose 12% to $6.4 billion last year from $5.7 billion in 1992, the agency still is dogged by the loss of the key creative assignment for the prestigious Coca-Cola Classic account.
"I would be less than honest to say I'm not disappointed not to be able to claim creative leadership for Coke," Mr. Dooner says.
McCann still handles promotions and media buying for Coke.
But the bragging rights to Coke's ubiquitous advertising belongs to Creative Artists Agency, the big Hollywood talent agency.
"We are striving to have a strong renewed creative partnership with Coca-Cola," Mr. Dooner says.
However, odds of that happening are slim since word from Coke headquarters in Atlanta is that CAA and other ad agencies, such as Fallon McElligott, will continue to handle Coke advertising.
Mr. Dooner, who recently lost 60 pounds over three-and-a-half months, says now that he has "reinvented" himself, he wants to do the same for the agency.
For Mr. Dooner, it means maintaining his running and exercise schedule, and for the agency, it means developing more global campaigns that nonetheless reflect local cultures.
One McCann account, "I Can't Believe It's Not Butter," a butter substitute, is in 11 countries, for example.
McCann has initiated a new so-called global collaborative system, composed of world-wide account directors paired with creative partners.
In addition, Peter Kim was hired from WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson last September as vice chairman, chief strategy officer, world-wide.
Mr. Dooner doesn't see a creative malaise permeating the agency.
He points to several campaigns with pride, including the Taster's Choice commercials that are like a running soap opera.
"It's a $19 million campaign with the recognition of a $200 million campaign," he says of the commercials that feature a couple that must hold a record for the length of time dating before kissing.
Even so, Mr. Dooner is on the prowl for more creative talent and is interested in acquiring a hot agency.
He says he would like to finalize an acquisition "yesterday.
I'm not known for patience."
Mr. Dooner met with Martin Puris, president and chief executive officer of Ammirati & Puris, about McCann's acquiring the agency with billings of $400 million, but nothing has materialized.
"There is no question," says Mr. Dooner, "that we are looking for quality acquisitions and Ammirati & Puris is a quality operation.
There are some people and entire agencies that I would love to see be part of the McCann family."
Mr. Dooner declines to identify possible acquisitions.
Mr. Dooner is just gearing up for the headaches of running one of the largest world-wide agencies.
(There are no immediate plans to replace Mr. Dooner as president; Mr. James operated as chairman, chief executive officer and president for a period of time.)
Mr. James is filled with thoughts of enjoying his three hobbies: sailing, skiing and hunting.
Asked why he would choose to voluntarily exit while he still is so young, Mr. James says it is time to be a tad selfish about how he spends his days.
Mr. James, who has a reputation as an extraordinarily tough taskmaster, says that because he "had a great time" in advertising," he doesn't want to "talk about the disappointments."
In fact, when he is asked his opinion of the new batch of Coke ads from CAA, Mr. James places his hands over his mouth.
He shrugs.
He doesn't utter a word.
He has, he says, fond memories of working with Coke executives.
"Coke has given us great highs," says Mr. James, sitting in his plush office, filled with photographs of sailing as well as huge models of, among other things, a Dutch tugboat.
He says he feels a "great sense of accomplishment."
In 36 countries, McCann is ranked in the top three; in 75 countries, it is in the top 10.
Soon, Mr. James will be able to compete in as many sailing races as he chooses.
And concentrate on his duties as rear commodore at the New York Yacht Club.
Maybe he'll even leave something from his office for Mr. Dooner.
Perhaps a framed page from the New York Times, dated Dec. 8, 1987, showing a year-end chart of the stock market crash earlier that year.
Mr. James says he framed it and kept it by his desk as a "personal reminder.
It can all be gone like that."
Ad Notes. . . .
BONNIE BLAIR: Kellogg Co. said it plans to put a picture of Olympic speedskating champion Bonnie Blair onto "limited edition" boxes of corn flakes.
She will appear on cereal boxes in her home state of Illinois starting next month.
She appeared on Kellogg boxes in 1992, when the company was an official Olympics sponsor.
This year, the company passed on the sponsorship but continued its endorsement relationship with Ms. Blair.
BUYOUT: Two executives of Calet, Hirsch & Ferrell completed a buyback of the New York agency from parent Ross Roy Communications.
Ric Calvillo, chairman and chief executive, and John Ferrell, president and chief creative officer, purchased certain assets and accounts of the old shop and are renaming it Ferrell Calvillo, with $85 million in billings, according to Mr. Calvillo.
Peter Hirsch, Calet Hirsch's other principal, remains at Ross Roy's New York office, called New York Partners/Ross Roy, which handles the Kmart account.
ACCOUNTS: Lionel Trains Inc. of Chesterfield, Mich., tapped the Detroit office of Young & Rubicam to create print ads for its electric trains, an account previously at Stone August Baker of Troy.
Last week, the company assigned a new account for nonelectric trains for preschoolers to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco. . . .
Duncan Toys, a unit of Flambeau Products, tapped Goldberg Fossa Seid, New York, to create ads for Duncan yo-yos, including regional television spots and promotions.
