Prices of U.S. Treasury securities fell yesterday as the market failed to sustain the gains posted Tuesday following the Federal Reserve's decision to raise short-term interest rates.
The Fed, meanwhile, appeared to confirm through its routine open-market intervention that the new target for the federalfunds rate is 3.5%.
(The federal-funds rate is the rate on overnight loans between banks.)
The action had been widely expected and there was little market response.
Meanwhile Brazil's creditors yesterday removed one of the biggest obstacles standing in the way of its $52 billion debt-restructuring deal with foreign commercial banks.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped more than 1/2 point, or more than $5 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 91 27/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from the price, rose to 6.89% from 6.85% on Tuesday.
When the Fed announced it was tightening Tuesday, a wave of buying from investors and traders took prices sharply higher across the entire spectrum of Treasury securities.
Some of that buying continued through the early part of yesterday's session -- especially among short-term issues -- and prices were holding on to moderate gains through midafternoon.
The positive reaction is a reflection of sentiments that the Fed's move to raise short-term rates would squelch inflationary pressures.
Investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of fixed-coupon payments from bond investments.
Restraining the market was a sense that although the Fed's second tightening in seven weeks removed some near-term uncertainty, at some point, the central bank will again raise interest rates.
And in a rising interest-rate environment, it simply doesn't make sense for investors to be aggressively buying Treasurys, market participants said.
"With the Fed having clarified to some degree the speed with which it is going to tighten, there were some people willing to get involved," said Dana Johnson, head of market analysis at First Chicago Capital Markets.
"But it's not a `close your eyes and buy' type of environment."
"There was definitely some real buying going on, but we're more in the process of establishing a trading range than on the verge of a substantial rally," said Mr. Johnson.
Investors didn't have to look far for a reminder that interest rates are heading higher.
A number of major U.S. banks announced yesterday afternoon that they were raising their prime rates to 6.25% from 6% in response to the Fed tightening and rising loan demand.
(The prime is the base interest rate that commercial banks charge on loans to their biggest borrowers with the best credit ratings.)
Prime-rate changes usually don't have much of an impact on the bond market, but with sentiment still fragile, it doesn't take much to undercut the market, traders said.
The yield on the 30-year bond, for example, is expected to hold between 6.75% and 7% over the next few weeks.
And barring any surprises, the market should be able to hold near current levels until another Fed tightening seems near, players said.
For the time being, most analysts don't expect the Fed to act until at least the middle of May.
"Near term, I think we're just going to level off here," said Roger Marshall, president of Riggs Investment Management Co.
That means that although 30-year bonds offer a decent return with a yield near 6.80%, it doesn't make sense to buy securities on a bet that prices will rise substantially, players said.
"At this stage in the market, we're not getting too excited," said Ed Labenski, president of IDS Fixed-Income Advisors.
"We're just biding our time."
Prior to the late-afternoon sell-off, much of the activity had centered on the government's auction of new five-year notes.
Although the bidding wasn't as strong as some had thought it would be, overall, the offering was deemed relatively well received.
The Treasury awarded the $11 billion offering at a yield of 5.91%, toward the higher end of expectations.
The coupon was set at 5.875%.
The bid-to-cover ratio, which is a measure of demand comparing the total number of bids to those accepted, was 2.56-to-1.
Noncompetitive bids, which typically reflect interest from investors outside the Wall Street community, were $671 million.
In comparison, over the last 12 five-year note auctions, the issue has drawn an average bid-to-cover ratio of 2.80-to-1 and noncompetitive bids have averaged $569 million.
Meanwhile investors in Brazil's debt obligations received very good news yesterday.
Citibank, which is the closing agent for Brazil's huge debt-restructuring deal, announced late yesterday that it has received the "necessary waivers from creditors to allow Brazil's $52 billion external-debt financing package to close on April 15 as scheduled."
Last week Brazil and its bank advisory committee took the unusual step of asking nearly 800 creditors to waive a clause in their contracts that conditioned the deal on an International Monetary Fund standby loan agreement.
Creditors holding at least two-thirds of the debt included in the deal had to agree to the waiver by today , in order for the deal to go ahead.
The IMF needs to approve Brazil's economic plan before it will provide a standby loan.
The standby loan would be used to help finance the purchase of U.S. Treasury bonds needed to collateralize the bonds to be issued as part of the debt deal.
There had been worries that the deal would be delayed indefinitely if the deadline hadn't been met.
According to a news release, William R. Rhodes, vice chairman of Citibank described the response of creditors as "unprecedented."
Mr. Rhodes said that creditors holding more than the necessary two-thirds of the debt had agreed to the waivers and more approvals were coming in.
Forging ahead with the restructuring without the IMF support could make the deal more risky and expensive for Brazil to complete.
That's because Brazil will have to buy the Treasurys needed as collateral in the open market instead of directly from the U.S. Treasury.
The U.S. Treasury said it would sell the bonds directly to Brazil in a special sale only with the IMF standby agreement in place.
The news had little effect on Brazil's outstanding debt since most investors were expecting the necessary number of waivers to be received in time.
"I think it got through because everybody wants the deal to get through," said Jerry Finneran, president at TCW Americas, which manages developing-nation funds for Trust Co. of the West, a Los Angeles money manager.
"You had to have cast-iron innards to see Brazil debt" through these negotiations and the "incredible volatility" of the Brazilian debt market.
All bids are awarded at a single price at the market-clearing yield.
Rates are determined by the difference between that price and the face value.
The notes are dated March 31, and mature March 31, 1999.
The pace of corporate debt issuance rose slightly with offerings by American Telephone & Telegraph Co., BankAmerica Corp. and Consumers Power Co., a unit of CMS Energy Corp.
In light trading, prices of investment-grade and high-yield bonds ended little changed.
One exception, though, was a rally in the bonds of R.H. Macy & Co.
Issuance had been low for the past month as interest rates rose in reaction to the Feb. 4 tightening of monetary policy by the Fed.
But after the Fed's tightening Tuesday, market sentiment improved enough to encourage a few more issuers, syndicate officials say.
AT&T sold $400 million of 10-year noncallable notes, an offering that is part of its 1994 overall financing plan, said Larry Prendergast, vice president and treasurer.
He said the deal had been planned prior to Tuesday's market rally, which set a nice tone in the market for the offering yesterday.
The debt was priced as 6.75% issues at 99.265 to yield 6.853%, 0.44 percentage point above Treasurys.
At that level, it was reportedly well received by the market, syndicate officials said.
The company will use the money initially to pay down commercial paper.
AT&T has about $6 billion of commercial paper outstanding at the parent level, Mr. Prendergast said.
The paper is rated double-A-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and doubleA by Standard & Poor's Corp., and it was sold through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
Macy bonds were the big movers of the day.
The company's 14.25% senior subordinated debentures maturing in 1998 traded up 4.75 points during the session, or $47.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 48.75.
The bonds first popped about three points in reaction to a Wall Street Journal report that Macy directors reached an agreement on the retailer's reorganization plan.
The bonds jumped again after Macy outlined the plan for its creditor groups.
Separately, Northwest Airlines began actively marketing a junk bond offering.
The size of the deal was decreased by $50 million to $350 million and price talk on the offering is for a yield of around 11%.
Prices of municipal bonds faltered after an early rise to finish little changed.
In secondary trading, Los Angeles's 5.70% wastewater system refunding bonds of 2020 ended unchanged at a price of 96.31, to yield 5.95%.
In light new-issue action, the California Public Works Board's $84 million issue of 1994 Series A lease revenue bonds were sold via underwriters led by Bear, Stearns & Co.
At a repricing, yields for some bonds were raised 0.02 to 0.10 percentage point to attract buyers.
Following the repricing, yields range from 4.30% in 1996 to 6.17% in 2014.
The initial yield scale was 4.25% in 1996 to 6.15% in 2014.
Prices of mortgage securities ended lower on renewed worries about interest rates.
Among prices of 7% securities for April delivery, Government National Mortgage Association issues ended 9/32 lower at 97 22/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues and Federal National Mortgage Association issues ended 11/32 lower at 98 4/32 and 97 29/32, respectively.
