Moving quickly, Alicja Wiecko loads the ammo into her particle gun, lines up the target in her cross hairs, and fires.
Another mutant banana.
This scene plays out not on some cheesy late-night sci-fi flick, but in a gleaming laboratory here at Texas A&M's Institute of Biosciences and Technology.
Ms. Wiecko blasts banana seedlings with microscopic particles of tungsten encrusted with viral DNA fragments, part of a research effort to genetically engineer prescription fruits and vegetables that, when eaten, would act as oral vaccines.
The tungsten particles pierce the banana plant's tough cell walls.
By a process only partly understood, the viral DNA encrusting the particles attaches to the cell chromosomes, changing the plant's genetic code.
In theory, the plants should "express" the viral DNA fragments in their cells, and pass them along during reproduction.
Those DNA fragments should then work as antigens, agents that provoke the immune system to produce antibodies against a disease.
Researchers aim to produce hepatitis B antigens in bananas.
Though a highly effective hepatitis B vaccine already exists, it is, at about $3 a patient, too expensive for most Third World countries.
In part, that's why more than one million people are expected to die from the effects of the disease this year.
Dr. Charles Arntzen, head of the project, hopes the altered bananas will deliver the vaccine at a cost of about two cents a dose, and save on such costs as refrigeration, hypodermics, needles and sterilization equipment.
Bananas don't have to be cooked, can be eaten by very young children, and are easy to grow.
And, he says, they have a type of protein that potentially lets them deliver very high levels of antigens, making them a promising vaccine candidate.
Research on genetically engineering plants, and separately, on using recombinant DNA to develop vaccines, goes back more than a decade, but melding them to grow plants as oral vaccines is more recent, and an approach, championed by plant biologists, that's still considered pretty iffy by most of the immunological research community.
When talking to immunologists, says Dr. Mich B. Hein, who directs similar work at Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif., "I call myself a molecular biologist.
If I say I'm a plant biologist, they think I'm a gardener."
Skeptics say obstacles abound: keeping transformed plants genetically stable from one generation to the next; getting the right concentration of the antigen in a plant to provide an adequate dose; making sure the antigen is stable.
Then there's getting the antigen to provoke the gut's immune system to make antibodies.
Because the gut evolved over time to protect us from a wide variety of toxins, there's also a problem with "oral tolerance," the tendency of the gut's immune system to become insensitive to proteins -- including antigens.
"We need to understand better how the immune system decides whether to make an antibody," says Dr. Hein.
Despite the skepticism, some researchers predict that they may have commercially viable vaccines for animals within five years.
Texas A&M just received a federal grant to develop a prescription plant, perhaps a potato, to inoculate pigs against trichina, the parasite that causes trichinosis.
Researchers at Texas A&M reported their first success in late 1992, transforming tobacco plants to produce a hepatitis B antigen similar to that found in the blood of infected humans.
Hepatitis B antigens isolated from the tobacco were injected into mice; but Dr. Arntzen won't say whether they provoked an immune response, or whether antigens of E. Coli bacteria sparked an immune response when they were fed to the mice.
Following scientific protocol, he's waiting to present a progress report to an international vaccine conference this month.
But from the manner of the researchers, it's apparent they're seeing success.
Besides transforming several other plant species to produce hepatitis B antigens, the Texas A&M researchers also engineered Boston lettuce, tomatoes and potatoes to make antigens of the Norwalk virus, a diarrheal disease; and potatoes containing antigens of an E. Coli strain that provoke an immune response against cholera.
(Unfortunately, cooking the plants destroys the antigens; so we won't soon see doctors prescribing potato chips.)
Scripps's Dr. Hein, meanwhile, is feeding mice alfalfa with a vibrio cholera antigen.
Researchers at Washington University, in St. Louis, have engineered tobacco and rapeseed to make antigens of E. Coli and Streptococcus strains.
And labs in Belgium and Japan are on the same track.
In her Houston lab, Ms. Wiecko deftly slices a banana seedling with her scalpel to expose the meristem, the plant tissue that programs the growth of the entire banana plant.
This she sets onto a gel on a small petri dish, which in turn she slides over a pair of cross hairs in a squat steel chamber like a breadbox stood on end.
Now she whirls black tungsten particles in a solution of viral DNA, and plunks a drop onto a fine filter, which she screws into the gun barrel poking down from the top of the box.
When a needle reaches 60 pounds per square inch of pressurized helium, used to power the shot, she squeezes the bright red trigger.
The dish jumps, and a black splotch appears on the meristem.
So far, government funds and private grants have financed the research at Texas A&M and Scripps.
"Companies that have the wherewithal," says Dr. Arntzen, "aren't in the mood to do it because their return on investment would be too low."
But a Hong Kong drug concern recently contacted Texas A&M to explore producing cheap hepatitis B vaccines for China, and Japan's state-run tobacco monopoly sent a delegation to see what the Houston lab has achieved with tobacco plants.
Dr. Hein said Scripps, too, has been contacted by concerns interested in commercializing the research.
But until prescription plants prove themselves, he said, "they're probably going to let it be carried out publicly."
