Such a policy, in theory, would permit a steel or auto plant in Ohio to negotiate an attractive price for electricity from Arizona, and require the local Ohio utility to transmit the purchased power.
If adopted on a widespread basis, most utilities argue, wheeling would wreck their planning and sabotage construction of new generating capacity by making local demand impossible to project.
One dismal scenario envisions a high-cost utility steadily losing large customers and being forced to raise local rates to cover fixed costs for existing plants and facilities.
The announcement expected today in New York will give electric utilities unusual allies -- environmental and consumer groups, as well as alternative-energy advocates, independent-power producers, energy-service companies and trade unions.
Already, power generation is largely deregulated, with more than half of new power capacity being built by nonutility companies.
In addition, wholesale competition for power among utilities and municipalities exists within states.
But retail wheeling would open the floodgates to nationwide pricing competition.
The new opponents generally fear that retail wheeling would go too far, disrupting efforts to encourage local utilities to practice conservation and demand management, and contorting federal policies designed to curb pollution from electricalpower generating plants.
"For us, retail wheeling essentially changes the incentives, moving away from long-term incentives to short-term issues," says Ralph Cavanagh, energy program director for the Natural Resources Defense Council.
"We thought that we had moved out of an era where . . . those who want to pay less need to use more power."
Wheeling advocates challenge those worries, citing federal clean-air laws that set baselines for permitted pollution.
"We expect the power producers to meet the environmental requirements of the law," says John Anderson, executive director of the Electricity Consumers Resource Council, a group that backs wheeling.
"But many environmentalists want utilities to go beyond the law, and that costs money," he says.
To be sure, the debate being waged remains largely theoretical.
Federal energy legislation in 1992 outlawed federal involvement in retail wheeling.
But states could mandate retail wheeling within their borders, and several states have debated adopting such a system.
No state has adopted a widespread retail wheeling plan to this point.
Moreover, there are technical hurdles in properly pricing electric energy pumped through the nation's power grid, which wheeling would turn into an electrical-energy pipeline.
Such technical concerns prompt Mr. Cavanagh to call retail wheeling "mythical" and nothing more than "gimmickry."
Heavy users, however, note that such utilities as Canada's Hydro-Quebec already transport electricity more than a thousand miles from plants in northern Quebec to customers in southern New York.
"What's really at stake is the declaration of dollars," says Mr. Anderson.
"Competitive outsourcing would allow consumers to choose the most-efficient, lowest-cost producers.
The competition for customers would greatly enhance the efficiency of utilities and lower energy costs," he says.
Mr. Anderson's organization, made up primarily of heavy energy users such as Bethlehem Steel Corp. and General Motors Corp., stand to gain the most from a wide-open power market, because they would have the largest blocks of buying power.
But, Mr. Anderson insisted, residential consumers could also benefit from such a system by forming co-ops and other power-purchasing alliances.
Mike Florio, senior attorney for Toward Utility Rate Normalization, a consumer advocate group, argues that Mr. Anderson's forecast is unlikely.
"Our concern is that such a system would allow a limited group of large customers to pick off the cheaper sources of power, leaving residential and small-business customers with the expensive power sources," he says.
