There has been much emphasis recently on "Schindler's List," the movie by Steven Spielberg.
On Dec. 22, your Dorothy Rabinowitz wrote a Leisure & Arts piece about the Italian Army's refusal to ship Jews to Hitler's extermination camps.
All this prompted me to re-read "The Man With the Miraculous Hands" by Joseph Kessel, 1961, Farrar Straus & Cudahy.
It is the "fantastic story of Felix Kersten, Himmler's private doctor, whose influence saved the lives of thousands of victims marked for exterminating by the Nazis."
Kersten was so able to cure Himmler's pains that he could influence the Reichsfuehrer to save many lives almost daily during the war.
Himmler once said, "With every one of his messages, Dr. Kersten deprives me of a life."
He stopped the deportation of the entire population of Holland to Poland in 1941 by convincing Himmler that stress of overwork was ruining his health, and preventing Kersten from curing his pain.
With his curing hands he convinced his patient to divert a trainload of 2,700 condemned Jews to Switzerland and freedom.
Perhaps his greatest accomplishment occurred near the end of the war when Himmler was preparing to obey one of Hitler's most heinous orders, to dynamite the concentration camps when the Allied armies came within a few miles.
Kersten continued his daily messages while working to overcome Himmler's blind allegiance to Hitler, convincing him of his greater role in history than the insane Hitler, and Himmler finally consented to countermand the order -- and 800,000 lives were spared.
Robert A. Lawson
Framingham, Mass.
Rabbi Alexander Schindler's Jan. 4 Letter to the Editor rightly extols the extraordinary effort made by the Danish people in saving the 8,000 Danish Jews from extermination.
It is important to remember that another European country under German control, Bulgaria, was able to save all its Jewish citizens.
In 1939 there were slightly more than 40,000 Jews in Bulgaria; at the end of the war there were close to 50,000.
It is the only European country, except for Switzerland, where the Jewish population actually grew during the war.
Somehow this remarkable event has escaped the attention it deserves.
Without diminishing the astounding and heroic deed of the Danish people, one should not forget the equally momentous deed of the Bulgarian people.
I, for one, owe them my life.
Jacob Amir, M.D.
Little Rock, Ark.
