Throughout our history, decisions about education have remained primarily with local communities, reflecting the values of the parents and families who foot the bills.
If some Democrats in Congress have their way, all this could soon change.
Under consideration on Capitol Hill this week are proposed amendments to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act reauthorization that constitute a massive -- and ill-advised -- shift of education control toward educrats, lawyers and Washington.
The Elementary and Secondary Education Act authorizes the country's largest federal education program, the Chapter 1 program that funds remedial math and reading programs for economically disadvantaged children.
Most of the school districts throughout America receive some Chapter 1 money.
In the current fiscal year, Chapter 1 disbursed more than $6.3 billion to local education authorities, and President Clinton wants to boost Chapter 1 funding next year by more than 10% to a nice, round $7 billion, despite the fact that no one knows for sure whether these federal dollars actually work.
(Some preliminary studies even suggest that Chapter 1 students regress rather than improve.)
Meanwhile, on Capitol Hill, a few liberal Democrats, including Rep. Major Owens (D., N.Y.), are trying to use Chapter 1 as a vehicle for breathing new life into one of the education establishment's favorite issues: How much are we spending (vs. achieving) in our nation's schools?
The Bush administration worked closely with the nation's governors (including then Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton) to develop national education goals describing what our children should know and be able to achieve in school.
The goals were appropriately endorsed by the Clinton administration in the Goals 2000: Educate America Act.
Some Democrats on the House Education and Labor Committee, however, were furious that the education establishment's fixation on spending might be slighted by too much emphasis on real educational achievement.
Despite the fact that countless studies demonstrate no correlation whatsoever between spending and educational performance, Democrats like Rep. Owens wanted to block all achievement standards unless they were preceded by "opportunity to learn" standards.
"Opportunity to learn" is the latest euphemism concocted by professional educrats to mask their single-minded determination to boost education spending.
To cut through the Orwellian mist, read "opportunity to spend" wherever you see "opportunity to learn."
In essence, such standards would mean that we cannot hold our children, schools and teachers accountable for better educational performance until we first equalize -- and then raise -- per-pupil spending across America.
"Opportunity to learn" standards constitute the latest excuse by the education establishment as to why our children aren't doing better in school.
The Goals 2000 legislation makes "opportunity to learn" standards voluntary.
Some House Democrats wanted the standards to be mandatory, making it virtually impossible to set higher achievement levels without first settling contentious issues surrounding resources.
But even with voluntary standards, such disputes will be settled by lawsuits, like almost everything else in America these days.
The former director of civil rights in the old Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, David Tatel, is planning a workshop tomorrow entitled "Opportunity to Learn, Opportunities to Sue."
Education reporter Emily Feistritzer quotes Education Department Under Secretary Mike Smith as saying almost a year ago, "I know people already who are getting their cases together" to sue once Goals 2000 is enacted.
These hyperlitigants would experience an even greater bonanza if these standards were mandatory.
Last month, the House Education and Labor Committee offered a series of amendments to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act that passed on a straight party line vote and would require states and school districts, subject to federal approval, to satisfy the new "opportunity to learn" standards as a prerequisite to receiving Chapter 1 funds.
The committee's Democrats don't want you to know about this, however, and that's why these amendments were not offered earlier at the subcommittee level.
By rushing them through late in the game, Rep. Owens and his colleagues will leave little time for opposition to mount.
Moreover, Rep. Owens and his allies will insist that "opportunity to learn" standards are not mandatory.
School districts, after all, are not required to seek Chapter 1 money, they'll note smugly.
A "bipartisan" amendment offered by Reps. Dale Kildee (D., Mich.) and William Goodling (R., Pa.) states that the implementation of model "opportunity to learn" standards is voluntary.
But a state nonetheless has to establish the standards in its Chapter 1 plan -- and get them approved by the federal Education Department -- regardless of whether the standards are actually implemented.
Their very existence conveys the imprimatur of a federally approved standard, thereby whetting the appetites of civil-rights attorneys.
Once approved, these standards would retard creative education reform nationwide.
Innovations that don't conform to the government-approved model could invite litigation.
Even though the bipartisan "compromise" states that the bill itself provides no new basis for litigation, Mr. Goodling concedes that the standards will guide states in ensuring that Chapter 1 students "receive a fair opportunity" at getting a solid education.
The new Chapter 1 bill may not have created any new legal rights, but plenty of existing federal and state laws can be invoked for litigating what constitutes a fair opportunity.
The Chapter 1 bill is set for a vote on the House floor this week.
Rep. Owens and his supporters see this struggle as part of one last and glorious effort to revive LBJ's Great Society in the 1990s.
If they are successful, you can be certain that "opportunity to learn" standards will become the next virus that infects all future federal legislation affecting elementary and secondary education.
Bill Clinton believes in activist government.
But activist government for a truly "New Democrat" means finding ways to inspire -- not impede -- education reform at the local level.
If President Clinton means what he says, he should urge his fellow Democrats in Congress to stop this nonsense.
We need real education reform, not more federal regulations and lawsuits.
Mr. Kolb, deputy undersecretary of education in the Reagan and Bush administrations, is the author of "White House Daze: The Unmaking of Domestic Policy in the Bush Years" (The Free Press, 1994).
