If the proposed employee-buyout of UAL Corp. is cleared, Gerald Greenwald, the airline's prospective chief executive officer, will move into the corporate suite as a part-timer.
Until next February, according to a United Airlines union official who has been briefed by Mr. Greenwald, the executive has a commitment to work one of every six weeks for Tatra Koprivnice , a Czech truck company.
Since last spring, Mr. Greenwald and two U.S. partners have managed the troubled truck maker using a tag-team approach -- each taking turns traveling to the Czech Republic.
It wasn't clear whether Mr. Greenwald must actually fly to the Czech Republic for his weeklong assignments after he takes the helm at United, or if he can simply work on Tatra's behalf from the U.S.
The union official, however, said he believes Mr. Greenwald must go abroad.
Mr. Greenwald, who was traveling over the weekend, didn't return phone calls.
The 58-year-old former Chrysler Corp. vice chairman was recruited as the CEO-designate last winter by United's two largest unions, which negotiated a $5 billion proposal to acquire a majority stake in UAL.
The transaction included big wage and work-rule concessions to pay for the UAL equity.
Proxy materials for a shareholder vote are expected to be mailed next week.
At least one large institutional shareholder expressed concern about the unusual work arrangement, citing Mr. Greenwald's lack of airline operating experience.
"I would think running United would be a full-time job," said John Neff, managing partner of Wellington Management Co., an investment company whose roughly 10% stake in UAL makes it the airline's largest stockholder.
"He certainly is going to have to be a quick study."
In response, a United union spokesman said, "We are aware of Mr. Greenwald's remaining commitment to Tatra.
It will have no effect on his ability to fully perform his obligations at UAL."
In December, Tatra's shareholders became concerned when word spread that Mr. Greenwald, thought to be the company's principal savior, would take the top job at United.
Mr. Greenwald and his business partners, David Shelby and Jack D. Rutherford, have vowed to return Tatra to profitability by March 1995.
Mr. Greenwald gained fame in the early 1980s as the architect of Chrysler's recovery.
After resigning the No. 2 job at Chrysler in 1990, he went on to lead a failed union buyout of UAL that earned him $9 million in compensation.
He later became president of Olympia & York Developments Ltd., the troubled Canadian real-estate concern, and quit that job to take over Tatra last April.
