In regard to Princeton health economist Uwe Reinhardt, who was quoted as saying that "physicians can still keep their Mercedes, but instead of going home at 5 o'clock, you go home at 5:30" ("Some States Try Taxing Doctors," Jan. 14):
I am currently in my ninth year of medical practice and have yet to finish my workday at 5 p.m.
Like many of my colleagues, 10 to 14 hour days are quite typical.
I do not own a Mercedes, but instead drive a Chrysler.
Would Prof. Reinhardt object to a 2% tax being placed on the salaries of professors in order to improve the quality of education in inner-city schools?
With health policy being planned by individuals who harbor such stereotypical views, both hard-working physicians and the patients we care for are certain to suffer from the proposed changes being made in Washington.
Alan H. Resnick, M.D.
Highland Park, Ill.
In regard to your article concerning the taxing of doctors, I was somewhat perplexed by Mr. Reinhardt's simplistic advice to simply work longer and see more Medicaid patients to pay additional taxes.
It has been our experience that fees paid by Medicaid often fail to cover the overhead and cost of examining and treating Medicaid patients.
Perhaps, the esteemed health economist might explain to us poorly educated physicians how the additional overhead expense of taxes and overtime pay would allow us to see more Medicaid patients when we now lose money for every such patient seen.
Lawmakers will always seek to tax those groups of society that are perceived as having large amounts of money with relatively little political power.
Unfortunately, the only effect that additional taxes on doctors will have is to reduce the numbers of physicians who are able or willing to provide health care for the poor.
Joseph M. Googe Jr., M.D.
Knoxville, Tenn.
I read Mr. Reinhardt's Mercedes quote at 9:30 p.m. after an exhausting 12-hour shift in an emergency department, and began seething.
I know of no physicians who manage to leave work at 5 p.m., and find Mr. Reinhardt's gratuitous suggestion of "just working until 5:30" insulting.
What makes matters worse is that he is billed as a "health economist," and should know better.
The statistics have been published repeatedly that the average doctor already puts in a 60-hour week, making it impossible to finish by 5 p.m.
I am sure I speak for practically all physicians when I say that we'd be delighted to pay an additional 2% tax to any government that could guarantee we'd be done by 5:30.
Jay M. Davis, M.D. Ph.D.
Arcata, Calif.
It is truly in the realm of the incredible that Mr. Reinhardt believes physicians can "reach out for new patients" and "go home at 5:30" in order to "keep {their} Mercedes."
My husband is a cardiovascular anesthesiologist.
He leaves home at 6:30 a.m., works a full day, often with no chance to eat lunch, and comes home between 7:30 and 8:30.
He is at the hospital for a full 24 hours straight on an average of once a week, and for 48 hours straight about every fifth weekend.
He pays for office staff, research staff, insurance of every kind imaginable and bears the responsibility of running a corporation.
He spends time as a question editor and oral board examiner in his medical specialty, writes articles for journals, chapters for books and participates in the training of physicians.
Mr. Reinhardt exhibits a generous amount of misinformation about the modern practice of many physicians.
We don't have a Mercedes -- at least not literally.
What we have to replace it is a 17-year-old freshman enrolled in Mr. Reinhardt's academic institution.
Perhaps Mr. Reinhardt would now be happy to contribute 2.5% of his income to offset the rising costs of college tuition.
Until then, I will simply remain dismayed at the attitudes that exist toward a profession that has become an easy target for discriminatory legislation.
Lynn M.C. Cooper
