Aoki Corp. of Japan said it tentatively agreed to sell most of its Westin Hotels & Resorts chain to a group of investors headed by Bernardo Dominguez, a Mexican entrepreneur, for $708 million.
Under a letter of intent, the Dominguez group will buy Westin operations in North America, South America and Europe.
These include 52 managed hotels, 10 of which are majority or wholly owned by Westin.
The Seattle-based chain operates 73 hotels in 16 countries with 36,800 rooms.
Aoki will retain ownership of Westin's brand name in the Asia-Pacific region, as well as several minority investments in the U.S.
"The transaction will include a combination of mortgage debt, bank financing and Mexican equity," said Chinh Chu, a vice president with the Blackstone Group, which is representing Aoki.
The transaction is expected to be completed by June.
Investment bankers at Salomon Brothers representing Mr. Dominguez couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Dominguez, executive chairman of DSC SA de C.V., couldn't be reached for comment.
DSC SA is a closely held construction concern based in the northern Mexican state of Chihuahua with interests in real estate, construction, retail and tourism, and operates a chain of Mexican hotels that operates under the name Qualton Hotels.
Mr. Dominguez is also involved with the Mexican government in a proposed $600 million hotel, restaurant and office development in the resort city of Cancun.
Westin, a higher-end full-service hotel chain, had been marketed aggressively to prospective buyers over the past year, and had attracted a host of financial and strategic bidders interested in restoring its lustre.
The Dominguez offer had surfaced late in the bidding process, which in the early stages had attracted more than 20 interested parties, peoplr familiar with the talks said.
Paul Wachter, managing director for Wertheim Schroder & Co.'s lodging and gaming practice in Los Angeles, said that although it was difficult to evaluate the deal without more detailed information, the purchase price seemed high, especially considering that much of the value is in management contracts rather than real estate.
Aoki bought Westin for $1.53 billion in 1988 from Allegis Corp. then the parent of United Airlines.
Aoki and a group of investors that included billionaire investor Robert Bass quickly sold the Westin Mauna Kea in Hawaii and the Plaza in New York for about $735 million.
But the chain hadn't been aggressively developed under Aoki's ownership, and has suffered along with the rest of the hotel industry from a prolonged downturn.
Aoki Corp., a Japanese construction company headed by investor Hiroyoshi Aoki, was said to be under pressure from its bankers to sell part or all of the chain.
Aoki continues to own the Caesar Park hotel chain and other independent hotels.
Roger Cline, world-wide director of hospitality consulting services for Arthur Andersen & Co., said the Westin brand still has a good reputation but would require more expansion to gain a profile as a truly national brand.
He noted that Westin might benefit from further consolidation in the hotel industry by purchasing another, smaller chain.
