For many institutional investors, yesterday's $250 million offering of 10-year Yankee bonds from the Republic of Colombia was a first foray into the world of developing-nation debt.
Many of these investors have been eager for the high yields available from Latin American bonds but have been unable to buy them because of the extra risks.
But thanks to fairly high credit ratings and a favorable risk rating from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, the Colombia bonds sold yesterday were within reach.
Yankee bonds are securities sold by foreign issuers in the U.S.
The Colombia Yankee bonds were sold at a price of 99.196 with a coupon of 7.25%, to yield 7.365%, about 1.48 percentage points more than the 10-year U.S. Treasury note.
Meanwhile, the price of the benchmark 30-year U.S. Treasury bond fell 1/32 to 97 8/32, to yield 6.45%, unchanged from Monday.
The bonds have investment-grade ratings from all the major credit-rating agencies.
They are rated Ba-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and triple-B-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
Insurance companies, in particular, wouldn't have come close to the Colombian debt were it not for the NAIC 2 risk rating granted it by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
That risk rating means that insurance companies must set aside just 2% of the purchase value of the bonds in capital reserves against possible future losses.
The higher the NAIC rating, the more an insurance company must set aside against the security as protection against potential losses.
Most Latin American debt comes with higher NAIC ratings, such as NAIC 3, which requires that 5% of the purchase value must be set aside in capital reserves.
"The deal was sold to a lot of different accounts," said Mario Covo, a managing director at Merrill Lynch & Co. and the head of the firm's emerging-markets capital markets group.
For many of these buyers, the Colombian offering was their "first time ever in emerging-markets debt," he said.
Merrill Lynch was the lead manager on the deal.
According to Mr. Covo, as much as 90% of the portion of the deal sold by Merrill Lynch went to nontraditional investors in developing-nation debt, with as much as 25% going to insurance companies and as much as 60% going to funds that don't specialize in developing-nation debt.
Colombia intends the deal to serve as a U.S. market benchmark for future debt issues from Colombian entities, said an official at Merrill Lynch.
According to market participants, several Colombian companies plan offerings.
Colombia's noncallable bonds originally were marketed at 1.5 percentage points over Treasurys -- considered aggressive by some portfolio managers who specialize in emerging-markets securities.
However, investment-grade investors clamored to buy the deal, which was 3.5 times oversubscribed, according to Mr. Covo.
"This transaction was targeted at investment-grade buyers, and that's who the buyers were," said a Merrill Lynch official.
Proceeds will be used to pay off outstanding debt.
Despite strong investor interest, Colombia didn't increase the deal's size because it didn't need additional funds, a Merrill official said.
Active trading after the offering was completed indicated that Colombia's bonds weren't priced too tightly.
The bonds rose by 0.304 point, or $3.04 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 99.50.
The yield dropped to 7.32% from 7.365%.
Meanwhile in the U.S. Treasury market, traders found no reason to break bonds out of the tight price ranges that have been in place for over a week.
At the end of an uninspired session, prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed, with the 30-year bond down just 1/32 and other securities slightly higher or unchanged.
The 10-year note, for example, rose 1/8 point to 99 29/32 to yield 5.87%, down from 5.89% on Monday.
The market shrugged off several economic reports.
The data included a 0.5% rise in January industrial production, which analysts said was too weather-distorted to accurately interpret, as well as figures showing a drop in chain and department-store sales in early February.
Dealers also barely responded to a Federal Reserve report showing a significant easing of terms and standards on bank loans.
The growing threat of a trade war between the U.S. and Japan continued to command attention, but it had little impact on yesterday's trading.
Fears of a trade war had sent the dollar tumbling against the yen Monday, raising fears that Japanese investors would unload Treasury securities.
But so far, that has not proven to be the case.
Also yesterday, Merrill Lynch announced an exchange offer for about $11 billion in Treasury Investment Growth Receipts, or TIGRs.
Merrill is offering to exchange another stripped security of equivalent face amount and the same maturity for TIGR series.
Strips are created by separating the interest and principal portions of securities into two distinct issues.
TIGRs are strip securities created by Merrill before the Treasury Department began its own stripping program.
Merrill's is similar to one by Salomon Brothers Inc. done back in November.
Through its tender, Merrill Lynch hopes to be able to glue back together the securities from which the TIGRs were created.
Merrill, like Salomon, is looking to take advantage of an arbitrage opportunity where the whole security is of greater value than its parts.
Sources at the firm said there were five underlying issues involved: the 13.25% Treasury due in May 2014, the 12.5% Treasury due in August 2014, the 11.75% of August 2004, the 11.625% of November 2004 and the 12% of May 2005.
The Salomon Brothers tender was plagued by rumors that the firm had problems coaxing the securities from investors' hands.
The problem, traders said, was that many of the securities that Salomon was trying to obtain were locked up in escrow accounts or in retirement funds.
Salomon officials refuse to say how the tender offer went.
The focus of the municipal market was the competitive sale of California's $3.2 billion of 1994 revenue-anticipation warrants, which were won by seven lead bidders.
In secondary trading, prices were narrowly mixed at the close.
The New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's 5.00% bonds of 2024 finished 1/8 point weaker at 93 7/8, to yield 5.39%.
The Reedy Creek Improvement District of Florida's 5.00% bonds of 2019 finished 1/8 higher at 94 3/8, also yielding 5.39%.
California's warrant offering, which is the largest one ever sold by the state, includes $1.2 billion of Series A RAWs, which are due Dec. 21, 1994.
The $2 billion of Series B RAWs are due July 26, 1994.
Most of the Series A RAWs, which have a 3.75% coupon, are priced to yield 2.95%.
The majority of the Series B warrants, which have a 3.50% coupon, are priced to yield 2.75%.
Moody's Investors Service Inc. has rated the warrants MIG-1, Standard & Poor's Corp. has rated the securities SP-1, and Fitch Investors Service Inc. has assigned an F1-Plus rating.
Prices of most mortgage securities ended slightly higher, but higher-coupon issues showed signs of incipient problems.
Among 6.5% current coupons for March delivery, prices finished 3/32 higher.
Government National Mortgage Association issues finished at 98 31/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues finished at 99 3/32, and Federal National Mortgage Association issues closed at 98 30/32.
However, some 8%, 8.5% and 9% securities closed off 1/32 and 2/32.
Research departments and strategy groups on Wall Street are starting to suggest to institutional clients that some higher coupons may be getting too rich when viewed against comparable Treasurys.
Also, even as the Treasury rally seems sure never to return to its heights, there is a fear that rates could drop enough again to cause the early call of the higher-coupon securities, as homeowners refinance the loans backing them.
Still, the overall market is in possession of a relatively clean bill of health, traders say, since money managers of all kinds have said since early in the year that they would like to move into mortgages or increase outstanding positions there.
Jacqueline Doherty contributed to this article.
