Copper futures prices continued to soar on strong merchant buying in Europe, tight U.S. supplies and strong speculative demand among investors.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, copper for May delivery was up 1.10 cents to 93.15 cents a pound.
Since March 1, when the May contract price hit a recent low of 85.50 cents a pound, the contract's price has risen nearly 9%.
Until recently, European copper prices have lagged behind prices in the U.S., which have been energized by surges in home building and positive U.S. economic data.
But now the European market is gaining strength, analysts said.
"The European sector is perking up, and that allows for the next phase of the rally," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"European merchant demand is rising, and scrap copper prices, a good indicator of market strength, are very firm."
Copper's strength yesterday was accompanied by gains in other base metals futures contracts traded in London, including aluminum and nickel.
And copper stocks at the London Metals Exchange are down sharply since late last year, an indication of strong demand for the industrial metal from overseas buyers.
In the U.S., consumption of copper by industrial users continues to be "phenomenal," said Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man.
"Brass and rod mill usage -- which accounts for about 90% of all usage of copper -- is up about 12% from year ago," he said.
Copper production, analysts said, is down around the world, especially in Africa and the Philippines.
Supplies of copper are especially tight in the U.S., which has resulted in a condition called "backwardization" at New York's copper futures market, in which prices for nearterm futures contracts are trading at prices higher than those for far-term contracts.
"The whole pattern sets up well," Mr. O'Neill said.
"I think copper prices will eventually move over $1 a pound."
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of most corn, wheat and soybean futures contracts rose amid continuing nervousness about tight U.S. grain supplies.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for July delivery rose 2.25 cents a bushel to settle at $2.9025 a bushel.
The soybean contract for July delivery rose 4.25 cents a bushel to settle at $6.9525 a bushel.
Don Roose, president of U.S. Commodities Inc. of Des Moines, Iowa, said he expects the quarterly Agriculture Department survey slated for release on March 31 to show that U.S. livestock consumed a record amount of corn during December, January and February.
The record rain last year across the Midwest that slashed the size of the corn crop hurt quality as well.
As a result, hogs and cattle have to eat more grain than normal to get the same level of nutrition.
The harsh winter also increased their nutritional needs.
Grain prices are also being supported by the reluctance of farmers to sell their crops.
Traders are already speculating that some areas of the Midwest might experience shortages before the autumn harvests.
ENERGY: Crude oil futures prices settled higher yesterday, with the contract for April delivery settling over $15 a barrel for the first time since Feb. 8.
Although traders pegged the rally as mostly technical, they also said that the market bounced a bit on news that Tosco Corp. will begin maintenance that will stop operations temporarily at part of its refinery in Martinez, Calif.
And the Iraqi pot was again stirred a bit, when Iraqi diplomats presented a nine-page letter to U.N. officials, saying Iraq is in full compliance with U.N. ceasefire resolutions and called for the immediate end to the oil embargo.
The letter charged that "political" pressure has been placed on the U.N. special commission monitoring Iraq's compliance with weapons resolutions, and that the pressure has wrongly prevented the oil embargo from being lifted.
Most petroleum products contracts also ended higher.
