Thieves, beware!
Simpson Kalisher is out to finger you.
While movie gumshoes quickly nab thieves by checking their fingerprints with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, in real life getting FBI help on a routine case can take months.
And even if the prints are on file -- if their owner has been arrested for a serious crime -- the agency has trouble matching the partial or smudged prints found at most crime scenes.
Mr. Kalisher, president of Franklin Service Systems, Roxbury, Conn., has developed some personal computer software that can quickly identify imperfect prints.
Tom Hopper, an FBI fingerprint expert, says word of the Kalisher system is spreading "like a religion."
Eight police departments nationwide are using it.
Police experts say Franklin Service Systems often outperforms the FBI, which still files prints under a system developed by Great Britain's Scotland Yard nearly a century ago.
With the help of Roger Brooks, a forensic expert with the Danbury, Conn., police department, Mr. Kalisher added 23 codes to the 16 in the FBI system.
By identifying more details, the system, called Felon/Find'r, can match more prints than the FBI, says Mr. Brooks.
And because it can pick up more details, Felon/Find'r also can better identify smudged or partial prints.
David Grieve, editor of the Journal of Forensic Identification, says "it's amazing" that a civilian has produced "a viable system" for identifying smudged or partial prints.
Such a system "has eluded more skilled forensic specialists over the past two decades."
It's rare that a local police department will catch a culprit based solely on prints left at a crime scene.
The FBI concedes it gets so many requests to match prints that only major crimes like murder and kidnapping get top priority.
"We're swamped with up to 50,000 requests a day," says spokesman John Kundts, an FBI special agent.
The two-year-old Kalisher system can match a new print with those filed on a local police department's PC in anywhere from a minute to several hours.
Mr. Kalisher, a professional photographer whose work hangs in the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan, got into the fingerprint identification business by chance.
He began Franklin Systems in 1988 to help corporate photo libraries and camera buffs catalog and cross-index their pictures by type on computer, as he had done with 30,000 photographs he had taken over decades.
When he offered to help Danbury police catalog photos of felons the same way three years ago, Mr. Brooks begged him instead to tackle what he called "the black hole" of police work: fingerprint files.
"It's like cataloging snowflakes," Mr. Brooks says.
With all those loops and whorls, developing a new classification system was a nightmare.
Putting it on a computer "was like unwinding a knotted string kite ball over and over again," says Mr. Kalisher.
The FBI classifies prints according to eight patterns, based on types of arches, loops and whorls, or circles.
The agency identifies the 10 fingers of two hands in a single formula of letters and numbers.
Mr. Kalisher's more detailed system can do what the FBI's system can't.
For example, it computes how many tiny lines emerge from a loop, the whorl's shape as an elipse, oval or teardrop and how far the print's base is from its core.
For a felon whose prints are mainly loops, for example, the FBI formula is LIROOO/MIROOI.
But in the Kalisher system, each finger is coded.
The right thumb alone is: 01-17-A-O-17space-space-space-F.
The "F" shows that the loop core is 12 millimeters from the baseline.
"Helping police catch crooks who leave fingerprints then became one of my goals when I found out what local police really needed," Mr. Kalisher says.
The fingerprint software is the biggest part of the Franklin Service Systems business.
Venezuela and Panama bought the software, says the U.S. Justice Department; a department unit plans to install it in Costa Rica, Guatemala, El Salvador and the Dominican Republic.
And the U.S. Post Office says it is considering using it in several cities.
The $5,000 system has some drawbacks: Police must create and enter fingerprint files, which can take months and produces only an inventory of local prints.
Still, police say most petty criminals are locals and that the Kalisher system helps relieve the frustration of waiting for an FBI response on petty-crime cases.
Bowie, Texas, a community of 50,000, used the system to track down a thief who hit a disabled training center and five churches early last year.
The culprit left only two right-hand fingerprints, and they "weren't very clear," says Bowie Police Lt. David Scruggs.
The FBI or the state forensic lab in Austin would have taken too long, says Lt. Scruggs, and in the end wouldn't have helped anyway, since the man had never been arrested for a serious crime.
The department ran the two prints through the Kalisher system, which has the fingerprints of 5,500 people arrested locally since 1989.
Within several minutes, it singled out a 19-year-old local handyman who had been arrested in Bowie on a traffic violation.
The suspect confessed to the burglaries and was sentenced to 10 years in state prison.
Officials of Lakeland, Fla., which has just bought the system, believe it will help identify three times as many suspects as it does through state and FBI fingerprint files, says Herman Moulden, a Lakeland police supervisor.
"We're going to fill more jail cells," he adds.
