Behold a miracle, said Diogenes the Cynic -- an honest man.
Bill Clinton's Washington has just produced its own miracle, an honest liberal.
Two of them in fact, and from Congress no less.
They deserve praise for telling truths that the liberals who occupy the White House won't dare utter.
The first blast of candor came from Robert Reischauer, who runs the Congressional Budget Office.
This week he called the Clinton health care plan "an exercise of sovereign power," thus confirming the arguments of critics who call it a vast federal intrusion into American medicine.
Mr. Reischauer then exposed more of the empress's new clothes by saying that what the White House calls private health "premiums" would really be "governmental receipts," which is what normal folks call taxes.
The White House tried to dissuade Mr. Reischauer from taking this line, then spun its typically nimble 180-turn to say it didn't matter.
"That's a Washington policy wonk deal," said President Clinton, the man for whom the word "wonk" was popularized.
The president might have been more believable if he'd heeded Rep. Jim McDermott, a Seattle Democrat and the other honest liberal.
About Mr. Reischauer's remarks, Rep. McDermott says, "I think this gives us a chance to make the debate a whole lot more honest and straightforward."
Dr. McDermott is the lead sponsor in the House of the "single-payer" health plan, which would resemble Canada's government-run system.
Two weeks ago he proposed to pay for this plan with -- in public, no less, in full view of voters -- an 8.4% "payroll tax."
He even used the "T word."
"My staff wants me to use the word premium, but I'm a physician.
I say, tell people the problem," Dr. McDermott says.
"What's the difference between a premium and a tax?"
The answer is politics.
"The issue that the president has been struggling with in his proposal is how to hide the fact that there's any government involved," says Dr. McDermott, a psychiatrist.
Why is that?
"My view is they took a poll," he explains, "and found what I could have told them for a 25-cent phone call -- that the American people say they don't want to pay taxes and don't trust government programs."
(He isn't just guessing.
Mr. Clinton's pollster, Stan Greenberg, told an audience at the American Enterprise Institute in December that his polling helped block any proposal for a value-added tax.)
Understandably, Dr. McDermott blames Ronald Reagan and other antigovernment villains for this sentiment.
But his answer isn't to dissemble or disguise.
It is to persuade.
"Clinton would have done much better to take the issues of taxes and government head on," he says.
"He can explain that this is a problem government can solve."
Hailing from Seattle, the Berkeley of the Northwest, Dr. McDermott can afford to be this blunt.
("Fidel Castro will win in his district before a Republican," quips Seattle Times columnist John Carlson.)
But his candor also exposes the fog of euphemism with which the Clintons have shrouded so much of their presidency, and especially their health plan.
In Clintonspeak, price controls are "premium caps," bureaucracies are "alliances," and an HMO is "choice."
Far from acknowledging government's role, Mr. Clinton keeps insisting that his plan merely involves "guaranteed private insurance."
More Orwellian yet, anyone who tries to challenge this interpretation (such as the Manhattan Institute's Elizabeth McCaughey) is accused of spreading "lies."
Hillary Rodham Clinton is so dogged that she won't even admit what's in her own bill.
She praises the famous Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., for example, but Mayo's president recently told her at a meeting with other executives that he couldn't support her reform.
His board wouldn't allow Mayo to spend more on research in a world bound by price controls, he said politely.
Mrs. Clinton replied that her bill had no such controls.
When another executive spoke up to list them, she changed the subject.
The group finally sent her office a two-page summary of the price controls in the bill; she hasn't written back.
Jim McDermott's bill is certainly more "left-wing" than Mrs. Clinton's, though not nearly as much as advertised.
But even a right-winger has to admit it's far more admirable because it's honest about its intentions.
Dr. McDermott thinks he can get a majority of 218 House votes for his bill if Mr. Clinton carries single-payer principles to the public.
I suspect he's wrong, which may be why he has only 92 co-sponsors.
But that is what a debate is supposed to be about -- principles.
The Clintons keep saying Americans must have "the courage to change."
But why should anyone take that risk when the Clintons don't even have the courage to be candid about the change they really want?
