An overwhelming decision by Michigan voters to finance public schools by means of higher sales taxes and lower property taxes is expected to result in similar proposals in some other states.
But Michigan's solution to the problem of financing public schools more equitably -- a burning issue across the country -- isn't for everybody.
And even in Michigan, it may prove a mixed blessing.
Up until now, about two-thirds of Michigan's school funding came from local property taxes, with most of the remaining provided by the state.
Under a new formula, approved decisively by voters on Tuesday, the state will provide more than two-thirds of the funding, with local property taxes contributing less than a third.
To make up the difference in the state contribution, voters agreed to increase the state sales tax to 6% from 4%, and increase cigarette taxes 50 cents a pack, effective May 1.
The new state funding plan also intends to make public school financing more equitable by redistributing state educational funds among districts.
Currently, the poorest school district in Michigan spends $3,200 on each student, and the richest district spends $10,800 a student.
Under the new plan, each school district must spend at least $4,200 on every student and by 1996, the minimum spending level for every district will rise to $5,000 a student.
The new plan surely will be watched carefully across the country as 27 other states are involved in litigation over the inequities of financing public schools through property taxes.
Wisconsin's Legislature currently is weighing a plan that would eliminate the use of local property taxes for school funding.
Officials in Illinois, Rhode Island, New Hampshire and South Carolina also have requested information about Michigan's plan.
But school financing experts say every state can't duplicate Michigan's solution because few are as dependent on property taxes to fund public schools.
In addition, states such as Texas and New Hampshire, which don't have income taxes, would have to increase sales taxes by huge, and politically unpalatable, amounts to make up for the shortfall if property taxes were slashed.
Moreover, critics say that sharply increasing state funding of public schools has its drawbacks.
States are pressed for funds by many programs, and state tax revenues, which rely on income and sales taxes, are more affected by recessions than property taxes.
In California, increased state funding for public schools ultimately helped lead to decreased funding for public higher education, as demands on the state increased to fund health and penal programs.
Michael Kirst, a professor of education at Stanford University, says that as states increase their financing of public schools, they typically demand more control -- in areas including curriculum policy, teachers' salaries and other areas.
"He who has the gold sets the rules," he said.
In addition, he said, large increases in state funding usually bring limits or caps on local spending for public schools -- often raising an uproar in wealthier communities.
"Local taxpayers who want to pay more for their local schools are told by state government they may not, even if the majority is willing to pay for it," he said.
Indeed, the Michigan plan, which limits what local districts can spend, already has drawn criticism from the state's richest communities, including Bloomfield Hills, north of Detroit.
