The proposed $5 billion employee buyout of UAL Corp. hit a snag early yesterday, forcing leaders of the airline and its unions to scramble to try and get the deal back on track.
The parties missed a 12:01 a.m. EST deadline for signing a definitive agreement after machinists union negotiators suddenly balked, claiming management and noncontract employees weren't fairly shouldering wage concessions.
At this point, the parties could agree to extend the deadline.
But in a statement, UAL said only that there could "be no assurance that the transaction . . . will be completed."
Despite the setback, stock analysts were hopeful that UAL and the unions will complete the accord, in which employees would offer wage and other concessions in return for equity in the airline.
That would make United Airlines, the nation's biggest carrier, the largest company majority-owned by its employees.
"This deal makes so much sense," says Max Holmes, a high-yield strategist with Salomon Bros., noting that several other major carriers, including USAir Group Inc. and Delta Air Lines, are similarly trying to address their high-cost structures.
"The unions proposed the deal, how could they not do it?"
UAL's stock fell slightly on the news, but rallied to rise $2.375 to $131.375 a share in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange after the pilots union said its chairman, Roger Hall, was in discussions with Stephen M. Wolf, UAL chairman, and John Peterpaul, the chief negotiator for the machinists union.
Still, the stock continued to trade well below the value of the employee-buyout proposal, which offers a package of cash and securities that the unions have valued at $173 a share.
That partly reflects the fact that the buyout isn't expected to be completed until late summer, and investors don't want to tie up their money in UAL with any big return still months down the road.
After four consecutive years of losses, United is hoping to use the concessions-for-equity transaction to substantially lower its labor costs and create a short-flight airline, with the blessing of its unions.
UAL has said such a plan would make it a stronger airline and "address its long-term financial viability."
The missed deadline could affects UAL's plans for a short-flight carrier.
The agreement in principle, approved by UAL's board late last year, said the company couldn't proceed with any plans that threaten employee job security if a definitive accord was signed by March 15.
With that deadline passed, however, United apparently is now free to move forward with plans to contract out work and set up a short-flight carrier, without the unions' blessing.
For most of last year, the unions worked in earnest to negotiate the buyout agreement precisely to prevent the company from taking such steps.
In refusing to sign the definitive accord, the International Association of Machinists said yesterday that the union "will not be a party to any agreement that isn't fair or equitable to our members or that doesn't address fundamental problems facing United Airlines."
The leaders of the pilots union approved the definitive agreement last weekend.
The machinists' stance partly reflects internal union politics.
The buyout transaction has been broadly unpopular with the union's rank and file, which narrowly ratified the deal, with only 56% voting in favor.
The machinists entered the buyout negotiations primarily to protect their jobs, while the pilots' main goal was to gain a controlling stake in the airline.
As a result, many machinists union members felt their leaders promised deeper wage concessions than were necessary.
The machinists agreed to take wage cuts of about 10% over nearly six years under the transaction.
Had the parties been able to agree on a purchase of less than a majority stake, which the pilots staunchly refused to do, the machinists would be facing smaller wage reductions.
The simmering resentment worsened in recent weeks, however, after the unions learned that United had instituted a two-tier wage program, paying lower scales to new nonunion employees, and giving them fewer benefits.
Under the buyout transaction, United's noncontract employees and managers were supposed to give up about 10% of their pay, just like the machinists.
But the machinists union members, according to labor industry consultants, figured that the existing noncontract employees would actually end up reducing their paychecks less than 10%.
The reasoning goes that the concessions pledged by the nonunion employees, some $509 million, would be buttressed by the lower wages and benefits for new employees.
In light of that, the union leaders, according to individuals who have worked with them recently, felt it was growing harder day by day to maintain support among the unions's mechanics and grounds workers for the buyout transaction.
A machinist union spokesman wouldn't comment on the issue.
A United spokesman said only, "We know that has been a concern of theirs."
The machinists have also had disagreements with the pilots over how much to pay Gerald Greenwald, the former Chrysler Corp. vice chairman the unions chose to be chief executive should the buyout succeed, and over fees paid to advisers.
With the deadline for a definitive agreement now passed, the next deadline for the transaction is a closing date of Aug. 31.
