It was a cold winter night, and Paul Sperco had no idea he was about to become just another hotel statistic.
He opened the door to his room at the Novotel New York, pushed out his room-service cart and click.
The door closed behind him and he was keyless.
"I walked down the hall looking for a house phone to call someone," says Mr. Sperco, a North Brunswick, N.J., auto dealer.
"Thank God I at least had my underwear on."
Most hotels don't track how many unfortunate customers get locked out, but Novotel, a 474-room property based in Manhattan's theater district, does.
Two years ago, it started surveying its employees to see how their time was spent.
Management discovered that security personnel were spending too much time unlocking doors for stranded guests -- 252 times last year.
In many cases, these accidental tourists meet their fate through travelers' vanity.
Guests who order wine or beer for their rooms sometimes prefer to push their bottle-strewn trays down the hall, says Steve Baker, sales director for Novotel, a unit of Accor Group in Paris.
Preoccupied with good appearances, these guests forget that their own doors automatically lock shut.
"If you don't have your foot in the door and you don't have your key, you're out," Mr. Baker says.
Novotel, which charges about $170 a night, has some nice amenities, such as multilingual voice mail, but the house phones on each of the hotel's 27 floors have turned out to be especially important.
After all, the naked woman who locked herself out -- she was getting ice -- might have caused a stir on the elevator.
Lockouts are not always accidental.
One hapless man was evicted from his room by his angry wife and showed up in the lobby in his underwear.
"He had nowhere else to go," Mr. Baker says.
Another time, a sleep-walking guest ended up in the hallway; he meant to open the bathroom door and miscalculated, Mr. Baker says.
For all the embarrassments, less than 1% of Novotel's guests suffer out-of-room experiences, and the trends are promising: The number of Novotel guests who shut themselves out last year fell by 3% compared to 1992.
But Novotel isn't taking any chances.
"We've increased the signage on all the floors," Mr. Baker says, "pointing out the house phones."
