Concluding a fugitive's trek that spanned three continents, Nahum Vaskevitch, former managing director of Merrill Lynch & Co.'s London office, was sentenced to three months in prison for insider trading.
Federal Judge Michael B. Mukasey said the Israeli citizen, who was allowed "safe passage" to the U.S. in 1992 as part of plea-bargain discussions that didn't bear fruit until earlier this year, had been "rehabilitated by his own actions."
Last month, he pleaded guilty to one count of securities-law violations.
In addition to the jail term, the judge also imposed two years of unsupervised probation.
Once the manager of Merrill's London-based mergers and acquisitions department, the 46-year-old Mr. Vaskevitch was fired in 1987 after the Securities and Exchange Commission uncovered repeated instances in which he had leaked confidential information about transactions involving Merrill clients to Israeli businessman, David Sofer.
According to prosecutors, on 11 different occasions between 1984 and 1986 Mr. Sofer traded on nonpublic takeover deals then wired partial profits to a Swiss bank account maintained by Mr. Vaskevitch.
Among the deals were W.R. Grace & Co.'s 1986 sale of Herman's Sporting Goods to Dee Corp.
The last confirmed tip was in May 1986, the same month the SEC's insider-trading investigation gained international prominence through its suit against Dennis Levine.
According to prosecutors, Mr. Sofer made $4 million; and Mr. Vaskevitch, the son of a family of Israeli tobacco merchants, earned $1,030,000.
With warrants issued for his arrest, Mr. Vaskevitch fled in 1987 to Israel from which, as an Israeli citizen, he could not be extradited.
In early, 1991, prosecutors filed a 45-count indictment against him.
Later in that year, while on a trip to Cyprus, he was detained by U.S. authorities but released after it was determined that he could not be extradited from there either.
Late in 1991, according to a prosecutor's letter submitted at the sentencing, his attorneys approached officials and began to discuss a plea arrangement.
In September 1992, Mr. Vaskevitch was given "safe passage" to come to New York to be debriefed by representatives of the U.S. Attorney's office in Manhattan and the SEC and then return home to Israel.
Such temporary immunity from arrest is within the power of prosecutors but is not common, according to officials.
In addition to confirming what was known, he told the government of $353,000 in illegal profits from pre-1984 trades done without Mr. Sofer.
Mr. Vaskevitch also detailed other trades by Mr. Sofer, who had settled SEC civil charges and been granted immunity from criminal prosecution, and provided information about illegal trades by "other individuals."
Two weeks ago, Mr. Vaskevitch again came voluntarily to New York and pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to trade on inside information.
At the same time, he agreed to settle SEC civil charges by paying $2.8 million.
In the letter to the Judge, prosecutors said the additional information provided by Mr. Vaskevitch was "useful" in continuing investigations of international insider trading, but that the five-year statute of limitations for insider trading prevented the U.S. from prosecuting anyone else.
In a statement, Merrill said that it had "cooperated fully" with the SEC in its investigation of Mr. Vaskevitch.
"We have no reason to believe that the other information he has given relates to anyone else at Merrill," it added.
In imposing the sentence, Judge Mukasey noted Mr. Vaskevitch's cooperation but indicated that his motive for facing U.S. authorities might not be "a pure act of altruism" or the result of prosecutorial pressure.
Since 1992, Mr. Vaskevitch has served as the managing director of Optima Ltd., a firm described by his lawyers as a "small, Tel Aviv-based investment company."
"He obviously wants to do something in this country at some point," said the judge.
Mr. Vaskevitch had faced up to five years in prison.
While people prosecuted under the federal "drug kingpin" law are mostly white, those prosecuted under its capital-punishment provisions are overwhelmingly black, a congressional report said.
The report, issued by the civil rights subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, analyzed cases involving the 37 defendants against whom the death penalty has been sought under a capital-punishment provision added in 1988 to a broader law aimed at cracking major drug rings.
"This may not be intentional racial prosecution of minorities, but it shows that there is a lot of opportunity for unconscious prejudice to enter into the process," said Richard Dieter, executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center.
This Washington-based group that opposes capital punishment, prepared the report for the subcommittee.
Three-quarters of those convicted of participating in a major drug ring under the general provisions of the federal law have been white, while fewer than onequarter have been black, according to the report.
But of those prosecuted under the law's capital-punishment provisions, which apply to people who have been involved some way in a death, 29 people, or 78%, have been black, while only four, or 11%, have been white, according to the report.
Another four defendants chosen for capital prosecutions have been Hispanic, the report said.
A Justice Department spokesman responded by stressing that while the attorney general must approve of all federal death-penalty prosecutions, neither she nor other senior officials at the agency's headquarters in Washington pay attention to the race of the defendants.
Attorney General Janet Reno has approved of 10 death-penalty prosecutions, all of them involving black defendants.
The report is consistent with other studies that have concluded that the death penalty has been imposed disproportionately on black defendants.
Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackman cited such evidence last month when he announced that he would no longer vote to uphold any death sentences; he is the only current member of the court to take that position.
Law Note . . .
CRASH VERDICT: The family of an Ohio man killed in a 1992 USAir crash was paid $8.1 million, one of the highest amounts ever awarded for a U.S. airline-crash victim.
An attorney for the family of Dr. Frank Forshew, a 50-year-old surgeon, said the compensatory amount reflected an Ohio federal-court jury's belief that Mr. Forshew would have continued successfully with his medical career.
USAir flight 405 crashed March 22, 1992, at New York's LaGuardia Airport, killing 27 of 51 people on board.
No punitive damages were awarded.
