TV coverage of mogul skiing, that rock-'n-roll blasting, testosterone-laden sport is providing, of all things, women heroes.
Young American females who would like a sporting role model who isn't required to dress Lolita-sexy and smile constantly now have the graceful, but rugged, Liz McIntyre, Stine Lise Hattestad and Donna Weinbrecht.
Viewers learned that Ms. Hattestad, who won the gold, tests herself by sky diving.
Ms. McIntyre, the silver medalist, seems smart and level-headed as well as athletically gifted.
Asked what she would do after Lillehammer, she replied: "I'm going to go someplace warm.
I'm going to get a dog and I'm going to think for a while."
Sponsors buy time on CBS's morning show at $15,800 per minute in normal times, a good deal more this week because of the Olympics.
You have to wonder how they felt yesterday morning when Mark McEwen spent broadcast minute after minute after minute inside Lillehammer's McDonald's, tasting the food, interviewing customers and generally plugging the famous fast-food restaurant chain.
We hope, at least, McDonald's gave him all he could eat.
CBS has used a lot of promotional time during the Games to show its news anchors Dan Rather and Connie Chung looking knowledgeable and talking seriously about world events.
Bosnia, the GNP, you name it.
Now, CBS has assigned Ms. Chung to fly to Lillehammer with Tonya Harding and stake out the controversial skater.
In the name of serious journalism, shouldn't Mr. Rather be dogging Nancy Kerrigan's heels?
The big event on yesterday's CBS morning show was the Kerrigan-Harding practice time.
Scott Hamilton noted the absurdity of it all, remarking that the media had so mobbed the skating hall that "It looks like a Grateful Dead concert."
(Guess he noticed how media types dress.)
Mr. Hamilton also had a phrase for how media packs behave.
They'd made the hall "a well-behaved zoo," he said.
Michael Barkann continued his lavish display of shamelessness that began with his reporting of Dan Jansen's failure to win the 500-meter speed-skating race.
Johann Olav Koss, the great Norwegian speed skater, supports sports events for handicapped children.
Mr. Koss has developed a special relationship with a blind 8-year-old boy who was in the arena for Mr. Koss's second gold-medal race.
Mr. Barkann got CBS coverage of the race off to a bathetic start by sticking his microphone in the boy's face and rattling off a loud, inane set of questions.
CBS's prime-time coverage Wednesday night again far outpaced other networks, drawing 22.8% of the nation's 94.2 million TV homes, according to A.C. Nielsen Co.
ABC drew 12.2%, Fox drew 11.1% from 8-10 p.m. only, and NBC drew 9.2%.
