After mediation attempts suddenly broke down last night, the Teamsters union has advised its workers to defy a court order and strike United Parcel Service of America Inc. starting today.
A strike by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters could cripple the Atlanta-based package carrier and disrupt businesses throughout the country, from catalog retailers to auto manufacturers.
But it is unclear how many union locals will honor the strike against UPS, which handles 11 million packages a day and is the world's largest package carrier.
The company said that, based on a survey of union locals, it "fully expects employees" to report to work today.
The call for a strike, which shocked many locals and UPS, came after a weekend of talks and legal actions that the company and union said would avert a walkout.
At issue is UPS's package-weight limit, scheduled to jump to 150 pounds from 70 pounds today, which the union said would cause serious worker injuries.
Union leaders said that during the mediated talks, UPS refused to negotiate the new limit.
UPS said it continues to work through a federal mediator to resolve the situation.
"We cannot understand why they would strike over a service that is safe and would mean more jobs and job security," said a UPS spokesman.
In an electronic message sent to union locals last night, Ron Carey, the Teamsters general president, said the new weight limit is "inhumane," and UPS has no legal right to impose it.
The strike could be risky for the union and the embattled Mr. Carey, who is trying to consolidate power after a hard-fought election in 1990.
Moreover, on Friday night, UPS won a five-day temporary restraining order from a federal judge in Washington, D.C., barring a strike.
A hearing for a permanent injunction was to be scheduled for early this week.
Unlike competitor Federal Express Corp., which has had a 150-pound weight limit for 10 years, UPS doesn't intend to provide back braces or require that two or more workers carry packages over 75 pounds.
UPS says carriers will have to call dispatch for help if they need it, and adds that it has invested millions of dollars in new rollers, carts and training videos to ensure worker safety.
UPS also argues that the 150-pound weight is standard in the industry and necessary to remain competitive.
Moreover, UPS said packages over the old 70-pound limit will make up less than 1% of total volume.
A strike could be costly for the Teamsters.
The union's strike fund is down to $18 million, enough to sustain the 165,000 Teamsters workers at UPS for about three days.
Moreover, UPS has said it would hold the locals liable for costs, which could run tens of millions of dollars a day.
Union members didn't vote on the strike.
And it was unclear last night how many locals would follow Mr. Carey's directive.
But several locals in the Midwest said they would defy Mr. Carey's call for a strike because of the liability.
