Comedy is no longer king on Madison Avenue; Larry Bird, Michael Jordan and Willie Nelson are.
While humor was an ingredient in some of 1993's top ads, it took a backseat to the celebrities starring in them, according to Video Storyboard Tests' closely watched 16th annual ranking of the most popular television commercials.
The New York company, which conducts print and broadcast advertising research, surveyed 21,000 individuals throughout last year.
Taco Bell's No. 7 campaign features singer Willie Nelson and flying rodent Rocket J. Squirrel.
And pro basketball legends star in three of the four top commercials.
An ad for McDonald's with retired veterans Larry Bird and Michael Jordan bounced to the No. 1 position; the company held the No. 5 spot in last year's survey.
PepsiCo's Pepsi soft drink followed at No. 2, primarily on the strength of an ad that stars Shaquille O'Neal of the Orlando Magic.
Nike at No. 4 had commercials starring Charles Barkley and Mr. Jordan.
"Advertising is becoming more show biz than marketing biz," says David Vadehra, Video Storyboard's president.
"Humor used to stand out.
But that isn't the case among the more popular commercials."
The campaigns that rely most heavily on tickling the funny bone are slipping the most.
The most popular television campaign in 1992, Little Caesars Pizza, fell to fifth place last year.
The quirky ads feature the slogan "Pizza, Pizza" and such situations as two dogs in a therapy session.
"If you rely on being funny," says Mr. Vadehra, "then the ranking depends on how good your latest joke is."
And Mr. Vadehra isn't optimistic about the popularity of Little Caesar's most recent ads featuring a chicken, with eyes bulging, splattering on a windshield of a car driven by the pizza chain's founder and chairman, Michael Ilitch.
Another comic campaign falling on hard times is Eveready Energizer battery commercials that star the omnipresent bunny.
The ads for the Ralston Purina unit continue to lose steam, dropping to No. 13 from sixth place in 1992 and second in 1991.
Animosity toward the drum-beating pink icon is multiplying like, well, rabbits.
One viewer quoted in Video Storyboard's report said the ads, from Chiat/Day, "make me want to kill the bunny."
DuPont's humorous Stainmaster ads also are losing favor.
The campaign, including an ad from Omnicom Group's BBDO showing a toddler racing around a house in an infant walker and creating havoc, fell to No. 9 from No. 4.
Video Storyboard's survey showed that Coca-Cola's gamble in hiring Creative Artists Agency, a Hollywood talent agency with no advertising experience, paid off handsomely.
The soft drink had dropped to No. 9 in the 1992 survey.
With last year's ads, Coke bounced back to No. 3, its best ranking since 1986 when the beverage maker's spokesman was the computer-generated character Max Headroom.
In 1993, TV viewers cited Coke's polar bear as well as the bouncy jingle.
The one campaign that catapulted to the Top 10 from nowhere is Taco Bell from Foote, Cone & Belding's San Francisco office.
An ad starring the crooning Mr. Nelson plucking a guitar received particularly high marks.
It was a break, says Mr. Vadehra, from the jarring in-your-face, rock-and-roll-oriented commercials that are in vogue.
Most of the commercials on the Video Storyboard list entertain more than inform consumers about the product.
In fact, only one campaign in the top 10, for Lexus automobiles, promotes the product's features to any degree.
Lexus's no-nonsense approach was taken because until the car, made by a Toyota unit, was introduced in the late 1980s, "Japanese luxury car was an oxymoron," says Tom Cordner, Team One's co-chairman and creative director.
"We had to prove Lexus is as good as other luxury cars slowly, demonstration by demonstration."
Other than Lexus, only Ford Motor ranked among the Top 25 campaigns, at No. 12.
It is Ford's first appearance since 1989, when it was No. 25.
Beer advertising has lost much of its kick.
Miller Brewing's Miller Lite, which had the most popular ad campaign during much of the 1980s, dropped to No. 19 last year from No. 17.
Only Budweiser made by Anheuser-Busch, made the Top 10.
Beer ads, says Mr. Vadehra, look so much alike the campaigns meld into one giant beach party of wisecracking yuppies.
Gaining in popularity is Nestle's Taster's Choice soap opera ("How does she explain her grown son to her next-door neighbor/lover/fellow coffee drinker?").
It is No. 8, climbing two notches from 1992.
That could only mean more in the never-ending courtship of Tony and Sharon.
Mr. Vadehra, for one, congratulates, Taster's Choice and its ad agency, Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson.
"It is difficult to conduct serial commercials," says Mr. Vadehra.
A serial campaign appears to be what McDonald's and its ad agency, Leo Burnett, are attempting.
The commercial that landed the fast-food chain in the top spot was "Showdown," a mock basketball contest involving Mr. Bird of the Boston Celtics, and Mr. Jordan, late of the Chicago Bulls.
The two try to outdo one another with seemingly impossible, "nothing but net" shots (including one from Chicago's Hancock skyscraper to a basketball hoop blocks away).
The winner gets to munch a Big Mac.
"Customers can relate to trying to make the ultimate basketball shot," says Tony Weisman, vice president and account director at Burnett.
But a more recent McDonald's ad, where the two are joined by Phoenix Suns star Charles Barkley, is perhaps a bit too fantastic.
(The ad ends with the trio in space, with Messrs. Bird and Jordan shooting baskets.)
It underscores the Madison Avenue dilemma of topping a creative coup.
"Sure, there's a risk of wearing out a campaign," says Mr. Weisman.
"You don't want it to run forever."
Mr. Vadehra says there is little risk of not focusing on a product, such as the Big Mac, when using celebrities.
After all, what could be said about the product that hasn't been said many times before?
"When you have nothing to say about the product," Mr. Vadehra advises, "build a story using a celebrity."
Saatchi & Saatchi Co. reported 1993 profit of #7.3 million ($10.9 million), or 3.7 pence per ordinary share, the first time in five years the advertising agency holding company has been profitable.
In 1992, Saatchi & Saatchi had a loss of #613.7 million, or 362.8 pence per share, including a #600 million write-off of goodwill.
The company said that for the third consecutive year it wouldn't pay a dividend this year.
Saatchi shares trade in the U.S. as American depositary receipts; one ADR equals three Saatchi shares.
Saatchi said revenue increased 9% to #813.4 million from #748 million.
But the company said that excluding exceptional items and the impact of favorable currency rates, revenue was flat.
Saatchi attributed the turnaround mainly to lower goodwill and other charges related to discontinued operations and lower interest and tax payments.
Saatchi's U.S. profit was up 30%, including the effects of favorable currency rates, to #21.1 million.
Its U.K. operation reported a #9.5 million profit; it had a loss in 1992.
Profit in the rest of Europe fell 89% to #2 million.
Average net debt was #112 million in December, Saatchi said, a reduction of #82 million.
Severance costs were higher than expected, at #19.1 million in 1993, the company said, compared with #10 million in 1992.
Saatchi reiterated that the revenue outlook for 1994 remains "difficult," citing the loss of more than $200 million in billings since October from two major accounts, Helene Curtis and Chrysler's Jeep-Eagle.
Coca-Cola Co. and its partner in iced-tea marketing, Nestle SA, are tripling ad spending for Nestea ready-to-drink iced tea to $30 million this year.
Coca-Cola Nestle Refreshments plans to target consumers aged 18 to 29 with an ad campaign from McCann-Erickson and a sponsorship of the Association of Volleyball Professionals' 1994 Pro Beach Volleyball Tour.
Karch Kiraly, a two-time Olympic indoor volleyball gold medalist, will appear in some ads.
Nestea also plans to distribute six million cans of iced tea by September through a fleet of tractor-trailers stopping in 60 cities.
Meanwhile, PepsiCo's Pepsi-Cola Co. said it has signed a five-year agreement with an association of health and sports clubs.
The Association of Quality Clubs and Pepsi will team up for an annual national promotion featuring Pepsi's carbonated drinks and teas and juices from Pepsi's partnerships with Lipton and Ocean Spray.
Ad Notes. . . .
SKATING DEAL: ABC Sports and the U.S. Figure Skating Association have agreed to extend the network's broadcast rights to association skating events.
Besides selling ad time during network broadcasts of skating events, the network, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC, also will market association sponsorship and licensing packages.
The multi-year agreement extends beyond the 1998 Winter Olympics, said ABC Sports Vice President Lydia Stephans.
