Linda Griego, ex-deputy mayor of Los Angeles and new chief executive of the city's economic-recovery operation, is full of stories about inert bureaucracy.
But she also remembers the exceptions, the hustlers, whom she will need in her daunting task.
Imagine, she says, if those unsung soldiers of prompt permitting could all be assembled in one superagency assigned to Get Things Done.
Although not adding staff at strapped RLA (nee Rebuild LA), Ms. Griego must Get It Done.
She and Chairman Lodwrick Cook of Arco are trying to revive a unit created with private funds and great fanfare under Peter Ueberroth after the 1992 riot.
It sank into a miasma of urban politics and disputed missions.
The organization was seen to be vainly intent on bringing major corporations into the central city.
Today, "I wouldn't be here if that was the goal, because I don't know how to do that," she says.
Her brief, instead, is for small to mid-sized businesses, of which Los Angeles has an abundance.
It needs to keep them from leaving or failing in the face of regulatory indifference on top of crime, taxes, lingering recession and a disaster or two.
Ms. Griego, 46, can talk to small-business people because she is one.
In the midst of immersing herself in civic affairs over the past two decades, she has opened two eateries and contended with many of the hassles that plague an owner-operator in the nation's No. 2 metropolis.
She got another perspective as former Mayor Tom Bradley's development deputy for 15 months.
That has honed her economic senses, but outsiders should first appreciate Ms. Griego's political standing.
She is of Mexican-American heritage in a city where that ethnic group is the largest single element of the population.
She made a belated bid to succeed Mr. Bradley and was, next to new Mayor Richard Riordan, the biggest "winner" of the campaign, finishing a surprisingly strong fifth in a huge field.
She is thus positioned, if she excels at RLA, to be at the headwaters of what some believe will be a stream of ethnic leaders of L.A. after Mr. Riordan.
For all of her business affinity, Ms. Griego is decidedly a Democrat.
She spent seven years on Sen. Alan Cranston's staff in the 1970s, and her mayoral campaign received its biggest boost from feminist groups (she was the only woman who figured in the race).
Moreover, although she has risen rapidly in the downtown establishment, her upbringing was more in line with L.A.'s working class.
She was the first in her small-town New Mexican family to be graduated from high school; she later got a UCLA degree while toiling for Sen. Cranston.
Helping an immigrant-based work force fill the needs of employers in the city's old industrial core is one of RLA's primary tasks.
These manufacturers don't need laid-off aerospace employees, but they despair of people who stopped school at eighth grade or can't speak English.
Ms. Griego sees the area's demographic upheaval as temporary.
"Once you get past the level of absorption, which is what we're dealing with, you have all the pieces for a very dynamic economy," she says.
"Systems aren't set up to take 80 languages."
Some newcomers gain footholds in wholesale and retail trade, but for many struggling to break in, the best hope is the community (two-year) colleges.
She's working with one in East L.A., long a Latino bastion, that shepherds fulltime workers through a degree program with sessions on Saturdays and one night a week.
A somewhat different reality applies in Koreatown, where the old RLA, with its heavy focus on the black poor, never quite engaged.
Korean-Americans are bitter that they received little compensation in the wake of the riot.
Ms. Griego says she knew from the outset that merchants transacting in cash wouldn't fare well with government relief programs.
She's still trying to wangle help from the Small Business Administration, but a more fruitful idea may be to link traders in the Korean community with markets in other regions or Mexico.
Networking is integral to RLA's new strategy, stemming from a belief that L.A.'s startup and subcontractor enterprises need to connect more.
For one thing, that could provide critical mass for bidding on major contracts, such as those let by Southern California transit agencies.
"Defense conversion" is largely a false hope in this vein.
Work exists, including that being let by Pentagon contractors, but no one wants to pay for overhead.
Ms. Griego's description of a typical subcontractor -- high-tech shop, low-tech back offices -- shows she's seen a few.
The boss is usually more concerned with bringing in orders than in hiring an aerospace castoff to design a sophisticated support system.
As "metal-bender" enterprises diversify into new processes and distribution channels, they and other businesses need RLA to relieve as many outside aggravations as possible.
Sometimes it's simply better street lights.
Often it's been officials' attitude problems, which brings us back to baneful bureaucracy.
Hard times have been a heads up, Ms. Griego believes.
Sales tax revenue has dropped four straight years in Los Angeles, down a total of 13%.
Inspectors who worry about their own jobs begin to care whether and when a revenue-producing venture can open.
Ms. Griego hopes that, in this new climate, L.A. will be conscious of the financial strain it imposes in other ways.
Cash-flow shocks like sewer or hazardous-material surcharges, due in 30 days, should be made financeable -- and for all businesses, she suggests, not just for ones that know how to lobby: "The person out there with a million-dollar business probably doesn't have a clue as to where you even call to complain, other than the number at the bottom of the bill, which is probably a recording when you call."
In addition to saving existing commerce and industry, RLA needs to bring new business in.
The area's ports, whose traffic steadily increased through the recession, are a selling point.
Ms. Griego says a lumber processor has called, wanting to open a plant with 300 "good jobs" so as to be close to the region's big market.
Her first concern is the environmental flak.
She has a pitch for overcoming residential resistance to major developments.
It stresses the same fiscal imperatives that help to motivate sluggish bureaucrats.
"It's the difference between the fire department arriving in five minutes or 10 minutes; the police responding in 15 minutes or two hours," she might tell a neighborhood group.
It's one big city, on the ropes, and everyone is -- in one of her buzzwords -- a "stakeholder."
Few personal stakes exceed Ms. Griego's right now.
