The Clinton administration is floating a proposal to sell quota rights for textile imports into the U.S., as a way of recovering revenue lost by the world-trade agreement.
The quota idea could replace another idea that the administration had considered last week: seeking a waiver from the deficit-reduction law, which requires new revenues or spending cuts to offset legislation that would widen the deficit.
The textile plan, which would overhaul the current system of allocating import quotas, would most likely appease lawmakers who are worried the U.S. would have to raise taxes to cover the cost of lost tariffs from the trade pact.
The agreement, negotiated under the Geneva-based General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, would eliminate many of the world's trading barriers.
But the idea is certain to anger retail importers and their friends on Capitol Hill.
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor told the House Foreign Affairs Committee that the administration is giving the quota-auction plan serious consideration and isn't seeking a budget waiver.
He said the White House Office of Management and Budget is reviewing the auction plan.
The White House budget office estimates that the world-trade pact would reduce projected tariff receipts by $13.9 billion over five years.
Clinton aides claim about $3 billion of that would be offset by lower-than-projected agricultural subsidies.
In the past, economists have estimated that selling U.S. textile and apparel quotas could generate as much as $6 billion a year; Mr. Kantor didn't offer an estimate yesterday.
Such revenue would most likely cover the cost of lost tariffs from the world-trade pact, an amount the U.S. estimates could run between $2 billion to $2.5 billion annually.
Under an international pact called the Multi-Fibre Arrangement, most developed Western nations, including the U.S. and the European Union, impose textile quotas on garment-producing countries as a way of restricting imports.
That pact is to continue over the next 10 years, but will be phased out during that period under terms in the world-trade accord.
The textile quotas are set on a bilateral basis.
The exporting countries then issue export licenses to companies shipping goods to the U.S.; those are often auctioned off, and companies in some countries can sell those licenses to each other in a secondary market.
Under the kind of quota-auction system the Clinton administration is considering, the U.S. would sell import licenses to companies or individuals, something it currently doesn't do.
However, some other countries have similar plans in place.
Critics charge that the system would become too cumbersome.
Laura Baughman, president of the Trade Partnership, an economic consulting firm that does work for the National Retail Federation, argued that a U.S. auction of import quotas would be "very disruptive" to the textile trade, because shippers would be charged fees for importing and exporting their goods.
In addition, Ms. Baughman says, most estimated benefits to the U.S. are "a real exaggeration."
In his testimony, Mr. Kantor said he discussed the auction idea in a meeting with Budget Director Leon Panetta.
Mr. Kantor said, "The fact is that there is a market in textile quotas, and it's a private market, and we're discussing whether or not it might be in the best interest of our country to auction off those quotas."
In trade circles, the idea of a textileauction system isn't a new one.
It was proposed during the crafting of the 1988 trade act, but didn't make it into the final draft of the legislation.
It could win points with textile-state legislators who believe the textile industry was burned in the recent world-trade negotiations.
U.S. textile makers wanted to phase out the Multi-Fibre Arrangement over a longer period than the 10 years that was settled upon.
In discussing the quota auction, Mr. Kantor backed off from the idea of a budget waiver, which would require approval by Congress.
"We are not seeking a waiver of those rules," Mr. Kantor said.
"We're looking for offsets, not revenue increases, in order to make up for the $13.9 billion."
On another trade front, Mr. Kantor was cagey about the administration's plan to renew the so-called Super 301 trade provision, which is aimed at Japan.
Mr. Kantor testified that "no timing has been discussed," adding, "in fact, no final decision has been indicated."
Earlier in the day, President Clinton indicated the same thing.
But congressional and administration officials said the U.S. has decided to renew the trade measure through executive order, and the announcement could be made as early as today.
Super 301 allows the U.S. to unilaterally impose sanctions against imports from a country considered to be engaging in unfair trading practices.
Mr. Kantor also said that South Korea and Singapore have expressed interest in joining the North American Free Trade Agreement, which reduces trade barriers among the U.S., Canada and Mexico over the next 15 years.
The administration has discussed opening Nafta to other countries, mostly in the Western Hemisphere.
Entry of South Korea and Singapore could strain U.S. relations with Japan because it would mean two of its big Asian rivals would have freer access to the huge North American market.
