Times Mirror Co., California's leading newspaper publisher, and the state's largest telephone company, Pacific Telesis Group, unveiled a joint venture for an information service that they plan to build into a "home-shopping lane" of the nascent communications superhighway.
"This partnership will create a powerful new electronic marketplace, an integrated source from which consumers can quickly and easily get information about products and services," said Richard T. Schlosburg III, publisher and chief executive of the Los Angeles Times, Times Mirror's flagship newspaper.
Initially, consumers in the Los Angeles area seeking information about such mundane needs as used cars, banquet facilities or hotel rates would be able to obtain listings by phoning the service, the companies said.
The service also will be accessible through home computers, and over time will add interactive television and other emerging technologies.
But beyond the rather low-tech shopping service that is expected to start in November, the venture will explore ways to "profitably" exploit the coming superhighway, the companies said.
"Some product experimentation will be successful and some won't.
We have a commitment to react to what the marketplace tells us," said Lee Camp, vice president of San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis's Pacific Bell unit and president of a newly created subsidiary, Pacific Telesis Electronic Publishing Services.
Financing, employment, pricing, and other specifics of the venture weren't disclosed.
Consumers and advertisers will both pay something to use the service, which will have its own facilities and staff.
Employees will include "shopping assistants" who will -- at least at first -- manipulate the electronic database to find answers to callers' questions.
Analysts said the venture was in line with experiments under way at other newspapers hungry to grab a piece of the emerging market for interactive shopping and information retrieval.
In October, BellSouth Corp. and Cox Newspapers Inc. said they would develop a family of electronic-information services based on newspaper classified and yellow-pages advertising.
"One of the big questions is we don't know for sure how much of a market for any of this there is yet.
Unquestionably there will be some day, but so far there hasn't been any overwhelming consumer interest," said John Morton, a Washington-based analyst with the investment firm of Lynch, Jones & Ryan.
Several newspaper companies, including Times Mirror, experimented with electronic videotext services in the mid-1980s.
The services didn't attract enough interest among consumers and were quietly shut down a few years later.
But electronic shopping may have a better shot at success, Mr. Morton said, because "we are clearly closer to a time when homes will be connected interactively to some kind of electronic systems."
