Miles Inc. said it will acquire a minority stake in generic-drug company Schein Pharmaceutical Inc. for about $310 million, an alliance that both companies said they need to remain competitive in the fast-changing pharmaceutical industry.
The pact shows that big pharmaceutical companies continue to have a strong appetite for generic-drug companies.
Demand for less-expensive generic drugs is rising rapidly as managed-care buyers and health-care reformers seek ways to control drug costs.
"As the market evolves, we think we will see much more concentration of purchasing power in fewer hands," said Horst K.D. Wallrabe, president of Miles's pharmaceutical division.
Miles is a unit of German chemical and drug concern Bayer AG.
"As a result, we see larger purchasers being interested in working with as few vendors as possible.
The vendor who can provide the greatest portfolio probably has the best opportunity to do business," he said.
Miles and Schein executives said they also are in discussions with other drug companies about forming a larger alliance to create a broader product portfolio and innovative cost-containment agreements.
Hemant Shah, an independent analyst in Warren, N.J., said that to be included in talks among drug makers about forming vendor alliances, Miles needed Schein.
Miles alone doesn't have much to offer an alliance, he said.
At the price Miles agreed to pay for the 28.3% of the closely held company, Schein would be valued at about $1.1 billion, or 2.7 times its annual sales of about $400 million.
That is about in line with what other big drug makers have paid for generic-drug companies.
The premium, however, is well below that paid by chemical concern Hoechst Celanese Corp., a unit of Germany's Hoechst AG, for a majority stake in the much smaller generic-drug manufacturer, Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. last year.
Hoechst Celanese paid the equivalent of 20 times Copley's fiscal 1993 sales.
Copley commanded a higher premium in part because it is solely a manufacturer, while Schein also distributes other companies' generic drugs, a lower-margin business, one analyst suggested.
Acquisitions of generic-drug companies will continue, predicted Jack Lamberton, a New York analyst at NatWest Securities Corp.
"Three years from now, the generic-drug industry will be primarily a subsidiary of the brand-name drug industry," he said.
The lower premium also reflects the increasingly difficult environment for generic-drug companies, Mr. Shah said.
With Merck & Co. and other research-based drug companies getting into the generic-drug business, companies such as Schein will find it increasingly difficult to get their drugs accepted for managed-care lists of recommended drugs, he said.
Schein, based in Florham Park, N.J., will bring to the alliance 350 generic drugs, while Pittsburgh-based Miles will contribute about 70 branded pharmaceuticals, including the anti-infective Cipro and Adalat CC, a heart drug introduced last year to compete with Pfizer Inc.'s blockbuster Procardia XL.
Schein and Miles discussed various relationships with other companies, their executives said.
Schein, which started in 1932 as a corner drugstore in the Woodside area of Queens, N.Y., was attracted by the access to bulk chemicals through Miles and Bayer, as well as the possibilities of tapping the companies' international marketing networks, said Martin Sperber, Schein's chairman and chief executive.
Miles also is in discussions with other major pharmaceutical companies about forming an alliance to package a variety of therapeutic products, Mr. Wallrabe said.
Among the ideas being discussed is offering managed-care buyers all the drugs needed to treat a disease such as hypertension for a set rate per patient, per year -- an arrangement called capitation.
The companies also would ask for direct access to patients to influence diet, lifestyle and other health decisions that may reduce their need for drugs.
Mr. Sperber said Schein also is involved in those discussions.
Mr. Sperber and Mr. Wallrabe declined to identify the other companies involved.
The talks are "going somewhere," Mr. Wallrabe said.
They aren't easy discussions, he added, because of the antitrust concerns and figuring out how to "share this risk and share the spoils."
