CLINTON AIMS to ratchet up pressure on Japan over trade.
A mid-March decision is due on whether to levy sanctions on Japan for failing to hit import targets for semiconductors.
Officials seek another vivid example of Japanese protectionism, like the cellular-phone case, on which to focus more public attention.
One possibility is computers, where the U.S. has a growing share of the private market and a declining portion of the government one.
The administration seeks to calibrate its pressure campaign; it last week delayed renewing the tough "Super 301" trade provision, which would target Japan for potential trade retaliation, for fear it would seem to be squeezing too hard too fast.
But a restive Congress won't allow much backsliding.
Gephardt and Rockefeller introduce legislation requiring "objective criteria" for prying open Japan's markets.
CHINA PREPARES to serve up some human-rights concessions.
Hoping to make it easier for Clinton to renew its trade status in June, China is likely to use Christopher's visit next month to announce medical paroles for some seriously ill jailed dissidents, visas for other dissidents and family members, and agreement to allow long-delayed inspections to monitor the use of prison labor on goods destined for the U.S.
But with the U.S. reluctant to press too hard while it engages in trade skirmishes with Japan, others warn the Chinese gestures may fall short.
Sen. Moynihan privately urges the administration to push the Chinese to meet with the exiled dalai lama .
Red Cross officials say it isn't likely they will reach an agreement by June on inspections of Chinese prisons.
REPUBLICANS LASH the administration over the Bell-TCI collapse.
Dole blasts Gore for backing the 1992 cable bill and predicts FCC chairman Hundt's policies will stifle new telecommunications services.
The administration tries a populist response: Gore aide Greg Simon insists that "the goal is to protect the public.
You do not need unfair pricing to build the information superhighway."
The deal's collapse adds to the uncertainties as Congress moves new telecommunications legislation.
Energy and Commerce Chairman Dingell says it won't slow the process, and GOP Rep. Oxley says it may even accelerate action.
But while Oxley calls the FCC action "the nail in the coffin" of the deal, other lawmakers of both parties conclude that negotiations had already soured over price.
Gore aides say he wasn't alerted about the impending collapse of the deal or the companies' attack on the FCC.
THE AD SHOWS a gray-haired doctor treating a sick child, with a worried mother hovering nearby.
The caption: "Keep Politics Out of This Picture."
The Christian Coalition's full-page attack on Clinton's health-care plan?
No, the AMA's nearly identical ad against Truman's health proposal 45 years ago.
"It worked for them, didn't it?" says Ralph Reed of the coalition.
CONSERVATIVE REP. ARMEY spars with GOP moderates over an amendment he sponsors championing home schoolers.
The amendment had to be withdrawn at the last minute and redrafted to correct mistakes.
Armey blames the foul-up on bad advice from lawyers representing Catholic schools, but, citing Reagan's "11th commandment" not to criticize fellow Republicans, adds, "I should hope everyone in our party would follow it as well as I do."
BUDGET BATTLE: "If we had the benefit of the balanced-budget amendment, the U.S. might not have been able to win World War II," suggests former Defense secretary and CIA chief James Schlesinger.
His rationale: Without the capital-shipbuilding program prior to the war, the U.S. wouldn't have had the naval muscle needed to win the battles of Midway and Coral Sea.
GAS ATTACK: Bradley collects 35 Senate signatures urging EPA administrator Browner to drop a rule virtually mandating a 30% market share for gasoline blended with ethanol, which is made mainly by politically active, increasingly Clinton-friendly Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.
The senators charge the rule would "create chaos in the marketplace," cost too much and possibly harm the environment.
WIDE GAPS REMAIN over campaign-finance reform.
Republican Sens. Durenberger, McCain, Chafee, Cohen and Jeffords, whose votes are needed to beat a GOP filibuster on the floor, insist on curbing political action committees, but PAC-dependent House Democrats dig in behind the current $5,000-per-election contribution limit.
Republicans want any taxpayer financing offset in the budget, but House Democrats struggle to identify a revenue source.
They may try to revive the idea of using money raised from ending a tax deduction for lobbyists, though those revenues have already been claimed for deficit reduction.
Democrats reject closing the "bundling" loophole benefiting Emily's List, which backs Democratic women candidates who favor abortion rights.
MINOR MEMOS: Accused spy Aldrich Ames didn't spend all his money on houses and Jaguars; federal records indicate he gave $5,000 to the Democratic National Committee in 1991 and 1992. . . .
Sen. Kennedy, attending a bipartisan White House health-care dinner on the day he turned 62, observes: "I've always wanted to spend my birthday with Bob Dole."
