If a new age of low inflation is at hand -- and it appears to be -- it may take some getting used to.
For the past quarter-century, American economic decision-making has hinged on a belief that inflation just happens.
Businesses depended on price increases to keep profit margins growing.
Young families bought houses they couldn't afford with the sure knowledge that they could "grow into" the monthly mortgage payments as inflation lifted their wages.
Some investors held onto assets because selling them meant paying taxes on profits that, when corrected for inflation, didn't exist.
Workers felt richer because their paychecks looked larger every year, even if they didn't always keep up with prices.
No longer.
Furniture maker Ethan Allen Inc. hasn't raised prices in three years and hasn't any plans to do so, despite growing demand for its products.
"We have gone the other way.
Our average price is down about 15% from three to five years ago," says Chairman M. Farooq Kathwari.
The Danbury, Conn., company hasn't any choice because of competition.
And to keep profit margins growing, he says, the company has turned to "simpler designs and technology efficiencies."
With low inflation rates, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan observes hopefully, "businesses seeking to increase their profit margins can do so only by enhancing efficiency."
The U.S. inflation outlook is as promising as it has been in decades, and that is going to change the calculus of economic life for workers, home buyers and other consumers.
With inflation running below 3% a year, a 3.5% raise may actually be worth more -- but feel worse -- than the 4.5% raises of yesteryear when inflation was higher.
"Psychologically, there is a depressing effect on workers when they get only a small increase," says Gordon Brehm, executive assistant at the United Paperworkers International Union.
The economy has been recovering from recession for almost three years and appears to have grown at better than a 4% annual rate in the fourth quarter.
Yet pressure to push up prices is negligible.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics said yesterday that consumer prices increased just 2.7% last year, the smallest increase since slumping oil prices drove down inflation in 1986.
Excluding often-volatile food and energy prices, as economists frequently do to gauge the underlying rate of inflation, consumer prices were up 3.2%; the last time this measure of inflation was so low, Richard Nixon was president.
Even health-care prices, the inflationary bugaboo for decades, are behaving better, rising 5.4% last year, less than any year since 1973.
The Labor Department also said consumer prices inched up 0.2% in December, the same as in November.
A 1.1% tumble in energy prices helped keep overall inflation in check.
But even excluding the food and energy sectors, prices rose just 0.3% last month.
Apparel prices dipped 0.7%, suggesting more than the usual holiday discounting, and transportation prices fell 0.2%, mainly because of big cuts in gasoline prices.
Medical and entertainment prices posted modest gains.
Gross weekly earnings of U.S. workers were unchanged in December after adjusting for inflation -- after rising 0.2% in November -- while hourly earnings went up 0.2%.
The prevailing wisdom among economists is that the economy will grow at about a 3% pace this year, but that inflation won't accelerate.
In the past, people have tended to assume that a pickup in growth inevitably brought with it a pickup in inflation.
The latest survey of 51 economists by the Blue Chip Economic Indicators shows that they expect consumer prices to rise only 2.8% this year; the most pessimistic prediction is for 3.5%.
The optimism is based on several arguments.
Unemployment in the U.S. is falling and businesses are operating closer to full capacity, so it should get easier for firms to raise prices.
But there remains so much slack -- so many jobless workers and idle factories -- in an increasingly global economy that U.S. firms will find it tough to push up prices significantly.
"We thought about price increases," says John Ballard, chief executive of TCI International Inc., a Sunnyvale, Calif., engineering company.
"But our research of competitors and what the market would bear told us it was not worth pursuing."
At the same time, an improving productivity trend, if it lasts, gives the economy more room to grow before bottlenecks make it easy for producers to raise prices.
Growth in money and credit, broadly defined, is up a bit, but still quite subdued.
The prices for oil and many other commodities are in a slump.
And the bond market, ever vigilant about inflation, has risen dramatically, a suggestion that investors are siding with the optimists.
There is even a market for 50-year bonds again.
Edward Yardeni of C.J. Lawrence/ Deutsche Bank Securities, an optimist's optimist who predicts a 2% inflation rate this year, figures the end of the Cold War helps, too.
"It dramatically increased the ability to access cheap labor in Russia, East Europe and China," he says.
Plus, lower trade barriers, and increased industrialization in countries such as Indonesia, tend to keep wage levels low.
But, as always, there are doubters.
After all, the past couple of years prove only that inflation will behave when the economy still has substantial slack.
"My inflation numbers for the first time put pricing power back in the hands of suppliers instead of purchasers," says Gail Fosler, chief economist of the Conference Board, a New York research group.
She sees consumer prices rising at a 4% clip by year's end and predicts they will rise 4.4% in 1995, making her the most pessimistic of the Blue Chip economists.
Many companies raised prices early last year, only to reverse course in whole or part after both the U.S. and overseas economies faltered, competitors didn't follow or big customers balked.
As the economy improves, it will be easier for companies to make price increases stick.
Steel companies and truckers started the year increasing prices for their products and services, as did some brokerage firms, Japanese car companies and the United Parcel Service.
DuPont says it will be pushing for higher chemical prices as yearly negotiations on new contracts begin with customers later this month.
Government inflation reports for the first few months of the year may send a false signal that inflation is rising -- a result, economists say, of flaws in the Bureau of Labor Statistics' calculation methods.
The prevailing consensus is that inflation won't increase much from its current pace and might even inch down toward 2.5%., which is pretty close to no inflation at all once the vagaries of measuring price increases are considered.
That means the Fed won't be under immediate pressure to raise interest rates to slow the economy down.
That gives the economy more running space, but beyond that happy consequence, the low-inflation world will also require some painful adjustments:
-- Wage increases will look smaller.
Workers receiving a 4% pay raise in times of 5% inflation may have been falling behind, but they enjoyed a heftier paycheck.
In the current low-inflation world, wage increases will seem skimpier even though they might be putting workers ahead of the inflation curve.
Economists also worry that it will be harder for employers to cut wages for workers whose skills aren't in demand.
In the past, a pay freeze or slight increase amounted to a real cut.
-- The economics of buying a house are changing.
Housing prices, of course, are driven by demographics, supply and demand and other factors.
But one factor behind the huge run-up in housing prices in the 1980s was inflation.
For many middle-class families with mortgages and modest savings, houses were the perfect hedge against inflation.
Even if the appreciation wasn't much better than the inflation rate, it created a sense of wealth.
That isn't likely to recur any time soon.
Dennis Dugan, an architect on Manhattan's West Side, says low inflation means to him that "I'm excited about getting rid of real estate, whereas in the '70s and '80s I was doing all I could to accumulate it."
Over the past 20 years, he has held onto every apartment or condo he has lived in, renting out the properties after he moved out.
Now, he says, "When I want to buy a new apartment, I sell two of the old ones.
That's a direct result of my assumption that low inflation will last and real-estate values are going to be flat."
-- Sticker shock may occur in other realms as well, at least until the public gets accustomed to a low inflation rate and a low interest-rate environment.
Low inflation means smaller increases in the cost-of-living adjustments in Social Security checks.
That can anger the beneficiaries -- even though the prices they pay rise slowly.
Similarly, a 4% yield on a certificate of deposit seems puny even though it is actually worth more than a 6% yield was in a time of higher inflation.
As a result, many people have hauled money out of low-yielding money-market funds, and into riskier mutual funds.
-- Businesses will devote less time to hedging against price increases, moving cash around to avoid the cost of idle balances in non-interest-bearing accounts and other largely unproductive activity.
"It frees you up to do other things," says Roger Heins, who manages money for Miles Inc., a $6.5 billion-a-year pharmaceutical and chemical company in Pittsburgh.
Economist Stanley Fischer of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has estimated that at an inflation rate of 5%, the U.S. wastes about $18 billion -- 0.3% of its total output -- on such activities.
-- The tax incentives for saving and investing may improve.
The tax code -- unfairly in the eyes of many economists -- taxes profits even if they aren't truly profits once one adjusts for inflation.
"The net effect of our tax system, coupled with current levels of inflation, is to make the effective tax rate on real" -- or inflation-adjusted -- "capital gains well over 50%," says Fed governor Lawrence Lindsey.
For years, there has been talk in Congress -- but only talk -- of altering the capital-gains tax to correct for this.
A low inflation rate makes the issue moot.
Imagine buying a share of stock for $100 that increases 5% a year in an era of 4% annual inflation.
After 18 years, the stock is worth $241.
Sell it, and after the government claims its 28% capital-gains tax, you are left with an after-tax profit of $102.
Doesn't sound too bad until you figure in inflation.
With 4% inflation, a stock has to double in value in 18 years just to keep up with inflation.
Adjust for inflation and the after-tax return after 18 years amounts to a measly 2%.
Consider the same scenario with 2% inflation and a stock that climbs 3% a year, the same 1% margin above inflation.
After 18 years, the stock is worth $170 and the after-tax profit amounts to $50.
Adjust for inflation again, and the return turns out to be a much more pleasant 8%.
The same logic applies to the rewards for saving because the government taxes interest as it is paid, even if it is just enough to compensate for inflation.
-- Businesses should be more willing to invest.
Fed Vice Chairman David Mullins figures that low, stable inflation rates should keep down what economists call "real" long-term interest rates, that is, interest rates adjusted for inflation.
Low inflation, he reasons, will reduce what is known as the "inflation premium," that extra margin that lenders and investors demand to protect against the risk of inflation.
And low interest rates encourage businesses to buy new equipment and computers and build new plants and buildings.
"The key to growth in incomes is growth in productivity," Mr. Mullins says, "and the key to growth in productivity is investment.
And the key to investment is low, low real interest rates.
And the key to low real rates is low inflation."
The peculiarities of the tax code should reinforce this incentive to investment.
A business that buys a machine can't deduct its cost all at once when it computes its taxes; instead, it deducts the cost over a period of years.
The more inflation, the less valuable these depreciation deductions in the later years.
The lower the inflation rate, therefore, the greater their value -- and the more attractive an investment should be.
Here are the price indexes (1982-1984=100) and percentage changes for the components of the Labor Department's consumer price index for all urban consumers for December.
The percentage changes from the previous month are seasonally adjusted. for seasonal variation, together with the percentage increases from December 1992 were:
