Amid concerns over inflation figures to be released this week, traders pushed the yield on the benchmark 30-year Treasury perilously close to 7%.
Sentiment in the bond market remained overwhelmingly bearish, pushing prices lower on most benchmark Treasurys.
"The market is still scared to death of another piece of bad news that would send the bond down into another spiral," said Van Siler, a managing partner at R.J. Walls & Co.
That fear has gone beyond what the fundamentals of economic growth and inflation would suggest, Mr. Siler said.
"It's not this figure or that figure, it's the fact that the market has problems holding gains for more than half a day," he said.
"But at some point we've got to have a reality check and figure out if this is the end of the world, or if there is some value in the market."
After beginning the session holding onto Friday's gains, bond prices eroded throughout much of the session.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 9/16, or $5.625 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 91 5/32 to yield 6.95%.
On Friday, the long bond had gained nearly a point, or nearly $10 for a $1,000 face value bond, to yield 6.91%.
"There is simply no follow-through buying that can sustain any gains for more than a few hours," said Anthony Karydakis, senior financial economist at First Chicago Capital Markets.
Among shorter maturities, the benchmark 10-year note fell 17/32 to 95 7/32, to yield 6.52%.
Besides nervousness about this week's inflation data, bond investors fretted about gains in some commodity markets.
Traders also reported concern over a report yesterday from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta showing an acceleration of economic activity in the Southeast during February.
Meanwhile, a spokesman for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York yesterday denied a rumor that the Fed had helped push down bond yields on Friday by buying long-term Treasury securities.
"We have not directly intervened in the long-term market to hold rates at a particular point," the spokesman said.
On Friday, the benchmark 30-year Treasury flirted with 7% in the morning before posting price gains for the day, raising speculation of Fed involvement.
Bond prices and yields move in opposite directions.
The Fed frequently conducts transactions on behalf of customers, such as other central banks.
The spokesman contended such operations aren't for purposes of "intervention."
The February producer price index report is due out today.
Analysts are calling for a 0.4% rise in the overall PPI and a 0.2% gain excluding food and energy components.
The February consumer price index report is to be released tomorrow.
An overall gain of 0.3% and a 0.2% increase without food and energy are forecast.
Despite market jitters over this week's data, some analysts said fears of surging inflation are overblown.
Although some commodity prices as well as certain big-ticket consumer items have had increases, there are few signs of widespread price rises, analysts say.
They also contend that wage pressures are well under control.
By definition, "inflation is an increase in the general level of prices," said Joseph Liro, chief economist at S.G. Warburg.
"To get a sustained increase in inflation, you have to have broad-based price increases, and, to me, we're just not there yet."
For those arguing that yields have risen more than the economic backdrop would warrant, the market has begun to look attractive.
But with sentiment so bearish, there is little reason to buy when the same securities can be bought more cheaply later.
"People are whispering that these levels might represent value, but nobody is prepared to take any action," said First Chicago's Mr. Karydakis.
One major reason why investors remain reluctant buyers is uncertainty over when the Fed will next raise interest rates -- and by how much.
For lack of another trigger point, most analysts have chosen the March 22 meeting of the policymaking Federal Open Market Committee as the likely date for tightening.
What happens once the Fed does move?
Many in the market argue that prices will stabilize because investors will have a better read on how aggressive the Fed plans to be in preventing a flare-up in inflation.
But others argue it won't be that simple.
"It will be a very dicey situation," said Samuel Kahan, chief economist at Fuji Securities Inc.
"You're not in a situation where concrete facts will drive anything.
It will be more the mood of the market that's important."
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated March 17.
The 13-week bills mature June 16, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature Sept. 15, 1994.
The corporate-bond market was quiet amid thin trading and few new issues.
Nearly $900 million of debt was sold during the session, mainly by government agencies.
The day's scant corporate issues included $100 million of senior notes from CIT Group Holdings Inc., which is owned by Chemical Banking Corp. and Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd.
Separately, DeepTech International Inc., a Houston gas exploration, production and pipeline concern, sold $82 million of senior secured notes maturing in 2000.
The State of Israel is expected to sell $1 billion of debt today.
The offering would be part of an Agency for International Development program to resettle and absorb immigrants to Israel from the republics of the former Soviet Union, Ethiopia and elsewhere.
The debt would be guaranteed by the U.S. government.
Trading was very light in secondary markets.
Margins of investment-grade bond yields to those of U.S. Treasurys were unchanged, and prices followed Treasurys down.
In the junk-bond market, prices were unchanged.
New issue activity in the high-yield market is expected to be light this week as Merrill Lynch & Co. and Dillon, Read & Co. both hold high-yield-investor conferences in Puerto Rico.
One $275 million deal, from Long John Silver's Restaurants Inc., was postponed due to market conditions.
A syndicate official said price talk began as low as 10.25% and rose to 11.25% before the deal was yanked.
In the new-issue arena, DeepTech's debt was brought to market through lead manager Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
The 12% coupon notes were priced at 97.722 to yield 12.5%
CIT's 5.75% coupon notes maturing in 1997 were priced at 99.878 to yield 5.795%, according to a syndicate official at lead manager Morgan Stanley & Co.
Municipal bonds drifted in quiet trading yesterday and were generally 1/8 to 3/8 point lower at the close.
Like Treasurys, munis lost ground as traders awaited the release of the February inflation reports.
Among the muni issues that registered declines this session was the New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's 5.00% of 2024 bonds.
They were about 1/4 lower at 86 in late trading, yielding 6.02%, according to a New York muni specialist.
There is competitive bidding this morning for Connecticut's $205 million general obligation bonds, the Mecklenburg County, N.C., $197.2 million public-improvement bonds and Tennessee's $161.2 million general obligation bonds.
Mortgages ended the session lower amid thin trading.
Over the last several sessions, the market has been hit with huge bid lists from institutional investors seeking to get out of weakening positions.
The selling slowed yesterday.
In secondary trading, Government National Mortgage Association 7% issues ended down 7/32 at 97 13/32, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold 7% issues were down 8/32 at 97 25/32 and Federal National Mortgage Association 7% issues were down 8/32 at 97 19/32.
In primary dealings, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. announced a $300 million real-estate mortgage investment conduit backed by 15-year 6.5% securities, and the Federal National Mortgage Association announced a $500 million issue backed by 30-year 7% securities.
Lauren Young contributed to this article.
