When it is horribly, implacably cold, when ice and snow cover the ground and arctic winds rage through the bare ruined choirs where once the sweet birds sang and then, for the most part, had the sense to head for warmer climes, what about the birds that stay behind?
What becomes of the chickadees, the titmice, the downy woodpeckers, the sparrows, starlings and pigeons that winter in urban wildlife preserves like New York's Central Park?
When the temperatures plunge to zero and below, are they doomed to freeze like the poor sparrow in Oscar Wilde's fairy tale "The Happy Prince"?
In real life, birds have remarkable resistance to cold -- far greater, indeed, than mammals, according to the Audubon Society Encyclopedia of North American Birds.
It makes some sense, when you think of what many mammals of our own species wear when the weather turns wintry: down garments.
Birds, of course, are protected by their own natural down.
Feathers, in fact, are one of nature's finest insulating agents.
There is very little exposed skin on the body of a bird -- no projecting ears or tail where body heat might be dissipated.
Only the feet and, to some degree, the horny bill are vulnerable to heat loss, which explains why you sometimes see a bird standing on one foot, with the other tucked into the breast feathers, or with his bill buried in a wing to conserve heat.
As winter approaches, the factor that impels birds to fly south is not the cold.
It is the food supply.
The birds that migrate are generally insect eaters, and when the weather turns too cold for insect survival, these birds must move to where the food is.
The birds that stay are generally seed and berry eaters, whose food supply remains available on the ground or clinging to leafless branches.
But in order to stay alive in conditions of extreme cold, these birds must eat a greater quantity of high-energy foods than usual to sustain their normal body temperature, which fluctuates between 100 degrees and 112.
Knowledgeable birdwatchers know this, which may at least partly explain why late on the morning of Wednesday, Jan. 19, a day when it seemed the entire Northeast was covered with a sheet of ice and everyone else in her right mind was huddling indoors, a small group of dedicated ornithophiles entered the deserted wastes of Central Park to feed the birds.
The three latter-day St. Francises who braved the subzero weather that day were Norma Collin, a retired art-gallery owner; Murray Liebman, a college teacher; and Charles Kennedy, a haiku writer.
Every Wednesday since the middle of October, they and a few others had been regularly stocking the bird-feeding station at the Azalea Pond, deep in that man-made wilderness known as the Ramble.
A well-known Central Park tourist attraction, the Azalea Pond features seven homemade bird feeders constructed out of plastic jugs.
These are regularly filled with sunflower seeds and attached to high branches of trees that overhang a picturesque stream called the Gill.
Regulation Frisbees suspended between the jugs and the branches are generally effective at deterring rapacious squirrels.
That morning, the three bird enthusiasts had a particular sense of urgency.
The city was enduring one of its worst cold waves ever and there were already reports of some bird victims: a frozen mallard had been found in the ice between the Loch and the Pool on the west side of the park near 100th Street, and a dead Canada goose at the north side of the Reservoir.
Moreover, there was some disquieting news from the Azalea Pond; in the course of that desperately cold week, squirrels had finally invaded the feeders.
Cautiously making their way on the icy path to the Azalea Pond, Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Liebman and Ms. Collin, the latter dressed in "five layers on top and four layers on the bottom," were prepared for trouble.
But when they reached the frozen stream they were shocked by what they saw.
The squirrels had twisted the Frisbee baffles, gnawed through the bird-sized entrance holes in the jugs, eaten all the seeds, and, in the process, destroyed most of the containers beyond repair.
In all the years Ms. Collin had been refilling the feeders she had never seen quite such a mess.
She and the others had lugged a 20-pound bag of bird seed to the feeding station, as well as a collapsible 15-foot pole used for attaching the feeders to tree branches.
Now, as they numbly wondered whether just to dump the seeds on the snow-covered ground and let the birds and squirrels fight it out among themselves, another angel of mercy appeared on the spot.
It was George Muller, a retired electrician, the very man who had devised and created the feeders.
He too, was amazed at the squirrels' depredations.
"It was as if they had tools!"
Mr. Muller said a few days later, "Their teeth must be like buzz saws."
Mr. Muller had come prepared.
Ms. Collin had called him on Monday to tell him that the feeders were damaged, and this moved him to take swift action.
He emptied out a gallon jug of Breck shampoo he had at home, appropriated another large plastic container he normally used for watering his plants, and commandeered a third from his building's basement.
In all three vessels, he cut out bird entrance holes at the sides.
He attached hooks to the top of each.
Then, because it was a painfully cold day, he waited for the weather to improve.
But the next day was even colder.
And on Wednesday the temperature went down to minus two degrees.
Still, Mr. Muller felt certain that the bird-feeding squad would be in the park that day no matter what.
He bundled up and headed for the Azalea Pond at about 11 a.m. with his three new feeders.
And so it happened that on the coldest day of 1994 (so far) Mr. Muller, Mr. Liebman, Mr. Kennedy and Ms. Collin filled three new bird feeders to the brim with sunflower seeds and with the help of a long pole hooked them on the branches of an overhanging cork tree.
Then, in the spirit of true forgiveness, they scattered quite a quantity of additional seeds on the ground for the hungry squirrels.
Ms. Collin had one more treat prepared for the birds.
Two days earlier a few friends had thrown a party to celebrate her 65th birthday.
The high point of the occasion was a cake, decorated with a realistic picture of one of Ms. Collin's favorite birds, a great blue heron.
The guests merely pecked at this avian dessert, so a big chunk of cake was left over after the party.
Ms. Collin took it home with the beautiful heron almost intact.
But these were desperate times.
On Wednesday morning before setting off for the park, Ms. Collin scraped all the icing from the cake and stuck it into a plastic bag.
At the Azalea Pond she smeared it on the deeply furrowed bark of the cork tree.
The icing was mostly butter, a high-energy food, and within minutes two downy woodpeckers were wolfing it down, so to speak.
They were soon joined by a male red-bellied woodpecker, announcing his arrival with a throaty "Churr!"
Finally a couple of titmice joined the belated birthday celebration.
Chickadees flew back and forth from the feeders to nearby branches, self-descriptively calling "Chick-a-dee-dee-dee."
On the ground three kinds of sparrows -- house, song and white-throated -- chirped as they fed on scattered bird seed alongside a considerable mob of rock doves (pigeons, that is).
And in the middle of January, deep in the heart of Central Park, the bare ruined choirs resounded with sweet bird song.
Ms. Winn is a writer in New York.
