"Philip set out to prove there is social mobility in America," she said.
"So he got born smack-dab in the middle of the middle class, grew up in the lower middle class, and then as an adult joined the working class.
He got it backward."
Mr. Levine owes his success to downward mobility.
In his youth, he heaved car parts down assembly lines, jackhammered highways and scooped soap out of ovens.
Decades later, he is still returning to those awful jobs -- in luminous poems that evoke, with acid-etched imagery, blue-collar work and the grace of people who sweat at it.
Now Mr. Levine has revisited his past more prosaically in an idiosyncratic memoir, "The Bread of Time" (Knopf, 296 pages, $23).
The memoir's collected essays -- a few of which owe more to fiction than fact -- leapfrog across the poet's life.
But their linchpin is the Detroit of Mr. Levine's youth; the jobs he had there, the poems he began to write.
Now 66, Mr. Levine hasn't lifted a transmission case or a jackhammer in ages.
The man I met for lunch during a brief visit here from his home in Fresno looks like the retired college professor that he is.
Although he peppers his comments with barnyard expletives, his manner is as mild as a kindergarten teacher's, and his slender frame seems better suited to tennis than heavy lifting.
By his own admission, he's just a shadow of his former self.
"I had the kind of body that responded very quickly to the kind of work I was doing," he said.
"My hands and wrists and forearms and arms would get so much thicker, I'd pick up a pen and my hands would feel almost too big."
Working with cars was something of a family tradition: Mr. Levine's father, a Russian-Jewish immigrant, ran a used auto parts business with his father-in-law.
He died after a minor operation when Philip was just five, and the family was pitched into financial turmoil.
Mr. Levine's mother went to work as a secretary to support her three sons.
The family, which had been "fairly comfortable," became "less and less comfortable."
He got his first job when he was 13, as a messenger for a downtown jewelry store.
A year later, in 1942, he worked at a soap factory.
In his poem "Growth," he writes: "My job/was always the racks and the ovens -- /two low ceilinged metal rooms/the color of sick skin."
"It scared me," he recalled.
"Of course, I didn't know this is what's happening to Jews in Europe: They're being transformed into soap."
Detroit in the '40s was a relatively safe haven for a Jewish kid, but no paradise.
One Friday night, Mr. Levine and his twin brother went back to his public school to retrieve some forgotten homework, and discovered a dance.
"It became clear as we saw these kids there why we were not invited.
Neither were the Italians, neither were the Armenians.
No Jews," he said.
"These kids we went to school with, who we thought were our dearest friends, were cheating us."
Encounters such as that one fostered a burgeoning class resentment.
Early on, he and his twin made a pact: "{We} agreed that the world was based on exploitation.
The powerful exploited the less powerful, and got rich doing it, and that stunk and we wouldn't take part in that," he said.
"Better to be exploited, we thought then, than exploit others."
By then, his family was living in a house recently purchased by his mother, on the outskirts of the city on a street bordered by an undeveloped stretch of woods.
It was on the wrong side of the tracks, but "there were birds, and there were these fabulous trees, and you could see the stars because there were no factories in that neighborhood."
In those woods, Mr. Levine first "entered poetry."
"After dinner and all the arguing, I would go out into this area and I would -- how can I put it? -- I would start reciting poems.
My own.
I would make them up," he said.
The poems "were very Whitmanian.
Large, long incantatory poems about the glory of the cosmos and the stars and my at-oneness with the trees and animals and who knows what," he said with a dismissive smile.
He went to Detroit's Wayne State University with the ambition of becoming a poet.
Ironically, it was in college that his life in the working class began.
"I had a notion if I lived on my wits that my wits would be compromised in some way, and my writing would be compromised," he said.
"But if I could live on the labors of my body -- and I was a very strong young guy -- that my mind, my imagination, would not be sullied."
While he was still in college, he got a factory job building transmission cases.
"My own job was operating a drill press," he said.
"These cases were heavy and you'd pick them up.
Maybe they weighed 80 pounds.
Then drill these holes, then pick the goddam thing up and pass it on down the line. . . .
People were always yelling at you, `Faster, faster.'"
Later on, he climbed down into tanks to mix up batches of acid for plating plumbing parts.
The experience, which turned his pants cuffs to lace, provided fodder for his poem "Fear and Fame": "I would descend/step by slow step into the dim world/of the pickling tank and there prepare/the new solutions . . ."
"It was very epic," he said.
"Descending into the netherworld, the underworld to get the secret, what have you.
Dante descends into hell."
Still, it wasn't as hellish as his job handling sections of red-hot steel for Chevrolet Gear and Axle, which he describes in his book as "so hard, the work so heavy and monotonous that after an hour or two I was sure each night that I would never last the shift."
His one attempt back then to live off his wits -- writing advertising copy -- ended after a day.
"All silliness, all lies," he said.
"Why is this bank better than that bank?
They're all thieves."
He quit, and returned to factory work.
But it was grinding him down.
"Very good people were being treated like dogs," he said.
"I saw people cry openly at the hardness of their lives.
Men and women so brutalized by difficult physical labor and crummy salaries. . . .
You saw it in other people, this sense of `I can't do this.'
"The irony is, that would become the subject matter for my poetry," he said.
"I never wrote about factory work at the time, never.
I was writing cityscape poems, nature poems, doom poems.
The poems of a young guy who feels hopeless in his environment."
Finally, that hopelessness -- fueled by a "disastrous" first marriage -- propelled him out of Detroit.
In 1953, he went off to the Iowa Writers' Workshop to study poetry with Robert Lowell and John Berryman, who is memorably portrayed in "The Bread of Time."
He met the woman who would become his second wife, traded in factory work for teaching, and never lived in Detroit again.
But he continued to return there -- and to the factories he had fled -- in his poetry.
Now the poet who adopted Walt Whitman's line, "Vivas for those who have failed" as his epigraph, is something of a success -- with a slew of awards to prove it.
"What Work Is," his most recent collection, netted Mr. Levine his second National Book Award.
Once, he considered himself an anarchist.
Now he's a well-established poet with doubts about establishments in general.
Asked what his worst job was, he paused awhile before answering: "I'd say it's a tossup.
Working at Chevrolet Gear and Axle, and teaching at Princeton."
But if the success that his downward mobility made possible seems strange, he is grateful for it.
"In a way, it's been able to redeem the past: Well, you had this bad marriage, and did all those years in factory work . . . but now look at the poems you got out of all that," Mr. Levine reflected.
"What could have looked like a bunch of extraordinary blunders, it now makes them all look like wise moves."
