Vronda Banda and Ronald Mashinini are old friends.
But one wouldn't know that from the less-than-hearty reception Mr. Banda gets.
Mr. Mashinini refuses to shake his friend's hand.
Then he tells Mr. Banda: "You're endangering my life by coming here.
You're endangering my property.
You're even endangering my dog."
It's all in a day's work on the campaign trail.
For Mr. Banda is no ordinary candidate for parliament in the April elections that mark the advent of multiracial democracy in South Africa.
Mr. Banda is black.
And he's running for the National Party, the inventors and enforcers of apartheid.
That a black would run for the party that long prevented blacks from voting is a sign of the extraordinary change South Africa has undergone since President F.W. de Klerk legalized the African National Congress and freed its leader, Nelson Mandela, four years ago.
With a new logo and a message of atonement for past sins, the National Party is actively courting the black electorate and even fielding a few black candidates such as Mr. Banda in hopes of reducing a likely landslide victory for Mr. Mandela and the ANC.
The frosty reception Mr. Banda gets, however, is a sign of how deep the chasm between blacks and whites remains.
The ultimate test of multiracial democracy will be not only when blacks can vote and seek office, but also when South Africa's parties are racially integrated.
So far, their efforts to cut across color lines are meeting with distrust, resistance and even violence and intimidation.
Whites who say they will vote for the ANC are regarded by many fellow whites as dangerous Communists or power-hungry turncoats.
Blacks who say they will vote for the National Party -- barely 1%, polls show -- are viewed by most of their fellow blacks as traitors and opportunists.
"Someone who does that has lost his soul," says Mzimkhulu Kwini, a Cape Town law student.
That view makes things tricky for the 36-year-old Mr. Banda, who runs the National Party's office in Soweto, the black township outside Johannesburg that gained fame as a flashpoint of resistance to apartheid.
Put simply, Mr. Banda's problem is: right race, wrong party.
"It's an incredible task," he says.
Mr. Banda makes an unusual National Party recruit.
Less than four years ago, he lived in a cell in Robben Island prison, serving a 12-year sentence on charges of high treason for his role as a commander in Umkhonto we Sizwe, the ANC's military arm.
The dismantling of apartheid gained him an early release.
But rather than rejoin the ranks of Mr. Mandela, a former fellow Robben Island detainee, Mr. Banda joined forces with his ex-foes, exposing himself to new charges of treason -- if not from courts, at least from many of his friends, family and other blacks.
"He spent years in jail, more in detention; he was tortured, and then he goes and joins the enemy," says a bewildered Mr. Mashinini, who also fought in the ANC's armed wing.
Mr. Banda is unapologetic.
"It's not high treason," he says.
"It's freedom of choice.
I'm exercising that right.
The National Party I joined is the new National Party, not the one that passed all those apartheid laws."
Mr. Banda denies widespread allegations that he's in this for money.
He says he joined the National Party because the ANC is Communist-dominated and has no economic expertise, while the National Party has a proven track record on economic policy to go with its born-again image.
"The National Party has developed South Africa to what it is today," says Mr. Banda.
"It's better to sleep with the devil we know."
Spreading that message in Soweto isn't easy, however.
"The National Party is operating underground," says Albe Moroalo, who works for the ANC in Soweto.
"It's very ironic, because that's how the ANC used to operate."
Indeed, Mr. Banda runs something of a covert campaign.
He operates from an unmarked office in a Soweto shopping center, right down the hall from the ANC office.
"It provides security," says Mr. Banda.
"If they bomb our office, they lose their office, too."
The National Party has held no public meetings here, and Mr. Banda rarely ventures outside to campaign, except to call on people he knows, such as Mr. Mashinini.
Instead of door-to-door canvassing, Mr. Banda quietly identifies a few key people in each area.
Then they try to recruit neighbors and form committees that also operate underground.
"When the committee expands to a size that gives us balance, then we can come out," he says.
Coming out can be dangerous, as David Chuenyane discovered.
Mr. Chuenyane is the most prominent black on the National Party's list of candidates for Parliament, which is to be elected under a system of proportional representation.
With his name in seventh place, he's virtually assured of a parliamentary seat.
But his efforts have earned him two Molotov cocktails exploding on the veranda of his Soweto home.
He has been the target of six drive-by shootings.
And he was run off the road four times.
"I completely damaged four cars," he says.
He now lives in Pretoria while his American wife and three children are in the U.S.
"Every now and then, when things really get tough, I say `What did I get myself into?'" he admits.
The 51-year-old Mr. Chuenyane, a former militant of the radical Pan-Africanist Congress, makes no bones of the fact that he joined the National Party in part out of opportunism.
"I had to contribute, and in order to contribute effectively, I had to look for a political party I could get into and use its resources in order to help my people," he says.
But, like many other black National Party supporters, he says he opposes the ANC because he views it as Communist and tribal-based.
He supports the National Party, he says, because South Africa needs a strong opposition to act as a watchdog.
Mr. Chuenyane admits those arguments get short shrift in his campaign, and he spends much time fighting off charges of selling out.
"I understand very well people who are angry at me," he says.
"But their anger is from the past, from the injustices of apartheid.
It was an evil government."
Now that apartheid has gone, he says, he feels he can do more good by educating the National Party and showing that blacks are just as capable as whites.
"One of the reasons I joined, too, was to understand what motivated them to have that kind of government and change them from the inside," Mr. Chuenyane says.
