Underscoring a rift in the nation's largest business organization, a key committee of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce again recommended that the organization endorse requiring employers to help pay for their workers' health insurance.
The health policy panel's action comes less than two weeks after a Chamber official withdrew copies of written testimony endorsing the so-called employer mandate shortly before it was to be delivered to the House Ways and Means Committee.
The latest action highlights tension between the chamber's big corporate members and the small businesses that make up 95% of its members.
Some small-business members, who complain that an employer mandate would force them to lay off workers or even shut down, say the health policy committee is dominated by big businesses, including Chrysler Corp.
Larger companies, which are more likely than small ones to provide health coverage for their workers currently, tend to support mandates; they say they currently end up paying higher health-care costs to cover a large portion of the uninsured population.
The mandate endorsed by the health policy committee this week is essentially the same it had favored in the revoked testimony -- namely, that employers' health-care payments be phased in until they reach 50% of the cost of a "lowest-priced" plan by the year 2000.
The Clinton administration favors requiring employers to pay 80% of the cost of workers' health coverage.
Two weeks ago, after withdrawing the chamber's earlier testimony, Robert Patricelli, chairman of the health policy committee, complained that the president's plan "gives mandates a bad name."
A Chamber official refused yesterday to confirm the policy committee's latest action, and stressed that five other committees will vote on the health-care issue before the full board makes its decision at the end of the month.
But two of the Chamber's affiliates that represent small businesses said they were alarmed by the policy committee's move.
"I went to that meeting hoping they'd changed their minds; we were very heartened after the Business Roundtable came out against mandates, and after our testimony before" the Ways and Means Committee, said Kathy McKimmie, vice president for human resources of the Indiana Chamber of Commerce.
"But every time I go to Washington I'm amazed. . . .
We don't support big government and mandates, and we continue to distance ourselves from the U.S. Chamber in all our communications with our members," she added.
John Polk, president of the Council of Smaller Enterprises, a Cleveland-based organization affiliated with the Chamber, said he would be "astonished" if the Chamber ultimately decides to back employer mandates.
"There's a clear perception on Capitol Hill that the chamber is in a certain amount of disarray," he said.
But Dorothy Sander, vice president for benefits for Hanson Industries, a manufacturing holding company in Iselin, N.J., said the clear consensus of the health policy committee was that businesses do support some form of a mandate, although not the one proposed by the president.
"I think they Chamber officials see this as clarifying their position," she said.
"If you support universal coverage, you have to have some form of a mandate."
The committee also suggested that Chamber officials to poll all their company members on the mandate issue, she said.
In addition, the committee suggested that any health-care system force companies to cover all their workers, instead of permitting some to be covered under spouses' plans.
The idea was seen as favoring big manufacturers.
Mr. Patricelli, the committee's chairman, was out of the country and couldn't be reached.
He is president of Value Health Inc., a Connecticut company that provides managed health care and health information services.
A Chrysler official who attended the meeting couldn't be reached for comment.
Meanwhile, President Clinton warned a senior citizens group that they could lose health benefits if his health care plan isn't passed.
"There are a lot of people who really believe the only way to reduce the deficit and to reform health care is to basically take benefits away from older Americans," Mr. Clinton told a generally reserved crowd made up largely of members of the American Association of Retired Persons in Edison, N.J.
"We have shown . . . that you can reduce the deficit and reform health care and be fair to older Americans."
Mr. Clinton's own health proposal would reduce projected Medicare spending, primarily by squeezing doctors and hospitals rather than their patients.
It would use the savings to pay for a new prescription-drug program for Medicare beneficiaries.
The president, who was accompanied by Hillary Rodham Clinton, urged his audience to apply its considerable lobbying clout to counter industry groups that oppose his plan.
"I would respectfully suggest that the AARP ought to be for the only plan that helps you," he said.
"Otherwise, the interest groups will convince Congress that you don't really care, and you will lose these parts of our plan.
The time has come to be counted, to stand up, to take a stand and to fight with us."
