I kept thinking during "Golden Gate" that it would be nice if the characters would start singing.
This isn't meant to insult the movie, which I liked.
But there was something missing from this historical drama about social injustice and thwarted love.
I'm pretty sure some good tunes and snappy lyrics would have filled the gap.
The story is about an overeager FBI rookie who hypes the evidence against a Chinese-American laundry worker and labor organizer accused of being a Communist sympathizer.
It's 1952, the height of the Red Scare.
The laundry worker is convicted, wrongly, and spends 10 years in jail.
When he is released, the FBI man is reassigned to the case, which he knows never had merit and which he no longer wants to pursue.
The laundry worker, already weakened by his years in prison, goes mad and kills himself.
The FBI man tries to atone for his part in this miscarriage of justice by offering to take care of this man's daughter, a college student.
They fall in love.
But when she discovers his connection to her father's death she banishes him from her life.
Eventually, however, he does find a way to redeem himself.
Perhaps I see the Broadway musical possibilities in this disturbing material because of the film's bouncy theatricality.
Playwright David Henry Hwang ("M. Butterfly") has written the story as a fable.
"There was once a man who transformed himself into an angel," the movie begins.
The director John Madden staged the story as a strange combination of 1950s musicals and 1950s films noirs; a mix of corny breeziness and dark surrealism.
For example, the essential moral dilemma of the FBI man is established while he is kissing the pretty blond woman he has just picked up at a dance hall.
She interrupts him with a series of questions: Does he understand the difference between law and justice?
If he had to choose one over the other, which would he choose?
It's a cute scene, played for comedy, the perfect introduction to a funny song.
Elsewhere, however, there are strong emotional moments played out in dark alleys in the rain.
The simplicity of this approach gives the movie a strong emotional push, even when it might come off as a little too gimmicky.
Some of the parts rely too heavily on caricature, like Bruno Kirby as the fast-talking sidekick.
But most of the actors play these melodramatic characters with a lot of sincerity; they pull you in.
Matt Dillon, as the FBI man, shows again that he is one of the more interesting young actors working today.
There's this intriguing battle going on, between his good looks and some inner complexity.
And both the picture's women are very good -- Teri Polo as the righteous blonde, and Joan Chen as the wronged Chinese-American girl.
We may think it's OK for a Frenchman to spend his dying moments telling us about how he's trying to decide between his nice wife and his nice mistress.
That was the premise of "The Things of Life," a book by Frederic Golchan, and of the 1970 movie that was inspired by it.
Now I see that this was a perfect example of what the French were calling the cultural exception during the recent negotiations for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
A Frenchman can get away gracefully with being with two women at the same time.
There's even an expression for it: lucky Pierre.
But when an American man spends his last moments caught between two women, he seems like a flake and a creep.
Or at least that's how Richard Gere seemed to me in "Intersection," the new American version of "The Things of Life" (which, even in its more-credible French form, was only a so-so movie).
As I remember it, the man in "Things of Life" had been unable to make his choice because he was equally compelled by the pull of history (the wife) and the pull of passion (the mistress).
The actors, who included Romy Schneider as the mistress, and the atmosphere and, possibly, the Frenchness of it all, made his dilemma vital.
What was the best way for him to spend the rest of his life -- with the family who had helped build what he had, or with the woman who made him see the possibilities in something new?
None of these thoughts occurred to me during "Intersection."
Instead I found myself wondering about why the filmmakers decided to remake this film in the placid beauty of Vancouver, not exactly a cauldron of burning passion.
The miscasting isn't only geographic, however.
Depth of feeling isn't Mr. Gere's specialty, certainly.
And Lolita Davidovich, as the mistress, has been given nothing to do that conveys her character's magnetic pull.
Which brings me to Sharon Stone, as the wife, a beautiful and talented architect.
We can at least see where her attraction lies.
No, not the obvious -- not the lithe body and beautiful face.
Here, Sharon Stone represents "history," the ties of work and family and hearth.
It has been said that Ms. Stone, with the right script, might just be this generation's Grace Kelly.
There is some physical resemblance.
However, it's more likely that Ms. Stone will be remembered as this generation's Tippi Hedren, Melanie Griffith's mother, the blank actress Alfred Hitchcock turned to after Grace Kelly left show business to become Princess Grace of Monaco.
VIDEO TIP: To understand the difference, just look at Grace Kelly in "Rear Window," "Dial M for Murder" and "To Catch a Thief."
Then watch Tippi Hedren in "The Birds" and "Marnie."
