Home Shopping Network Inc. said it will launch another channel this summer to sell merchandise from name-brand retailers, catalogers and consumer product companies.
Home Shopping's service, called the Television Shopping Mall, is the latest entry in the increasingly crowded field of electronic retailers trying to appeal to affluent audiences.
QVC Network Inc. of West Chester, Pa., is launching an upscale network called Q2 in May.
Retailers R. H. Macy & Co. and Nordstrom Inc. are planning TV and interactive shopping services.
And on Monday, catalog powerhouse Spiegel Inc., in partnership with entertainment and cable giant Time Warner Inc., will unveil details of its catalog-based home-shopping channel, Catalog 1.
They will announce deals to sell merchandise from Sharper Image, Neiman Marcus, Crate & Barrel, Nature Co. and Williams-Sonoma Inc., as well as Spiegel subsidiary Eddie Bauer, the sports and outerwear marketer.
The new services all face an uphill climb in selling merchandise to the affluent.
So far, services have made their revenue from selling bargain-priced items aimed at low- to moderate-income households.
There have been brief forays from designer Diane Von Furstenburg, retailer Saks Fifth Avenue and the makers of Citizen watches.
But it's still a medium dominated by jewelry and clothing from largely unknown vendors and manufacturers.
Home Shopping's national network, to be launched this summer, initially will reach three million cable homes and 20 million broadcast-TV homes.
It will provide a televised stage on which marketers can control and design two-hour shows featuring their merchandise.
Home Shopping, based in St. Petersburg, Fla., reaches 60 million television households; QVC is available in 50 million homes.
After 10 years on the air, the major home-shopping channels have about $3 billion in combined sales.
Some optimistic projections say the business could grow to $25 billion by the end of the decade.
But critics contend that people won't abandon the experience of shopping, particularly to buy big-ticket merchandise.
And despite brisk sales, TV shopping channels are plagued by high return rates.
The first hurdle for the new shopping channels will be acquiring space on cable systems.
Although cable-system owners plan to upgrade channel capacity, in the next two to five years there may not be enough slots on the TV channel lineup.
"Just how many shopping channels will cable operators feel they need?" says Kim Hendrix, senior manager at the Management Horizons division of Price Waterhouse.
"Operators face the issue of programming mix on their systems.
They may take two or three shopping channels, but I doubt they take more than that."
But Ms. Hendrix, like other industry analysts, believes the new, upscale shopping channels can significantly expand the audience for electronic retailing.
"Our data show a good percentage of affluent customers aren't frequent shoppers on TV.
But once you put something out there they find worth buying, you will see numbers grow," Ms. Hendrix says.
A new shopping channel could restore some luster to Home Shopping Network, whose founder and chairman, Roy Speer, resigned last year amid charges of receiving kickbacks from vendors.
The new president and chief executive, former Turner Broadcasting System Inc. executive Gerald F. Hogan, has hired retailing and merchandising experts from several industries, cut costs and streamlined operations and improved the mix of merchandise on its basic shopping channels.
The Television Shopping Mall will have a different look from HSN's primary service, Home Shopping Club.
Mr. Hogan said the televised mall will allow marketers to create their own "stores" on air, each with a distinct look and sensibility.
In contrast to the in-studio, 24-hour shopping club, the HSN mall could permit more elaborate production and visual effects since the show could be live, taped or both.
"Each of the 35 merchants will be able to craft the look and feel of their store to represent the image they want," he said.
Mr. Hogan said HSN has had informal talks about the Television Shopping Mall with marketers including cataloger Hanover Direct Inc., off-price retailer Marshalls and Macy.
Over time, the competing upscale channels could find themselves in a battle for exclusive rights to certain retailers or marketers.
While Mr. Hogan's electronic mall isn't signing companies to exclusive arrangements, Spiegel says it is signing marketers to appear only on its Catalog 1 for the test period.
Catalog 1 will debut as a test on various Time Warner-owned cable systems nationwide, with a national rollout planned for fall.
John J. Shea, Spiegel president and chief executive, also plans to have his shopping channel look different from typical home-shopping channels.
Spiegel plans to feature models on runways or even swimsuits modeled on location in Hawaii.
"There definitely won't be any talking heads," Mr. Shea says.
"This will be very different."
