Boarding their 1952 Convair with powerful, updated turboprops, AlliedSignal Inc.'s engineer William Weist and his crew of four scientists and pilots suggest they might be mistaken for drug runners flying beneath surveillance radars.
This morning, as usual, they will fly at 300 feet, first eastward over the ocean and then in a wide loop over the Everglades.
But they are the hunters, not the pursued, and their quarry is wind shear.
A violent and unpredictable change in wind direction at low altitudes, wind shear can drive a jetliner, landing or taking off, into the ground.
Since 1964 it has caused at least 26 aircraft accidents, killing more than 500 people in the U.S.
The deadly phenomenon was identified only two decades ago.
In the last five years many airports have installed radar to predict wind shear.
But it can take as long as two minutes for air-traffic controllers to relay a wind-shear warning from a ground system.
A pilot might have only 10 seconds to maneuver away from a sudden wind shear, according to the Federal Aviation Administration.
Now the AlliedSignal team has developed an onboard detection technology that it says can issue a warning 50 seconds before the pilot encounters a wind shear.
The team has been developing the system, which is essentially a highly modified weather radar, since October 1991.
It expects to have it ready for installation on airliners early this year.
On this morning's flight, the scientists are testing how well their warning system can differentiate wind shear from nonhazardous gusts of wind and rain, moving ground traffic and other low-altitude phenomena.
If it raises a false alarm or misses a real wind shear, the engineers analyze all the data surrounding the error.
Then they try to modify the system's analytical software to hone its power of recognition.
"We're teaching the system to make precise translation," says Mr. Weist, the chief engineer.
As the plane roars aloft, Mr. Weist says every bit of information the plane's radar picks up at low altitudes about moving or stationary objects will be important.
The demands on the system require it to be much more sophisticated than standard aircraft weather radar, which must see only rain, snow or hail.
To detect a wind shear, Mr. Weist's radar must filter out a variety of "clutter" from the ground, including flying dust, moving vehicles, moisture in the wind, flying insects and birds.
The system must recognize and discard such clutter information and isolate the movement that unambiguously represents a wind shear.
That requires a more advanced transmitter, a more sensitive receiver and a thousand times more computerized processing capacity, he says.
"It's like asking the system to listen for a whisper in a rock concert," says Mr. Weist, a 48-year-old intense but affable man who sold hi-fi equipment in East Lansing, Mich., before joining AlliedSignal 13 years ago.
On the plane, a cluster of instruments that collect and analyze signals are stacked on shelves.
The instruments include a monitor that displays the weather pattern (and, in case of a wind shear ahead, would display the location and size of the hazard), speakers to blare out voice-synthesized wind shear warnings, and a computer screen that projects in zigzag graphs the strength of radar echoes returning to the receiver.
Mr. Weist keeps a constant eye on the continuous graphs or "spectra" on the screen in front of Ray McLaughlin, an engineer, who is monitoring the returned signals.
The graphs are moving rapidly from one end of the screen to the other in cascading peaks and valleys.
"The system is analyzing four million pieces of information per second," says Mr. Weist.
A series of sharp and narrow peaks on the screen in front of Mr. McLaughlin attracts Mr. Weist's attention.
"We are passing over a long convoy of trucks on I-75," Mr. McLaughlin explains.
The engineers settle back to their routines; they turn knobs, flick switches, stare at graphs, scrutinize the green, yellow and red displays on the weather radar and communicate with the pilot.
The weather is too beautiful today to produce any wind shears, which are uncommon in winter.
In the summers, says Mr. Weist, the team has flown around wind shears over the Everglades, where they are common, after the warning system pinpointed their locations.
The team has even tested the warning system by flying through wind shears.
In one such foray in Denver, where wind shear is also common, "the plane dropped 600 feet," the pilot, William Callan, said later.
"Luckily I was flying at 1,000 feet."
The plane makes a loop and turns west, back toward the coast.
Halfway over the Everglades, still at 300 feet, the shapes moving on the monitor attract Mr. Weist's attention.
He unbuckles his seat belt and leans over to take a close look.
He scrutinizes the graphs for a few minutes.
He consults with Mr. McLaughlin, who's also intently looking at the graphs and the weather monitor above it.
Mr. Weist later explains that the pattern looked very similar to signals bouncing back from a wind shear, the weather condition in which bursts of concentrated cold air descend to the ground and then spread out horizontally and violently in all directions.
A close study revealed that the graph in fact represented traffic moving in different directions at an intersection on the highway below.
The signals bouncing back from such a pattern of moving vehicles can "masquerade as a wind shear," says Mr. Weist.
But his system differentiates a wind shear from moving traffic by measuring target velocity changes over a certain range.
If the change is constant the returned signals represent a wind shear; if it's random "it's almost always traffic," says Mr. Weist.
He is pleased that the system wasn't fooled.
"If the system gives out false alarms, the pilot will eventually ignore it, and that would be dangerous," he says.
"With all the experience I have it took me three minutes to recognize that the spectra didn't represent a wind shear.
That's too long.
Our detection system did it in seconds," says Mr. Weist.
The final product for the cockpit will be a small rectangular box with a weather screen.
The pilot won't have to interpret any data, just listen to the warnings.
"It should be a no-brainer for the pilot," he says.
