R.H. Macy & Co., in an effort to keep peace with key creditors, is likely to agree to a shorter-than-expected extension of its exclusive right to file a bankruptcy reorganization plan.
Macy, operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection for more than two years, is seeking to avert a public battle with its most important creditors at a crucial court date in bankruptcy court in lower Manhattan next Tuesday.
Macy originally had filed for a six-month extension from the current expiration date of March 15, but is now expected to seek an extension in the exclusivity period that doesn't go beyond the end of July, according to people close to the retailer.
Macy is considering proposing a shorter exclusivity period, possible four months, in return for guarantees that secured creditors will not object to the extension.
In recent weeks, the retailer has faced rumblings from some creditors who privately objected to the length of the extension request.
Some have suggested they might formally object in filings with the bankruptcy court.
The retailer believes court approval of another extension is critical for rallying all the creditor groups to a reorganization plan that leaves Macy independent.
Macy is currently fending off Federated Department Stores Inc., a rival and now senior creditor that wants to merge the two department store chains.
Negotiations between Macy and attorneys for secured creditors heated up recently over reaching a compromise on the extension's length.
Macy's two largest creditors, Fidelity Investments and Federated, haven't said what they will do.
But people involved with the discussions say Fidelity is "ready for a compromise" and will likely not file an objection.
Macy declined to comment.
Once the exclusivity period expires, Federated or any other creditor could submit a competing reorganization plan.
Macy creditors -- including banks that hold senior debt secured by the retailer's stores, and owners of its unsecured bonds -- must approve any plan of reorganization before the company can emerge from bankruptcy court.
Macy is talking to its secured creditors because their $2.4 billion in claims are the first to be paid off in a reorganization plan, and most likely to object to a prolonged bankruptcy proceeding.
A Macy adviser talked with Dan Harmetz, the Fidelity mutual fund manager responsible for the Boston fund company's $490 million stake, about the extension earlier this week.
Mr. Harmetz would not comment on the talks.
Trust Co. of the West, another secured creditor, with about a $80 million stake, declined comment.
Federated's attorney, David Heiman of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, met yesterday with Macy executives.
"My expectation is that Federated will probably follow the creditors," who are expected to agree with a new, shorter extension period, said one person familiar with the talks.
"They don't want to get out in front of the other creditors."
Macy and creditors could reach a compromise before next week's court appearance before Judge Burton Lifland.
Reducing the six-month extension request wouldn't please Macy's unsecured creditors, who stand to get a better return on their claims the longer Macy remains under bankruptcy protection, which is expected to help the retailer's cash flow.
Robert Miller, an attorney with Berlack, Israels & Liberman, who represents holders of $1.3 billion in Macy bonds, said: "I would be very unhappy if Macy agreed to something that is significantly shorter than six months.
That wouldn't be a realistic amount of time in which to develop a consensual plan."
He added, "There is a lot of stuff to be done here."
