Aad Jacobs, chief executive officer of Internationale Nederlanden Group, sets clear targets for his managers.
"If you want to remain a member of this group, you have to achieve two things: 10% growth in earnings per year and a return on shareholders' equity of 11%," he states.
The penalty for failure?
"In 1993, we sold two operations that were not profitable enough," says Mr. Jacobs, a quiet-spoken 57-year-old veteran of the Dutch insurance business.
"Probably in 1994 we will sell more."
Born out of the merger in 1990 of the Netherlands' largest insurance company, Nationale-Nederlanden NV, and the third-largest banking group, NMB Postbank -- itself the product of a 1989 merger -- ING is one of the world's most prominent examples of bank-insurance, or Allfinanz.
The idea is simple: banks, because of their existing relationships with clients, are well-placed to sell insurance products, particularly savings products like life insurance.
Meld this, in ING's case, with an expansionary drive that has taken both arms of the company into central and eastern Europe, Asia and Latin America, and you have a spicy cocktail.
Though it's too early to say how successful it will be, ING's adventurous approach, combined with its hard-nosed business attitudes and attention to financial detail, is winning plaudits from investment analysts.
"They're moving in exactly the right direction," said Fokko Tuin, an analyst at Kempen & Co. in Amsterdam.
"There are definite signs that the combination of an insurance company and a bank creates value," said Richard Urwick, of Fox-Pitt Kelton in London.
As a group, ING broadly meets Mr. Jacobs's criteria.
For the first nine months of 1993, it reported net profit up 9.7% to 1.4 billion guilders ($725.3 million), with earnings almost evenly divided between insurance and banking.
For the whole of 1993, analysts are estimating net profit of more than two billion guilders, against a restated 1.8 billion guilders in 1992, giving a return on shareholders' equity of more than 11%.
Tim Dawson of Lehman Bros.
Securities in London is forecasting net profit of 2.3 billion guilders this year and 2.5 billion in 1995.
"They should be able to achieve something like 10% earnings growth over the next few years," he said.
To be sure, not everything has gone well.
Following heavy losses, ING pulled out of the British insurance market last year, selling its Life Association of Scotland Ltd. unit to Britannica Life and closing its Orion Insurance Co. PLC general insurance unit, with part sold to Guardian Royal Exchange PLC.
It also sold a U.S. unit, Wisconsin National Life Insurance Co, to Protective Life Corp. of Birmingham, Ala.
Currently, it is in the process of selling the life reinsurance portfolio of another problem subsidiary, Nederlandse Reassurantie Groep, to Employers Re, a unit of General Electric Co. of Fairfield, Conn.
As one of Europe's top 15 financial institutions in terms of market capitalization, however, ING as a merged operation wields more clout than its two components did on their own.
"We are doing more deals and bigger deals," Mr. Jacobs says.
As a recent example he cites ING's acquisition jointly with Hochtief AG of Germany of a Dutch construction company, Ballast Nedam BV, from British Aerospace PLC. at the end of last year.
The deal was negotiated in a few weeks following the collapse of plans for Ballast Nedam to merge with another company, he said, thanks to the combination of ING Bank's financial engineering skills and the equity investment capacity of ING's life insurance arm.
Until the merger with NMB Postbank, the former Nationale-Nederlanden executive confesses, "I was more in favor of a merger with another insurance company.
But my insurance colleagues convinced me that a merger with a bank was the thing.
Now, I am fully convinced that we took the right step."
On the life insurance front, around 8% of ING's total new domestic business comes from sales through the 400 branches of its Internationale Nederlanden Bank subsidiary, corresponding to the former NMB Bank network.
A further 2% comes from sales through the Postbank network that serves four million households through 2,100 post offices, and "we have only just started," says Mr. Jacobs.
In part, such moves are defensive.
Other Dutch banks are also setting up their own insurance operations.
By the end of the decade, however, ING hopes sales through its Dutch banking network will account for around 20% of its new life insurance business in the Netherlands, enabling it to boost its share of the Dutch market by a few percentage points.
Encouraged by its experience in the Netherlands, ING plans to forge similar bank-insurance links between its businesses internationally.
Last April, ING Sviluppo Finanziaria SpA, an Italian brokerage and financial services unit acquired in 1991, added life insurance to its products menu.
In December, ING bought a significant stake in a big east European banking institution, Poland's Bank Slaski.
Under plans for a new Polish life insurance venture, Slaski is expected to be a major outlet for ING savings products.
Internationally, ING is laying the foundations for growth with what it calls "green-fields" life insurance operations in countries such as Hungary and South Korea.
ING Bank, meanwhile, has a long-standing tradition of involvement in emerging markets.
In the early 1980s, what was then NMB Bank established itself as a leader in the secondary market for Latin American debt.
Following the fall of the Iron Curtain, ING Bank expanded into central and eastern Europe, concentrating on trade and project finance and services like payments transfers.
It now has operations in more than 40 countries.
