Dry goods were Phar-Mor's business, but some of its bosses had a taste for raisin cookies.
Schemers in the retailer's executive suite kept two sets of records, an official ledger that they sometimes manipulated with false entries, and another, nicknamed the "cookies," where they kept track of the false entries, called "raisins."
They would refer to their legerdemain as "putting raisins in the cookies."
It's been known that Phar-Mor Inc. had a scandal.
But few suspected it was quite this elaborate.
The once-soaring Midwestern discount retailer is operating in bankruptcy protection these days, after disclosing 18 months ago that it was the target of a fraud and embezzlement scheme by some of its top executives.
Amid three indictments and two guilty pleas by former executives, Phar-Mor has slimmed down and continued operating with its unconventional strategy of ultra-low prices on a jumble of mix-and-match goods often heaped to the ceiling.
But now it appears that losses to Phar-Mor stemming from the internal fraud totaled $1 billion -- double previous estimates.
In fact, Phar-Mor -- a private company that drew several big-name investors, that investment bankers were clamoring to take public and that Sam Walton once called the rival that most worried him -- never earned a penny of profit in the five years before it filed for Chapter 11 in August 1992.
Moreover, Chairman and co-founder David Shapira, who has portrayed himself as unaware of a fraud led by his nowindicted co-founder, was handed red-flag warnings of chicanery years before it came to light.
In one case, when his general counsel gave him a memo warning of inadequate financial controls and conflicts of interest involving a top executive and a director, Mr. Shapira told her to rip it up.
All in all, a picture emerges -- from interviews, indictments and now a court-ordered report -- of Phar-Mor as a thicket of conflicts of interest, corporate negligence and outright corruption.
For six years, some officials seemingly used the company as their personal plaything, falsifying financial ledgers and allegedly raiding company coffers.
Their excesses extended to hiring cheerleaders in hot pants to escort them around Las Vegas, according to allegations in the report by court-appointed examiner Jay Alix, who along with lawyers took depositions and subpoenaed documents for nearly a year.
Among other things, his two-volume report says that several directors, including Chairman Shapira, exercised stock options after their expiration date by signing backdated promissory notes.
Some of those shares they sold back to the company 11 months later at a substantial profit, according to the report, which was submitted yesterday to U.S. Bankruptcy Judge William T. Bodoh in Youngstown.
Chairman Shapira, asked if he didn't have reason to suspect fraud well before it was revealed in mid-1992, says that "all along we got consistent audits and unqualified financial statements from extremely qualified accountants.
There were numerous due diligences by some of the most sophisticated investors. . . .
Everyone came to the same conclusion that this was a sound company growing quickly."
He adds that "obviously this is a disaster, but I never saw anything, taken in context of all the positive information, that gave me the slightest hint."
The options maneuver, he says, "was properly done in consultation with lawyers and accountants. . . .
The fact is that what we were doing was investing money directly into Phar-Mor.
We had no idea whatsoever that we could sell the stock" back to the company later.
Phar-Mor's tailspin began 18 months ago when the growing retailer disclosed that it apparently was the target of fraud and embezzlement masterminded by the company's then president, Michael I. "Mickey" Monus, Phar-Mor's co-founder.
Mr. Monus has since been indicted on 129 federal counts, pleaded not guilty and faces trial Feb. 14 in Cleveland.
A founder of the now-defunct World Basketball League and onetime investor in the Colorado Rockies baseball team, he is accused, among other things, of diverting about $15 million from Phar-Mor, much of it to prop up the failing league.
Former Chief Financial Officer Patrick Finn and Jeffrey Walley, who was vice president of finance, are cooperating with authorities and have pleaded guilty to federal charges.
John D. Sammon, an assistant U.S. attorney in Cleveland, says that "the investigation is continuing."
Mr. Monus's position is that the fraud was committed "unbeknownst to him" by Mr. Finn and people who reported to Mr. Finn, says his attorney, Richard Goldberg.
"When Mr. Monus started finding irregularities, around June 1992, he commenced his own investigation," Mr. Goldberg says, and was conducting that probe when Mr. Shapira held a news conference to disclose the fraud and accused Mr. Monus of spearheading it.
Phar-Mor directors and officers face lawsuits, as does Giant Eagle Inc., a supermarket chain partly owned by Mr. Shapira and several directors.
Giant Eagle had a 38.3% stake in Phar-Mor when the discount chain filed for Chapter 11.
According to the Alix report, certain Phar-Mor executives used financial statements showing healthy margins and profits to obtain more than $1 billion of credit, as well as capital, for the company from investors that included Sears, Roebuck & Co., Westinghouse Electric Corp., mall developer Edward DeBartolo Sr. and Corporate Partners, an affiliate of Lazard Freres.
But Phar-Mor actually had $238 million in pretax losses in 1992 alone, according to the Alix report.
Shortly after disclosing the apparent fraud, Phar-Mor dismissed its auditors, Coopers & Lybrand.
Coopers's position is that it, too, was a target of the fraud.
It is suing Phar-Mor, and Phar-Mor is suing it.
Mr. Alix says that he "discovered nothing which indicates David Shapira knew of or participated in the fraud."
Still, while Phar-Mor wowed investors, Donald Robinson, a former Phar-Mor director, raised questions as long ago as 1988 about possible conflicts between Mickey Monus's duties at Phar-Mor and his interests in suppliers.
The board asked its outside financial adviser to look into it.
Mr. Shapira says this was "a red flag," and that the board asked Mr. Monus and his father, Nathan (who was a director), to disclose all outside interests and sell any that posed conflicts.
Only later, Mr. Shapira adds, did he learn that the Monuses had disclosed only some of their outside interests.
Another flag went up in November 1990.
A finance staffer who was apparently in on the fraud accidentally sent Mr. Shapira an accurate financial report showing deep losses.
According to federal indictments and the Alix report, Mr. Shapira summoned CFO Mr. Finn to Pittsburgh (where the chairman carried out his other role, as chief executive of Giant Eagle).
Mr. Finn told examiner Mr. Alix in a deposition that he convinced Mr. Shapira the report was only preliminary.
Mr. Shapira says he doesn't remember the incident, but "speaking hypothetically . . .
I got reports about Phar-Mor every day.
Say one day a report comes that is inconsistent with all the other information I've gotten.
I call up the chief financial officer and say what's the matter and he gives a reasonable explanation that I accept -- is that a flag?"
Then in June 1991, about a year before Mr. Shapira says he learned of the fraud, he got a memo from Phar-Mor General Counsel Charity Imbrie raising serious questions.
The memo, which Phar-Mor fought to keep away from the court-appointed examiner, was first made public yesterday as part of his report.
Ms. Imbrie's memo asked whether Phar-Mor had paid for improvements to a video studio part-owned by Mickey Monus and whether the retailer was using inadequate telephone equipment because of Nathan Monus's interest in a phone-leasing concern.
The memo questioned why Phar-Mor stores were selling sports clothes from the World Basketball League and the Colorado Rockies.
It expressed concern that the company was pressuring suppliers to sponsor the basketball league and that Phar-Mor employees were working on the Monuses' private ventures on company time.
Ms. Imbrie wrote that Phar-Mor lacked adequate controls on cash distribution and employee-business expenses and faced a constant cash-flow problem that had vendors furious about late payment.
Describing Mickey Monus's behavior at a real-estate convention in Las Vegas, Ms. Imbrie wrote: "He is putting together the All American Cheerleaders for the WBL.
Two of the cheerleaders served as our hostesses in Las Vegas.
They both wore hot pants and one sported an ankle tattoo."
She also suggested Phar-Mor was living beyond its means, questioning why the company was ordering "$30,000 worth of Nicole Miller ties . . . supposedly to be given away at Phar-Mor sporting events, such as the golf and tennis tournaments."
The memo's last page contains handwritten notes.
Ms. Imbrie told court examiner Mr. Alix that she wrote, after meeting with Mr. Shapira: "Met June 4, 1991 with David.
Gave him this memo.
He asked me to rip up all copies.
He ripped up the one I gave him.
Said he was aware of most of the items listed in this memo.
Said it was particularly important to rip it up now because of pending financing/stock sale with C.P." (C.P. meant Corporate Partners, the Lazard affiliate.)
Ms. Imbrie didn't destroy her copy of the memo.
Mr. Shapira says he told her to rip the memo up because "there are statements in it which are defamatory and blatantly untrue.
I don't think documents like that should be part of the corporate record" but "I told Charity to make sure conflicts were disclosed to Corporate Partners."
Corporate Partners declines to comment.
A person close to the investment fund says that it wasn't told about Monus outside interests detailed in the memo, and about sports apparel linked to Mr. Monus's teams being sold in Phar-Mor stores, among other things.
Had the Imbrie memo or its contents been disclosed to Corporate Partners, it wouldn't have invested in Phar-Mor, this person contends.
Mr. Shapira says he was told Phar-Mor hadn't paid for renovations to the Monus video studio.
He says there was nothing improper about using phone equipment from a leasing company partly owned by Nathan Monus, nor about selling sports clothes from the World Basketball League and the Colorado Rockies.
Regarding business expenses, "I thought that to have a system where all expenses were approved by the CFO was an extra safeguard. . . .
I do feel stupid about it now, that I was taken in by these guys."
As for Mr. Monus's behavior in Las Vegas, Mr. Shapira says, "I felt Mickey was a true merchandising genius, as did everybody else . . ., but some people felt he was obnoxious . . . and he had a very high lifestyle."
So, "do you fire him and risk all this shareholder value?"
Meanwhile, from 1986 or 1987 to 1992, Mickey Monus and some underlings overstated inventory levels and other assets, and understated liabilities and other expenses, according to the indictment and to Phar-Mor.
This enabled them to disguise shrinking profit margins and justify their claims to performance-based pay, while maintaining vital access to capital and credit markets and a chance at someday going public.
As Phar-Mor's finances deteriorated, they relied on payments from suppliers to hide losses.
Manufacturers ranging from Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. to Fuji Photo Film Co. to Gibson Greetings Inc. paid a total of $138 million from 1988 to 1992 in exchange for Phar-Mor's promise not to deal with rival brands, an unusual but not illegal practice.
In addition, Phar-Mor funds were diverted to help pay for the construction of Mickey Monus's showy Youngstown mansion and security needs -- a total of $180,925, according to the Alix report.
His father, then-director Nathan Monus, received $16,990 from Phar-Mor to pay for meals at the Palm Beach Country Club.
Nathan Monus's attorneys decline to comment until they have seen a copy of the Alix report.
The privately held Phar-Mor also bought from dozens of vendors linked to Phar-Mor executives and directors.
For instance, Phar-Mor bought costume jewelry from a Youngstown concern called Jewelry 90, which had purchased the jewelry from a New York wholesaler; Monus business associate David Karzmer owned Jewelry 90, and Nathan Monus was a paid consultant to the firm for two years, receiving $354,754 for just six months in 1992, the Alix report says.
If Phar-Mor had bought directly from the wholesaler instead of going through Jewelry 90, it would have saved $2.1 million, the report notes, adding that other directors didn't know about Mr. Monus's consulting arrangement with Jewelry 90 and with several other firms.
Mr. Shapira says he and the company didn't know about the Jewelry 90 situation until after the fraud was disclosed.
In another case, Phar-Mor sold a stake in a company part-owned by Mickey Monus -- Strouss Building Associates -- to a newly formed firm controlled by some Phar-Mor directors and shareholders.
Had Phar-Mor retained its investment in Strouss, it would have earned "a substantial return," the Alix report says.
"On the other hand . . . certain Phar-Mor shareholders and key executives have personally realized extraordinary returns on their investment in" Strouss Building Associates.
Mr. Shapira says it is common for companies to set up such arrangements to benefit shareholders.
The Alix report also describes how Mr. Shapira and four other directors exercised expired stock options in September 1990 "through the use of promissory notes executed after the expiration date, but dated prior to such date."
The following June, Corporate Partners invested $200 million in Phar-Mor, part of it earmarked for stock buybacks from insiders.
Several directors, including Mr. Shapira, tendered some shares in August.
Mr. Shapira, for instance, received $2.1 million for stock he cashed in, and Nathan Monus received $488,800 for stock he tendered at the time, the Alix report says.
Mr. Shapira says directors had been told by advisers that they could exercise the options, and that it was perfectly legal.
It took an outside shareholder, Mr. DeBartolo, to raise the questions that uncovered the fraud allegedly led by Mickey Monus.
Eighteen months ago, a Youngstown travel agent told Mr. DeBartolo that a Phar-Mor unit had made an $80,000 payment to cover a delinquent World Basketball League account, according to the Alix report.
Mr. DeBartolo passed that information to Daniel Shapira, a brother of David Shapira and outside counsel to Phar-Mor.
He told David, who began an internal investigation and soon fired Mickey Monus and Mr. Finn.
Mr. Monus was a friend as well as business partner to the Shapira brothers.
Dan and Mickey had traveled twice to Atlantic City, once to see Mike Tyson fight, another time to see Wrestlemania.
Another Shapira brother, Ralph, had helped Mr. Monus hire World Basketball League cheerleaders, according to the Alix report.
Once Mr. Monus was accused of fraud, however, he became persona non grata and was fired.
The Monus family owns about 2.9% of Phar-Mor.
Today Phar-Mor is striving to build a profitable business from the rubble, with creditors warring over whether it is healthy enough to emerge from bankruptcy.
The company, which has begun turning an operating profit, intends to submit a business plan to creditors in June and says it could emerge from bankruptcy as a public company as early as September.
Phar-Mor has slashed overhead and distribution costs and closed its weakest stores, leaving it with about half of the 300 or so it once had.
"We've improved our margins by three percentage points," says Antonio Alvarez, a turnaround expert who was named chief executive after the fraud came to light.
Stores look pretty much like in the prebankruptcy days, with pyramids of deeply discounted goods in a hybrid drugstore and mass-merchandise setting.
This worries some trade creditors, who wonder if it is wise to count on a strategy that apparently never really worked.
They also worry about the current harsh retailing environment, in which even some strong retailers like Rite-Aid are shuttering stores.
Meanwhile, Phar-Mor shareholders, executives and directors -- many of them relatives, old friends and business partners -- are at war with one another in the courts and at social gatherings in Pittsburgh and Youngstown.
The situation has created rifts in once tightknit families.
Cardiologist Richard Rosenbloom, for instance, named an uncle, Phar-Mor director Irwin Porter, in a class-action shareholder suit.
Dr. Rosenbloom, whose grandfather co-founded the Giant Eagle chain that formed Phar-Mor, also saw the value of his Giant Eagle share shrink as a result of Phar-Mor's collapse.
"When I first realized what happened," says Dr. Rosenbloom, "I went through incredible rage at having the people I loved involved in this.
Now I'm just left with sadness."
Monus was also on the board at that time.
