The Baby Bells are getting back to minding their own business now that the megadeal between Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. has fizzled.
The other six regional Bell telephone companies had looked on with a mix of horror and fascination as their former sibling set out to acquire the cable giant.
Coupled with TCI, Bell Atlantic would have been able to invade their home turfs on a wide scale, using TCI cable systems in some 43 states to offer rival phone service as well as new interactive services.
Now that the threat has eased, the other Baby Bells are focusing on pursuing smaller-scale regional strategies, putting existing partnerships to work, and hunting for new cable properties, which should be cheaper now that federal regulators have cut cable rates again.
Bell Atlantic and TCI scuttled their audacious deal last week after failing to reach a final price.
They were riven by a culture clash, the phone company's declining stock price and TCI's clouded outlook for cash flow.
The lesson of the collapse?
"Don't let hype run your business," said William F. Reddersen, a senior vice president of BellSouth Corp., which covers the Southeast.
Mr. Reddersen said BellSouth is close to finalizing the company's interactive strategy -- but don't look for the Atlanta-based Bell to blare out the details in the way Bell Atlantic favored.
"We've been preparing the network plan for interactive services for a long time," Mr. Reddersen said.
"But we see no reason why we should tell our competitors where we are going."
BellSouth faces the most pressing order of business.
Soon it must decide whether to proceed with a half-billion-dollar investment in Barry Diller's QVC Inc.
When QVC, which owns home-shopping channels, was trying to buy Paramount Communications Inc. out from under Viacom Inc., BellSouth had agreed to invest as much as $1.5 billion to back the bid.
Now the Baby Bell must figure out what a $500 million investment in QVC can really buy, in terms of a voice in Mr. Diller's affairs and assurances of how the money would be used.
QVC has lost the bidding for Paramount, and it lacks the pipeline into homes that a cable operator like TCI has.
BellSouth's option to become partners with QVC runs out in six months; the phone company also is looking at a host of other programming deals.
When Bell Atlantic's $20 billion-plus bid to acquire TCI was announced last October, it became the yardstick by which all other interactive plans were judged.
It made U S West Inc.'s $2.5 billion investment in Time Warner Inc.'s entertainment unit look almost paltry by comparison.
Ameritech Corp. was deemed shortsighted for a lack of interest in venturing beyond its Midwestern region.
Nynex Corp.'s move to invest $1.2 billion in Viacom, once deemed a daring move in Viacom's fight to buy Paramount, suddenly looked uninspired.
That all changed last week, and now the perception that the other Baby Bells' interactive strategies somehow weren't good enough, aggressive enough or smart enough has evaporated.
Sitting prettiest, perhaps, is U S West.
The Denver-based Baby Bell pursued a partnership with Time Warner rather than a massive merger, investing $2.5 billion for a 25% stake in its entertainment unit.
Now industry experts say that approach could become a model for other telephone-cable ventures.
"U S West is looking smarter than ever," says Andrei Jezierski of Booz-Allen & Hamilton Inc.
After the failure of the Bell Atlantic-TCI deal last week, U S West's chief executive officer, Richard McCormick, was inundated with interview requests, prompting him to quip that he is "now back to being the multimedia darling," said one executive.
In April, U S West and Time Warner will start a much-watched trial of new interactive services in Orlando, Fla.
They are also said to be interested in buying Cablevision Systems Corp., whose Long Island cable properties would mesh well with Time Warner's New York systems.
The ultimate goal: to offer U S West's phone services along cable lines in the nation's most lucrative business market.
Inside its 14-state region, U S West plans to build new multimedia networks in 20 cities over the next five years, starting with a $750 million effort in four markets.
For Nynex, the next move will be to get tangible benefits out of its alliance with Viacom, now that the Paramount fight has been won.
It has an exclusive window of one year or more in which to negotiate for the right to fashion new interactive features and phone services for Viacom cable systems.
It also must look for ways to tap into the programming assets of Paramount, which produces an array of prime-time TV fare and has a storehouse of old films and TV series.
Nynex also has set plans to build interactive networks across the Northeast, providing it gets some leeway with regulators.
But it hasn't yet specified when it will wire the New York market, where Nynex faces the biggest threat from other Baby Bells, particularly U S West.
Ameritech and Pacific Telesis Group had been dismissed as also-rans for their lack of big strategic partners and their stay-at-home strategies.
Now they seem a little wiser to some industry analysts.
PacTel has announced a $16 billion, seven-year blueprint for wiring the California market.
Ameritech, based in Chicago and serving the Midwest, also has plans for interactive services in its own region and has begun a new push for the right to enter the long-distance market, as well.
Southwestern Bell Corp., San Antonio, is forming a $4.9 billion partnership with Cox Enterprises Inc. that will exploit cable, telephone and interactive opportunities in each other's markets.
One likely target is Cox's home base of Atlanta, the backyard of BellSouth.
Bell Atlantic, meanwhile, is refocusing on building its in-region network, wiring 1.2 million homes by the end of next year.
James Cullen, president, said Philadelphia-based Bell Atlantic will go back to the drawing board today to begin mapping out a new interactive strategy outside of its service territory.
Instead of trying to link up with another big ally, Bell Atlantic may seek individual cable partners on a market-by-market basis -- an approach that will be far slower.
That patchwork approach, initially eschewed by Bell Atlantic, might be necessary to turn the interactive era into reality.
Indeed, some observers say the most important lesson of the Bell Atlantic debacle may be that big and bold isn't necessarily better, at least when it comes to forging interactive partnerships.
"There are market forces out there that no amount of CEO chemistry can fix," said Booz-Allen's Mr. Jezierski.
"It might be tempting to try to get together two visionaries from two companies who seem to know something you don't, but sometimes that just isn't enough."
Source: Kidder, Peabody & Co.
