Steven Hoffenberg, a debt collector who briefly enjoyed the spotlight during an ill-fated attempt to buy the New York Post last year, was charged yesterday with securities fraud and obstruction of justice.
In a complaint filed in federal court in Manhattan, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York charged Mr. Hoffenberg and others with fraudulently selling investors $450 million of securities in Towers Financial Corp., Mr. Hoffenberg's debt-collection business.
The complaint alleged that Mr. Hoffenberg and "his confederates" falsified Towers's financial records to make the company appear more attractive to potential investors.
And, the complaint continued, proceeds from the sale of those securities were used to repay earlier investors in the company.
Moreover, the complaint charged that Mr. Hoffenberg and others conspired to obstruct an investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission into Towers's fraudulent practices.
The SEC, which began investigating Towers in 1989, sued the company last year for defrauding investors.
But by the time the SEC caught up with Mr. Hoffenberg, Towers was nearly insolvent.
It filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection in March, effectively putting the SEC's action on hold, as court-appointed trustees began sorting through Towers's affairs.
Yesterday's complaint alleged that Mr. Hoffenberg, who had been cooperating with the government through a plea agreement, obstructed the SEC investigation by lying under oath in SEC depositions and by falsifying documents in response to SEC subpoenas.
Neither Mr. Hoffenberg nor his attorney Jeffrey Hoffman, a partner with the firm of Hoffman & Pollok, could be reached for comment.
But the SEC said it was gratified by the resurrection of its case.
"We're very happy with it," said Richard Walker, director of the SEC's Northeast regional office.
"The conduct charged in yesterday's complaint helped unmask one of the largest Ponzi schemes in history."
The charges alleged that Mr. Hoffenberg "materially breached" the terms of a plea arrangement with the government, thus voiding all terms of that agreement.
This allowed the government to use statements made by Mr. Hoffenberg during the time the plea agreement was in effect as evidence in yesterday's charges.
The U.S. Attorney's office declined to provide any details about the plea agreement or how Mr. Hoffenberg violated it.
In a deposition filed with the case by John Hess, a special agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Mr. Hess stated that "Hoffenberg and his confederates invested a substantial amount of time and money to ensure that the witnesses they controlled misled the SEC at every turn."
According to the deposition, Mr. Hoffenberg fabricated "computer runs of certain accounts receivables to substantiate the bogus accounting theories that Hoffenberg and his confederates adopted during the course of the SEC investigation to support their fraudulently prepared financial statements."
The U.S. Attorney's office said Mr. Hoffenberg was presented before a federal magistrate at a bail hearing yesterday.
He was released on a $1 million bond that was co-signed by Mary Hasho, who put up her house as collateral on the bond.
Ms. Hasho was identified in an earlier suit filed against Mr. Hoffenberg in U.S. Bankruptcy Court by the Towers trustees as Mr. Hoffenberg's "paramour and now expectant mother of his child" who at one time worked as a real-estate broker in Melville, N.Y.
Mr. Hoffenberg was ordered by the magistrate to surrender his passport and was forbidden to approach potential witnesses.
If convicted of the charges made in yesterday's complaint, Mr. Hoffenberg faces a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison, a $500,000 fine and three years of supervised release.
