To understand President Clinton's new budget, you need to know the LINGO (Lexicon of Incoherent Nomenclature by Government Officials).
BUR, or Bottom-Up Review, wasn't dreamed up in Las Vegas.
It's about cutting the military and making it fit into the post-Cold War world.
HIDTA, or High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas, is a program aimed against crack houses or dealers hanging out on the street.
ISTEA, pronounced "ice tea," has nothing to do with summer afternoons or rappers.
It stands for Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act, which has something to do with unsnarling traffic jams and tying tongues.
And in the Clinton budget, "investment" often stands for increased spending.
If the budget still gets you down, maybe you need a little LIFT, Leveraged Investments For Tomorrow, which subsidizes private investment in "distressed urban neighborhoods."
New acronyms and words "come along every so often, but it's the same old thing only it sounds a little zippier," says James Boren, head of INATAPROBU, the International Association of Professional Bureaucrats, a spoof group whose motto is "When in doubt, mumble."
The jargon, he says, is "all about trying to keep the people from figuring out what is going on in Washington."
The defense budget is especially filled with arcane code names, such as the Air Force's HAVE FLAG -- (will salute?).
The favorite designation for several Army programs seems to be TRACTOR.
An Army spokesman says he doesn't know what the names mean, so they can be whatever you want.
In a TRACTOR FIELD they make a TRACTOR HOLE in the TRACTOR DIRT for the TRACTOR ROSE.
But if a TRACTOR HIP doesn't watch enough MTV, it might have to take a TRACTOR HIKE to the TRACTOR CAGE.
Then again, the whole thing may be a TRACTOR FLOP.
On the list of proposed terminations is Chicken Little Follow-On, an Army program on tracking mobile missiles.
The budget also proposes to cut some employees.
But if you work for the government, don't worry.
It isn't firing people or laying them off.
It isn't even downsizing.
It is "right-sizing" 100,000 positions.
That should make everyone feel better.
