MCI Communications Corp. agreed to pay $1.3 billion for a 17% stake in wireless-service provider Nextel Communications Inc., challenging rival efforts by AT&T and the Baby Bells to create national cellular-telephone service.
MCI has scrambled to find a cellular partner ever since American Telephone & Telegraph Co. moved last year to acquire McCaw Cellular Communications Corp.
Now MCI hopes it can help Nextel, a far smaller rival, build a nationwide digital cellular network in two years -- one that conceivably could surpass even the reach of industry leader McCaw.
Nextel, which controls a federation of radio-dispatch services that it hopes to transform into full-fledged cellular-telephone service, hopes to use MCI's substantial marketing muscle to sell consumers on a nationwide service under the MCI brand name.
Together, they plan to offer each customer one telephone number at which they can be reached, no matter where they are on any given day.
They also plan to offer two-way paging services, voice mail, and other features, all to be delivered to a little radio phone that is lighter than today's cellular models.
"Nextel can be for MCI's wireless business what Friends & Family has been for its long-distance" operations, said Morgan O'Brien, chairman of Nextel.
But MCI's all-cash bet faces a daunting marketing and financial challenge.
MCI is paying top dollar for its stake -- more than double the price that another part owner, Comcast Corp., paid less than two years ago.
The long-distance marketer had rejected the chance to invest a mere $40 million to $50 million for a sizable stake in Nextel back in 1988.
Under its agreement announced yesterday, MCI is offering cash in four installments over four years for a 17% stake in Nextel.
The first payment for $800 million will come this year at a price of $36 a share for 22 million shares; yesterday, Nextel shares surged almost 15% to $44.25, up $5.625 on volume of 4.2 million shares in trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
MCI has agreed to buy during the next three years, five million shares annually at $37, $38 and $39 a share, respectively.
For its money, MCI joins an enviable coterie of partners in the tiny wireless company.
Comcast owns 17.5% of Nextel and is also a major operator of cellular-phone services.
Motorola Inc., the world's largest radio-equipment supplier, is close to obtaining a 20% stake in Nextel (through Nextel stock valued at about $1.8 billion) in return for the "specialized mobile radio" licenses it owns in numerous U.S. markets.
Another big Nextel holder is Japan's powerhouse telephone company Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp.
But MCI must tackle far bigger communications players by rebuilding a Nextel network that now serves as a two-way radio service for taxi drivers, plumbers and the like.
From its base in Rutherford, N.J., Nextel has been racing to acquire small specialized mobile radio operators and rebuild an aging two-way radio network into a nationwide digital phone and data system.
So far it offers new digital phone service in only one U.S. market: Los Angeles.
Together, the MCI-Nextel-Comcast axis plans to offer services to Nextel's licensed service regions covering 45 of the top 50 U.S. metropolitan markets and 180 million potential customers.
The team plans to build a national network -- at a cost of more than $2.5 billion -- to provide a state-of-the-art digital phone and data service that's clearer and more powerful than current cellular systems, most of which use older analog radio technology.
But that's also what AT&T-McCaw and the Bells want to do.
McCaw was an early wireless-phone pioneer and has the marketing savvy and technical smarts to smack MCI-Nextel before it gets started.
Moreover, the new MCI-Nextel team will have to contend with changes in the telecommunications industry.
Alliances between Baby Bells and cable companies were thrown for a loop last week when the megadeal between Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. crashed.
AT&T is still wading through regulatory waters to push through its $17.6 billion acquisition of McCaw.
And the outlook is uncertain for the massive auction of licenses for a rival new cellular technology known as PCS, or personal communications services.
The deal also is drawing fire from the Baby Bells, which have struggled to market a joint national cellular service of their own and that want to win the right to enter the long-distance market.
"I was amazed at the amount of puffery" in the MCI-Nextel announcement, said John Stupka, chairman and chief executive officer of Southwestern Bell Corp.'s cellular unit, adding that the Bells plan to market their cellular services under a single brand name by the end of this year.
But that would mostly use analog technology, which is less powerful and less efficient than digital.
Bell Atlantic put out a statement contending the MCI deal underscores the need for freeing the Bells from federal restraints on long-distance efforts.
Favoring MCI is the looser regulatory constraints it enjoys versus its larger rival, AT&T.
While AT&T still must jump through Justice Department and federal court hoops to complete its McCaw deal, MCI-Nextel can build now and market to customers craving pocket-phones right away.
Still, Nextel has a long way to go before it can challenge AT&T-McCaw and others in all markets.
Nextel was founded in 1987 by Mr. O'Brien, a former Federal Communications Commission lawyer, and Brian McCauley, a CPA and former chief financial officer of Millicom Inc.
They saw a chance to turn their FCC contacts and previously private-dispatch radio services into a new phone offering that could compete with cellular.
But when Messrs. O'Brien and McCauley approached MCI about five years ago for a $40 million to $50 million cash investment -- a deal that would have been worth hundreds of millions of dollars today -- MCI responded that wireless operations didn't fit in with its plans.
Indeed, MCI had just sold off its cellular business -- to McCaw.
Ironically, archrival AT&T now plans to use those operations as a club against MCI.
MCI re-entered talks to buy a Nextel stake two months ago at the urging of Ralph Roberts, Comcast's chairman, and his son, Brian, Comcast's president.
The two visited Bert C. Roberts Jr., (no relation), MCI's chairman, figuring that MCI's PCS plans were going nowhere and that MCI might reconsider an investment in their hot property.
Brian Roberts said yesterday that while Comcast's original $200 million investment in Nextel had grown into about $1.3 billion during the past 18 months, there was still plenty of room for MCI to draw a huge financial windfall from the company.
Convinced, MCI's Mr. Roberts gave his nod to the deal last week, and it was finally signed on Saturday.
MCI decided it was better to forgo waiting for the nebulous PCS future, particularly when its request for a nationwide PCS license was denied by the FCC.
While MCI still intends to bid for PCS licenses in territories where it needs wireless-radio coverage, the company no longer regards "PCS as the vehicle through which MCI will offer national services," Bert Roberts said.
"Nextel is that vehicle."
AT&T and McCaw, which expect to close their deal by this summer, will market under the omnipotent AT&T brand.
They also will be able to exploit AT&T's billion-dollar advertising budget and the technical smarts of Bell Laboratories -- assets that outstrip the size and strength of MCI's new partner.
