Japan's political woes are trashing Tokyo stocks.
The Nikkei Stock Average plummeted 954.19 points, or 4.9%, Monday to close at 18353.24.
In trading Tuesday, the Nikkei index rose 98.71 points, ending the morning session at 18451.95.
Monday's volume was estimated at 360 million shares, down from 463.22 million shares Friday.
Losers outnumbered gainers, 1,105 to 15.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, fell 70.85 points, or 4.5%, to 1499.06.
The last time the Nikkei had such a big single-day plunge was during the August 1991 coup in the Soviet Union.
But this time the problems are local: The surprise defeat of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's political-reform package has thrown domestic politics into disarray, and likely slows a much-needed Japanese government economic-stimulus program.
The biggest victim Monday was the market, which had been up about 11% so far this year on the belief that pessimism about Japan was overblown.
But nearly half the year's gains disappeared Monday, and some said the decline could continue for another 1,000 points if the political situation doesn't stabilize.
"We're a nation that takes a single direction," said Yukio Yoshida, deputy president of Bank of Tokyo Asset Management Ltd.
"Now it's pessimistic."
How investors are coping with the sudden gyrations of the Tokyo market seems to depend on their nationality.
Japanese were heavy sellers while foreign investors, who for many years have been underweighted in Japanese stocks, are still buying.
While foreigners may have been just as surprised as the Japanese by the political setbacks, they haven't given up hope that more economic spending will eventually lead to recovery and to healthier corporate earnings.
International investors were modest net buyers Monday.
The foreigners tend to favor Japanese high-technology stocks and electronics exporters like Sony Corp. and Hitachi Ltd., which benefited from a recent weakening of the yen.
"The foreign attitude is that this is a hiccup, but we'll get through it," said Kathy Matsui, strategist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities (Japan) Ltd.
"On our order sheets, the foreign bias is towards buying."
It's easier for foreigners to stomach the ride in Tokyo.
While Japanese investors have lost billions in their market during the past four years, foreigners have kept relatively little money in Japan.
International Funds Most foreign buying has come from big international funds, which last year made fortunes in the U.S., Europe and Asia's emerging markets.
Many institutional managers reason that it's time to allocate more money to Japan, which hasn't seen a sustained bull market in years.
International investors "made money everywhere else," said Edwin Merner, director of Schroder Investment Management (Japan) Ltd.
"Where else can they go except Japan?
By default, it's the only place left."
One danger, he notes, is that "a lot of foreigners are buying indiscriminately."
Others scoff at the whole asset-allocation idea, at least where Japan is concerned.
"Despite a world-wide bull market in bonds, you don't see people buying Russian Czarist bonds," said Andrew McGrath, strategist at Credit Suisse.
"This market is still overpriced."
If foreigners stay modestly bullish, it could be a powerful plus for the market, particularly if Japanese sellers restrain themselves during the next few days while the ruling party seeks common ground with the opposition.
Even with Monday's plunge, though, the allocators are showing strong results over the short term.
The Nikkei is still up 5.3% for the year, and 14% above November's low.
There's reason to think foreign investors will remain bullish.
"We have new money coming in, we're wary of other markets, and we're underweight in Japan," said Mr. Merner.
He thinks Japan has "some great opportunities," mostly in the smaller-capitalization stocks that his fund and others now favor.
While Mr. Merner and other foreign managers expect Japan to resume its dependable ways, voting through a big spending package soon, they also speak as veterans of one of the century's great bear markets.
"At the worst case, if there's an election, we're delayed a few weeks," said Paul Manson, a manager at Kleinwort Benson Investment Management.
"We've already had a number of years of disappointment.
This isn't the end of the world."
