President Clinton's political troubles sent bond prices tumbling.
Stock prices and the dollar followed suit.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average slid 22.79 points to 3830.62.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index lost 3.16 to 463.90, and the Nasdaq Composite Index sank 3.96 to 789.09.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond, which climbs as bond prices fall, jumped to 6.98% -- the highest level since May -- from 6.83% Wednesday.
Bond prices were pummeled by traders' increasing worries about the political controversies swirling around the president and first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The first family's troubles with the Whitewater affair came into the spotlight yesterday when administration aides began appearing before a federal grand jury.
Also, a congressional hearing into the Whitewater matter seemed more likely despite opposition by Special Counsel Robert Fiske.
The administration also was confronted with a call by 81 Republican House members for an investigation into Mrs. Clinton's holdings in an investment partnership that sold short several health-care stocks early last year.
"It seems something new about the administration's difficulties comes out every day," said Donald Maude, chief U.S. fixed-income strategist at Scotia McLeod (USA).
"That creates nervousness among traders in long-term bonds."
Mr. Maude said worries about the administration also were behind a sharp rise in gold prices as investors flock to gold in times of uncertainty.
Gold for April delivery jumped $8.10, to $388.20 an ounce.
Some traders said bonds also suffered because of a report by the Washingtonbased consultancy Johnson Smick International Inc. that raised new questions about the circumstances of the suicide of former White House attorney Vincent Foster.
The White House dismissed the report.
The Clinton administration's troubles come at a bad time for an already-jittery bond market.
Mr. Maude said the flow of funds into bonds has slowed considerably as mutual funds hold back making further commitments.
Commercial banks, which were heavy buyers last year, also have tightened purse strings in the past three months, Mr. Maude said.
He added that bond traders are apprehensive about next week's heavy docket of inflation reports.
It was the inflation component in last month's Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia survey of business activity that set off a bond rout.
The stock market also suffered from continuing uncertainty about interest rates.
"There's so much confusion about what the next Federal Reserve interestrate move is," said Elaine Garzarelli, Lehman Brothers' stock strategist, who recently changed her stance on the stock market to neutral from bullish.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index gained 0.32 to 115.49.
Stock prices fell.
Volume totaled 333.5 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 1,486 issues fell and 688 rose.
Bond prices plunged.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue sank more than 1 5/8, or more than $16.25 for each $1,000 face amount.
The dollar fell.
In late New York trading the currency was quoted at 1.6825 marks and 105.25 yen compared with 1.7025 marks and 105.80 yen Wednesday.
