But last month, Mrs. Phillips signed up for Oregon's new health plan for the poor, which extends coverage to 120,000 previously uninsured people by explicitly rationing the amount of care to all its members.
No longer will she have to resort to desperate remedies; she will receive free care for her ailments, which include heart disease, diabetes and a recent bout of vertigo.
"I have to stay well," she says, complaining of dizziness as she perches on an examining table at Oregon Health Sciences University hospital here.
"I've worked all my life, raised five children, and I'm now raising two grandchildren.
I hope this plan works."
After years of debate and two months of operation, the benefits -- and problems -- of the Oregon Health Plan are manifest.
Two clear benefits: Huge numbers of working poor are getting their first regular health care, and state sponsorship has so altered medical economics that public and private health plans are vying for poor patients rather than shunning them.
However, the plan is likely to raise an outcry as sick and dying patients find out that it excludes some treatments, such as "heroic" measures for incurable cancer.
The Oregon plan does allow some leeway, though, that could let doctors stretch the definitions of included treatments -- and possibly undermine the plan's fiscal foundation.
Doctors may be able to claim that chemotherapy for a terminal cancer patient, for example, isn't a heroic effort to cure but just intended to provide comfort and relieve pain, and so is covered.
The cutoff of terminal-stage treatment "will be ignored or obviated at every turn," predicts William Fletcher, a cancer surgeon.
But most Oregon residents are stoically accepting something most Americans seem reluctant to confront: the need to ration health care for the uninsured poor who otherwise might not get care.
Half a million people -- one-sixth of the state's population -- were uninsured.
So, after the federal government gave the green light, Oregon, despite its projected budget deficit, revamped its Medicaid program on Feb. 1 as a first step toward universal access to care.
But to finance high-priority items such as prenatal services, prescription drugs and dental care, Oregon's reformers had to sacrifice things deemed unnecessary, futile or cosmetic.
"It's a social experiment," admits Paul Kirk, a physician and member of the commission that drafted the Oregon Health Plan.
"We're anxious to see if it improves opportunities for care" and "if there's damage by not funding items at the bottom of the list."
Adds Rick Wopat, another physician: "The intent isn't to deprive people of life-lengthening benefits, but to make sure that the money is spent in the most effective way."
High on a hill overlooking Portland, Oregon Health Sciences University, which runs the state's only medical-school hospital, treats so many poor patients that it has had to write off nearly a third of its $370 million in annual billings.
Now, doctors here, hoping to stabilize patient care and hospital revenue, are signing up many of its indigent patients for the Oregon plan.
"I'll be able to offer patients more regular care, tests and medications, without worrying that it's going to bankrupt them," says Gregg Coodley, bustling around his internal-medicine clinic.
He gives Mrs. Phillips a prescription to steady her dizzy spells.
"Dr. Coodley wanted me to look into the new plan because my bills are astronomical and times have been tough," she says.
She used to pay bills out of pocket; now, she can get checkups free.
Also recently signed up is another of Dr. Coodley's patients, David Jones.
A utilities inspector, the stout, 41-year-old Mr. Jones quit work after his diabetes spiraled out of control and inflicted painful nerve damage.
Jobless and his unemployment benefits exhausted, Mr. Jones previously existed on "a false sense of security, running risks and thinking I'd never get sick," he says.
"It's stupid."
Now he is grateful for a chance to see Dr. Coodley and get his blood sugar stabilized.
In the Oregon Health Sciences University emergency room, or ER, Mohamud Daya, an ER specialist, likes the new plan because it is likely to stem the tide of poor and uninsured who use the ER as their doctor -- a costly, inefficient habit.
For example, John Renoud, an unemployed 27-year-old construction worker, recently made his third ER visit in six months, for a sprained ankle.
"I can't afford $60 medical bills, rent and food on the table," he says, grasping a health-plan application.
"But the lady at the hospital told me that with zero income, I qualify today."
Under the state's new plan, he will get regular, free therapy at the hospital's sports-medicine clinic and free checkups for his infant son.
In its first phase, the Oregon plan broadens Medicaid eligibility, puts patients into cost-conscious managed-care plans and limits care to a list of priority services.
Heading that list are obvious items such as lifesaving treatment for head injury, diabetes, appendicitis and tuberculosis.
Excluded are treatments for colds and flu, most plastic surgery and heroic treatments for the incurably ill.
Unlike conventional Medicaid, the new plan has simple eligibility rules.
Anyone earning at or below federal poverty level -- $991 a month for a family of three -- can qualify.
Members don't have to sell assets such as a house or car.
These liberal criteria are expected to swell Oregon's Medicaid rolls, now totaling 275,000, by adding 120,000 of the working poor.
Starting in 1995, the plan will also embrace the elderly, the disabled and foster children living in poverty.
In 1997 and 1998, the plan will be expanded to cover about 300,000 Oregonians who are working and uninsured -- that is, if state legislators vote to require an employer mandate, which is unpopular with small business here.
Through 1995, the plan is expected to cost $169 million, with the costs split 63% federal and 37% state.
To finance the state's share, Oregon lawmakers voted $21 million from the state general fund and levied a new cigarette tax of 10 cents a pack that is expected to yield $44 million.
Thanks to the tax, the state is offering doctors higher rates than did the old Medicaid plan, which paid about a third of their usual fees.
Now, Oregon pays managed-care plans a "capitation" rate, a monthly fee per patient, that is 50% to 60% of doctors' fees.
Such rates have proved a potent lure for doctors.
"Now, plans are beating down our doors," says Jean Thorne, who heads Oregon's Medicaid program.
Nearly two dozen prepaid plans -- including every health-maintenance organization in the state -- have signed up for the plan.
Oregon's poor have a new choice in health care, and health-care providers that once served distinct groups of people are battling for market share.
"There's this newfound altruism, now that money's around," grumbles Tim Goldfarb, director of the Oregon Health Services University hospital, which is proud of its tradition of indigent care.
"People who rejected the poor all those years are now competing with us for them.
There's a certain resentment."
That's "ludicrous," counters Robert Pallari, senior vice president of marketing for Legacy Health System , a Portland managed-care company.
He says Legacy already cares for many poor and expects to gain 20,000 more patients under the new plan.
The plan "is taking people who haven't been full participants and saying: `You can join any health plan.' . . .
It's the ultimate empowerment."
Annie Mockabee, manager of government programs for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Oregon, says phones at her company's HMO "have been ringing off the hook.
We're doing orientation for new members all over the state in five languages: Russian, Vietnamese, Hmong, Spanish and Cambodian."
She concedes that commercial HMOs must become more sensitive to needs of the poor, but scoffs at the idea of market-share wars.
"There are more than enough patients out there to go around," she says.
The debate that led to the new plan began in 1987, when a dying boy named Coby Howard was denied a bone-marrow transplant for leukemia under Oregon's old Medicaid program.
Today, the health plan includes bone-marrow transplants for leukemia and other costly transplants for curable patients, thanks to improved success rates.
Now, 20-month-old Kebrin Jones will be eligible for a new liver.
Jaundiced and fragile, Kebrin is suffering liver failure due to a viral infection contracted at birth.
Oregon will cover his operation, even though he must be flown to a pediatric transplant center in California.
Knowing the health plan covers the transplant "is a relief," says Lynetta Jones, Kebrin's grandmother.
She dons a mask to comfort the boy, who is inside an isolation unit bedecked with purple Teddy bears.
"Now," she says, "it's just a matter of finding him an organ donor."
Many doctors are so relieved to have their poor patients brought under the plan that they defend it against charges of rationing.
"It sounds trite, but health care was already being rationed.
If you were rich, you could get everything, and if you were poor, you couldn't get anything.
That was morally and ethically unacceptable to me," says Sig-Linda Jacobson, a Portland physician.
But for all the plan's benefits, its explicit rationing upsets doctors long trained to do everything possible for patients.
"The problem with old fee-for-service medicine was that the incentive was to do more," Dr. Coodley says.
"The problem with capitation -- or one monthly fee for managed care -- is that the incentive is to do less."
He also worries that profit-minded health plans may "cherry-pick" healthier people and leave the university the harder cases.
Specialists such as Alan Seyfer, a plastic surgeon, also are finding that the plan limits funding of their services for the poor.
"Children with certain birth defects aren't covered.
Breast reconstruction isn't covered," he says, even though mastectomy is "a mutilating operation."
With procedures being denied, Dr. Seyfer adds, "Patients will soon be upset with us."
In some cases, he says, "I'll just do it anyway and suck up the costs until they tell me to stop."
His department is treating several women who have had mastectomies with reconstructions and now are evidently sickened by silicone breast implants.
Some have requested surgical removal, solely for health reasons, and got the bureaucratic runaround.
It took Kathy Dubbs of Azalea, Ore., 6 1/2 weeks of persistent phone calls, and four reversed judgments by the health bureaucracy, before her inflamed and leaky breast implants were finally removed last week.
However, to some, the plan's most troubling aspect is its cutoff of heroic treatments -- long-shot procedures such as bone-marrow transplants or stays in the intensive-care unit for the incurably ill.
Such patients get "palliative" treatment: hospice programs, comfort care and pain remedies.
But some doctors are unsure where to draw the line.
"I take care of a lot of patients with HIV," says Dr. Coodley, who wonders when an AIDS patient should be classified as terminal.
"Is that the last two or three months?
Two to three months may mean a lot.
I'm a little worried."
In the case of cancer, the plan defines the transition as occurring when a patient's tumor has spread and the chance of surviving five years is less than 5%.
Paul Kirk, who helped draft the Oregon plan, says its implicit acceptance of death isn't heartless.
"Mortality isn't an option.
It's a reality," Dr. Kirk says.
He adds that new treatments can be added to the plan if doctors present compelling data.
"But we can't fiddle with the list every month," he warns.
"It throws the actuarial basis of the plan out the window."
Meanwhile, Matthew Brouns, an oncologist, predicts, "We'll run into battles with some patients who feel they're being rationed out of care."
One of his patients is Evelyn Davis of Springfield, Ore., whose dream of being cured of colon cancer was shattered in January when the tumor returned to invade her liver and lymph nodes.
Though doctors don't consider her curable, she would like as much time as possible with her five grandchildren.
"I suppose everything's got to have a limit," the 57-year-old babysitter says, "but I want to do as much as possible."
So, Dr. Brouns won't give her a hospice referral -- as the Oregon Health Plan presumably requires -- but instead another round of chemotherapy.
Though he fears the plan may deny reimbursement, he vows, "I'm going to treat her, no matter what."
