Even at their most creative, the dog-ate-my-homework crowd probably couldn't come up with the excuse El Paso, Texas, school officials are using to request rescheduling of a May 10 statewide test.
There's a solar eclipse that day.
"After an exciting morning of viewing the eclipse, it is doubtful that the afternoon would be an optimum time for our children to test" is how El Paso Independent School District Superintendent Stan Paz put it in a letter to the Texas Education Agency.
He asked the agency to reschedule the reading portion of the annual Texas Assessment of Academic Skills test to May 12.
Dr. Paz has science on his side.
On May 10, El Paso will be in the direct path of an annular solar eclipse, meaning the moon's shadow will almost block out the sun.
"It will look as though a big black dot is covering the sun," says John Peterson, who runs the school district's planetarium and brought the eclipse/test conflict to light.
The parents in El Paso back Dr. Paz.
"This is an educational experience well worth rescheduling the TAAS tests over," says Francie McIntosh, president of a parents association and mother of two children in El Paso schools.
"It's not like we planned the solar eclipse," she adds.
El Paso was last in the direct path of a solar eclipse in 1821, and won't be again until 2165, Mr. Peterson says.
So the rare eclipse just might rattle some of the third-to-eighth graders who have to be tested.
And low TAAS test scores would rattle their teachers.
Scores become public knowledge in Texas and chronically low ones can lead to a school's closing.
None of which seems to be swaying the TEA.
"The eclipse is only for about 7 1/2 minutes at 10:45," says TEA spokeswoman Della Mae Moore.
The TEA has offered to let the school district start the test early, break for the eclipse, then resume.
Or, the agency says, postpone the test until afternoon.
Though the TEA has been known to change test dates, Miss Moore says, "you have to look at the overall effects on test security" for the 2.2 million test takers.
While El Paso has a front-row seat, the eclipse will be evident all over the U.S.
"It's worth a month of regular astronomy instruction to see an eclipse," says Carolyn Sumners, director of astronomy at the Houston Museum of Natural Science.
In fact, she notes, a TAAS sample test last year had a question about the alignment of the earth, moon and sun in an eclipse.
