If the Nellie Fox Society had existed 25 years ago, getting Little Nell elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame would have been no problem.
If he had needed 14 votes on the 18-member Veterans Committee, as he will when the group meets on Feb. 25 in Tampa, Fla., he'd have had 20 or 30 votes for sure.
Da Boys woulda seen to it.
But things change, and not always for the better, so the prospect of another year in immortality limbo for the late, great Chicago White Sox second baseman is real.
Phil Rizzuto, the old New York Yankees shortstop who's now a broadcaster, is considered a serious threat to cop the single player spot the Veterans Committee can fill annually.
Joe Gordon, the former Yank second baseman; Roger Maris, who hit 61 home runs for the 1961 Yankees; and Gil Hodges, the Mets ex-manager, also are said to be in the running.
New Yorkers do not lack for clout in these matters.
And that's too bad, says Louis Hegeman, the Chicago lawyer who's a cofounder of the five-year-old Fox Society.
"Our cause is just," Hegeman declares.
"We'd hate to see Nellie denied again because of politics."
Given the makeup of Hegeman's group, that's a strange kind of complaint.
Fox Society rolls include Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley, former Illinois Gov. James Thompson, Cook County Sheriff Michael Sheahan and State's Attorney Jack O'Malley.
Also enough judges and lawyers to keep the world in knots for centuries.
They and several hundred others meet a couple of times a year, sitting around wearing 1950s-style White Sox caps, reminiscing about their city's Great South Side and plotting ways to elevate their hero.
"We do some lobbying with Veterans Committee members, but it's nothing like the old `machine' days," Hegeman says apologetically.
"Among other things, we're bipartisan, which can be a hindrance.
Hey, we even have a few Cubs fans!"
The motivating force behind the group is Jacob Nelson Fox, who was born in St. Thomas, Pa., on Christmas Day 1927 and died in Baltimore of cancer on Dec. 1, 1975.
He played big-league baseball for 19 seasons, 14 of them -- from 1950 through 1963 -- with the White Sox.
He was nicknamed Little Nell and The Mighty Mite even though, at 5-foot-10 and 160 pounds, he wasn't tiny.
Add the enormous chaw of tobacco he always carried in his cheek afield, and he weighed a few pounds more.
"Nellie was very strong," Hegeman volunteers.
"Guys who played with him say he used to turn off the locker-room showers as a prank.
He'd have the valve screwed so tight that the only one who could turn it back on was big Ted Kluszewski."
Fox was a 13-time participant in the All-Star Game, and the American League most valuable player in 1959, the last year the White Sox won the pennant.
He had 2,663 regular-season hits and a lifetime batting average of .288.
He struck out only 218 times in 9,223 official times at bat; that ratio of 42 to 1 is the third best in baseball history, trailing only that of Joe Sewell and Lloyd Waner.
Fox's lifetime fielding percentage was an outstanding .984.
He holds the record for most double plays by an American League second baseman.
Nine times he led the league in chances accepted, showing he didn't achieve his fielding mark by standing still.
He was a notable ironman, too, missing just 15 games over the 10 seasons from 1952 through 1961 and appearing in 798 consecutive games in one stretch.
That Nell was admired by his contemporaries was seen most strongly in the number of votes he received from sportswriters when those worthies considered him for Hall of Fame membership.
In 1985, the last year he could have been elected via that route, he received 295 votes, or 74.678% of those cast, just two shy of the required 75%.
No one else has come that close and not made it.
Many still maintain that Fox's vote percentage that year should have been rounded up so he could have been admitted.
"No matter how talented or well-intentioned the baseball writers might be, they should never be entrusted with the finer points of accounting," the Fox Society contends.
Fox's boosters are eager to compare their man's credentials with those of Rizzuto, whom they think Fox must beat to gain entry this year.
Fox, they note, played more years than Rizzuto (19 to 13), was a more frequent All-Star (13 times to five), had over 1,000 more hits and higher lifetime batting and fielding averages.
The most votes the ex-Yank ever got from the sportswriters was 149, or 51%, in 1976.
Sure, Rizzuto played in nine World Series to Fox's one, but it wasn't Nellie's fault that Phil had better teammates, they say.
The matter of mates rubs Fox's backers particularly, because some believe that one -- his old White Sox manager Al Lopez -- has kept Nellie from the Cooperstown, N.Y., shrine through faint praise.
Lopez's view is important because he's a Veterans Committee member, along with former officials and writers and ex-players Ted Williams, Stan Musial, Monte Irvin, Bill White, Yogi Berra and Pee Wee Reese.
Although he won't say how he has voted or will vote on the Fox candidacy ("it's a secret ballot, you know"), Lopez, now 85 years old and living near Tampa, professes to be perplexed by the charge.
"Nellie was a real good player for me; you can't blame the Chicago people for wanting him in," he says.
"Of course I had other good players in Chicago, like Luis Aparicio, Early Wynn and Sherm Lollar.
And don't forget Jimmy Landis.
He was good, too."
So maybe Nellie won't make it this year, even though by all rights he should.
That would not end the battle.
"We are in this for the long haul," vows Hegeman.
"If you aren't patient, you aren't a White Sox fan."
And if Fox is elected, the society won't lack for future causes.
"Let me tell you about Billy Pierce," he says.
"Now, there was a really great pitcher who everybody underrates . . ."
