Hollywood movie studios scrambled to take advantage of the hype surrounding yesterday's Academy Award nominations, which will probably boost all five best-picture nominees at the box office.
Typically, a number of the nominated films leave theaters, or are released on videocassette, by the time the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences announces the candidates.
As a result, box offices generally can't benefit from the endorsement.
This year, however, four of the nominated films are still in theaters; the fifth, "The Fugitive," is being rereleased nationwide at 1,000 theaters Friday.
Universal's "Schindler's List" was the big winner, capturing 12 nominations that included nods for best picture and for its director, Steven Spielberg.
The Holocaust epic would be expected to show its biggest box-office increase following the Oscar ceremony on March 21 if, as many executives expect, it wins the Oscar.
The film so far has grossed about $30 million.
Another Universal movie, "In the Name of the Father," is expected to benefit more immediately.
The drama about the Irish Republican Army was the big surprise at the nominations ceremony here, garnering seven nominations, including best picture.
The film, which has taken in only $6.4 million since its opening Dec. 29, is playing at just 176 theaters.
Armed with a new ad campaign heralding the Academy's tribute, Universal will expand the movie's run Friday to about 500 theaters.
Universal, a unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s MCA, won 23 nominations this year.
Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Bros. hopes to squeeze a few more dollars out of best-picture nominee "The Fugitive" this weekend.
Hollywood executives speculate that while the Harrison Ford action film doesn't have much of a shot at winning the main prize, they believe Warner can sell a large chunk of tickets in its rerelease anyway.
The other best-picture nominees are Columbia Pictures' "The Remains of the Day," and Miramax Films' "The Piano."
Those films, which each won eight nominations, have been in theaters for more than 10 weeks but are believed to have strong box-office potential.
Miramax is a unit of Walt Disney Co.
"Remains," which also captured nominations for Anthony Hopkins and Emma Thompson, played this past weekend at 174 theaters; on Friday, the film will move to about 250 theaters, mostly in major cities.
Industry executives speculate that the movie, which has taken in about $20 million, could gross an additional $5 million to $10 million.
Columbia is a unit of Sony Corp.'s Sony Pictures Entertainment, which said its three separate distribution companies won a total of 31 nominations.
"The Piano," which also won a nomination for director Jane Campion, will jump to as many as 700 theaters this weekend from the current 400 screens.
The film will increase its showing to a total of about 1,000 theaters Feb. 18.
Miramax Co-Chairman Harvey Weinstein, acknowledging that "Schindler's List" is the favorite, nonetheless predicted "a major upset" in the best picture or best director category.
Mr. Weinstein estimated that "The Piano," which has grossed $26 million, will easily reach a take of $40 million before the awards ceremony.
Disney plans to rerelease "What's Love Got to Do With It" to reflect its winning nominations for stars Angela Bassett and Laurence Fishburne.
And many more audiences will be able to see young actor Leonardo DiCaprio in Paramount Pictures' "What's Eating Gilbert Grape" when that movie expands to around 600 theaters on March 4.
Mr. DiCaprio was nominated for best supporting actor.
