Kemper Corp.
Chairman David Mathis has spent two years reshaping and improving the company.
But it took GE Capital Corp. just minutes to boost Kemper's flagging stock price 50%.
Facing a $55-a-share offer from GE Capital, Mr. Mathis now must convince Kemper shareholders that he can serve them better in the future than the General Electric Co. unit already has.
That might be impossible.
"They can't just say no and expect GE to walk away," said Martin Sass, president of M.D. Sass Investors Service, a big Kemper shareholder.
Nevertheless, "Just Say No" is about all Kemper has done so far in its effort to escape GE Capital's clutches.
Many analysts argue that Kemper's bid to remain independent is hopeless.
With its triple-A credit rating and a mountain of cash, they believe GE is simply too mighty to be defeated.
The best Kemper can hope for, they say, is to stall in the hopes that GE and its aggressive chairman, John Welch, will simply go away rather than continue to press their $2.2 billion bid.
The one thing that might allow Kemper to stall like that is GE's apparent reluctance to make an outright hostile tender offer for Kemper shares.
GE has repeated time and again that it would never do a hostile takeover, and an outright tender offer for Kemper would be a very public breach of that pledge.
"If GE did that, every chief executive who had lunch with Jack Welch would have to worry about GE doing a hostile deal," said one investment banker.
But GE and Jack Welch are nothing if not tenacious.
The next test in the battle of wills is likely to come at Kemper's shareholder meeting May 11.
Within a week, GE is expected to announce a proxy fight in which it is expected to propose a shareholder resolution demanding Kemper put itself up for sale.
It could also try to get its own people elected to Kemper's board.
For Kemper to win a proxy fight, it would have to convince shareholders that they could earn more money by sticking with management.
And shareholders say they're willing to listen to whatever arguments Kemper can make.
"We don't feel we're obliged to go with the `highest bid,'" said Luther Jones, manager of corporate affairs for the Florida State Board of Administration, which owns 457,000 shares.
"We are interested in long-term value."
Indeed, Goldman, Sachs & Co. is preparing a study to show Kemper could do just as well on its own.
The thrust of Kemper's case would be what Mr. Mathis has accomplished at the company in the past two years.
By selling its reinsurance firm and building large reserves against bad real-estate investments, the 56-year-old Mr. Mathis has made the company's earnings less volatile and cleaned up its balance sheet.
But there are still lingering concerns about the $1.7 billion real-estate portfolio.
There is also the uncertainty about continuing liabilities at Kemper Securities Inc., its brokerage unit, which has been plagued by lawsuits.
In addition to outlining a plan for growth, Kemper must explain if it has fully overcome its past.
Whether a strategic vision speaks louder than GE's cash is doubtful, analysts say.
"Investors aren't interested in what you will do two years from now," said one insurance stock analyst.
Before Kemper can convince Mr. Jones, the executive with the Florida pension fund, the company will have to talk a lot more about shareholder value.
"GE's bid, while fairly low, did put in place a broad outline of a strategic rationale for the combination as well as putting on the table the issue of shareholder value," he says.
"Kemper talked about strategic issues but not so much shareholder value.
That has to be focused on a little bit more."
People close to GE suggest Kemper management might be more concerned about shareholder value if they owned more shares.
Directors and top executives owned 646,947 shares out of about 32.9 million common shares, according to Kemper's most recent proxy statement.
GE owns 100 shares, which it bought after announcing its bid on March 14.
AT&T vs.
For some investors and Wall Street deal-makers, the takeover battle bears similarities to American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s battle for NCR Corp.
In late 1990, AT&T made an unsolicited $6.1 billion bid for NCR, which was rejected by that company's board.
AT&T then began a proxy battle trying to unseat four directors.
It also proposed a special shareholder meeting in which it recommended an alternative list of directors.
Boards and managements are aghast at the prospects of being ousted by shareholders.
After fighting tooth and nail for nearly four months, NCR succumbed to pressure four days before its shareholder meeting and opened up discussions with AT&T.
It eventually sold for a sweetened offer of $7.48 billion.
For NCR shareholders, the company's "Just Say No" defense served a purpose, coaxing AT&T to raise its bid.
NCR was able to extract an extra $20 a share for shareholders, or about $1.36 billion.
But the strategy couldn't block a well-financed bidder who was willing to put the time and resources into the acquisition.
Kemper might also try to persuade regulators to block or at least delay any takeover.
But regulators might not be the staunchest allies the company could have.
Their chief concern is insurance-company solvency, and a bid from a rock-solid suitor like GE would look awfully attractive to regulators considering Kemper's lower credit rating.
"I think regulators would welcome GE with open arms," said one investment banker.
"They might view this as salvation."
Yet another wild card is the role played by shareholders in Kemper's mutual funds.
Kemper has contracts to manage the funds, and mutual-fund shareholders could vote to end those contracts if they don't like GE.
But, given that GE and its pension fund have a solid track record for managing money, fund shareholders, like regulators, might view GE as an improvement.
Kemper's funds have performed well over the long term but have lagged recently, according to a report by Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst Allen Nadler.
All of that makes it increasing likely that the only way Kemper will be able to escape GE is by falling into the arms of a "white knight," a company or an investor willing to top GE's offer.
Trouble is, as long as Kemper denies it is for sale, it can't seek such a rescuer.
And if it does concede that it is for sale, then it would be obligated to take the highest offer.
That doesn't stop investment bankers from actively soliciting would-be acquirers to take on GE in a fight over Kemper, and a number are known to be hard at work shopping Kemper around.
"Wall Street is now doing Kemper's work for them," another investment banker said.
But there aren't that many companies ready, willing and able to buy Kemper.
American International Group Inc. and American General Corp., as well as insurance investor John Byrne, have been mentioned as capable, but unlikely to want to enter a bidding contest.
Several European insurance companies are interested in expanding their U.S. presence, but observers say it would be tough for Kemper to convince shareholders that a European company could do more for them than GE.
What it boils down to, said James Ramenda, an insurance analyst at Northington Partners, is that "GE is as strong a partner as you are going to get.
If you're not happy with GE, who would you be happy with?"
