Two leading Republican senators on health issues said health-care reform legislation should provide for universal insurance coverage.
One week after President Clinton threatened to veto any health-care bill that "does not guarantee every American private health insurance that can never be taken away," Sens. John Chafee of Rhode Island and Don Nickles of Oklahoma both said they think it is important to guarantee every American at least some health coverage.
"Our bill provides for universal coverage.
I think that's an absolute essential," Sen. Chafee said during an American Hospital Association convention.
Sen. Nickles added that his bill "says everyone in America should have at least catastrophic coverage, and that is a giant step in the right direction."
The two GOP senators, authors of two of the principal GOP health bills in the Senate, have endorsed universal coverage in the past.
But their comments took on heightened significance in the wake of the president's veto threat.
Their comments show that the administration still could have some Republican backing for a universal-coverage bill.
A number of Republicans have suggested in recent days that the U.S. doesn't face a health-care crisis and needs only small legislative steps to fix the medical system.
Despite the president's insistence on universal coverage, administration officials indicated yesterday that the administration may be willing to compromise on when to achieve that goal.
A top administration official said the White House is willing to consider extending the timetable for achieving universal coverage beyond the 1998 deadline it has proposed.
That could bring the White House trouble from the left.
Rep. James McDermott (D., Wash.), author of a bill that would establish a government-run, taxpayer-financed national health-insurance system, told reporters at a separate luncheon that straying much beyond 1998 would be unacceptable.
Separately, the nation's governors called on Mr. Clinton and Congress to pass health-care reform this year, and they asked that it include a series of changes that have bipartisan support among the state chief executives.
At the winter meeting of the National Governors' Association here, the governors called for legislation that includes insurance reform, state-organized insurance purchasing cooperatives, a "core" benefits package, full tax-deductibility for health-care premiums, subsidies for the poor, and malpractice and liability reform.
The governors also reported that, in a closed-door meeting at the White House, Mr. Clinton reiterated his willingness to compromise on both his plan's provision to create mandatory health-insurance alliances and its call for national health-care budgets.
But Republican Gov. Carroll Campbell of South Carolina reported that the White House didn't appear similarly inclined to be flexible on its plan to require employers to pay the bulk of employees' health benefits.
Gov. Campbell said the so-called employer mandate will be a major stumbling block with the GOP.
Gerald F. Seib contributed to this article.
