Philip Morris Cos. said its key Marlboro cigarette brand has recouped most of the market share lost to discounted brands in recent years.
That turnaround should mean "a return to profit growth in 1994" for the company's U.S. tobacco business, Geoffrey C. Bible, executive vice president of world-wide tobacco, told securities analysts here yesterday.
Last April the company slashed prices on Marlboro to halt the brand's market-share deterioration.
Since then the brand's share has increased 4.7 points, to 26.8% of the domestic market, Mr. Bible said.
"Our other premium brands have also seen steady share gains since last summer's price reduction, recovering some of the share they lost to discount."
He said the Basic brand is now the leading discount brand, with a 4.6 share.
As for Marlboro, Mr. Bible said Philip Morris estimates that the brand has "recaptured almost 90% of the business it had lost to discount over the past three years."
Much of that gain has come from smokers who switched from discount cigarettes back to Marlboro, he said.
"We anticipate, now that Marlboro's price is lower and it has recaptured smokers lost to discount, that the brand will return to its previous growth trend," Mr. Bible said at the conference, which was closed to the news media.
The company provided The Wall Street Journal a text of his remarks.
Mr. Bible said that overseas Philip Morris believes it can continue to grow volume, share and profits in its established markets while "simultaneously investing for long-term growth in newer markets."
Cash flow from international business exceeded $2.2 billion last year, he said.
In Japan, where the company recently introduced a brand called Next, the low-tar cigarette has captured more than a 1% market share.
Mr. Bible said that Latin America is the company's fastest-growing region in terms of profit from tobacco products, with a 29% share.
The executive also reiterated that the entire U.S. tobacco industry will focus on defeating "any increase in the federal excise tax on cigarettes" that might come out of federal health-care reform.
