Tonya gets to skate and Tommy Moe wins the downhill!
It doesn't get much better than that, does it?
OK, that's a bad question.
Let me put it this way: How 'bout that Tommy Moe?
No Yank groans for that one.
On a cold, bright day that will light the oft-dim annals of U.S. skiing, the sunny Mr. Moe, a native of Palmer, Alaska, rocketed down "White Mountain" -- named for the deposit of pale quartzite near its peak -- to win the first and, by many estimations, premier event on the alpine skiing schedule in these Winter Olympics.
Mr. Moe's victory was an upset by most expectations; he'd never before won a world-class event and only last winter was second team on a not-highly rated American squad.
Among them was his own: "My goal was a top-six finish," the soon-to-be-24-year-old admitted.
Another was that of most of the 38,000 people who crowded this fledgling ski area north of Lillehammer in hopes of seeing a triumph by the Norwegian hero, Kjetil Andre Aamodt.
At 22, Mr. Aamodt is younger than Mr. Moe, but was a certified ace as a result of his gold and bronze medals, in the giant slalom and downhill-slalom-hybrid Super G, at the Albertville Olympics of two years ago.
This time, the seventh skier out of the gate, he zipped into first place as his countrymen waved their flags and clanged their cowbells.
Their elation was still at full volume when Mr. Moe, the next out, started his run.
It quieted as his fractional times close to Mr. Aamodt's were announced, and ended in a kind of collective gasp when the American's clocking of 1:45.75 edged out their man.
"I was surprised when I looked up and saw I'd taken first, and wasn't sure I'd stay there.
My first thought was that a medal was a possibility," Mr. Moe allowed.
But he added, "I always knew I could ski fast and that it was just a matter of time before I'd win."
As often is the case in big-time international skiing, the amount of time that mattered here was small -- 0.04 second separated Mr. Moe from Mr. Aamodt, with the Canadian Ed Podivinsky an additional 0.08 second back in third.
A wiggle here and a wobble there over the 2,936-meter run made the difference.
"I think I lost 0.01 second at the top part, 0.02 in the middle, and 0.01 at the bottom," Mr. Aamodt smiled.
That's a ski joke.
A bigger difference was in the nationalities of the top three finishers.
This was the first time that the countries of the Alps -- Austria, Switzerland, France and Italy -- all were denied an Olympic men's downhill medal.
Usually, they win all three.
Given Messrs. Moe and Podivinsky's North American residence, and Mr. Aamodt's colloquial mastery of that continent's predominant tongue, the outcome might be dubbed "the triumph of the English-speaking peoples."
The only previous U.S. medal in 12 Olympic downhills was Bill Johnson's gold in 1984 at Sarajevo.
The Kvitfjell course was praised by just about all the competitors for its fairness, although their definition of what that meant might differ from yours and mine; downhill skiers, after all, are people who fling themselves into the abyss with the full expectation of coming out the other side.
"It was great: There were turns at the top and jumps in the middle, and it was fast at the end," Mr. Aamodt explained.
So there.
The course also was safe, which everyone can appeciate; just four of yesterday's 55 starters failed to finish, and all of those walked away from their falls.
Apparently, it's a layout that can be enjoyed on more than one level, as the movie critics might say.
Last year, just after the run was complete, Norway's dignified Queen Sonya, then 55 years old, negotiated it not once but thrice.
Her times were not announced, however.
For Mr. Moe, a tightly wound 5-foot-10, the victory capped an athletic career that's been remarkable for its many ups and downs over a relatively brief period.
He was something of a prodigy in his sport, gaining a sixth-place finish in the U.S. national championships before the age of 16 and winning three medals -- two of them gold -- over four World Junior competitions.
He also was kicked off a couple of national teams as a youth, and last season never placed higher than 13th in a World Cup race.
He ended the year strongly with a fifth place in the downhill at the World Championships in Morioka, Japan, and in December copped a bronze medal in a Super G at Val D'Isere in France.
But he still came here as the No. 2 American behind the veteran A.J. Kitt, who was to wind up 17th.
In answer to a direct question, Mr. Moe confessed to "getting involved with certain things," i.e., drugs, and having had some "rough" years as an adolescent.
But he said he never considered himself a drug user, "just a normal American kid," and, besides, that was in the past.
He credited his sudden surge to a willingness to follow coaches' advice and an appreciation of the value of rest in training.
After this past Christmas, he removed himself from the ice-and-snow circuit for an eight-day trip to the Canary Islands where, among other things, "I stuck my feet in the warm sand."
Shelving some expectations helped, too.
"Today, I tried not to be overwhelmed by the fact this was a Big Olympic Downhill," he said.
"Instead of thinking medal, I tried to keep my mind on the simple parts of skiing -- keeping my hands out in front of me and staying forward.
Before I knew it, I was at the bottom."
Time sure flies when you're having fun.
