Caryn Brooks got a rude welcome when she signed on to her first on-line service in January.
After just a few minutes in an America Online conference on literature, male subscribers flashed her messages like "Are you hot?" and "What do you look like?"
"I wrote frantically to a friend, and he said, `That happens because you have a woman's name,'" says Ms. Brooks, a Berkeley, Calif., communications consultant for companies that are restructuring.
Women are finding that being female in the ether can be like wearing a bikini to a monster truck show.
Searching for conversation on literature and politics, they instead find themselves fending off men who assume they are airheads or bombard them with requests for phone sex.
When they aren't being attacked for their gender, women must tiptoe delicately through "flame" wars, in which men -- and some women -- attack and even threaten to kill each other over politics or poor grammar.
The flames are meant to be fun, but they can escalate quickly as mostly male subscribers, protected by anonymous names like "Mr. Happy" and "Bozo," take advantage of the chance to vent without fear of retribution.
"It's like warfare.
Instead of having to face your enemy and pull a sword, you coordinate cross hairs on your bomb site," says Terry Winograd, a board member of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility.
"You lose restraint."
To find a kinder, gentler forum for swapping ideas, more women are signing on to on-line services designed especially for them.
Women's Wire of San Francisco, which started in January, says at least 90% of its 700 subscribers are female, compared with industry estimates of just 10% on most on-line services.
(If women who use accounts of male friends are counted, about 35% of on-line users are women, according to market research firm LINK Resources, N.Y.)
Another service, Echo Communications Group Inc.'s "Echo" (East Coast Hang Out) of New York, says about 40% of its more than 2,000 subscribers are female.
In addition to bulletin boards on general topics like politics and culture, Echo offers three conferences for women only, one for men only, one for those under age 30, and one for those over age 40.
The main women-only conference, Women in Telecommunications, is Echo's sixth most popular bulletin board, while the men's conference rates somewhere below the top 10.
Technically, either sex can "crossdress" by assuming a name of the opposite sex.
But there are hurdles.
To get into a women-only conference on Echo, a subscriber sends e-mail to the host, Stacy Horn, who is also Echo's founder and president.
Ms. Horn phones to verify gender and then adds the subscriber to the access list.
She concedes that she doesn't do voice-verification for men in the men's conference but says she figures that men are more likely to try to crash the women's conferences.
The women-only bulletin boards offer a place to discuss such sensitive topics as breast cancer, abortion, pregnancy, daycare and working motherhood without fear of male subscribers cruising through and typing in offensive salvos.
Women can also sign on to conferences hosted by professionals to get advice on everything from medical problems to car repair.
And Women's Wire offers documents related to women's health issues, and daily news articles on women's issues.
Some women use the services when no friend is around to take a phone call.
Erika Lockhart of San Francisco recently signed on to a Women's Wire conversation about bad days, and told about an unpleasant conversation she'd just had with a roommate she had evicted.
"I wouldn't call up a friend to tell them something like that" during the day, "because if they're at work, they're working," Ms. Lockhart says.
"If I post it, it's out there.
You talk to a whole bunch of people at once that way."
Other women use the services for emotional support during trying experiences like childbirth.
Betsy Richter, the manager of on-line services for New York's Village Voice, announced her first pregnancy in the women's only section of Echo and posted an announcement that her water had broken before she headed to the hospital.
That night, her husband logged in with her password to post the baby's size and weight.
For the next 12 weeks, Ms. Richter stayed home with the baby, recovering from a Caesarean section.
Missing social contact with colleagues at work, she logged on for support.
The women of Echo tapped in their own birth experiences and answered her questions about diaper rash.
Ms. Richter says she wouldn't have tried to have this discussion in the public section of Echo.
"It would have degenerated into snickering," she says.
A television producer in New York has used the women's only section of Echo to discuss an affair she's having.
She figured her friends would probably tell her only what she wanted to hear, but the women on Echo might be more blunt.
They were, she says, but she didn't follow their advice.
If anything, women complain that online services for women are too nice.
At Echo, "it took a long time for anyone to ever disagree with each other.
There was all this niceness," the New York TV producer says.
That is partly a function of the services' small size and their geography.
Echo and Women's Wire members are concentrated in regions (New York and San Francisco, respectively) that allow them to get together for face-to-face socials.
Once they've seen each other, members are less likely to flame each other on-line.
The women who run the services also try to discourage offensive behavior, like personal attacks or unwanted sexual talk.
Echo's Ms. Horn says she sometimes sends private messages to people after receiving several complaints about them.
"It's usually a misunderstanding," she says.
But three times in three years, she has kicked men off Echo for persisting in offensive behavior, such as sending harassing e-mail to individual subscribers.
Men who use Echo's "MO," or men-only, bulletin board say they're not sexist; they just like having their own space.
Chris Weller, an unemployed software programmer who met his girlfriend of six months on Echo, says the conference is "fairly close to hanging out at a bar."
The men talk about guns, their fathers, women and the proper etiquette for asking an "Echoid" woman out on a date.
Generally, he says, they're "very respectful" toward women.
"But at the same time, we don't have to be so PC when we speak."
Mr. Weller adds that he once signed on to America Online under a woman's name for fun, and was bombarded with men asking what he looked like.
"It was a real eye opener," he says.
Men who sign on to women's on-line services say they object to the locker-room atmosphere on mainstream services.
Maxwell Hoffman says he signed on to Women's Wire because he felt that women's voices were absent on the Internet.
The service "is a good place to be reminded of what women go through," he wrote in a recent posting.
