HUBBELL RESIGNED abruptly from his senior Justice Department post.
Associate Attorney General Hubbell, locked in a billing feud with his former law firm, resigned.
His departure leaves the leadership of the Justice Department reeling from its second top-level resignation in recent weeks.
While Hubbell's decision to leave stemmed from the billing dispute with the Rose Law Firm, his announcement drew attention to the Whitewater controversy.
Hubbell has come under fire for his representation of the RTC after it took over Madison Guaranty.
Hubbell and the Rose Law Firm represented the RTC in a suit against Madison's auditor.
China has transferred advanced missile technology to North Korea, according to U.S. intelligence reports, posing another stumbling block for renewal of China's trade status.
The reports contend that the diameter of a new long-range missile being developed by the North Koreans is evidence of China's assistance.
Israel pressed its crackdown against Jewish extremists by focusing on Hebron, site of last month's mosque massacre.
Police confiscated automatic weapons from Jews and briefly detained a leading rabbi.
Separately, a U.S. envoy met with Arafat in Tunisia but failed to win the PLO leader's consent for resuming talks with Israel.
Prime Minister Rabin signed an agreement to add the religious Shas party to his coalition, giving him a majority in Israel's parliament.
The accord will go into effect after approval by Rabin's Labor party.
Sen. Packwood conceded defeat in a legal fight over his diaries, agreeing to turn them over to the Senate Ethics Committee for its investigation into allegations of sexual and official misconduct.
The Oregon Republican said he was ending a challenge to a district court order that directed him to give the panel the diaries it subpoenaed last year.
Officials from G-7 nations discussed global unemployment during a conference in Detroit.
President Clinton urged the Group of Seven officials to focus on ways to create jobs.
A U.S. Air Force plane crashed off Kenya's coast en route to Somalia, killing at least one crew member and leaving 10 others unaccounted for, the Pentagon said.
At least three crew members survived.
Adm. Jeremy Boorda was nominated by Clinton to succeed Adm. Frank Kelso as the Navy's top officer.
Boorda, commander of NATO forces in southern Europe, would become the first chief of naval operations to rise from the enlisted ranks if he is confirmed.
Kelso announced his retirement last month, citing the Tailhook controversy.
Thousands of small communities lack the funds necessary to meet federal drinking water requirements and need help finding cheaper ways to make their water safe, a congressional report said.
Separately, an environmental group, the National Resources Defense Council, said the largest cities use outdated filtration technology.
Georgia's Senate gave final legislative approval to Gov. Miller's proposal to send criminals to prison for life without parole for a second violent-crime conviction.
For the measure to take effect, voters must approve a constitutional amendment in a November referendum.
Georgia would then become the first state with a "two-strikes" policy.
Secretary of State Christopher urged Russia's Foreign Minister Kozyrev to use his influence to bring Bosnia's Serbs into a peace accord reached by Croats and Muslims.
Separately, France chastised U.N. civilian officials for failing to order air attacks on Serb gunners who fired at French peacekeepers over the weekend.
The Inkatha Freedom Party said it could still take part in South Africa's elections but the balloting would have to be postponed to give the party time to campaign.
Inkatha leader Buthelezi urged "flexibility and the resolution of the date problem."
The rival African National Congress has ruled out any delay in the April 26-28 vote.
Tuberculosis was found in the body of a 1,000-year-old woman in Peru, giving strong evidence that a disease lethal to thousands of American Indians was in the New World before Columbus and not a plague brought by Europeans.
A report on the study is to be published in today's issue of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
