Lots of promise, lots of hype and lots of volatility.
That about sums up the "wireless" investing scene.
The sector -- sent aloft on a wave of merger activity touched off by American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s proposed takeover of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. -- was among the most explosive stock groups last year, and it promises to be a hot ticket this year and beyond.
But analysts warn that much of the recent big price jump reflects merely speculative bets on companies that won't be profitable for several years -- if ever.
These companies, after all, are investing huge sums of money to develop products that are still unproved, based on technology that could quickly become outdated.
And the markets are teeming with competitors.
"You don't know what new technology is coming down the road, and there's also the issue about how much demand there's going to be for the final product," says Herschel Shosteck, an independent analyst based in Silver Spring, Md.
He adds: "Most of the stocks are going up on speculative frenzy, not on any fundamentals or a short-term chance of fundamentals."
The sector's volatility was underscored in November, when Dial Page Inc., a wireless paging company based in Greenville, S.C., saw its stock skid heavily on news that BellSouth Corp. was planning to set up wireless operations in Dial Page's core area of operations in the Southeast.
On Nov. 29, the stock plunged 16% on the Nasdaq Stock Market to $41.50 from $49.25; it has since recovered to levels above $50.
So, what do analysts recommend?
Mr. Shosteck, for one, is focusing on big multinational telecommunications and technology companies, while steering clear of such pure wireless plays as CenCall Communications Corp. of Denver, Dial Page, Geotek Industries Inc. of Montvale, N.J., Nextel Communications Inc. of Rutherford, N.J.
"The risk involved is generally unrecognized when it comes to wireless stocks," Mr. Shosteck says.
"The people who recognize this are the Motorolas, for example.
They want to spread the risk, and that's why they're successful.
No matter what hit they take, they're only going to take part of the hit -- and the success, when it comes, will be shared with other companies."
Motorola Inc., a Schaumburg, Ill., leader in the manufacture of hand-held cellular phones, has its fingers in every aspect of the wireless pie, as a provider of both technology and equipment.
Other analysts are bullish on big cellular providers outside the U.S. -- particularly since McCaw (pending completion of the AT&T merger) will have been removed as an independent U.S. player.
Vodafone Group PLC, the dominant cellular provider in the U.K., whose stock trades in the U.S. as an American depositary receipt, is the top cellular pick among analysts at PaineWebber Inc., Goldman, Sachs & Co. and Cowen & Co.
Jeff Hines, PaineWebber's senior wireless analyst in New York, says Vodafone could become a $115 to $125 stock over the next two years, up from its current level of about $90.
He notes that despite the emergence of new players in the competitive U.K. market, Vodafone has been able to expand its subscription base rapidly.
For instance, it added 53,000 net new subscribers in December, a monthly record for the company and more than four times the increase in December 1992.
Mr. Hines says Vodafone is also well positioned to compete in important foreign markets, such as Germany, Sweden, Australia and Hong Kong, where it participates through equity holdings in domestic licenses.
Beyond the advantage of having a dominant presence in its home market, Vodafone is trading at "attractive" multiples on future earnings, he says, adding: "They also have no long-term debt, and they've been paying dividends."
Barry Kaplan, a media and wireless-communications analyst at Goldman Sachs in New York, also sees a lot more steam in the stock.
The shares, he notes, trade at one of the lowest price-to-cashflow multiples in the industry -- around 10.5 times the $700 million he sees for the fiscal year ending March 1995.
U.S. cellular companies, by comparison, trade on average at 15 to 20 times projected cash flows.
Another favorite stock at PaineWebber and Goldman Sachs is Rogers Cantel Mobile Communications, the dominant cellular provider in Canada.
"They're the McCaw of Canada, with a nationwide license" says Mr. Hines of PaineWebber.
He says that the company's margins have been improving, and that he expects to see the stock trade as high as $40 to $45 in two years from its current level of about $27 on Nasdaq.
The company is a unit of Rogers Communications, Canada's largest cable operator.
Mr. Kaplan, the Goldman analyst, says Cantel's nationwide reach is a big plus.
"In cellular, operating on a nationwide license is better than a regional license," he says.
That's because a nationwide network creates economies of scale and makes it "a lot easier to coordinate delivery of calls over one seamless web," he says.
Mr. Kaplan also likes the recent initial public offering PacTel Corp., a wireless-communications spinoff of Pacific Telesis Group that was priced at $23 in December and has been trading slightly above that level.
"It has great domestic markets," he says, "and outstanding opportunities overseas, especially in Germany, Japan and Portugal."
For now, Messrs. Kaplan and Hines are a bit less enamored of the highflying shares of players in a hot field: specialized mobile radio.
This technology promises to transform limited two-way radio communication into a network that would provide for telephone, data transmission and paging capabilities.
The problem, Messrs. Kaplan and Hines say, is not that the technology may fail or prove a financial rout -- it's just that they view the stocks as richly priced, with most having doubled in price last year.
They like to rate these stocks as "market outperformers."
This applies, in particular, to three key mobile-radio companies: Nextel, Dial Page and CenCall.
Collectively, these companies have bet billions of dollars that they can transform humdrum radio dispatch services into a wireless phone network -- and all before the cellular companies add capacity to their networks by moving to an integrated digital system.
Still, Mr. Kaplan says he is becoming a bit more bullish on the mobile-radio sector.
"I've been wresting with valuations," he says.
"The stocks have come down a bit recently and gotten intriguing."
But he's reluctant to suggest any "buys" from the group for now, he says.
Similarly, Mr. Hines is warming up to one mobile-radio stock -- Nextel -- although he, too, is not yet rating it a strong "buy," calling it a more speculative "attractive market outperformer."
His change of heart, he says, stems from Nextel's recent acquisition of Motorola's radio dispatch properties -- more than 2,500 radio frequencies in 21 states -- for about $1.8 billion.
"They now have licenses that give them access to 180 million people in the U.S.," Mr. Hines says.
"They are now in the top 10 regional markets."
He is also encouraged by the fact that the agreement provided for Motorola to acquire a minority 20% stake in Nextel.
What's more, he points out, the company just got a big boost from Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp. of Japan, the world's largest telephone company.
NTT recently agreed to buy 1.5 million Nextel shares for around $75 million as part of a technological alliance that will help Nextel build the technological and financial clout it will need to overcome hurdles of cost, technology and marketing.
"Now that they've made these transactions -- and because the stock has come down some -- I'm much more positive about it at these levels," Mr. Hines says.
As reported, Nextel has started offering, on a test basis, its integrated digital services in Southern California, and plans to cover most of the state by the middle of this year.
For a play on wireless-equipment-manufacturing companies, the PaineWebber analyst recommends taking a look at Allen Group.
The Beachwood, Ohio, company is a leading supplier to the wireless two-way communications market, manufacturing mobile antennas, base-station antennas and cellular telephone area extenders.
The group is already supplying antennas in Germany for personal communications services, a new wireless technology that will compete with cellular and mobile-radio systems.
The PCS technology is being developed in the U.S. as well, pending a government auction of radio-spectrum frequencies scheduled for this spring.
Mr. Getler is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
