As early as today, a federal magistrate in New Jersey is expected to decide on the first pretrial order in a case that may determine the direction of welfare reform across the country.
The plaintiffs are a handful of welfare mothers rounded up by attorneys from the National Organization of Women, American Civil Liberties Union and Legal Services Corp.
They charge that the courts should roll back New Jersey's 1992 welfare overhaul, the Family Development Act.
Specifically, they object to a provision that cuts off extra benefits to mothers who have children while receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children.
Until now, AFDC mothers could collect $64 a month for every additional baby.
Thus the $64 Question is: Should the government create incentives that keep the "cycle of dependency" spinning?
The answer from state Assemblyman Wayne R. Bryant is a resounding no.
He authored the "child exclusion" law and will now have to defend it in court.
It will be an interesting -- and telling -- juxtaposition.
On one side, liberal litigators high on self-righteousness but low on any mandate to speak on behalf of welfare mothers.
On the other side, Mr. Bryant, an elected Democrat who represents Camden, one of the poorest counties in the state.
Mr. Bryant says he isn't amused by the "arrogance" of lawyers telling him what's good for his constituents.
"Show me one company that gives employees a pay raise for getting pregnant," Mr. Bryant says.
"So why do we teach welfare mothers a value that won't serve them well in working America?"
Since going into effect last year, births to AFDC mothers are down a monthly average of 10.4% from the same period the year before.
There is some dispute over how much of this can be traced directly to the new law, but other states have noted the results.
Wisconsin already has a "child exclusion" provision, the Virginia Legislature just passed its own version and other states are considering similar measures.
A "child exclusion" measure isn't part of President Clinton's welfare-reform package, but Hill Republicans may push for it.
When the tides of politics start running against them, liberals have a fail-safe response: They go looking for a judge.
In this case, the brief claims the state is interfering with welfare mothers' "fundamental rights to make decisions about family composition, conception and child-birth without undue government intrusion."
Leave aside for a moment the highly debatable proposition that any such right exists.
You're still left with the fact that New Jersey doesn't prevent anyone from having children.
The state simply refuses to give AFDC mothers a financial bonus for getting pregnant.
It's a simple distinction, but one that gets lost a lot nowadays.
(The subsidy-dependent arts lobby, in bellyaching about grant cutbacks, also didn't distinguish between the government outlawing an activity and refusing to subsidize it.)
Two groups of state legislators are taking it seriously enough to ask the Institute for Justice, a conservative legal outfit in Washington, to enter the case on the side of the state.
A ruling on their request may come today.
Dirk Roggeveen, an Institute for Justice attorney, points out that the Supreme Court has previously held that pregnant women have no right to Medicaid-funded abortions.
But, he notes, New Jersey courts ruled the other way in the Medicaid dispute.
Thus a federal judge could easily find a "right" to higher AFDC payments under the state constitution.
If that happens, look for a spate of copycat suits elsewhere.
That would send a clear -- and tragic -- answer to the $64 Question: Don't bother trying to fix a system that everyone agrees is broken.
Otherwise, you'll be sued.
