William Griner roots around the base of a young hazelnut tree and uncovers the fruit of a decade of secretive labor: a warty black glob.
This lowly lump is none other than the black diamond truffle, an allegedly aphrodisiac fungus that is credited with revving up the sex drives of King Henry IV and Emperor Claudius of Rome.
But it is best known for the way its pungent aroma boosts the natural flavors of other foods, converting ordinary meals into gourmet feasts.
The black truffle is so prized, so difficult to cultivate and so increasingly rare that it fetches $350 to $500 a pound.
Mr. Griner, a 44-year-old handyman with a blond ponytail, plans to change all that.
In a secluded spot in these mountains, where helicopters hover in search of illegal marijuana crops, Mr. Griner says he and two partners, Don Reading and Bruce Hatch, have perfected a method that produces high yields of truffles.
This growing season (it ends in March), they say they harvested 12 pounds of truffles from 39 trees whose roots had been treated with truffle fungus before they were planted 12 years ago (the tubers grow on the roots).
Across the Atlantic, truffle farmers swear it takes about 400 trees to produce that much.
Mr. Griner plans to license more farmers, plant thousands more trees and bust the European stranglehold on the truffle market within five years.
"The more the merrier," he says with a grin.
Mr. Reading, a 49-year-old gem cutter, has a bigger dream: He would like to see truffles for the masses, stocked even in supermarket chains.
"If you could put a billion trees in the ground, Safeway might see one," he says.
Only one other American, Franklin Garland of Hillsborough, N.C., claims success raising truffles, but his 500 trees have yielded only five pounds so far.
Truffle propagation is a mysterious business.
The tasty fungus grows in a decidedly hit-or-miss relationship with the roots of certain trees and so far has resisted being cultivated to produce reliable, high yields.
World production of the black diamond truffle has dwindled to a mere five to six tons last year from 2,000 tons in the 1910s, thanks to targeted bombings of truffle fields during both world wars and other reasons no one completely understands.
Against this backdrop, the Europeans darkly suspect that these Californians are trying to pull off some kind of vol a l'americaine, or con game.
Truffles cultivated by the bushel in America?
"Impossible!" says Rosario Safina, the native Italian president of Urbani Truffles USA, a unit of Urbani SNC of Italy, which describes itself as the biggest truffle company in the world.
Three years ago, Mr. Safina verified that a truffle he received from Mr. Griner was the real thing.
But he doesn't believe America can produce a commercial crop.
"If someone is telling you that, it's not true.
It can't be done," Mr. Safina says.
He adds: "If no big truffle companies in Europe have the secret, I can't imagine why someone in California who is not in the business would do it."
One of the world's most esteemed truffiers, 67-year-old Jacques Pebeyre of Cahors, France, suspects that the California truffle "is not what is called the truffle in France."
Mr. Pebeyre, the grandson, son and father of truffiers, hasn't actually seen one of Mr. Griner's truffles, and says he will withhold final judgment until he has.
In the meantime, Mr. Griner has won over some leading chefs to his product, including a personal friend of Mr. Pebeyre's, Jacky Robert, the French-born owner of Amelio's, a restaurant in San Francisco.
Mr. Robert served his customers Mr. Griner's truffles alongside French truffles in a blind taste test one day last year.
The verdict: Mr. Griner's truffles "were as good as the French," Mr. Robert says.
If the French claim otherwise, that's because "most French are chauvinists," he says.
The Europeans have reason to be suspicious, however.
Truffle lore is full of tales of con artists who bilked buyers by dyeing a less-flavorful breed of truffle black, or by packing worm holes in the tubers with dirt to make them weigh -- and cost -- more.
There also has been talk before of supplying truffles to the masses.
Arotz SA of Madrid planted some 300,000 fungustreated trees in the 1970s, but 20 years later remains a minor player in the market.
In California, a microbiology professor once claimed he could grow truffles in test tubes, but in 1991, his California Truffle Co. filed for bankruptcy after only a year.
Mr. Griner admits that growing truffles is tricky.
He bought 100 saplings treated with truffle fungus in the early 1980s and planted them in hopes of one day having money to retire on.
For the next several years, he and his partners read reams of truffle literature and, figuring all the printed methods had failed, avoided trying any.
Instead they devised their own techniques: One year they spread rabbit manure on the tree roots.
Another year, they set New Age crystals out in the field.
But the final secret is no hocus-pocus but "the most obvious thing in the world," Mr. Reading says cryptically.
Mr. Griner finally dug up the orchard's first truffle in 1987, five years after the trees were planted.
He says he screamed so loud that tenants in a house 100 yards away came out to see if he was all right.
Confident it was the first of many, Mr. Griner ate the truffle on the spot -- "as soon as I chased the worms out of it."
He was right.
The next year he found several and tried to sell them, calling more than 30 chefs in the San Francisco area, but they all politely declined to buy.
"Then word got back to me that they thought I was getting them from France and trying to resell them" at higher prices, Mr. Griner says.
(Figuring his truffles retained their flavor longer than French ones, Mr. Griner was charging $900 a pound, nearly triple the going rate.)
The big break came last year, when Mr. Griner and his partners caught the attention of Dafne and Mats Engstrom, owners of California Sunshine Fine Foods Inc., a San Francisco caviar supplier.
Ms. Engstrom was buying stones to be made into jewelry and happened on Mr. Reading, the gem cutter.
The Engstroms never before had seen a truffle farm, but they have eaten and studied Mr. Griner's tubers.
They are convinced that his claims are true.
Indeed, they have staked their reputation on it by selling the truffles to prized customers, including Stars Restaurant in San Francisco and The Four Seasons in New York.
Mr. Griner concedes his currently tiny truffle orchard isn't much of a threat to the Europeans -- yet.
He maintains his truffles are superior in many ways to the competition, but he won't give details.
"I don't want to scare the French too much," he says.
