The European Union's "committee of wise men" examining the aviation industry crisis reportedly calls for independent reviews of state aid and the adoption of a single EU external relations policy in its upcoming report.
According to people familiar with the committee's findings, the report places blame for the airline industry's woes on low productivity among European carriers.
The committee was appointed in June by EU Transport Commissioner Abel Matutes to study problems confronting the airline industry and propose concrete solutions.
The 12 aviation industry officials and analysts concluded their work last week and are to release their report formally Feb. 1.
But copies of the report are circulating, and people who have seen it say it takes a strong, pro-competition stance.
The committee reportedly finds no legitimate reason to roll back the EU's deregulation of the sector, and targets government subsidies as a corruptive force.
"There are some very clear statements about state aid and liberalization," said one industry official who has seen the report.
"Some conservative members of the airline industry may be shocked."
Another person familiar with the report portrayed its conclusions as saying "it's up to the management and shareholders to get on with the job."
-- The EU Commission immediately should set a clear policy on state aid.
In particular, the committee recommends that all airline requests for state aid be accompanied by a restructuring plan and that an independent audit be conducted to check on a plan's feasibility.
British Airways PLC called for such action in December at hearings hosted by the committee.
Under current EU law, subsidies are illegal unless private investors would make the same decision based on potential returns.
But the lack of explicit rules frequently results in competitors challenging commission decisions, often accusing the commission of acting on political rather than economic grounds.
-- The EU should adopt a single external aviation policy within three years.
That would represent a significant change from the current system, under which member states negotiate their aviation treaties with non-EU countries individually.
Legal scholars have argued for years that the EU could extract better agreements with the U.S. and other nations if it acted as a whole.
Furthermore, the committee reportedly lays out what it sees as the ideal external policy, recommending that the EU avoid creating a "fortress Europe" by closing its skies.
-- The EU should create a level playing field by harmonizing laws affecting the airline industry, such as flight-time limitations on pilots and value-added tax.
But one source said the committee calls for cost-benefit analyses in each case to make sure that harmonization is done at the best possible level.
-- The EU should break up monopolies on ground handling at airports, except where it can be proven that competition may threaten airport safety.
Currently, several of Europe's major airports have only one company allowed to check in passengers or refuel planes, and many airlines complain of excessive pricing.
Airports counter that additional groundhandling companies would create safety hazards.
The group's report also includes an extensive analysis of the European airline industry's performance compared with that of the U.S. industry.
The reported conclusion is that while U.S. and European airlines pay their employees on roughly equivalent scales, on average the U.S. carriers get significantly better productivity from workers.
On Wednesday evening, a spokesman for the committee declined to discuss the report.
"The committee will not comment on the report and its findings until it has been formally presented to Commissioner Matutes on Feb. 1," said Andre Clodong, a director of the European Aviation Club, which is acting as secretariat to the committee.
Two members of the special committee wrote strongly worded dissenting opinions in the report.
French union official Rene Valladon and Frankfurt Airport Vice Chairman Manfred Schoelch disagreed with certain pro-competition proposals, according to a copy of the report obtained by The Wall Street Journal Europe.
Mr. Valladon took issue with recommendations on subsidies and with its call for higher labor productivity through such action as increased worker mobility.
And Mr. Valladon and Mr. Schoelch combined efforts in writing a dissent over the committee's recommendation to deregulate airport services such as checking in passengers and ground handling.
For the most part, though, the committee members present a united front.
With Europe's major airlines reporting a combined loss of about $4 billion in the three years through 1992, Mr. Matutes created the committee last year to study what action could be taken.
His move followed the establishment of a similar group by the Clinton administration in the U.S.
The U.S. committee finished its work last month.
The EU committee is headed by former Belgian Transport Minister Herman De Croo.
