With even bond-market professionals bewildered by the clouded outlook for interest rates, individual investors have a right to feel confused.
A lot of them have taken a beating this year, as long-term bond prices tumbled after the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates early last month.
Many taxable- and municipal-bond mutual funds have lost 3% and 4%, and some of the long-term zero-coupon government-bond funds have suffered 6% and 7% declines.
Today's meeting of the Fed's policymaking Federal Open Market Committee could bring more pain.
Many institutional investors expect the meeting will move quickly to raise interest rates again.
That could send bond prices lower and mean further losses for bond-market funds, especially those that invest in long-term bonds.
Indeed, bond prices fell sharply in advance of the meeting.
But policy makers could also decide to wait longer so they can get a better handle on what's really happening in the economy.
Professional investors were so encouraged by favorable inflation news early last week that they bid up long-term bond prices, pushing yields lower.
There was even talk that maybe the market had turned a corner.
All of this leaves individual investors wondering who to believe and what to do.
People who own long-term bond funds want to know if they should sell now and avoid capital losses if interest rates rise further.
"It's the No. 1 question on conservative investors' minds these days," says John Markese, president of the American Association of Individual Investors.
People with new cash to invest are equally perplexed.
Long-term bond funds may be risky, but yield-hungry investors aren't eager to live with the lower returns from safer, shorter-term bond funds or money-market funds.
How much yield do you have to give up?
Say you put $300,000 in the no-load Vanguard Fixed Income Long-Term Corporate Bond Fund.
It currently yields 6.9%, or $20,700 a year.
But if you put the same money in the no-load Vanguard Fixed Income Short-Term Bond Fund, which yields 5.2%, your income would be only $15,600.
"Understandably, most people don't want to do this," says Mr. Markese.
Moreover, if investors sell their long-term bond funds, they will have to give up 28% of their long-term capital gains in federal taxes.
They also may have to pay sales charges, since some bond funds sold by brokers levy "back end" sales charges if investors leave before a specified deadline.
"It's a bitter pill to swallow," says Steve Janachowski, partner in Brouwer & Janachowski, a San Francisco investment-management firm.
So far, most investors seem to be doing more thinking than selling, says Robert Adler, president of AMG Data Services, an Arcata, Calif., firm that monitors mutual-fund flows.
Some long-term bond funds have had redemptions, but the amount so far is less than 1%.
Vanguard Mutual Funds says its outflow from long-term bond funds has been "tepid."
That's good, say a number of bond-market strategists who feel that this is a time for caution but not the time to liquidate your long-term bond holdings.
"Now is not a good time to sell," says Marshall B. Front, senior executive vice president at Stein Roe & Farnham Inc., a Chicago investment-counseling and mutual-fund company.
If investors think they have too much of their portfolios allocated to long-term bonds, there will be a better time to reduce these holdings later, he says.
He expects the economy to slow down later and interest rates to back off.
The bond market's volatile action this year points up a key lesson for investors, says Brad Perry, senior partner in David L. Babson Co., a Cambridge, Mass., investment-management firm.
"Long-term bonds are volatile, and it doesn't make sense having all your fixed-income money in long-term bonds."
But investors should "hang tough at this point," says Mr. Perry.
"The bond market is discounting the worst inflation that we could reasonably expect in the next six to 12 months."
What about income-oriented investors with cash to invest now?
Paul Solli, managing director of Financial Design, a Larkspur, Calif., investment-management firm, says people sweating about potential losses on long-term bond funds wouldn't be in this fix today if they had purchased intermediate or short-term bond funds.
That's because the price of short-term bonds and bond funds isn't as sensitive as long-term bonds and funds to a given move in interest rates.
"Once you go out beyond seven years, you historically haven't received a commensurate return for taking on added risk," Mr. Solli says.
If the Federal Reserve raises short-term interest rates again, short-term and intermediate-term bond funds "will take a small hit," says Mr. Janachowski.
He doesn't think it's necessarily a good idea to buy adjustable-rate mortgage mutual funds now as a way around the problem of volatile interest rates.
"If you really believe interest rates are beginning a sustained rise, you're better off in money-market funds," he says.
Many pros like intermediate-term municipal bond funds.
Once a taxpayer gets into the 28% marginal income-tax bracket or higher, municipal-bond funds are attractively priced today compared with taxable-bond funds, says John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a Chicago publication that tracks mutual-fund performance.
After taxes are taken into consideration, many investors will do better with the tax-free fund than the taxable fund, he says.
The supply-demand dynamic is working for municipals.
The issuance of municipal bonds has declined this year, yet it's expected that the demand for tax-free municipals will sharply increase as many people pay their higher income-tax bills in April, Mr. Front says.
Investors who live in high-tax states like California and New York might consider buying a double-tax-free state municipal-bond fund with intermediate maturities, says Mr. Markese.
"Even though they are slightly more risky because of concentration in one state," he says, "they are the easiest and most convenient tax shelter available to most people."
Data: Morningstar Mutual Funds.
