Russia's free-market reforms were supposed to rid the country of lines, subsidies, rationing and shoddy products.
But reforms mostly have bypassed Ulyanovsk, Lenin's Volga River birthplace.
And that suits the province's 1.5 million residents just fine.
"We love things the way they are," says Faina Ivanova, a shapeless babushka who stands in a winding meat line at State Produce Store No. 21.
After a long wait, she will get her ration of meat -- of poor quality, but at a cheap price mandated by the local government.
"What's so bad about standing in a line?" she chirps.
Ulyanovsk is 500 miles and an ideological world away from Moscow.
Russia, one might say, is driving toward market reforms, albeit with some hesitation about its speed and the many potholes in the road.
Ulyanovsk, meanwhile, hasn't left the parking lot.
The result?
Ulyanovsk's prices are lower than those anywhere else in Russia.
The province's unreformed collective-style farms are obliged to sell all their output locally.
Private businesses are discouraged, as are expensive "imports" from the rest of Russia.
The popular local governor, Yuri Goryachov, sees to it that Ulyanovsk stays its retrograde course.
Moscow sets economic reform guidelines but gives provinces considerable leeway to carry them out -- or not.
Mr. Goryachov thinks the old ways are superior.
And what he says, goes here.
Last December, the 55-year-old former veterinarian and longtime Communist Party apparatchik won election to the upper house of Russia's parliament in a Soviet-style landslide, taking 90.1% of the vote.
"Each day, I pray that God will protect our Goryachov," says Lyudmilla Khechikova, a middle-aged shopper at State Store No. 21.
Ms. Ivanova one-ups her.
"I'd go through fire and water for him," she says.
The Ulyanovsk "miracle" once was dismissed as a bizarre aberration in increasingly market-oriented Russia.
But after two years of economic reforms that produced few gains for most of the country, delegations from other Russian provinces now are flocking to Ulyanovsk to see whether Russia's past is also its future.
Even Russia's prime minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin, late last year sent a top aide to see if Ulyanovsk's centralized system would be worth copying nationwide.
Andrei Illarionov, an advocate of radical reforms who since has quit government, was amazed.
"I felt like a time traveler," he says.
"It was like going back to the Soviet Union of five years ago."
While Mr. Illarionov and others of his ilk don't want to see Russia journey back in time, the comforting stasis of Ulyanovsk remains an option to some fraught provincial and federal bureaucrats who don't like the alternatives.
It would be tough to make the Ulyanovsk model fly without a clever, paternalistic strongman like Mr. Goryachov at the controls, however.
Governor since 1990, the balding Mr. Goryachov is nearly as revered, though on a local level, as Lenin was in his heyday.
But where Lenin was respected for his revolutionary ideology, Mr. Goryachov earns his devotion by dispensing large doses of largess and public relations.
Here in the proud birthplace of Lenin, there is, of course, a museum dedicated to the founder of Soviet communism, whose surname at birth was Ulyanov.
On this day, the Lenin Museum (located on Lenin Street in the city's Lenin District) is nearly deserted.
So curator Tatiana Bryliaeva has time to chat, not about past glories, but of a new one: Yuri Goryachov.
She recounts an incident, reported on local television, in which Mr. Goryachov traveled on a wintry day to a remote provincial hospital.
There he saw a doctor, dressed in a warm coat, tending a sick child whose torso was bare.
The governor publicly berated the doctor and local medical authorities for allowing the child to shiver.
"He takes care of our neediest," marvels Ms. Bryliaeva, though she doesn't remember Mr. Goryachov giving the child his own coat.
The lap-dog local press obligingly accompanies Mr. Goryachov on his frequent forays into the province's villages.
"If Goryachov promises to do something, he'll do it -- even if it kills him," says a fawning Konstantin Azov, senior correspondent of Ulyanovsk Pravda.
"Intuitively, Goryachov has mastered the techniques of the personality cult," says Alla Bagdasarova, editor of the lone opposition paper, Simbirsky Courier.
(Mr. Goryachov declines to meet foreign journalists.)
But personal mystique goes just so far.
What most makes Mr. Goryachov a local hero is his deft handling of the purse strings.
He works his fiscal magic through a mysterious, off-budget "stabilization fund" he created in 1992.
No one seems able, or willing, to explain its exact size or source, though it's known to be funded partly by a special profits tax levied on all transactions, as well as by fines on the area's few private businesses.
The fund is substantial enough to permit Mr. Goryachov to dole out plenty of goodies, including gold tooth fillings for retirees, videotape players for orphanages and cultural performances for all.
Locals have become spoiled.
An elderly woman comes to the office of Emma Grigorieva, manager of Ulyanovsk's welfare services, to demand a daily ration of caviar -- underlining that only black caviar will do.
Ms. Grigorieva turns down the request, gently explaining to the disappointed pensioner that it's not good to eat caviar every day.
But it is the low, government-controlled prices, reinforced by a system of ration coupons, that most please Ulyanovites.
On a recent tour of the region's stores, Mr. Goryachov and his price statistician discover that one government-run shop is selling bread for 20 rubles, or about one cent, more than the provincial ceiling.
Generally, bread here costs just a third what it does in Moscow.
The governor calls for a team to investigate, and, as the statistician explains, "to persecute the guilty."
At Minuta, one of the very few private stores in the province, employee Lyudmilla Vassilieva decries local pricing regulations.
"We lose money on every loaf of bread we sell," complains the miniskirted accountant.
But the government requires the store to sell bread and won't let it raise the price.
A couple of times a month, she says, the "price police" visit the store to ensure that Minuta's markups don't exceed mandated maximums that often are as low as 10% above wholesale prices.
To insulate Ulyanovsk from the market "chaos" beyond its borders, the local government bars the export of its abundant agricultural output.
Imported goods from the rest of Russia and overseas tend to be scarce and expensive.
Highway police check outbound cargoes.
And customs agents at the airport often stop passengers trying to spirit out "contraband" like cheap butter or a few eggs.
"There is indeed a miracle in Ulyanovsk," says Ms. Bagdasarova, the opposition paper's editor.
"Despite the inevitability of change here, it didn't come."
