The world's largest record companies, led by Sony Corp.'s Sony Music and Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Music Group, are discussing the formation of a world-wide televised music-video service that could be the first significant competitor to Viacom Inc.'s MTV Networks.
Other record companies involved in the discussions are EMI Music, a unit of Thorn EMI PLC, and PolyGram, 80%-owned by Philips Electronics NV.
Neither could be reached for comment.
Sony declined to comment, and Time Warner said: "We don't comment on transactions that haven't been consummated."
According to people involved in the talks, the partners initially plan to launch a number of local music-video services in different languages overseas in some of MTV's fastest-growing European and Asian markets.
Eventually, however, as channel capacity increases in U.S. cable systems, a new video channel will be launched in the U.S.
All the channels would play music videos and possibly sell tapes, compact disks and other merchandise.
The Time Warner-Sony plan is bold and risky.
It would take hundreds of millions of dollars to match MTV's formidable reach and replicate its globally recognized trademark.
Its primary 24-hour music channel, MTV, reaches 57 million homes in the U.S., and a sister service, VH-1, is received in 47 million homes.
In Europe, MTV already is in 58 million homes.
The company estimates total world-wide viewership at 251 million homes.
In the U.S., MTV soon will begin testing the sale of music and related merchandise on TV.
There is widespread speculation in the music industry that the partners in the Time Warner-Sony venture may attempt to provide their videos exclusively to their start-up service overseas, refusing to supply them to MTV.
Such a move could raise major antitrust problems in the U.S. and probably in Europe as well.
But people involved in the Sony-Time Warner venture said the two companies haven't any plans to withhold their music videos from MTV.
Viacom officials said that they are aware of the Time Warner-Sony plan and aren't worried about it, unless the record companies do intend to withhold their product from MTV.
Tom Freston, MTV Networks president, said: "If it's fair competition, that's fair and it's good."
Record industry executives say they have become increasingly frustrated that MTV is the only outlet for their music videos.
Videos are the primary marketing tool used to sell records, and MTV has limited playlists, or videos that it regularly airs.
If MTV decides not to air a video, the record companies have little chance of spurring sales.
Currently, MTV is the only service that pays record companies to use music videos, but record companies often complain that it pays too little.
Time Warner and Sony are said to be using an existing partnership in Germany, called Viva, as the prototype for musiccable channels around the world and, eventually, in the U.S.
That service, on the air since Christmas, is available in 90% of Germany's cable households.
Unlike MTV, where all the "video deejays" speak English, the Time Warner-Sony service anticipates offering different music channels in the local language.
Viva uses only German-speaking announcers, even when playing songs in other languages, and 60% of the music is German.
In China, the service probably would be in Mandarin, and in Latin America, in Spanish.
Thus, people involved in the talks say, the channels would be positioned as "alternatives" to MTV.
Sony and Time Warner have been partners for three years in the Columbia House record club.
In that partnership, Michael P. Schulhof, Sony Corp. of America's chairman, and Robert Morgado, Warner Music Group chairman, already havehatched a number of joint ventures, including a digital cable radio service and music catalogs.
The Time Warner-Sony venture isn't the first of its kind to be announced, although its scope could dwarf other would-be competitors of MTV.
Last summer, for example, cable giant Tele-Communications Inc., announced it was teaming with midsize record company Bertelsmann AG to launch a hybrid music-video, home-shopping cable channel in the U.S.
The partners said the channel would be launched first in TCI cable homes starting in mid-1994, although it didn't say how many of TCI's 10 million cable homes would receive the channel initially.
A TCI spokesman said he wasn't aware of the Time Warner-Sony venture, but the company had expected other players to enter the music market.
Some in the record industry have speculated that the TCI-Bertelsmann deal has taken a back seat since TCI's announced merger with Bell Atlantic Corp.
But Robert Thomson, a TCI senior vice president, said: "We're still working on a definitive agreement with Bertelsmann.
We're still on track."
Mark Robichaux contributed to this article.
