USF&G Corp. reported surprisingly strong fourth-quarter earnings, signaling that its restructuring is beginning to pay off.
The results propelled USF&G stock up $1.50, or 11%, to close at $15.375 a share in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
The once-struggling insurer has reported eight straight quarterly profits.
But until now the company has been shrinking instead of growing.
Considerable skepticism still surrounds the USF&G turnaround and whether it can produce increasing profits over the long term.
But yesterday's results marked the first time in three years that the company reported an increase in premiums.
After adjusting for factors that exaggerated the growth, premiums grew 4% in the fourth quarter compared with the prior year.
"I was very pleased," said Steven Gavios, a stock analyst with Kidder, Peabody & Co.
USF&G said it earned $59 million, or 55 cents a share, compared with prior-year results of $13 million, or one cent a share.
Despite the increase in premiums, total revenue edged down to $799 million from $802 million.
Under Chairman Norman Blake, who took over three years ago, USF&G has cut its work force by 48% and cut costs by 31%.
But analysts say trimming is easy compared with trying to increase profit and revenue, particularly in the markets where USF&G specializes.
The company is focused on selling commercial insurance to small and midsized businesses.
"They have made themselves from a below-average company to an average one," said Northington Partners analyst James Ramenda.
"But to go from a average company to a growing company will be a real challenge."
Dan Hale, chief financial officer for USF&G, said the company has completed its withdrawals from states where workers-compensation and auto-insurance laws make it tough to earn a profit.
He said the company plans to grow by offering superior service to small businesses and by selling specialized insurance programs to midsize businesses.
Businesses being targeted include taverns, restaurants, manufacturers and contractors, industries where other insurers have sustained disappointing results.
