Honda Motor Corp. said it will unwind its cross-shareholding arrangement with the Rover Cars of Britain, dealing a setback to BMW just weeks after the German company acquired a majority interest in the U.K. car maker.
In Munich, officials at Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, which had hoped to maintain Rover's relationship with Honda, said the company agreed to Honda's request.
The arrangement, under which Honda owns 20% of Rover and Rover holds a 20% stake in Honda U.K. Manufacturing Ltd., probably will be dissolved though a swap of the stakes, said Uwe Mahla, spokesman for BMW.
The terms and time frame of such a transaction still need to be worked out, Mr. Mahla said.
But a Honda spokesman said Honda wasn't seeking an immediate end to its product-sharing and technology-sharing arrangements with Rover, noting that the company will "review" those ties later.
In time, however, Honda seems poised to phase out its ties with Rover and go it alone in Britain, a base that it considers crucial to its fortunes in the European market.
"In the future, we intend to create a more independent operation in Europe, using our own resources," Honda President Nobuhiko Kawamoto said in a statement.
Honda's decision represents a blow to BMW and reflects the fact that Honda has bigger problems to solve.
BMW Chairman Bernd Pischetsrieder had gone to Tokyo in hopes of persuading the Japanese car maker's executives to hang on to their remaining 20% stake.
The news sent BMW shares down 19.5 marks ($11.30) to close at 848 marks in Frankfurt trading Monday.
In Tokyo, Honda shares closed at 1,660 yen ($15.91), up 40 yen.
Since the deal was announced for BMW to acquire an 80% share of Rover Cars from British Aerospace PLC on Jan. 31, the German luxury car maker had repeatedly said it would like the cooperation agreements between Honda and Rover to continue.
Honda supplies numerous engines, transmissions and design licenses to Rover.
Rover, in return, supplies Honda with body parts and produces some cars for Honda.
But officials at Honda, which is widely credited with turning Rover around, have expressed concern about hooking up with competitor BMW.
BMW's sales soared 19% in the U.S. last year, fueled by new products and competitive pricing.
A crucial question for both companies is how quickly the ties might be severed.
Because of the depth of their cooperation, neither side can abruptly end the relationship without encountering production snarls.
"If Honda were to terminate the contracts short term, they would be left holding large quantities of parts intended for Rover with no customer and would not be able to sell a great number of Honda cars in Europe, because Rover would no longer be building them," said one BMW official.
"The biggest problem for Honda right now is trying to sell more cars," said Peter Boardman, analyst with UBS Securities in Tokyo.
Mr. Boardman expects Honda to report Tuesday that its consolidated pretax profit for the October-December quarter fell 81% from the same period last year to just two billion yen ($19.2 million).
Honda has seen its performance stall in America, its largest single market.
Consider the remodeled Accord, Honda's biggest seller in the U.S. and a model that the company touted as the first example of a new, leaner method of developing its cars.
Honda sold 22,384 Accords in January, up a sharp 53% over the same month a year ago.
That helped boost Honda's overall sales by 14% that month.
But analysts note that the Accord increase was so remarkable largely because the year-earlier sales were artificially suppressed by special factors.
What's more, this January's sales fell far short of the average of about 31,000 a month needed to meet Honda's stated goal of selling 375,000 Accords in the U.S. this year.
The Accord faces stiff competition from models like Chrysler Corp.'s LH sedans.
Sales of other cars in Honda's U.S. lineup are falling.
Honda sold just 1,229 of its redesigned Prelude sports car in January, down 51% from a year earlier.
Civic sales, meanwhile, slipped 4.2% to 17,080 cars.
Things look even grimmer in Japan, Honda's second-biggest market, where most car makers have been battered by the nation's long economic slump.
Jonathan Dobson, an analyst at Jardine Fleming Securities, expects Honda's car sales in Japan to fall 10% in the year ending March 31.
Analysts expect Japanese vehicle sales to recover later this year -- but not much.
Adding to Honda's woes is the mighty yen, which recently soared to near-record highs against the dollar because of worsening trade tensions with the U.S.
The currency crisis erodes the yen value of the profits Honda earns on cars sold in the U.S. and other foreign countries.
To bolster its yen-based revenue, Honda then has to raise prices in other currencies -- which hurts its price-competitiveness overseas.
Honda's problems in the U.S. and Japan are doubly troubling because roughly 80% of its total auto sales are concentrated in those two markets.
Those difficulties underscore the importance of Honda's bid to increase sales in Europe -- a strategy that has been disrupted, though not derailed, by BMW's acquisition of Rover.
A Honda spokesman noted that individual contracts between Honda and Rover for supplying parts and technology will come up for review when car models reach the end of their lifecycles.
To be sure, Honda is weathering Japan's recession much better than Japanese rivals Nissan Motor Co. and Mazda Motor Corp., both of which have dipped into the red.
What's more, the company's overall sales are being buttressed by strong demand for its motorcycles.
Thanks to a booming market for two-wheel vehicles in China and Southeast Asia, motorcycles will probably account for more of Honda's pretax profit than its car business during the year ending March 31, said Jardine's Mr. Dobson.
