Some brokers think investors are becoming just a little too smart for their own good.
The brokers' good, that is.
Individuals nowadays receive a wealth of information and advice about finances from newspapers, magazines, cable television, investment newsletters and on-line data services.
The explosive growth of mutual funds, meanwhile, makes it easy for small investors to hire experts to manage their money.
And to comparison shop among those experts, individuals can easily peruse the managers' track records in statistics published by such organizations as Morningstar Inc. and Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
Not surprisingly, these trends alarm brokers, because the more individual investors learn to think for themselves, the less they need their brokers.
Data on managers' track records, in particular, "render the salesman superfluous," warns Nick Murray, a popular industry speaker and columnist for Investment Advisor, a trade publication that includes tips for brokers on how to sell more effectively.
Performance numbers also make the costs of broker-sold mutual funds obvious to investors.
In contrast to no-load funds, broker-sold funds typically come with hefty "loads," or sales charges, as well as surrender fees.
What's more, "all the academic research I've ever seen shows that there's no difference in performance between load and no-load funds -- until you add in the sales loads," says John Markese, president of the American Association of Individual Investors.
Once loads are accounted for, the broker-sold funds tend to lag.
"The more your presentations make track record a critical . . . variable, the more clearly you tell the investor to just go buy Money magazine's top-performing no-load fund," Mr. Murray tells brokers.
To sell their funds in the face of such evidence, brokers often resort to telling clients to ignore the bottom line.
"You can't argue with performance numbers, so it's easier for the broker to say: `Don't look at performance.
Trust me to help you choose a fund,'" says Mr. Markese.
Sometimes, the brokers even fight back with a few statistics of their own.
Take a recent study from Dalbar Financial Services, a company that produces mutual-fund marketing information and research for organizations that rely on brokers and other salespeople to distribute their funds.
The Dalbar study purports to show that "no-load fund investors underperform load investors."
However, it doesn't actually compare performance.
Rather, it measures "retention rates," or how long investors hold on to their mutual funds -- although it doesn't specify how those rates are measured.
According to Dalbar, load-fund investors hold onto their mutual funds for an average of 48.84 months, compared with an average 21.84 months for no-load investors.
The results are based on Dalbar's proprietary data base of funds for the nearly 10-year period between Jan. 1, 1984, and Sept. 30, 1993.
Based on these retention rates, the study concludes that investors who buy mutual funds from brokers were in the market longer, and therefore enjoyed higher returns.
In contrast, direct buyers were more likely to "churn" their accounts, which resulted in lower returns, the study says.
But that doesn't wash with Martin J. Gruber, chairman of the finance department at the Stern School of Business at New York University.
"They're making an unwarranted conclusion," he says.
For one thing, the study assumes that people with no-load funds got out of the market, he notes.
In reality, they may have moved into other stock funds.
Further, says Mr. Gruber, it's not surprising that the average dollar remained invested longer in load funds.
But this may be more a function of surrender charges that penalize investors for taking their money out of such funds than a reflection of prudent hand-holding on the part of the broker.
Will Goetzmann, a finance professor at Columbia University Business School who specializes in mutual-fund performance and asset flows, says it's "impossible to track individual investors" using Dalbar's methods.
Mr. Goetzmann says that current research on cash flows in and out of mutual funds shows that while money pours quickly into funds with winning records, it oozes rather slowly out of losing funds.
He likens it to a "roach motel" effect.
"Investors who buy load funds may be less knowledgeable, and more prone to stay in losing funds longer," he says.
Still, Jerry Tuccille, senior financial analyst at Dalbar, defends the study.
Assuming load-fund investors did tend to stay put longer, thus enjoying more of the benefits of the past decade's bull market, they would have reaped returns of 6.82% a year, on a compound annual basis.
Meanwhile, the restlessness Dalbar sees among no-load fund investors would have reduced their returns to just 5.61%, compounded annually, the study shows.
Actual performance figures reverse those standings, however.
According to Morningstar, the average compounded annual return for no-load funds was 12.38% for the 10 years ended Dec. 31, 1993 -- a notch above the 12.16% average for broker-sold funds.
Those results don't account for loads, which would make the broker-sold funds look even worse.
Incidentally, both groups did extremely poorly relative to someone who just bought and held a fund that tracked the Standard & Poor's 500 index.
This low-cost investment strategy would have produced compound annual returns of 15.07% in the 1984-93 period.
Investors who rely on performance data to pick and choose among mutual funds should be careful not to read more into those numbers than is warranted, however.
For instance, to avoid the apples-to-oranges problem, only judge "performance relative to similar investments," says Mr. Markese.
And to check the integrity of the data, experts say investors should make sure the numbers are supplied by a third party, such as Morningstar or Lipper; cover a meaningful stretch of time, preferably five years or longer, and have been adjusted for all fees, expenses and potential loads.
It's also useful to find out how a fund does in both bull and bear markets.
A good broker will be happy to supply this information, and will welcome an investor's desire to better educate himself, says Jennifer Strickland, a consultant at Morningstar.
"A lot of financial planners and brokers have told me that their best customers are the best-educated customers," she says.
