The Clinton administration is preparing to withdraw a clean-air regulation challenged by Venezuela under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The rule, intended to reduce smog-producing chemicals, requires Venezuela to impose costly controls on gasoline it ships to the U.S.
It was issued in final form in December.
Withdrawing it would be an unusual regulatory move and would likely stir opposition from environmentalists and the U.S. domestic-oil industry.
Officials of the U.S. Trade Representative, the State Department, the Energy Department and the Environmental Protection Agency concluded at a White House meeting this week that the regulation would have to be withdrawn and modified because in its present form it was likely to violate GATT.
A Clinton administration official said no final decision has been made on the matter.
Alteration of the rule is vigorously opposed by the Sun Co. and several other domestic-oil companies that compete with Venezuela's state-owned Petroleos de Venezuela SA.
The Venezuelans have argued that the rule discriminates against foreign oil companies because the formula they must follow differs from the one that applies to U.S. companies.
Supporters of the rule contend the difference is necessary because foreign refinery methods are harder for U.S. regulators to police.
Separately, the EPA said a vehicle-inspection program approved by the California state legislature resolves a dispute between the agency and the state.
The EPA contended that California's current program, which allows service-station operators to certify their own repairs as being in compliance with federal smog requirements, violated the 1990 Clean Air Act.
The agency several times threatened cutoff of federal highway funds if California didn't require independent inspection and certification of such repairs.
The California law reflects a compromise reached between federal regulators and state officials.
Under it, 15% of California motor vehicles will go to inspectors who do not perform repairs.
