On the front pages of American newspapers, Whitewater Development finally is becoming a big story.
On the financial pages, the global market in something called "derivatives" is getting scrutiny.
These two stories might seem unrelated.
In fact, they fit together like mortise and tenon.
Most everyone by now knows about Whitewater.
Indeed, my colleague David Brooks was questioned about it by Flemish students at a seminar in Leuven, Belgium, the other night.
They were up to speed on the central question: whether Bill and Hillary Clinton, through a company called Whitewater Development, helped loot Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan of Little Rock, Ark.
More to the point, are the Clintons now engaged in efforts at political damage control that involve further legal and ethical non-niceties?
With financial derivatives, the issue is more illusive and abstruse.
There is little evidence that their users have violated any laws -- or created any problems of any kind, for that matter.
But Fortune, Barron's and other forums are carrying debates on whether their mere proliferation -- to a notional value of some $4 trillion -- threatens the world with some as-yet-unforeseen financial catastrophe.
Readers already will have guessed the underlying relationship between Whitewater and derivatives.
The issue is regulation.
Madison Guaranty was, at least theoretically, a federally regulated institution.
Many people think that trading in financial derivatives should be more heavily regulated as well.
But if Madison Guaranty could not be supervised effectively, why does anyone think financial derivatives can be?
The world's bank regulators get their heads together in Basel, Switzerland, from time to time.
They think that bank trading in derivatives and other instruments should be backed with required amounts of capital relative to risks involved.
In short, the Basel group wants to expand to bank trading the risk-based minimum capital requirements they established for bank lending in 1988.
They are not deterred by the fact that the Basel requirements put a global damper on commercial lending by banks for some years and indeed caused banks to turn to their now-controversial trading desks to try to restore their profits.
To be sure, financial derivatives are rather strange little animals.
They carry funny names, such as swaptions, strips, collars, captions -- names that the rocket scientists who create them as hedging instruments think are descriptive of what they do.
The fact that the creators often are mathematicians or computer nerds good at handling complex equations contributes to the suspicions of politicians and regulators that there is something going on here that the average person isn't supposed to understand.
At $4 trillion, the kids at their computers are playing with what looks like big money.
Some critics think that a big shock to financial markets might start a derivative chain reaction that would cause a global financial meltdown.
In principle, however, derivatives are not as complicated as they sound.
They are merely contracts that derive their value from some underlying asset, such as a bond.
If, for example, one party wants to hedge against a future risk by acquiring the revenue stream from a variable-rate security, he might swap the revenue stream from a fixed-rate security to someone with a fixed-rate preference.
The two don't trade the underlying asset; they just make a contract to trade places for a while.
At relatively low cost traders can hedge, perhaps in several different ways, to protect themselves against future changes in underlying values.
Whether the counterparties are each good for the amount of the contract is of course of some importance, but that's true in any contractual arrangement.
As to the possibility of a meltdown, anything is possible.
But presumably at any given point in time the hedges on one side of a market roughly equal those on the other side -- lending, in theory at least, a certain stability to the complex network of hedges.
It is true, of course, that the traders are pretty much on their own with nothing much to protect them except their own judgment.
Yet, there probably would not be $4 trillion worth of contracts floating around the globe unless large banking institutions felt they had at least some grip on the risks.
And indeed, separate studies by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and a task force set up by a banking industry organization called the Group of 30 could see no need for further regulation of these instruments.
The Group of 30 study was led by former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker, who few would regard as a soft touch where banks and markets are concerned.
One of the interesting characteristics of derivatives is that even if someone decided they should be regulated, it would not be easy to devise a method for doing so.
Trading in financial instruments today is global and moves with the speed of light.
The rocket scientists running hedging operations are dealing rapidly with difficult equations as they try to balance risk against risk to protect the customer's underlying position.
Former Chicago Mercantile Exchange Chairman Leo Melamed wrote in Barron's last week that Congress will find it just as impossible to fully direct the development of financial engineering as has been the case with another advanced science, genetic engineering.
The underlying question in both cases of course is whether the public is somehow endangered.
For the answer, it is useful to ask exactly how effective Congress has been in protecting the public in the past.
The U.S. financial services industry is arguably the most heavily regulated in the world, with five or six different regulatory agencies at the federal level not counting the Securities and Exchange Commission and state banking authorities.
And yet large numbers of institutions in the vast savings and loan industry collapsed at great cost to American taxpayers.
They collapsed not because of too little political interest, but because of too much.
The safety net for S&Ls eventually became so cushy, through almost unlimited federal deposit insurance, that it attracted large amounts of cash and a ravaging horde of fast buck exploiters.
The issue on the front pages of the American press is whether the president and his wife were among those exploiters.
The issue on the business pages is whether a financial service is safer if it relies on the individual judgment of its deliverers or if it is subject to intense regulatory supervision.
Maybe the answer is by now self-evident.
