Noranda Inc. and Trelleborg AB said they plan to sell up to 25% of jointly held Falconbridge Ltd. to the public in an offering that Canadian investment industry sources said could be valued at about 1.4 billion Canadian dollars (US$1.03 billion.)
Noranda, a mining, forest products and energy concern, plans to maintain its 50% ownership level by subscribing for about half of the shares, leaving the remaining C$700 million available to institutional and retail investors.
Alan Thomas, senior vice president of finance at Noranda, said the issue is being contemplated at the request of Trelleborg, a Swedish industrial group, which he said seeks to decrease its exposure to Falconbridge.
He said both shareholders believe that making Falconbridge a publicly traded company will enhance its value.
Trelleborg is "looking at having a smaller piece of a better asset, while we'd like a bigger piece of a better asset," Mr. Thomas said.
Proceeds from the issue will be used to reduce Falconbridge's debt, which now totals about C$1.8 billion and which is guaranteed by its two shareholders.
News of the issue is being met with enthusiasm.
In recent years, investors have played metals prices by buying Inco Ltd., a Toronto nickel producer.
Normand Lamarche, manager of the Altamira Resource Fund in Toronto, sees Falconbridge as an attractive alternative.
"They have lower average costs than Inco. . .," he said.
But others point to the uncertain outlook for prices of Falconbridge's key commodities, nickel and zinc.
Nickel prices, which bottomed at US$1.86 a pound last year, have rebounded to a high of $2.80 a pound, said Vahid Fathi, a metals analyst at Kemper Securities Inc.
"There's perhaps been some premature enthusiasm regarding these prices," said Mr. Fathi, who expects a resumption in Russian exports this spring to lower prices.
Falconbridge posted a loss in 1993 due to low commodity prices and cutbacks that reduced production by about 15% , said Lars-Eric Johansson, chief financial officer of the Toronto company.
But he said that so far in 1994, Falconbridge has been profitable.
More uncertainty could center on the future of Trelleborg's remaining holdings in Falconbridge, analysts said.
They believe that Trelleborg, which has recently sold stakes in several concerns as part of an effort to cut debt and focus on wholly owned core operations, could sell Falconbridge stock into the market.
Trelleborg and Noranda acquired Falconbridge in 1989, paying C$2.13 billion for the 73% of the shares the two firms didn't already own.
Trelleborg officials couldn't be reached for comment.
