Options speculators are sending a potentially bullish message to stock investors.
But investors are too busy being bearish to listen.
Ever since the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates to 3.25% from 3% earlier this month, the speculators have been loading up on "put" options.
These options confer on the owner the right to sell stocks at specified prices.
By buying put options, the speculators are making a bearish bet on the market, but in the sometimes paradoxical realm of stock market analysis, a big bearish bet can be a bullish omen.
In recent weeks, the buying of puts has been so frenzied that on certain days volume in put options has exceeded volume in "call" options, an unusual event according to many technical analysts.
In contrast to puts, a call option confers the right to buy stocks for specified prices.
"What it means is that people are turning increasingly bearish and they are putting their money where their mouth is," says Richard Eakle, president of an investment advisory firm that bears his name.
The rising put-call ratio is "an excellent contrary indicator," says Mr. Eakle, who thinks the Dow Jones Industrial Average could rally to 4,300 to 4,500 in the second half.
As long as investors are bearish, that means they still have plenty of cash that could be put to work to move the market higher.
And the longer they're bearish, the better.
Mr. Eakle says he is particularly encouraged to find that the put-option purchases have been running strong even as the market has been gaining ground in recent days.
"The longer sentiment is negative, the more it gets engrained in people's minds and the more of a response you get in the opposite direction," says Mr. Eakle.
Looking back over the past decade, he notes that each time the volume of put options has surpassed the volume of call options for two consecutive days, the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index has rallied in the following 12 months, gaining as much as 27% and as little as 1%.
Indeed, one of the reasons Mr. Eakle is so bullish today is that on Feb. 4 and on Feb. 7, which were consecutive trading days, the volume of put options at the Chicago Board Options Exchange surpassed the number of calls.
Such an event has only occurred 10 other times in the past decade.
More recently, the CBOE put/call volume ratio has been running close to 1-to-1, suggesting that the pessimistic sentiment is still running strong.
"The put-call ratio has been incredibly bullish," says Timothy West, a technical analyst at S.G. Warburg.
"I just don't understand why the market hasn't exploded on it."
Mr. West suggests that one of the reasons put option buying is such a bullish signal for the market is that when speculators are loading up on puts, they are indirectly adding to the selling pressure in the stock market.
The market more quickly becomes oversold and bounces back.
This reaction attracts both investors who want to buy stock and investors who have to buy to offset their bets that stock prices would decline.
This combination of buyers often propels the market sharply higher and creates momentum for additional gains.
For some analysts, the put-call volume ratio in itself isn't a sufficiently compelling indicator of investor sentiment.
Thomas McManus, a stock analyst at Morgan Stanley, for instance, also looks at the CBOE's volatility index, which is an indicator of how expensive options are.
Ever since the Fed raised interest rates earlier this month, the volatility index has shot up.
Taken together with the rise in put volume, it suggests that demand for puts is so great now that it is boosting options prices.
In contrast with 1987, when investors were wildly bullish, Mr. McManus says that the recent pickup in put buying suggests that investors today are still diffident about the stock market.
"It is quite possible that we could be in the middle of or entering an explosive rally in the market," says Mr. McManus.
