How important is private television for a healthy advertising market?
From its new European marketing and media survey for 1994, Young & Rubicam Europe concludes that contrary to conventional wisdom, state-television monopolies depress not only advertising rates but also advertising spending for other media in the same market.
"It's clear to me that state monopolies artificially restrict and depress the whole advertising market," says Jane Perry, who headed the study of European advertising and media habits as media research director for Young & Rubicam Europe, a unit of Young & Rubicam Inc., New York.
"Advertisers are not spending as much as they would in those markets and therefore, it holds back the natural development of the market."
For example, in Switzerland and Finland, which don't have private national television, advertising expenditures for media remained basically flat for the past seven to eight years, Ms. Perry said.
Total ad expenditures in Switzerland were 2.5 billion Swiss francs ($1.69 billion) in 1992, up from 2.4 billion Swiss francs in 1986 using constant 1985 prices, the survey indicates.
Likewise Finland's total ad spending remained at 3.2 billion Finnish markkas ($566.7 million), or the same as in 1984 at constant 1985 prices.
That compares with markets like Italy, France and Germany that have private channels and have seen dramatic growth in ad spending.
In Italy for example, ad spending more than doubled to 6.3 trillion lire ($3.73 billion) in 1992 from 2.8 trillion lire in 1982, again using constant 1985 prices.
German ad spending in that period nearly doubled to 23.7 billion marks ($13.47 billion) in 1992 from 13.3 billion marks in 1982.
All dollar conversions are based on current exchange rates.
For its fourth consecutive annual media survey, Young & Rubicam Europe gathered economic, demographic, media and advertising statistics for 22 European countries from organizations and associations in each country responsible for official data, Ms. Perry says.
It standardized the figures for comparison.
Until 1988, only four countries -- Italy, France, Germany and the U.K. -- had private national television, Ms. Perry notes.
But the continuous introduction of private cable and satellite channels over the past five years has dramatically altered the advertising climate, Young & Rubicam Europe says.
Today, only four countries remain with state monopolies: Switzerland, Finland, Ireland and Austria.
"Normally you find that the absence of a lively TV-ad market affects other media advertising," Ms. Perry says.
"As ad spending for TV increases, spending in other media does as well."
Contrary to what many newspapers and magazine publishers have feared, private-television advertising doesn't steal print advertising, but instead expands total ad spending, the study found.
"I've found no long-term relationship between television gaining advertising and press losing," Ms. Perry says.
"Press might lose its share of advertising as a whole but the total has become bigger so advertising on TV is ultimately beneficial for everyone."
The Young & Rubicam Europe study also found adding television channels tends to change programming content and viewing behavior.
"The first thing you notice is an improvement in program quality," Ms. Perry says.
"There becomes a difference between what the consumer wants to watch and what the government wants" the consumer to watch.
Typically, a country that has state television as well as private television will see the two converge in terms of program quality, she says.
"Public-service broadcasters suddenly react when new channels come along.
Instead of low-cost discussion programs, heavy documentaries and lots of politicians' speeches, they introduce game shows" and other things to "liven it up," she says.
On the other hand, the private broadcaster seeks credibility and will introduce serious programming, original productions and documentaries to gain viewers' and advertiers' respect.
One surprising conclusion in the study is that availability of private television doesn't necessarily increase the hours viewers tune in.
Instead, increases in viewing hours correspond with the number of hours broadcast a day.
Quality of programming doesn't appear to influence how long viewers watch.
"All over the world, I've found that if the TV is there, people will watch it and they don't really care what's on," Ms. Perry says.
Viewing hours also depend on weather, time spent in the home and the number of television sets per household, Ms. Perry says.
According to the study, the most avid viewers are in Britain, where they watch an average of 3.5 hours a day, followed by Spain with 3.3 hours; Italy and Greece with three hours, seven minutes; and France, three hours, five minutes.
The Swiss watch the least, one hour, 54 minutes a day.
