AS GUN-SWAP PROGRAMS proliferate, will corporate support last?
The success of New York's toys-for-guns exchange in December prompts a slew of similar programs -- aided by retailers like Toys "R" Us and Caldor and even the New Jersey Nets basketball team.
"There's more mileage left" in this form of cause-oriented marketing, says Gary Stibel of New England Consulting Group in Connecticut.
He says more manufacturers will get involved.
They generally held back from the first crop of programs because they don't readily have the channels for making the swaps.
Supermarket company Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea, which donated to the New York program, says it will consider backing swaps elsewhere.
"It's a way to participate in the community," a spokesman says.
Others see the bandwagon eventually slowing, possibly next year.
By then, programs "will be speaking to people who won't be listening" since those willing to swap would already have done so, Mr. Stibel says.
Meanwhile, Fernando Mateo, the businessman who runs the New York program, says funding is running out.
VIRTUAL BILLBOARDS: Video technology inserts signs into live sports broadcasts.
The Baltimore Orioles weighs putting "billboards" in such once-sacrosanct spots as behind home plate.
But players and fans in the stadium won't see them.
The signs would be inserted into broadcasts via a video processor leased from New Jersey's Princeton Electronic Billboard Inc.
The technology hasn't been tested on the air yet, and the machines won't roll off the production line until March.
Still, the Orioles' David Cope thinks it's possible the technology can be ready by opening day.
"We might sell spots for half innings," he says.
It may be "a new avenue for revenue growth," says James Healey of the Boston Red Sox.
Meanwhile, Bryan Burns of Paragon Alliance, a New York consultant, looks at using the technology for a sports broadcast from abroad.
The attraction: It can replace foreign signs with ones that are more "U.S.-oriented."
U.S. CRAFT COMPANIES seek to cut a wide swath overseas.
Makers of craft items, like jewelry-making kits, are building up their export business even as U.S. sales stay strong.
Kentucky's Ceramichrome, a ceramic and paint maker, says 25% of its 1993 sales were made overseas.
Last year, it hired a manager just to handle sales to Spanish-speaking countries.
EZ International, a New Jersey quilting-kit supplier, plans to use multilingual packaging this year for exports to Europe.
The companies are jumping at the chance to grab footholds in markets where demand is rising and competition scarce.
The market abroad has to do a lot of catching up with the U.S., says Al Seifert of Greene Plastics, a Rhode Island bead firm.
Mike Harnett of Craft Trends Magazine, Niles, Ill., says the firms also are hedging their bets as U.S. craft retailers consolidate.
Here, "you're putting your fate in the hands of just a dozen buyers," he says.
The Hobby Industries of America, a trade group, will hold its first overseas craft show in the Netherlands in 1995.
HOSPITALS ARE HEALTHIER, says Modern Healthcare magazine in Chicago, comparing fiscal 1993 and 1992 figures of 311 hospitals.
It says the median profit margin rose to 4.76% from 4.42%, due partly to higher revenues and slower gains in expenses.
STUDENT, HEAL THYSELF?
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pa., trims health-center costs with a computer program that helps students treat themselves for minor ailments like colds and rashes.
Lehigh, which plans to sell the program to other campuses, says self-treatment costs $1 a student vs. $15 for a visit with a doctor.
CORPORATE CUSTOMERS paid up faster last year, says Mid-Continent Agencies Inc., an Illinois collections firm.
In a poll of 278 credit managers, 39.4% said days sales outstanding, the time it takes to collect on a bill, fell in the last half of 1993 from a year earlier, compared with 27.1% who said the number of days rose.
RADAR-DETECTOR BAN for truckers puts a brake on sales, but not everywhere.
In Ontario, Calif., retailer Truckstops of America's detector sales have dried up since the Jan. 19 federal ban on the gadgets in trucks and other commercial vehicles.
The truck stop now tries to sell the devices to car drivers.
Bonnie & Clyde's CB and Stereo in Dallas says sales were halved.
But "it's not as bad as we thought," says salesman Paul Garza.
Some truckers "are going to buy, regardless."
Indeed, at Truckstops of America's Mesquite, Texas, outlet, the ban boosted sales in pricier detectors with "stealth" features that make them undetectable.
The store used to sell one or two a week of such models, says manager Don Rightmyer.
In the past few days, it has sold several.
Tony Mirabelli of detector maker Uniden America in Fort Worth, Texas, says orders for scanners that spot police frequencies have risen about 15% in the past month.
In dollar terms, truckers account for about 18% of the $250 million detector market, says Don Rich of B.E.L. Tronics, a Covington, Ga., manufacturer.
BRIEFS: It was just a matter of time: P.R. practitioners can schmooze on-line with PRFORUM, an electronic-mail network started by Indiana University in Indianapolis. . . .
For another form of news-sharing, Clearblue Easy pregnancy-test kits come with numbers that allow users five minutes of free phone calls.
