Watching "Midnight Cowboy" on a big movie screen is both exhilarating and depressing.
Now 25 years old, it hasn't lost its power to shake you up as only a powerful movie can do.
That's the exhilarating part.
The depression sets in later, thinking about "Midnight Cowboy" and realizing how rare that kind of experience has become.
With its re-release in theaters, "Midnight Cowboy" will almost certainly be the most exciting "new" movie this year.
The film's greatness and durability come from the integrity of its vision.
In their adaptation of James Leo Herlihy's novel, director John Schlesinger and screenwriter Waldo Salt paint a bleak picture of American life.
It may not be fair; the satire often veers off into cruelty.
It certainly isn't politically correct.
But it fits the emotional truth of the main characters, Joe Buck and "Ratso" Rizzo.
They are the down-and-outers in a hostile world who briefly find in one another a friendly witness to their lonely dreams.
There are no speeches about homelessness or homosexuality or child abuse or friendship as there surely would be if this film were made today.
But then, it's hard to imagine a Hollywood studio attempting such a thing today.
What words would a test audience use to describe its response to a complicated picture about the bonding between a hustler who sells himself to women and men and a dirty street punk with a severe limp and awful teeth?
In some ways the film is an artifact of a time that sometimes seems so distant it might as well be the Paleolithic period.
It's not so much the period details of the 1960s -- events like the "happening," a party where stoned people videotape one another spouting marijuana wisdom and have self-conscious sex on and off camera.
It's the style -- the absence of self-consciousness and self-protective irony.
In so many films today the characters (in the better movies) always seem to be commenting on their emotions instead of just having them.
Everything is spelled out, not just what the characters are doing and thinking but how the audience should react to them.
Yet "Midnight Cowboy" doesn't seem creaky at all, or even dated.
In fact, its flashy visual style was an indication of things to come.
And the filmmakers cleverly linked the movie with its music.
After seeing "Midnight Cowboy" again it is impossible to clear your mind of its signature song, "Everybody's Talkin."
"Midnight Cowboy" also marked the beginning of the end of an era.
I'm not talking about the most obvious way (the movie was rated "X" when it was released, and re-rated an "R" a few years later when its sexual content no longer seemed shocking).
"Midnight Cowboy" was released in 1969, at the beginning of the last great gasp of American filmmaking.
After the '70s, movies for grown-ups would become more and more rare.
Though there are exceptions, the movies have never recovered their literacy.
This hindsight gives the opening shot of "Midnight Cowboy" a special nostalgia.
The movie opens on a white background, which, as the camera pulls back, turns out to be the screen at a drive-in movie.
You can see by the scrub brush that this is the West, but the only cowboys are little boys riding the toy horses at the playground under the movie screen.
Now, of course, the drive-ins as well as the cowboys have disappeared.
Joe Buck is from this place -- both literally and figuratively -- and he wants to leave it.
He puts on his cowboy clothes and heads for New York, dreaming of making it rich as a hustler.
He plans to earn his living off of rich ladies, but finds himself hustling young boys and old men on 42nd Street instead.
Yet to the end he remains touchingly innocent, his humanity untouched by the sordidness he can't escape.
Jon Voight's portrayal of Joe remains astonishingly touching -- nothing kitsch about it.
It's much more complicated watching Dustin Hoffman's Ratso Rizzo, the very small-time con man who also has a dream, of moving to Florida.
With his crippled man's walk and bad teeth and loser's whine, the character Ratso was a Method actor's dream.
So much to do -- anguish, slyness, physical infirmity.
And Mr. Hoffman did it, so well that everything he's done since in some way brings Ratso Rizzo to mind.
Yet, amazingly, when you see Dustin Hoffman playing Ratso Rizzo you don't think of anything else.
"Belle Epoque" is the pretty and frivolous picture that swept the Spanish academy awards last year.
Set in 1931, it's the story of a young man who finds himself in the country home of a wealthy man and his three daughters.
The man wants a friend; the daughters -- all lovely -- want romance.
The young man tries to oblige all of them.
Though the film is set against the backdrop of the Spanish Civil War, politics serves only conversation and punch lines (to jokes that may elude those not familiar with the intricacies of Spanish history).
Director Fernando Trueba has a painter's eye for lush countrysides and luscious humans, so it's all very pleasing to look at.
Your enjoyment of it will depend on how you feel about films that call into use the verb "cavort."
VIDEO TIP: I wanted to recommend a very good documentary I once saw on public television about the life of the late Waldo Salt, who wrote the screenplay for "Midnight Cowboy."
Salt had a difficult life and career, which included being blacklisted and spending 10 years writing television shows under an alias.
Unfortunately, the documentary apparently isn't available at video stores.
It is possible, however, to see Salt's work, already distinctive in his first film, "The Shopworn Angel," with James Stewart and Margaret Sullivan.
There is toughness and intelligence in all his work, even in "Taras Bulba" (with Tony Curtis and Yul Brynner as 16th-century Cossacks) and especially in "Serpico" (with Al Pacino as the last honest cop in 20th-century New York City).
