Bosnia's Serbs withdrew some heavy weapons and NATO called off the air strikes.
NATO Secretary General Manfred Woerner is properly thankful that he won relief for badly mauled Sarajevans.
NATO, for the moment, is spared deeper involvement, the danger of losing fliers and the risk of accidentally bombing non-combatants.
But it is not quite correct to call the Serbian backdown a victory for the West.
When the dust settles it may be seen, on balance, as more of a win for Russia and Serbia.
One of the indicators of the power equation developing before Sunday night's denouement was the mood of Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
He was positively joyful as the deadline approached for allied warplanes to start turning his artillery and tanks into molten metal.
"We are approaching peace in Sarajevo," exulted the man who has done so much to kill and maim the people of that city.
Why this sudden emergence of a cheerful Mr. Karadzic?
The answer is simple.
Mr. Karadzic knew that there would be no air strikes because he was prepared to make the gestures that would dissuade the NATO allies from that bold risk.
He also knew that Russia had just emerged as a very important player in this drama, as nominally a peacemaker but as a peacemaker very much on Serbia's side.
With the arrival in Sarajevo of Russia's photogenic young envoy, Vitaly Churkin, a power equation that had been shifting against the Serbs tilted back in its favor.
Mr. Churkin went before the cameras and got the world's attention with a warning that bombing would mean "all-out war."
He also was able to say that 400 Russian paratroopers would be brought down to Sarajevo from Croatia to help keep the combatants separated.
The Russians would wear blue berets and be under full U.N. control, of course.
Mr. Churkin's maneuvers in Sarajevo were getting muscular backing from Boris Yeltsin, who was dealing directly with Bill Clinton.
The Russians summoned a Security Council meeting just before the midnight GMT deadline, no doubt to block any remote possibility that the air strikes might go forward against their wishes.
Russia might be suffering from economic and political disarray, but on the weekend it proved to be very much back in business at the United Nations, an arena where during Cold War days it achieved formidable influence.
Look at the arrival of the diplomatic Russian cavalry from the point of view of Mr. Karadzic and his partner in crime in Belgrade, Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic.
Chances are now much improved that the Serbian fighters will be able to hold most of what they have won, that is to say some 70% of the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Before the strong Russian diplomatic intervention both men had good reasons to fear reversals.
Mr. Milosevic faced a Serbian population growing increasingly malevolent as hyperinflation and shortages brought on by U.N. sanctions grip the country.
Mr. Karadzic was confronting a Bosnian Muslim army that is growing in strength.
He may have morale problems among his Serbian fighters as well.
Signs of declining Serbian morale, such as desertions or sales of weapons to the enemy, are ones that the Russians would be quick to recognize.
They suffered the same thing, and eventually defeat, in their attempted conquest of Afghanistan.
Given Russia's sympathies, there is every reason to believe that it volunteered its 400 soldiers for duty in Sarajevo out of fear that the Serbs' interests are best served at this point by shielding them from the Bosnian army.
Indeed, the Serbs had explicitly complained that if they surrendered their heavy weapons they would be at the mercy of the Bosnian infantry.
As Paul Beaver of Jane's Information Group in London wrote in The Wall Street Journal Europe Jan. 27, the Bosnian Muslims have been greatly strengthened by improved organization, professional cadres from other Muslim countries and, despite the U.N. arms embargo, clandestine imports of modern weapons.
The combination of NATO air strikes and the ground maneuvers of the improved Bosnian army might have quickly tilted the military balance against the Serbs.
Bill Clinton was asked after his radio address Saturday why NATO didn't take a tough line a year ago.
He answered, rather absently, that there was "no consensus" then.
If there is a Western consensus now, it is partly because of greater strength on the Muslim side.
But nature and politics abhor a vacuum and the NATO allies may have allowed the vacuum to last too long.
In Russia's December election, foreign policy hard-liners were big winners.
Russia is beginning to assert itself once more.
It is finding that it no longer must plead with NATO to respect its weakness.
Given the division and lack of direction in NATO, Russia finds it can wheel and deal once more, taking advantage of its operational freedom.
Russia can do that especially well in Europe's mid-section.
It talked Bill Clinton and his friends out of admitting the Visegrad countries -- Poland, the Czech and Slovak Republics and Hungary -- to NATO.
Its intervention on Serbia's behalf now has the sympathy of Hungary and most likely silent admirers in other Slavic countries.
Greece, a NATO member, also is nominally in its camp.
Old leftist Andreas Papandreou pulled a power play of his own last week by trying to deny Macedonia, a predominantly Muslim country, access to the sea.
Given the fact that NATO-member Turkey is sympathetic to and may be aiding Balkan Muslims, new disarray within NATO is possible as the traditional rivalry between Turkey and Greece is further aggravated by differences over Bosnia.
Turkish planes were poised to take part in the NATO bombings.
Much has been said about the "peace dividend" that would result from the end of the Cold War.
Bill Clinton appears to see foreign policy, an American president's most important responsibility, as an unwanted bother or something that can be carried off with mere bonhomie.
He and his European allies are dismantling armies to free up more money for their welfare states.
"Where's the threat?" it is often asked.
The threat, we should have seen Sunday, comes from letting situations like Bosnia fester until the neighbors find themselves choosing sides.
Europeans will remember that choosing sides has happened before with terrible consequences -- in 1914 over the same patch of ground.
It may be that Russia and the West will be able to work together to bring that much-sought "just and lasting peace" to the rest of Bosnia-Herzegovina, all of it taking place under that alluring rubric called "U.N. peacekeeping."
But it is not clear that what was going on over the weekend between Russia and the West was cooperation.
It looked more like confrontation.
Perhaps it's time for the West to start asking whether it really wants Russia to re-establish hegemony in Slavic lands.
Mr. Melloan is deputy editor, international, of The Wall Street Journal.
