A few American textbooks become legends, known familiarly by their authors' names as editions and titles change over time.
Todd and Curti, which first appeared in 1950, is one such book.
Under the title "Triumph of the American Nation," in the 1980s it became the largest-selling high school American history book in the country.
But lately Todd and Curti has been a troubled title.
In 1991 Georgia rejected the book, criticizing its "outdated approach, inattention to multiculturalism, inadequate critical thinking questions, and choppy narrative flow."
Holt, Rinehart & Winston made the book over from scratch, giving it a new name, "Todd and Curti's The American Nation," and publishing it last month with a 1995 copyright.
The new Todd and Curti exemplifies disturbing trends in social studies publishing today.
It is a big step backward, a case of "dumbing down" and revisionist folly in search of a larger audience.
No "triumph" remains in the title, and no triumphalism exists in the text, except for the many forces in contemporary culture that seek to transform the curriculum along the fault lines of multiculturalism.
The new 1,090-page book has a streamlined four-color look.
A pictorial, jazzy, broken format has replaced the stolid design of the previous volume.
The core text has been cut in half, replaced by illustrations and white space.
That's bad enough.
But Todd and Curti's new content is more disturbing than its format.
The final chapters are a medley of racial and gender themes, radical gestures and trendy global "concerns."
Liberal crusades and activism receive uncritical accolades.
Two photographs of protesters in wheelchairs (and a third, captioned: "A woman with visual impairment demonstrating for civil rights.") reflect the force of pressure groups on the shape of schoolroom history.
So do profiles of Native Americans Russell Means and Wilma Mankiller.
The 1974 Bilingual Education Act receives prominent attention as a multicultural initiative.
The 1946 Employment Act shrinks to two sentences.
The saga of the postwar computer industry vanishes; the computer is presented instead as a machine that helps "make the workplace safe for people with disabilities."
Recent American letters are represented by Gish Jen, Sandra Cisneros and Jessica Hagedorn.
A map entitled "A Multicultural Country" color codes the U.S. into 22 ethnic and "high diversity" areas.
The results are confusing or plain wrong.
Students will now learn that northwestern Nevada and central Montana are "high diversity" areas, just like Los Angeles and Miami.
American blacks have been relabeled "African Americans," an unsettled designation that, like others, has become nearly universal in social studies textbooks.
With the 1960s counterculture, recent history fades into romance.
Jimi Hendrix makes the scene at the 1970 Isle of Wight music festival; the text tastefully omits his drug overdose later that year.
According to Todd and Curti, "Woodstock was more than just a rock concert.
It was a celebration of the era."
Then, darkly, the chapter concludes, "Some four months later, at a free concert held at Altamont Raceway near San Francisco, a security team beat a young African American to death in full view of the stage.
The idealistic spirit of the youth movement seemed to die with him."
Not true.
And wasn't the "security team" a group of Hell's Angels?
We meet Murphy Brown having a baby and learn that "many Americans were abandoning the idea that marriage was necessarily a lifelong commitment."
We deal with sexual harassment and homelessness, "which increased during the 1980s, partly as a result of President Reagan's economic policies."
An estimated three million Americans are homeless, according to the book, four to six times the number in reputable surveys.
Todd and Curti states, "Ronald Reagan appealed to a wide range of voters disenchanted with liberal politics."
It never explains the appeal or the disenchantment.
"To gain support for their causes, the New Right established research centers such as the Heritage Foundation and launched direct mail campaigns" to elect Mr. Reagan, says the book, which conflates Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority and voter insurgency in the 1980s.
A chapter on the environment sounds a different alarm: "One 1992 report claimed that at least 140 species were vanishing each day!
Activists are campaigning to slow this process and save at least some species from extinction."
-- The number of mass-market educational publishers continues to shrink.
The recent departure of Macmillan from school publishing and the absorption of McDougal, Littell by Houghton Mifflin are the latest chapters in the depressing tale of ingestion, consolidation and lost autonomy in the field.
-- History as a basic and required subject increasingly competes with social studies electives that are concerned mainly with building students' self-esteem.
-- Educational publishers are tempted to retreat entirely from history, a troubled and costly area of the curriculum where little agreement on content exists and where marketing headaches abound.
The new Todd and Curti confirms the ongoing decline of a narrative core in history texts and profound changes in high school history courses.
It indicates the continuing success of pressure groups that want to reconstruct the nation's official record of its past for young people.
As it happens, I spoke a while back to the co-author of the original text, Merle Curti, now a 96-year-old retired professor at the University of Wisconsin and a Pulitzer Prize-winning historian.
Mr. Curti said he "lost control of the book years ago."
The new book is written under the signature of Paul Boyer, also a historian at the University of Wisconsin and a respected textbook author.
I know several of the historians listed as "content reviewers" in the front of the text and have favorably reviewed their own works of history.
I cannot believe they had anything more than the narrowest of encounters with the final product.
Mr. Sewall is director of the American Textbook Council, which reviews history texts and curricula.
Most recently, he is the co-author of "After Hiroshima: The U.S.A.
Since 1945" (Longman, 1993).
