In the spirit of the silly British headmistress who recently decided that Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet" is inappropriate for her students because it's a "totally heterosexual story," the American Bar Association is poised to adopt a politically correct speech code for lawyers at its midyear meeting in Kansas City, Mo., next week.
The ABA Standing Committee on Ethics and Professional Responsibility wants to amend the Model Rules of Professional Conduct to prohibit lawyers from expressing certain points of view.
Specifically, the proposed rule provides that it is professional misconduct for a lawyer to "knowingly manifest by words or conduct, in the course of representing a client, bias or prejudice based upon race, sex, religion, national origin, disability, age, sexual orientation or socioeconomic status."
This proposal violates nearly every principle of freedom of speech under the Constitution.
It restricts political speech at the very core of the First Amendment.
It censors speech on the basis of viewpoint.
And it is chillingly vague and overbroad.
Suppose several attorneys are representing clients at the closing of a business transaction.
During a short lull in the meeting, Attorney A asks two of his colleagues what they think of a gay-rights law currently before the state legislature.
Attorney B says he favors the legislation "because gays are an oppressed minority," and Attorney C says he opposes the legislation "because homosexuality is immoral and unnatural."
When I posed this hypothetical to George Kuhlman, counsel to the ABA committee that drafted the speech code, he said that Attorney C's words "might be a violation" of the rule.
Attorney B's statement, which is the politically correct one according to the ABA, is not a violation.
As Mr. Kuhlman conceded, the potential reach of the rule is practically limitless.
Suppose that in our hypothetical the attorneys are discussing economic policy instead of gay rights.
If Attorney B condemns tax cuts that favor "only the greedy rich" and Attorney C complains that welfare "subsidizes the irresponsible poor," both of them might find themselves in hot water for having expressed "bias" on the basis of "socioeconomic status."
Such will be the risks of practicing law in the sensitive '90s.
Moreover, the consequences for attorneys who express the wrong opinions are significant under the new regime.
As David Isbell, chairman of the ABA's Standing Committee on Ethics and Professional Responsibility, noted in a letter to the House of Delegates: "What we are saying is that a failure to comply with that policy should result in lawyer sanctions, including suspension from the practice of law."
That ought to get their attention!
Like most PC nonsense, the proposed ABA rule is well-intended.
We can all agree that lawyers, like everyone else, should strive for civility and tolerance.
This is particularly true when lawyers participate in judicial proceedings, because of the societal goal of ensuring fair and impartial trials.
But this interest calls for only a narrow restriction on lawyers' speech.
Indeed, the Model Code of Judicial Conduct already places upon judges the duty to require lawyers practicing before them to refrain from expressing bias or prejudice against parties, witnesses, counsel or others.
The proposed ABA speech code sweeps far beyond the courtroom and uses a hatchet to perform surgery that calls for a laser.
Since attorneys spend most of their day at the office "representing" clients, the rule obviously regulates and chills a great deal of speech of the typical lawyer.
We can shrug and laugh at the headmistress who banned the Bard for his heterosexism.
But if the ABA wishes to be taken more seriously, it would do well to reaffirm its commitment to freedom of speech by rejecting the proposed lawyer speech code.
As always, the proper response to opinions one finds offensive is counterspeech, not censorship.
Sadly, this is a lesson that that the ABA is in danger of forgetting.
Mr. Duncan is a professor at the University of Nebraska College of Law.
