If you want to figure out how the U.S. is faring in its trade battles around the world, don't look to those much-publicized monthly trade numbers everyone rails about.
They may not be getting the picture even half right.
That is a lesson politicians here usually forget.
President Clinton lectured Japan's prime minister that that country's trade surplus "puts our people here and our economy here in a very difficult situation."
But it isn't so simple.
First, sometimes U.S. exports are simply undercounted, says Allan Mendelowitz, a General Accounting Office economist.
For years, he says, Canada recorded greater imports from the U.S. than showed up in U.S. export data.
The reason?
U.S. Customs agents are more meticulous in counting imports, on which they must collect duties, than in keeping track of exports.
Then there is the matter of middlemen.
U.S. figures show China racking up a $22.8 billion trade surplus last year with the U.S.
But China says those numbers are way off because many of the exports the U.S. credits to China really are shipped from Hong Kong.
But the U.S. says some Hong Kong shippers are just fronts for the Chinese.
Both have a point, making the figures suspect.
In southern China, it is routine for garment and electronics factories to sell goods at low prices to Hong Kong affiliates; those are the export numbers China records.
The units then sell the products abroad for fat profits.
That money goes to Hong Kong -- and China views the high-value exports as Hong Kong's.
Sometimes U.S. trade trackers agree, sometimes they don't -- muddling the numbers further.
And finally, there is the question of using other nations as production platforms.
Generally, the trade statistics record exports and imports according to the countries that ship or receive the goods.
But that ignores offshore production.
For instance, sales in Europe of Opels produced by General Motors Corp.'s German plants don't show up in the U.S. trade balance.
The U.S. and Japan have many overseas factories, so the trade stats don't accurately reflect trade between them.
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. makes most of its stereo equipment in Singapore for shipment to the U.S. Texas Instruments Inc. makes semiconductors in Japan for the local market.
Those sales wouldn't show up as Japanese or U.S. exports, but they clearly strengthen the parent company back home.
The tracking problem will worsen because the strong yen is making it more attractive for Japan to manufacture offshore.
By the end of 1992, Japanese investment in East Asia had more than doubled in six years to $54.3 billion, says Edward Graham of the Institute for International Economics.
If exports from Japan simply shift abroad, its trade relations with the U.S. won't change much -- even though the U.S. trade deficit with Japan will shrink.
The trade numbers also don't clearly indicate which nation is winning the more important competition -- the one for jobs.
Jagdish Bhagwati, a Columbia University economist, puts it this way: If sales of U.S. cars to Japan someday surge, U.S. car makers will be able to hire more workers.
But as the pool of skilled workers diminishes, he notes, the wages required to hire them rise.
That leads to higher prices for cars and other goods, reducing their competitive advantage and appeal overseas.
Overall, he says, it's a mystery how many additional jobs -- if any -- would be created.
A few years ago, Commerce Department economists calculated that, on average, $1 billion in exports supported 20,000 jobs in 1990.
But that figure was widely used during the Nafta debate to predict how many new jobs would be created by increased exports -- a use for which it isn't suited.
"We won't put out that kind of number again," a Commerce economist vows.
To try to fix some of the broader problems in the trade numbers, the National Academy of Sciences suggested toting up companies' total sales, no matter where their factories are.
That calculation better reflects the competitiveness of companies world-wide -- and shows the U.S. a lot stronger than commonly recognized.
Using that method, Commerce Department economists calculated that the U.S. would have posted an overall trade surplus in goods and services of $164 billion in 1991, rather than a $28 billion deficit.
But the National Academy report doesn't distinguish how much of the activity by overseas U.S. affiliates helps workers at home.
As an alternative, a trio of Commerce economists propose counting a rough estimate of profits by U.S. companies abroad as U.S. exports -- figuring that those funds often benefit companies domestically through greater investment and R&D.
Under that accounting, the $28 billion trade deficit in 1991 turns into a $24 billion surplus.
"We're trying to present a comprehensive picture," says Steven Landefeld, a Commerce economist.
Maybe then the trade stats will actually mean something, too.
Total U.S. trade in goods and services, in billions of dollars
