Among the proposals to be considered by a newly formed disclosure-reform committee of state regulators is one requiring firms to provide prospectuses about partnerships and other investments at the time investors buy them -- not several days later with their trade confirmation slips.
"There's a hypocrisy in delivering the disclosure document with the confirm," says Nancy Smith, New Mexico's securities director who is heading up the state regulators' committee.
When receiving a prospectus after the sale, she says, "what you know is whether you made a good deal, or whether or not you bought a lawsuit."
Indeed, considering how late investors sometimes receive a prospectus, some have suggested that the disclosure document instead be called a "retrospectus."
The regulators' move to buttress brokerage disclosure stems from the scandal at Prudential Securities Inc., a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, which has been accused of widespread fraud in selling $8.15 billion of partnerships.
Among the problems raised in the Prudential mess was that brokers routinely sold risky partnerships based solely on rosy sales scripts, and didn't rely on the prospectus.
A state-regulatory survey of 22,000 Prudential partnership investors last year showed that just 15% said they received the prospectus before making a decision to buy the partnerships.
Moreover, former Prudential brokers have testified in various court cases they were told not to rely on the prospectus, for fear investors would shun the partnerships.
"Retail customers would not read or understand prospectuses and would be so confused that they would not purchase" partnerships, according to affidavits filed in various court cases from about three dozen former Prudential brokers.
The regulators' disclosure committee, formed last month, isn't expected to propose recommendations until late this year.
Among the options for the committee is to change states' securities regulations or the guidelines of the North American Securities Administrators Association, a state regulators' umbrella organization sponsoring the committee.
The disclosure group also could advocate federal legislation; indeed, committee members say they are working closely with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the matter.
Under federal securities law, investors technically have one year to try to rescind a trade if they discover that the data in the prospectus conflict with what their broker told them.
But many investors don't bother to read prospectuses, which typically run 50 to 300 pages and are steeped in technical language so dense that some securities lawyers can't easily understand them.
Last year's state survey showed that just 6% of Prudential partnership investors surveyed carefully read the prospectus.
Among other potential proposals by the disclosure committee is simplifying prospectuses to make them more readable.
The committee also is looking into requiring that brokerage firms include the nature of the investment and all fees on trade-confirmation statements.
One possibility being discussed, for instance, is language on the confirmation statement that says the investment has been approved for either conservative or speculative investors.
"This would be a flag for investors to say, `Wait a minute, my broker said this was safe, and this confirm says it's speculative,'" says Thomas R. Grady, a Naples, Fla., plaintiffs' lawyer who was asked to serve as an adviser to the state committee.
Another recommendation the committee is likely to consider is requiring that firms include all fees on the confirmation slips.
"There's never a spot where you actually see what proportion of a dollar invested is going totally to fees," says Ms. Smith, the committee chief.
The practice of brokerage firms providing prospectuses after the sale has evolved during the past several years.
"In most sales made prior to about '86 or '87, prospectuses were delivered with the sales pitch," says Charles Bennett, director of corporate financing at the National Association of Securities Dealers.
Since then, he says, "a lot of the Wall Street firms started looking for ways to conduct business . . . over the phone" in selling partnerships.
