Whenever Yaacov Nimrodi starts talking about his life's adventures, his boyish face lights up.
Soon, the 67-year-old Israeli spy-turned-businessman is bounding across his study to the mahogany bookshelves, pulling down old photo albums.
"Here's Adnan and me in Italy during my daughter's honeymoon," he says, displaying a snapshot of the Nimrodi clan dining last fall with Adnan Khashoggi, the Saudi Arabian financier.
Mr. Nimrodi smiles.
"Adnan is a great man," he says.
"He loves peace.
He loves Israel."
Adnan Khashoggi and Yaacov Nimrodi, the arms-dealing duo who helped bring the world the Iran-Contra fiasco, are back, pooling their chutzpah again for a new era in the Mideast.
This time, the gunrunners, who have traveled the world targeting a buck, have sworn off the business of death.
Instead, they are plowing their money into peace.
Messrs. Khashoggi and Nimrodi are angling to become the leading industrialists in the Gaza Strip after Israel's anticipated withdrawal later this year.
Their plans cover the waterfront.
In the works are a telecommunications system, electric-power generator, desalinization plant, pipe factory, a Muslim-pilgrimage company, investment bank, railroad, even an airline.
In all, Mr. Nimrodi says the investments could reach $500 million.
The comrades-in-arms aren't equal partners in every planned venture.
Some of the projects are taking shape aboard the peripatetic Mr. Khashoggi's DC-9 jet, while others are evolving here in Mr. Nimrodi's Gatsby-esque mansion near Tel Aviv.
But the two adventurers are working with each other, and with the World Bank, to form several large industrial companies that would be owned by Israeli, Palestinian and other Arab investors.
"This isn't charity.
We're fully profit-oriented," the 58-year-old Mr. Khashoggi says in his Paris townhouse.
With his U.S. bankruptcy problems behind him, Mr. Khashoggi says he is focusing on Russia, Iran and the Mideast.
In the past two years, he says he has made nearly $3 million on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange.
"If we can help the Palestinians today," he says, "we'll profit later on."
Mr. Khashoggi says he has been secretly sowing seeds in Israel for years.
As far back as 1967, the confidant of Saudi kings opened clandestine links with Western Jews, Mossad agents and Israeli politicians, in an effort to bridge the Arab-Israeli divide.
The contacts were a risky breach of the Arab boycott of Israel.
But now that peace seems at hand, Mr. Khashoggi is emerging from the shadows.
"My role has always been a soft one," he says.
"I was just opening doors."
The Khashoggi vision is simple: Forge peace through commerce.
"Adnan has always had this notion of marrying the energy and business acumen of the Israeli with the capital of the Arab world," says Kenneth Bialkin, the financier's long-time U.S. lawyer and a partner in the New York firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.
As a former chairman of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, Mr. Bialkin has introduced Mr. Khashoggi to many powerful Israelis over the years.
"He has always said, in a jocular way, that if we can't make peace, perhaps we can make money," Mr. Bialkin says.
That is naive, says Nasser Nashashibi, scion of one of Jerusalem's oldest Palestinian families and a pal of the Saudi.
"I know Mr. Khashoggi's concept of peace is that business has no nationality," Mr. Nashashibi says, "but he isn't mature politically.
If he accepts any advice from me, it's to remember he's a Muslim and an Arab.
Don't rush into business and lose friends to win enemies."
There are Israelis who would give Yaacov Nimrodi the same advice.
Born in Baghdad and raised in Jerusalem, Mr. Nimrodi became one of the young Jewish state's most gifted spy-masters.
In intelligence circles, he is legendary for his mastery of the language and mannerisms of Arabs and Persians, skills he used to recruit some of Israel's best spies.
In the mid-1950s, Mr. Nimrodi was sent to Tehran as Israel's secret military attache to Iran.
Though Israel and Iran had no formal diplomatic ties, the young colonel remained in Tehran for 24 years -- the first 14 for Israel, the last 10 for himself.
He built the shah's intelligence agency while earning huge commissions on some $250 million a year in arms sales to Iran.
That is how he got to know Mr. Khashoggi, who amassed, and later spent, one of the world's biggest fortunes by brokering arms to Saudi Arabia.
They met in Paris in 1975.
The rendezvous was arranged by the late Herman "Hank" Greenspun, publisher of the Las Vegas Sun newspaper and a hero in Israel for smuggling guns to the Jewish state in its war of independence in 1948.
Mr. Greenspun knew Mr. Khashoggi through Eugene Warner, another Jewish activist in Las Vegas and an adviser to the Saudi tycoon.
Mr. Warner, who lives at the Sands Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas, didn't return phone calls for this article.
But Mr. Khashoggi says he met Mr. Warner in 1958, on a visit to Nevada as a guest of Howard Hughes.
He describes Mr. Warner as "my Las Vegas real-estate agent."
Associates of both men say Mr. Warner traveled widely with Mr. Khashoggi for decades, including many trips to Saudi Arabia, where Jews are legally barred.
(Saudi Arabia also forbids its citizens to do business with Israel.)
With Mr. Warner, the Saudi met other prominent Jews and Israelis.
"All these Jewish friends of mine endorsed me to the Israelis," Mr. Khashoggi explains, "so they wouldn't fear me."
At their 1975 introduction, Messrs. Khashoggi and Nimrodi were joined by Adolph "Al" Schwimmer, the Israeli-American founder of Israel Aircraft Industries, the country's biggest defense contractor.
(A decade later, Mr. Schwimmer would participate with them in the Iran-Contra affair.)
At the Paris meeting, they discussed ways of opening links between Israel and Saudi Arabia, and Mr. Khashoggi, who was close to Anwar al-Sadat, conveyed the Egyptian president's readiness for peace with Israel.
Mr. Schwimmer declines to comment.
According to Arabs and Israelis who know both men, Messrs. Khashoggi and Nimrodi arranged arms transactions long before the first Iran-Contra deal in 1985.
Both of them, however, now deny this.
They dabbled in diplomacy.
As Egypt and Israel were negotiating peace in the late 1970s, Mr. Khashoggi floated a proposal by King Fahd, then the Saudi crown prince, for peace with Israel in exchange for Saudi control of the Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem.
As an added incentive, says Mr. Nimrodi, the Saudis dangled some $100 billion of investment capital for the region to underwrite development.
Mr. Nimrodi took the offer to Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, who discussed it with Mr. Khashoggi in New York.
Mr. Khashoggi recalls that Mr. Begin, who died in 1992, "told me that before we could talk about Jerusalem, we needed to make total peace.
I said, `Sir, part of total peace is to fly the Saudi flag over the mosques.'
He didn't buy it.
He lectured me for 2 1/2 hours on the history of the Jews, and said Jerusalem wasn't for sale."
The plots thickened.
According to Mr. Nimrodi, in 1981, after many fortunes were wiped out in the Iranian revolution, Messrs. Khashoggi, Nimrodi and Schwimmer decided to overthrow Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
In Morocco, Messrs. Nimrodi and Khashoggi say, they recruited the late shah's son, Prince Reza Pahlavi, to lead the effort.
The mercenaries would be funded by Riyadh, armed by Israel, and trained in Sudan, according to Mr. Nimrodi.
There followed a gathering at Mr. Khashoggi's safari ranch in southern Kenya in May 1982.
Along with Messrs. Nimrodi and Schwimmer came Ariel Sharon, then Israeli defense minister, and David Kimche, then director general of Israel's foreign ministry and later a key Israeli representative in the Iran-Contra affair.
Mr. Khashoggi says he had known Mr. Kimche from the Israeli's days as a Mossad agent in Paris in the 1960s.
Mr. Khashoggi brought along Sudanese President Gafaar Numeiri, who has since been deposed.
According to Mr. Nimrodi, everything was set: Mr. Sharon agreed to provide surplus Israeli weaponry for as much as $1 billion being offered by Saudi Arabia; the Sudanese president was happy to host the guerrillas, in exchange for cash and Israeli help in containing Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi.
The Central Intelligence Agency, which was kept abreast of the plan, didn't interfere, Mr. Nimrodi says.
The CIA declines to comment.
But the Mossad intelligence service, despite Defense Minister Sharon's involvement, ultimately killed the scheme.
"The Mossad had concluded, in this and other cases, that it was not a good idea to trust Arabs," explain authors Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman in their 1990 book "Every Spy a Prince."
Yitzhak Hofi, the Mossad's chief at the time, resented the encroachment on his turf by Messrs. Khashoggi and Nimrodi, and sent word to the Baby Shah, as the prince was known, not to work with them, the authors write.
The Kenya meeting proved instrumental, however, in Israel's evacuation of thousands of famine-stricken Jews from Ethiopia.
Thanks to Mr. Sharon's request to Mr. Numeiri, many Jews were airlifted to Israel from Sudan's capital, Khartoum.
Mr. Sharon and Mr. Kimche were traveling and couldn't be reached for comment.
In 1984, when word broke about the rescue operation, Yasser Arafat, leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, was angry at Mr. Khashoggi for helping Israel.
So the Saudi tycoon, who had never met Mr. Arafat, paid him a visit.
"I walked into his office and Yasser was wearing his gun, so I said, `Shoot me!'"
Mr. Khashoggi says.
"We laughed and kissed."
For the next several months, Mr. Khashoggi says, he carried peace feelers between Mr. Arafat and Shimon Peres, Israel's prime minister at the time.
The contacts didn't go anywhere.
But Mr. Khashoggi's rapport with Mr. Peres, whom he had known through Mr. Schwimmer, would be crucial in the next adventure: trading arms for hostages with Iran.
The Iran-Contra escapade strained the long Khashoggi-Nimrodi relationship.
Though Mr. Khashoggi had introduced Iranian middleman Manucher Ghorbanifar to the Israelis and provided bridge loans for the secret weapons deals, he and his outside partners lost at least $7 million in the fiasco, according to the final report of special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh.
Much of their money was diverted to Nicaragua's rebels, who were trying to oust the Sandinista government, by Lt. Col. Oliver North, Mr. Walsh concluded.
By 1988, after Mr. Khashoggi's Triad American Corp. had collapsed, the Saudi-Israeli machinations were back on.
Mr. Khashoggi agreed to meet in London with Meyer Kaplan, a Nimrodi protege who was starting a company to bring Muslim pilgrims to Jerusalem.
Brainstorming together, Mr. Khashoggi advised Mr. Kaplan that Israel's chief rabbi should invite Morocco's King Hassan II, a noted Arab moderate, to Jerusalem to pray.
Mr. Khashoggi also helped open contacts for the Israeli with tourism officials in Jordan, and offered to invest $1 million in the enterprise himself.
The money, however, still hasn't arrived in Jerusalem, nor has King Hassan II.
"Adnan is brilliant.
He penetrates to the heart of the problem between Muslim and Jew," says Mr. Kaplan, a retired Israeli police detective and head of Mr. Nimrodi's Ziara International.
The "intifada," or Palestinian uprising, bred still more Khashoggi initiatives.
In 1989, at the height of the rebellion, Mr. Khashoggi proposed that Israel simply abandon the Gaza Strip.
He and some Arab backers would step in and, with $20 billion or so, turn the swath of sand dunes and refugee camps into a cross between Las Vegas and Hong Kong.
Mr. Khashoggi discussed the plan in Paris with Mr. Sharon, then Israel's housing minister.
"I told him the only solution for Gaza was to walk out," Mr. Khashoggi recalls.
"Let the Arabs worry about it."
With Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's knowledge, Mr. Nimrodi explored the concept further with Bassam Abu Sherif, a close PLO associate of Mr. Arafat.
Though the Persian Gulf War -- specifically, Saudi anger at the PLO for sympathizing with Iraq -- killed the proposal, Messrs. Khashoggi and Nimrodi take credit for leading the way to last September's agreement calling for Israel's eventual withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the city of Jericho.
"This was the beginning of what I call the opening of the Israeli mind," Mr. Khashoggi says.
Adds Mr. Nimrodi: "Arafat and Rabin took the Gaza idea from us."
After the Gulf War and the Mideast peace conference in Madrid, the pace quickened.
Mr. Khashoggi began investing heavily in Israeli stocks.
He tried to organize a visit to Jerusalem by 100 Saudis but was stymied by Jordan's King Hussein -- a boarding-school classmate -- who wouldn't let the group travel through Amman.
Last year, after engineering Col. Gadhafi's $307 million investment in a chain of Lonhro PLC hotels, Mr. Khashoggi persuaded the Libyan leader to send 200 Muslim pilgrims to Jerusalem via Mr. Nimrodi's company.
Col. Gadhafi hoped the gesture would erode his international isolation caused by the 1988 Pan Am jet bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland, in which 270 people were killed.
But the trip backfired amid a swirl of Israeli, Palestinian and Libyan recriminations.
"Gadhafi's a friend of the peace process," Mr. Khashoggi contends.
Their Gaza business plans began churning nearly a year ago -- months before the Israeli-PLO agreement was signed.
Mr. Nimrodi proposed to his old friend that they build a $25 million factory to produce high-capacity water and sewage pipe for export throughout the Mideast, particularly Libya.
The partners created a three-way joint venture with an Italian pipemaker and got the Israeli government to release 38 acres of land for the plant on the edge of the Gaza Strip.
Last fall, Mr. Khashoggi met with Israel's economic minister, Shimon Shetreet, in Geneva to discuss the plan.
Groundbreaking is scheduled in six months; 500 Gaza Arabs are expected to work in the plant.
That is just for starters.
Mr. Khashoggi's third wife, 29-year-old Shapuri, a cousin of the late shah of Iran, has collected $15 million to build a children's hospital in the Gaza Strip.
She recently visited Israel, to make contacts.
Mr. Khashoggi himself is raising capital for an Arab-Israeli investment bank.
And Mr. Nimrodi recently visited Kuwait -- on a "non-Israeli" passport, he says -- to buy a 10% stake in Shorouk Airlines, a Kuwaiti-Egyptian venture that plans to fly to Jerusalem from Cairo and Kuwait.
Next up: Messrs. Nimrodi and Khashoggi have submitted a proposal to the PLO and World Bank for a $60 million generator to handle Gaza's electricity needs, and to power a desalinization plant that would supply water for one million people.
Mr. Nimrodi, who owns a desalinization-technology company in Israel, has been developing the project for years.
"Adnan and me -- we know how to get money, we have the right connections, we can develop the economy to put Arabs and Jews to work," Mr. Nimrodi gushes.
Mr. Khashoggi remains a little more coy.
"I don't want this impression to be left that because I'm doing one or two transactions with Yaacov, he's my only agent," he says.
"I know lots of Israelis."
