Cifra has long been a favorite of the pros who invest in emerging markets.
As a consumer-spending play, what could be better than Mexico's No. 1 retailer, which even has a joint venture with Wal-Mart Stores?
But now Cifra, which issued a disappointing 1993 profit estimate last week, is falling into disfavor among some big money managers.
They say the stock is too expensive, even though Cifra is still among the best-managed companies in Mexico.
True, the company's joint venture with Wal-Mart appears successful.
And Cifra's Vips diners and Aurrera food and merchandise warehouse stores are admired for their quality and selection.
But the stock trades at about 28 times estimated 1994 earnings, double the Mexican-market multiple.
Suddenly, such fundamentals matter to investors in Mexico's market.
A few years ago, when Mexico was putting its economic house in order, U.S. investors wanted big stocks that would rally along with the economy.
They were willing to shrug off a high multiple, comforted by the notion that a "Mexican Wal-Mart" would be easy to sell on the Bolsa.
But today, the big investors are more at ease with Mexico's economy.
They care more about short-term earnings performance.
They look harder at stock values.
They want more feedback from executives.
Like many Mexican companies, "Cifra is very difficult to talk to," says Marla Marron, an analyst at Bear Stearns in New York, who nonetheless is recommending the stock.
Last week, Cifra startled analysts with a "preliminary earnings report" for the year.
It declined to spell out the reasons for a surprisingly weak fourth quarter, and didn't even specify the quarter's results, saying all would be explained in a March shareholders' meeting.
Executives declined to elaborate.
Cifra said 1993 net income grew 2.2%, as much as eight percentage points below some analysts' expectations.
Operating earnings rose 7%.
Sales climbed 15%, also below expectations.
Previously, investors counted on Cifra's big money-market gains to carry earnings through slow periods.
In 1992, financial income accounted for as much as 35% of all earnings.
Cifra has such pull with suppliers that it pays within about 45 days for merchandise that it turns over faster -- in 35 days.
That creates a cash surplus, on which Cifra has earned heaps of interest income by investing in high-yielding Mexican treasury bills.
But shortterm Mexican T-bill rates have fallen to 9%.
Investors now want to see some muscle in Cifra's real business-merchandising.
Yet Mexican consumer spending is weak.
Soraya Betterton, manager of Latin American portfolios at G.T. Capital Management in San Francisco, figures investors are paying a multiple of about 40 times Cifra's nonfinancial earnings.
"That is kind of high," she says.
Especially when retail sales in Mexico City, Cifra's main market, fell nearly 7% in the first nine months of last year.
Ms. Betterton has sold the stock.
"How can the market pay around 40 times operating earnings for a company that is growing those earnings at around 7%?" says Gaspar Quijano Paredes, an analyst at Vector, a Mexican broker.
Investors may be betting on rapid future growth.
But Ms. Betterton doesn't see it.
Cifra, like Wal-Mart, she says, is moving to an everyday-low-price approach that will shrink gross profit margins.
Bear Stearns's Ms. Marron says: "The competition in Mexico is intense and is moving toward cutthroat."
But, she says, "Cifra is smart in recognizing they will have to give up margin and go to volume."
She thinks the stock will outperform the Bolsa this year, as it has for two years.
Cifra has three stock classes.
Mutual funds and individual investors frequently go right to the Mexican Bolsa to buy class C shares, which lack voting rights.
Class B, traded over-the-counter in New York in the form of an American depositary receipt, does have voting rights; so do class A shares, but foreign investors can only "participate" in the price gains of this stock, which is held in a trust in Mexico.
Robert Meyer at Morgan Stanley Asset Management says he's selling Cifra and prefers to buy Mexican banks that are trading at around 10 times earnings.
Jean van de Walle, manager of Latin American equities at Alliance Capital, says he will stick with his Cifra shares for now, but at today's valuation, he won't buy more.
"Cifra is a beautiful company," says Vector's Mr. Quijano.
"But right now, the stock is overvalued."
Year ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Revenue: 14.231 billion pesos
Net income: 1.035 billion pesos; 24.9 centavos a share
Nine months ended Sept. 30, 1993:
Per-share net income: 17.2 centavos vs. 16.1 centavos a year earlier
Common shares outstanding: 3.2 billion class A, B and C shares
All figures in new Mexican pesos.
Exchange rate at year end: 3.107 pesos per dollar.
