Andy who?
In a bizarre legal battle taking place in New York State Surrogate's Court, the foundation that controls Andy Warhol's work is arguing that the pop-art master's 15 minutes of fame may be over.
The court case is being waged to settle a valuation of the Warhol estate.
Its thousands of celebrity portraits and Campbell Soup-can and Brillo-box pop art are collectively valued at either $220 million or $827 million, depending on whose calculator is adding it up and at what point in the art market's furious boom-bust cycle they started to count.
On one side of the courtroom is Ed Hayes, the estate's onetime general counsel.
Mr. Hayes, who served as the estate's attorney for six years, is arguing that because Warhol was a genius whose place in art history is secure, the value of the estate (which holds securities, real estate and art) is $827 million.
He has good reason to estimate high: If he prevails, he could get a fee of $16 million.
On the other side of the table, and at the low end of the spectrum, is the estate's chief beneficiary, the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts.
Siding with the foundation on the estimate is the executor of Warhol's estate, Frederick Hughes.
Mr. Hayes says the Warhol foundation wants to keep the valuation low so they can pay him less and the foundation will look smarter if they later sell the works for more money.
The foundation's $220 million figure was assigned by an outside appraiser at the bottom of the art market in the spring of 1991.
The Warhol Foundation's star witness, veteran art dealer Andre Emmerich, took the stand late last week to warn of a potential "period of oblivion" for Warhol.
In coming years, "Brillo boxes will no longer look the same . . .
Coca-Cola bottles have already begun to disappear, Campbell Soup labels will change."
To our "children and grandchildren," Warhol works may have lost their "freshness," he warned.
Moreover, Mr. Emmerich said Warhol is more at risk than most artists of his generation of becoming "unfashionable."
Warhol's celebrity portraits -- of Elvis Presley, Marilyn Monroe, Elizabeth Taylor -- will be forgotten as soon as the celebrities, he testified.
Future generations may treasure a silk-screen of Marilyn Monroe about as much as "a photograph of Alice Roosevelt Longworth."
Which is to say, not much.
Counters Francis Harvey, an estate attorney who worked with Mr. Hayes, "Who the hell was Mona Lisa?"
And while Mr. Hayes's side waxes eloquent on Warhol's distinctive, easily recognizable style and his similarity to Pablo Picasso, experts testifying for the Warhol Foundation draw parallels to lesser artistic lights such as crushed-car-parts sculptor John Chamberlain.
Archibald Gillies, the foundation's own president, says Warhol is no Picasso, except perhaps when it comes to the abundance of his work.
The Warhol Foundation attorneys deny that their legal strategy essentially runs down the foundation's own progenitor.
They argue that $220 million is a "staggering" amount for the work of a contemporary artist and that the experts who testified to Mr. Hayes's higher valuation are using "Jeane Dixon" fortune-telling.
They say the foundation is keeping Warhol's memory alive by funding an Andy Warhol museum in his hometown of Pittsburgh and by lending or selling Warhol art to 62 museums world-wide.
Warhol, the pioneer of the pop-art movement, died Feb. 22, 1987, at the age of 58.
Almost immediately, the "ghoul factor" set in, the art-world phenomenon in which prices of a dead artist's work take off due to financial speculation, the cutoff in supply and a posthumous re-evaluation of his talent by collectors and trend-setting museums.
At the same time, the great art-market boom of the late 1980s was raging.
Before Warhol's death, no Warhol work had sold for more than $1 million; in the five years following Warhol's death, almost two dozen works broke that barrier.
In 1989, a hugely successful retrospective of his work was mounted by the Museum of Modern Art in New York and toured the world.
In the exhibition's catalog, some of the world's leading art critics lauded Warhol as the primary artist of his generation.
Now, the whole valuation issue turns on how much Warhol art there actually is, since appraisers sometimes figure in a a discount if an art estate has a large number of similar works.
And it seems Warhol's style of creation may have boobytrapped his own artistic legacy: The silk-screening process he used most frequently facilitated multiple copies of each work.
While the foundation fought hard -- and successfully -- to keep the total number of works in the estate out of the public record, sources close to the estate put it at an awesome 4,000 paintings, 8,000 drawings and more than 60,000 photographs, often taken by Warhol as studies for later works.
Mr. Hayes believes so strongly in his own side's value estimates and the Warhol legacy that he is willing to settle his entire claim in exchange for 19,879 black-and-white Polaroids Warhol took as studies for future works.
The foundation appraised the photos at $107,000; to Mr. Hayes, however, they are the blueprint for Warhol's life's work and are worth the additional $12 million he says he is still owed in legal fees.
In fact, he would prefer to be paid in Warhol art, not cash, and plans to go into the art-dealer business.
But Mr. Gillies, flatly refusing to use Warhol art as payment, says: "Imagine letting Ed Hayes loose, selling art in airports.
Everybody gets a piece of Andy Warhol."
In fact, the judge may decide the case not on the estate's value but on upcoming hearings that address whether Mr. Hayes earned his money.
Mr. Hughes is siding with the foundation on the evaluation but declines to discuss the Warhol Foundation's legal stance toward his old friend.
But of Warhol, he says, "If I was not 100% sure of his genius when he died, I am now."
In Warhol's art, he says, "I discover new things all the time.
"I think it will be a long time before anyone comes close to any understanding of Andy Warhol."
