Where's the beef in these burgers?
There isn't any, but that isn't stopping investors from gobbling up shares in veggie-burger maker Wholesome & Hearty Foods Inc.
Heavy buying has sent the stock up nearly eightfold from its split-adjusted 52-week low of $3 a share to its close of $23.75 yesterday .
The stock, in fact, was last year's top performer on the Nasdaq Stock Market, jumping more than sixfold.
Little surprise, then, that company Chairman Paul Wenner has been paring his huge holdings in the firm, taking profits in the sizzling shares of the Portland, Ore., purveyor of the Gardenburger: a meatless, soyless pattie sold precooked and frozen to restaurants and supermarkets nationwide.
Mr. Wenner, a 46-year-old chef and the company's founder, sold 150,000 shares between Oct. 4 and Dec. 6 last year and sold an additional 75,000 shares in early February, filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission show.
Why shouldn't he take a few chips off the table?
After those early February sales, Mr. Wenner still holds 975,963 shares in the company and has options, currently exercisable at a paltry $1 a share, to acquire an additional 1.65 million shares.
The company, which went public in June 1992, has 7.46 million shares outstanding, following a 3-for-2 stock split late last month.
"I've sold some stock because I've never had any money in my life, and the timing was right," he says.
"I bought a second home, in Hawaii, and bought my folks a house.
I also support several nonprofit environmental groups."
The question for outside investors is, can they get excited about this highflying stock in the wake of its already huge run-up and amid the jittery small-stock market?
Indeed, the stock is trading at a multiple of just under 150 times trailing 12-month earnings.
"Because of the enormous move the stock has made in the last couple of months, I'd be leery about stepping in at these levels real aggressively," says Robert Toomey, an analyst with Piper Jaffray in Seattle.
"Technically, the stock has to consolidate, but curiously that doesn't seem to have impeded it from going up," Mr. Toomey says.
He sees the stock as a long-term buy and would encourage investors to load up following a pullback.
"They've got a very good product in the Gardenburger.
I think they can achieve 50% annual earnings growth long-term based on further market penetration," he said.
The Gardenburgers, he notes, are also being sold in Canada, Mexico and Europe and were served up at the just concluded Olympic Games in Norway.
The Piper Jaffray analyst thinks the company will report earnings of a split-adjusted 19 cents a share for 1993, up sharply from a split-adjusted 7 cents a share in 1992, and that it can achieve 30 cents a share this year and 47 cents a share in 1995.
He expects sales to have nearly doubled last year to $13.1 million from $6.95 million in 1992, and to climb to $25 million this year.
Mr. Toomey -- who says he eats the burger once a week -- points out that there's no real competitor in the meatless and soyless veggie-burger market, although several companies are offering soy-based products.
Those soy burgers, he adds, don't seem to be creating much of a following.
Wholesome's Gardenburgers are, according to the company, a zero-cholesterol blend of mushrooms, onions, rolled oats, brown rice, low-fat cheeses, bulgur wheat, egg whites, seasoning and spices -- with about one-sixth the fat of hamburgers and half the calories.
They sell for anywhere between $1.69 and $3.99 for a package of four patties, depending on the regional market.
Kevin Skislock, an analyst with Dain Bosworth in Minneapolis, says he thinks the growth stock still has potential to rise.
"My current target price is $35 a share over the next six to nine months, based on an 80% to 100% rate of annual growth."
He thinks the company can post earnings of up to 40 cents this year and 75 cents next year.
If the stock hits his 1995 earnings target, the issue would thus be trading at around 32 times those forward earnings, he says.
"The company is growing its same-accounts by 100% annually, they're aggressively adding retail accounts, and they have strong repeat sales," he says.
"Eighty percent of this company's customers are nonvegetarians.
People are trying to avoid having meat seven nights a week."
Mr. Skislock says the stock could get a boost from another direction.
"It's fast becoming the most attractive takeover target in the food industry."
The stock's close yesterday marked a 25-cent gain over Monday's close but was 50 cents shy of its 52-week peak of $24.25.
