Life Savers had dug itself into a hole.
The venerable candy spent years selling itself with warm, fuzzy commercials that emphasized nostalgia and the good feeling of popping a Life Savers into your mouth.
The one ingredient always omitted: how the sugared candy tasted.
Meanwhile, rivals Mentos and Star Burst have continuously stressed taste in their commercials.
Now, new ads from Life Savers and its agency, FCB/Leber Katz Partners, the New York office of Foote, Cone & Belding Communications, resemble lush music videos.
And the ads emphasize only taste.
The lilting music is supplied by the South African group, Ladysmith Black Mambazo, which became popular in the U.S. with the Paul Simon album "Graceland."
Life Savers shifted its marketing strategy because of increased competition.
Although Life Savers is the No. 1 brand in the hard-candy category, it has been around for more than eight decades.
The candy, says Bob Hirsch, senior executive vice president at FCB/Leber Katz, "isn't top of mind for consumers when they're making a buying decision."
In supermarkets, Life Savers sales fell 4.5% to $42.1 million for the 52-week period ended Sept. 11, according to A.C. Nielsen.
While the entire hard-candy category had supermarket sales of $80.8 million, down 5.4% from the year-earlier period, a number of hard-candy brands grew.
Sales of Mentos, for instance, rose 62.4% to $3.4 million in supermarkets.
"We have been selling the Life Savers moment," says Mr. Hirsch.
"We haven't competed on a flavor level."
Past ads showed four generations of men watching a baseball game, each passing a roll of Life Savers.
The slogan was: "Isn't life delicious?"
Now, Mr. Hirsch says, he wants consumers to watch the ads "and taste the film."
He very nearly accomplishes that task.
There is no authoritative voiceover, no catchy slogan in the new ads.
Instead, there are beautiful shots of a white "Pepomint" Life Savers atop a snowy mountain, in one commercial.
The candy breaks loose, rolls peacefully down the mountain and drops into a river, dissolving into tiny, chiseled snowflakes.
All the while, lilting voices sing, "So refreshing, so cold . . .
So full of Life Savers."
Another spot, for the "Five Flavors" roll, shows such images as a green Life Savers plopping into a river of thin lime slices, a red Life Savers rolling into water to become a stem of cherries, and slices of pineapple turning into yellow candies.
The "Pepomint" spot, scheduled to premiere tonight on Capital Cities/ABC's "Coach," will pop up later this week on more shows, including "Late Show with David Letterman" on CBS.
The "Five Flavor" spot will be released later in the first quarter.
The campaign marks the return of advertising for Life Savers' traditional flavors, which haven't been on the air since the first quarter of 1993.
So-called wild flavors, including tangy fruits, were advertised last year on youth-oriented networks such as MTV.
Life Savers, a division of RJR Nabisco's food groups division, is expected to spend more than $15 million this year, at least matching the amount spent in 1992, according to Competitive Media Reporting, which tracks ad spending.
Interestingly, the new strategy for Life Savers is the opposite of diet Coke's new campaign.
The Coca-Cola product introduced new spots last week that emphasized refreshment, a special time of the day when a consumer can enjoy a diet Coke "moment."
For the previous 12 years, the soft drink stressed taste and flavor.
Now, by contrast, Life Savers is eschewing magic moments to lean on taste.
Focus groups screened two versions of the "Pepomint" ad with the same song: one with strong music sung by Ladysmith Black Mambazo, another with a nameless bunch of jingle singers.
Ladysmith's variation was the solid winner, says Trish McHale, business director for Life Savers.
"It takes a product everyone knows and gives it more reverence and makes it uplifting."
Mr. Hirsch says that with the new campaign, "We feel we're introducing the taste experience of Life Savers to a whole new generation.
We don't want to be thought of only as the candy their parents gave them when they were good."
Adds Ms. McHale: "We're doing a lot of things to wake up America to Life Savers."
Life Savers is also trying line extension.
It already produces Gummi Savers to compete with the popular gummy bears soft candy, as well as Breath Savers to rival mints such as Certs and Tic Tac.
Moreover, Life Savers is licensing its name to be placed on ice pops, and it is teaming with another RJR Nabisco brand, Royal gelatin, to test market six flavors of Life Savers gelatin.
"Can we beat Jell-O?" asks Ms. McHale.
"No, but we can eat into their market share."
Not all of Life Savers' efforts have met success.
In what must have seemed a good idea at the time, RJR Nabisco decided to market Holes, meant to be the discarded center of traditional Life Savers.
According to Nielsen, sales of Holes registered $12.5 million in the 52-week period ended Sept. 11.
That was a drop of 32.7%, indicating that the fledging candy may be headed for, well, a black hole.
Wendy's International is crashing the Olympics sponsorship party with a new series of ads featuring company founder Dave Thomas and, in a cameo role, the 1992 Olympic figure-skating champion, Kristi Yamaguchi.
The burger chain's sponsorship of Olympics coverage marks a sharp increase in its presence during the Games.
"In 1992, if we had one or two spots, that would have been a lot," said a Wendy's spokesman.
Previously, the chain spent about $50 million a year on national television advertising, too little to buy a major broadcast sponsorhip, the spokesman said.
This year, that figure increased to $80 million, he said.
The spots are set to start Feb. 6, during the CBS network's Olympics broadcast.
