Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. and two other companies were ordered to pay $18.5 million in damages by a Houston jury in a closely watched breast-implant lawsuit involving three women with immune-system and nervous-system illnesses.
The St. Paul, Minn., company, which owned a California manufacturer of silicone breast implants from 1977 to 1984, will share any liability with the California company, McGhan Medical Corp., and with McGhan's current parent, Inamed Corp. of Las Vegas.
The four-week trial, in Houston's Harris County District Court, has garnered intense scrutiny because of the possible larger implications it holds for 3M.
Several lawyers who are negotiating a tentative $4 billion global settlement of breast-implant litigation had predicted that a big verdict against 3M could propel the company into joining the settlement.
The Minnesota company, along with McGhan Medical and one-time silicone supplier General Electric Co., have balked at participating in the settlement because of the cost, according to negotiators.
Participation by 3M could greatly expand the size of the settlement fund.
A 3M spokeswoman said the company "wouldn't base our decision about joining a global settlement on one case."
However, John M. O'Quinn, a plaintiff lawyer in the case, points out that there are "probably 300 cases against 3M" already on file in Harris County, which is famous for whopping jury verdicts in favor of plaintiffs.
Several cases are set for trial this year.
Most other big players in the silicone-implant business, including Dow Corning Corp., Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. and Baxter International Inc., have already agreed to fund the settlement plan but still are negotiating some facets of the deal.
They and other defendants generally deny that the implants are linked to illnesses.
Once signed by the companies and plaintiffs' representative, the settlement would have to be approved by a federal judge, Sam C. Pointer Jr. in Birmingham, Ala., before it could become final.
3M and McGhan declined comment on the Houston trial, noting that it isn't over yet: The $18.5 million represents only actual damages such as medical costs, lost wages and compensation for pain.
The Houston state-court jury is expected to decide whether to award additional, punitive, damages as early as today.
One of the plaintiffs contended she contracted lupus, an immune-system illness, from the silicone in her implants, while the other two women claimed the devices caused a condition known as neuropathy.
They contended their symptoms included severe muscle pain and weakness, extreme fatigue, inability to concentrate and memory loss.
One of the women, Darla Lawson, had to quit her job as a flight-attendant supervisor because of her lupus, Mr. O'Quinn said in an interview.
It is estimated that some 12,000 federal and state lawsuits related to silicone implants have been filed.
The global settlement deal, if approved, would conclude the cases of all women who don't opt out and pursue their own litigation.
