Though there are clear hints of trouble for him over the long haul, President Clinton at the moment is defying the political laws of gravity.
After a month of negative stories about his business dealings and personal life that seemed sure to drag down his standing with the public, Mr. Clinton's approval rating is rising.
In a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, 60% of those surveyed approve of the job Mr. Clinton is doing as president.
That's up from 56% in a survey taken last month, just before a spate of stories that raised questions about Mr. Clinton's investment in Whitewater Development Co. and his personal life as governor of Arkansas.
And the approval rating is a full 10 points higher than it was just four months ago.
By contrast, 31% say they disapprove of Mr. Clinton's job performance.
The findings suggest two important characteristics of Mr. Clinton's relationship with the American people.
First, Americans are basing their perception of the president by and large on general economic trends and an overall perception of his foreign-policy competence.
And second, the public seems to think stories about Mr. Clinton's past life have only limited relevance to his current performance.
"Clinton is doing significantly better," says Republican pollster Robert Teeter, who conducted the Journal/NBC survey along with Democratic pollster Peter Hart.
"What has caused that are a better economy and . . . some foreign-policy success."
But both Messrs. Teeter and Hart point out that the poll shows a cloud floating above Mr. Clinton: Though the battering of negative stories hasn't hurt public views of the president's job performance, they clearly have eroded Americans' confidence in his truthfulness and his personal values.
Moreover, those feelings open Mr. Clinton to criticism on the "character" issue, which figured so prominently in the 1992 presidential campaign and seems likely to continue to dog him.
When asked to rate Mr. Clinton's ethical and moral values, 33% of those surveyed now give the president good marks.
That's down from 43% just three months ago and 50% at the outset of his administration.
Republicans have hinted in the last few weeks that they expect to direct their criticism of the president in precisely this area -- the general question of personal credibility -- rather than at the details of the Whitewater controversy.
Republican National Committee Chairman Haley Barbour asserted to a group of reporters last week that "credibility is the linchpin of any office of authority."
And Republican National Committee spokesman Chuck Greener reasserted yesterday that "this is the thing that will be an underlying concern for quite some time."
For now, though, Mr. Clinton can be cheered by the fact that Americans are giving him higher marks on handling both the economy and foreign affairs.
Precisely half those surveyed say they approve of his handling of economic affairs, a sign that "people are feeling pretty good about the economy," says Mr. Hart.
By contrast, just 40% approved of his handling of the economy back in October.
And the perception of Mr. Clinton's foreign-policy skills clearly were enhanced by last week's trip to Western Europe and Russia.
The survey, begun just as that week-long trip was ending, found that 53% approve of his handling of foreign policy, up sharply from 33% in October.
In general, the survey suggests that Americans are moderately concerned with the Whitewater affair, in which questions have been raised about the Clintons' investment in the real-estate development company and their involvement with a related savings and loan that went under.
But it shows significantly less public concern about allegations, leveled by Arkansas state troopers, of sexual misconduct by Mr. Clinton while he was governor.
Asked their view of the importance of the Whitewater saga, 41% of those surveyed rate it as an important issue, while 50% say it doesn't concern them that much.
Only 29% say they consider the state troopers' allegations an important story.
By contrast, far more Americans, 63%, say the recent revelations of government testing of radioactive materials on unknowing civilians after World War II is an important issue
By a slight margin, a plurality of Americans seem inclined to believe Mr. Clinton's explanations of his role in the Whitewater flap.
Those surveyed were asked whether they believe the president's critics, who say he is concealing information about his and his wife's involvement with Whitewater to hide embarrassing or even illegal behavior, or Mr. Clinton, who says that he simply lost money on the deal and that all important facts are known.
By a 43% to 36% margin, those surveyed say they believe the president.
In fact, there are signs in the survey that the paramount issue to the public is whether Mr. Clinton is telling the truth rather than the details of his involvement with Whitewater.
Among those who call Whitewater an important issue, 59% say they believe Mr. Clinton's critics, while just 21% say they believe the president.
But overall, three-quarters of those surveyed say the Whitewater story hasn't affected their opinion of Mr. Clinton, while 21% say it has made their opinion of him less favorable.
And 61% say that it is unnecessary to form a special congressional panel to look into Whitewater now that Mr. Clinton has asked for a special counsel to investigate.
Among other things, findings such as those in the new survey are bound to raise questions about the media, which have devoted great attention to the Whitewater and state-trooper stories, which the public seems to consider of only modest importance.
"There really is an inside-the-Beltway mentality, and it does affect the press just as it affects members of Congress and political appointees in the executive branch," says Stephen Hess, an analyst of politics and the press at the Brookings Institution.
"And we get terribly involved in talking to each other."
Your Jan. 4 editorial "Postal Bully" struck home.
Boyd's City Dispatch, founded in New York City in the 1840s as one of the nation's first private postal delivery services, was driven out of the postal delivery business as a result of the Private Express Statutes of 1872.
Boyd's issued its own stamps, had uniformed employees and installed postal boxes in retail businesses around Manhattan.
For one penny you could be assured of next-day delivery.
Boyd's connected with other private delivery services up and down the East Coast, and was a highly regarded competitor to the Postal Service.
So, of course, it was forced out of the postal-delivery business.
Fortunately, Boyd's had developed a sideline of providing mailing lists to financial-services companies and fund-raising organizations, which it continues to this day, as one of the oldest continuously operated companies in America.
Lakeville, Conn.
The public's shift to use of Federal Express, UPS, faxing, E-mail, etc., rather than the U.S. Postal Service is born of necessity.
The USPS will not be able to force, bully, threaten or fine the public into returning to the Postal Service's frustrating inefficiencies now that they've experienced the consistently good and reliable service of the private carriers.
The USPS would be better advised to concentrate its energy on improving the quality of its service, rather than intimidating mail clerks.
Mary V. Gaffey
St. Louis, Mo.
