Lonrho PLC announced changes in its board, a sign that investor Dieter Bock may be winning his power struggle with his co-chief executive, Roland W. "Tiny" Rowland.
The diversified multinational company said its chairman, Rene Leclezio, and three other directors closely allied with Mr. Rowland are retiring and that the board appointed three nonexecutive directors.
Mr. Leclezio's successor wasn't named.
Mr. Bock, who became co-chief executive and the company's largest shareholder when he bought an 18% stake more than a year ago, has been agitating for boardroom change.
Mr. Bock wants to pare Lonrho -- an amalgamation of 700 companies in 60 countries with interests in mining, agriculture, hotels, pipelines, publishing and automobiles -- to three core businesses.
Mr. Rowland, who has led the company for 32 years, wants Lonrho to stay much as it is.
The changes leave open the fate of Mr. Rowland, a flamboyant international figure who built Lonrho from a tiny mining company in colonial Rhodesia.
Mr. Rowland, 76 years old, is a likely choice to become chairman.
The post would allow him to engage in his passion -- roaming the globe in search of new business opportunities -- while leaving day-to-day operations to someone else.
Mr. Leclezio oversaw Lonrho from his ranch in Mauritius for the two years he was chairman.
Lonrho also reported that pretax earnings, buoyed by asset sales, grew 51% in the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, to #172 million ($257.1 million), or 15.1 pence (23 cents) a share.
The company said sales totaled #2.70 billion in the fiscal year.
In fiscal 1992, adjusted for new accounting rules, Lonrho's pretax profit stood at #114 million, or 6.6 pence a share, on sales of #3.93 billion.
Asset sales added #87 million to Lonrho's 1993 pretax profit.
The latest results were largely in line with analysts' expectations.
Lonrho's debt ratio was much improved at 31% of equity, down from 57% a year ago.
Lonrho's debt problems led Mr. Rowland to turn to Mr. Bock for a cash infusion in December 1992.
Mr. Bock is said to be considering selling off more than 1 billion in Lonrho assets -- from its Rolls-Royce dealerships to postage printing plants.
Mr. Bock has said Lonrho should focus on three core busineses: mining, agriculture and hotels.
In a statement to shareholders, Mr. Leclezio seemed to signal that the rest of Lonrho's board agrees: "Your company will concentrate on these central businesses whilst preparing to dispose of other assets sensibly, as opportunities arise."
The new outside directors are Sir John Leahy, a former British ambassador to South Africa, where Lonrho has mining interests; Peter Harper, a director of Hanson PLC; and Stephen Walls, chairman of Albert Fisher Group PLC.
Meanwhile, from within Lonrho, Terrence Wilkinson joins the board as an executive director.
He has been developing Lonrho's platinum mines in South Africa.
