A federal jury in Los Angeles hit Microsoft Corp. with a $120 million judgment in a closely watched patent feud with little Stac Electronics.
The same jury found that Los Angeles-based Stac had swiped trade secrets from Microsoft and awarded the software giant $13.6 million.
Nonetheless, Microsoft is the clear loser in the case, which revolved around mutual accusations of patent infringement and theft of trade secrets involving data-compression products, which increase computer-storage capacity.
Although Microsoft's cash hoard of $2.8 billion and its other resources mean it can easily absorb a $120 million hit, Stac said it will immediately seek permanent injunctions barring Microsoft from selling products that contain technology the jury found to infringe on Stac patents.
Such an injunction would cover two of Microsoft's latest versions of its popular MS-DOS operating systems, known as MS-DOS 6.0 and 6.2., of which Microsoft expects to sell tens of millions of copies this year.
Moreover, the case could set precedents in the vague and still emerging area of software patents that may bedevil Microsoft in the future and invite similar patent challenges from other rivals.
It also is certain to highlight lingering questions about Microsoft's aggressive competitive tactics, which have embroiled it in many lawsuits and triggered a continuing U.S. antitrust inquiry.
Microsoft said it would appeal the jury award.
It said it doesn't anticipate any material disruption of its MS-DOS shipments and it expects to quickly shift to new versions of MS-DOS products that don't contain the technology that the jury ruled infringed on Stac's patents.
Some analysts were doubtful about that.
Microsoft also said it will set up a reserve covering the $120 million, a step which would knock 26 cents off the company's third-quarter earnings.
Microsoft also said it would seek an injunction trying to block sales of certain Stac products, based on the jury's trade secret ruling.
Nonetheless, Gary Clow, Stac's chief executive officer, hailed the verdict.
"We have been vindicated," he said."
The dispute between Stac and Microsoft had its roots in failed efforts by Microsoft to license Stac's data-compression products.
Such products are valuable because they increase computer-storage capacity and speed for relatively little cost.
Stac filed a lawsuit in January 1993, alleging that Microsoft, after failing to get a license from Stac, simply copied the technology in two patented Stac products and built it into its own data-compression products, which were sold in Microsoft's blockbuster MS-DOS 6.0 and 6.2 operating systems.
Stac alleged that the patent infringements robbed it of sales, forced it to lay off workers and virtually crippled the company.
Microsoft countered last summer with a suit of its own, charging Stac with pilfering Microsoft trade secrets.
The cases were consolidated, and the jury concluded in yesterday's verdict that Microsoft had infringed on two Stac patents and damaged Stac to the tune of $120 million.
The jury denied a Stac claim that could have led to treble damages; Stac's Mr. Clow said Stac may appeal that portion of the jury verdict.
The case could have broad implications for several areas of patent and trade-secrets law, which are muddy on high-tech products.
For one thing, the jury found in Microsoft's favor on one of its seven counterclaims, involving charges that Stac's reverse engineering of certain "undocumented calls," or segments of software code, amounted to trade-secret theft.
Such reverse engineering is common in the technology business.
Stac's Mr. Clow said the finding, if broadly applied, "could have serious implications . . . because Microsoft aparently can protect undocumented calls from reverse engineering, which is widespread in the industry."
Beyond that, Mr. Clow said the Stac case could provide a model for how smaller companies can use patent protection to compete with larger rivals such as Microsoft.
"The case will have a monumental impact on this industry because we've provided a prototype showing that small, entrepreneurial companies can protect their ideas and use patents to essentially erect barriers against very strong, very aggressive competitors," Mr. Clow said.
Although Microsoft has sued and been sued numerous times over patents, the Stac case marks the first time Microsoft has gone to trial on the issue.
Patent attorneys said that if the verdict stands, Microsoft would have little option but to modify MS-DOS 6.2 so it no longer violates the Stac patent, or to pay Stac licensing fees, which could be substantial.
Mr. Clow said Stac would be open to discussing such a licensing arrangement with Microsoft.
News of the verdict came late in the day, after Microsoft had made some product-related announcements that were welcomed by the market.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading, Microsoft shares rose $1.50 to $81, while Stac shares rose 12.5 cents to $4.375.
Analysts said that Microsoft stock could suffer if sales of MS-DOS 6.2 are interrupted for any length of time.
