New York -- Several times each year, four women wearing long dresses and singing medieval chant walk slowly in single file up the side aisle of St. Michael's Church on Amsterdam Avenue in Manhattan.
They are Anonymous 4 (Ruth Cunningham, Marsha Genensky, Susan Hellauer and Johanna Rose), an extraordinary vocal quartet that puts concert going onto an entirely new plane.
For 70 or 80 minutes, with no intermission, no applause until the end and no props but its four voices, Anonymous 4 invites the audience into an intense evocation of another world.
For some, that world is medieval France or England; for others, it is a place that has no map or time.
But in any case, just as these four singers together are more than the sum of their individual voices, so does the church where they sing become something more than just a space.
Anonymous 4 sings the music of the High Middle Ages: the 12th, 13th and 14th centuries.
It is carefully researched and transcribed by Ms. Hellauer, the group's musicologist, but that is just the beginning.
The four members go through Ms. Hellauer's finds, building programs around themes.
Some are made up of sacred music: One example is "An English Ladymass (13th and 14th Century Chant and Polyphony in Honor of the Virgin Mary)," recently performed as part of the Music Before 1800 series in New York.
Others are secular, such as "Love's Illusion (Music of Romance and Chivalry in Medieval France)."
The group weaves pieces of chant, simple multivoiced songs, complex polyphony and readings into a dramatic event.
"An English Ladymass," for example, opens with all four women singing a unison chant melody about the five joys of Mary.
Next, the warmth and gentleness of the two-voice song, "Edi beo thu, hevene-quene" ("Blessings on you, Queen of Heaven"), which invokes the sweetness of Mary the Mother.
This leads naturally into the three-voice rondellus, "Flos regalis," in which the singers address the Virgin more formally and elaborately.
After a reading that salutes Mary and asks for intercession, the four voices explode into an extremely complex motet, "Salve mater redemptoris."
Pacing and ordering provide tension and release throughout the program.
The rapturous "Alleluia" that occurs midway through the "Ladymass" program is one dramatic high point; later, we get a more visceral shock.
A reading, "Why have you no reuthe on my childe?" in which Mary herself cries out against the cruelty of the Crucifixion, is followed by a wrenching song, "Jesu Cristes milde moder," that describes that event in gruesome detail.
The voices, always close, nearly collide in a particularly jarring interval, on the words "The sone heng" ("The son hung"), and the bald image of human suffering leaps out of the music.
The members of Anonymous 4 got together in 1986 because they wanted to sing medieval music and found little opportunity to do so.
As Ms. Hellauer explains, the repertoire has traditionally been sung by men because only men sang it in public during the Middle Ages, and also because the range of the voice parts is so small that it does not demand the extravagantly high and low notes of a mixed choir.
It is, in part, that closeness of range and the interweaving of vocal lines that make Anonymous 4 so magical.
While Ms. Cunningham and Ms. Rose have the higher voices, Ms. Hellauer is an alto and Ms. Genensky is in the middle, decisions about who sings what line in any given piece are not automatic.
You do not hear some spectacular soprano leaping out of a vocal quartet rigidly stratified with each voice occupying a niche in the spectrum from high to low (the soprano/alto/tenor/bass arrangement of most choirs).
Instead, there is an exquisite, carefully tuned vocal blend in which individual voices are less important than an overall shimmering sound.
That sound can be serene or passionate, but the similarities in the voices are what count here, not the differences.
Anonymous 4 is more like a vocal string quartet than anything else.
That otherworldly, egoless quality has earned the group fans outside the classical/early music world.
Its two recordings on Harmonia Mundi, "An English Ladymass" and "On Yoolis Night," have sold more than 100,000 copies combined, and its most recent New York concerts were standing room only.
Sarah Folger of Harmonia Mundi says that the records have been selling in the New Age music market, appealing to people interested in everything from "the Marian cult" to "the new spirituality."
Indeed, after a recent concert, two audience members told Ms. Rose that they had become serious fans because they found Anonymous 4's music to be a tremendous stress reliever.
Yet the group also has admirers who earnestly study the informative program notes and puzzle over the tropes and sequences.
For them, the Old French, Old English and church Latin, the plainness of chant and the sudden, thrilling exuberance of polyphony conjure up another place and another time.
It isn't a specific church service or castle banquet -- Anonymous 4 isn't interested in literal re-creation.
Instead, the group has given the music a framework that enables it to evoke the feelings it was created to inspire.
(The alternative, says Ms. Hellauer, is the endless concert of beautifully performed medieval music that, after 20 minutes, "leaves you feeling as though you are being hit over the head by a beautiful velvet hammer.")
Performance space is crucial to this effect, and Anonymous 4's new success (its tour schedule has jumped from 20 concerts a year to more than 75 next season) may send it into inappropriate halls.
It is chilling to imagine what happens acoustically and emotionally to "Ladymass" in a classroom, where Anonymous 4 has performed it, or a 2,500-seat concert hall.
Better it should stick to churches, like St. Michael's, or the one in the south of France where a woman came up to the members of the group after the concert and told them, "The stones recognized your music."
Ms. Waleson is a music writer in New York.
