From the start, they seemed an unlikely couple.
She is an articulate, 22-year-old sophisticate.
He is a 300-pound bruiser with a habit of vomiting on people he doesn't like.
About all they had going for them was a certain animal attraction.
For she is Koko, probably the most famous gorilla since King Kong.
In the 1970s, Koko amazed the world with displays of her ability to communicate with human beings using American Sign Language taught to her by her human keepers at the Gorilla Foundation's redwood-shrouded encampment here.
She had a pet kitten named All Ball that she mothered.
He is Ndume, a muscle-bound silverback gorilla who, despite a certain coarseness, has become the love of Koko's life.
For more than 10 years, Koko's human handlers, Penny Patterson and Ron Cohn, have kept the famed ape more or less out of the limelight, hoping that Koko would fall in love and start a family.
It hasn't been easy.
There have been rejected suitors, unfulfilled passions, sexual infidelities and trouble with motorcycle gangs and noisy loggers.
There have been tribulations enough for the soap operas Koko likes to watch on her TV set.
For Koko's handlers, helping her find love and achieve motherhood is of scientific importance.
Dr. Patterson, a psychologist, and Dr. Cohn, a biologist, have been working with Koko all her life.
They want to find out if Koko's gift of gab will be passed along to her offspring, whether she will teach it to her babies.
The question is relevant to understanding to what extent gorillas truly do have human characteristics.
"A lot more is at stake here than Koko's love life," says Dr. Patterson.
And what a troubled love life it has been.
For starters, it isn't easy for a 350-pound gorilla to get dates, even in California.
Gorillas in general are finicky about such things, and Koko seems especially standoffish.
Some speculate that Koko's accomplishments make her a bit disdainful of run-of-the-mill males.
Dr. Patterson isn't sure.
"But Koko can be a bit haughty sometimes," she says.
Moreover, a good man is hard to find.
Koko's first prospective mate was Michael, a lowland gorilla a year her junior who was captured in Cameroon.
For several years, Koko and Michael lived together, and there were hopeful signs that something longterm might develop.
But Michael had a bad temper, not to mention a bad stomach.
He was prone to bouts of rage, which didn't endear him to Koko.
They still live in adjoining suites at the Gorilla Foundation, but they are just friends.
Koko's handlers turned quickly to a more modern approach.
In the early 1980s, Dr. Patterson compiled tapes of the world's most eligible silverbacks, as mature male lowland gorillas are known, for the silvery hue of their coats.
She rolled the tapes for Koko.
Most left her cold, such as the snippet on Ivan, an ape in his 30s who lives in a cage at a shopping mall in Tacoma, Wash.
When Ivan popped up, Koko attacked the screen with her stuffed alligator.
"Ivan got the instant heave-ho," Dr. Patterson recalls.
But the video dating did turn up one hot prospect.
His name was Bongo; his home is the Rome zoo.
"He was Koko's Italian Stallion," Dr. Patterson recalls.
Koko signaled furiously to Dr. Patterson -- by blowing kisses, rubbing her belly and folding her arms as if cradling an infant -- that "Bongo was a hunk."
But this match was not to be.
The Rome zoo refused to let Bongo and Koko get together.
Koko, friends say, was crushed.
She cried, she moped.
Then, finally, she seemed resigned to her lonely state.
But then, one sunny spring afternoon in 1991, Ndume came into her life.
Koko flipped when she saw Ndume on video.
She raced up to the monitor and planted kisses all over his muscular image.
Ndume had a fearsome reputation; his handlers at the Brookfield Zoo, just outside Chicago, had been forced to take him off display because he insisted on bombarding zoo patrons with gorilla dung and throwing up on zookeepers.
He, with different mates, had already fathered four babies.
But none of that seemed to matter to Koko.
A first date was arranged.
Ndume was tranquilized, crated up, shipped to San Jose and trucked to Woodside, about 30 miles south of San Francisco.
It went like a lot of first dates.
As Ndume edged into Koko's cage, Koko belted him with a plastic pipe.
Ndume retaliated by heaving burlap bags at Koko.
"It was a rocky start, for sure," says Dr. Patterson.
It took about a year for Koko and Ndume to stop throwing things at each other.
Every once in a while, they still do.
The motorcycles were also a problem.
The Gorilla Foundation is only about a mile down the road from a restaurant where cyclists hang out.
On weekends, dozens of hot-rod bikers are lined up outside the place, gunning their engines.
The big bikes were driving the gorillas bananas.
Drs. Cohn and Patterson have discussed the gorillas in their midst with bikers, who are trying to be quieter.
Meanwhile, Koko and Ndume, having gone beyond their awkward early encounters, were sharing chewing gum, playing with each other's dolls and falling head over heels.
By late last year, they seemed ready to settle down and start a family -- but another problem arose.
For some reason -- probably stress-related -- Koko hasn't been menstruating lately, though female gorillas can produce young from roughly the age of 10 to 40 and can live to the age of 60.
Koko theoretically is in her child-bearing prime time.
To treat the problem, Drs. Cohn and Patterson have been planning to give her female hormones.
"It should work, and we see no reason why Koko shouldn't be able to get pregnant now that she and Ndume are ready," says Dr. Patterson.
But now that has been put off by yet another intrusion -- logging.
The Gorilla Foundation's next-door neighbor, developer Steve Pankowski, is cutting down about 500 trees on property adjacent to Koko and Ndume's love nest.
"Chain saws howling and trees crashing and trucks grinding -- not exactly mood music," observes Dr. Cohn.
The noise gives Koko diarrhea.
"That's not a big turn-on for Ndume," observes Dr. Patterson.
Mr. Pankowski's logger, Roy Webster, says his boss is sympathetic to the gorillas' plight.
He says they plan to take steps to minimize the noise from their logging operation and to consult gorilla experts of their own choosing, to satisfy themselves that Drs. Cohn and Patterson aren't exaggerating the problem.
But his boss, he says, intends to keep on cutting trees.
Logging "is loud," Mr. Webster says, "but I don't think it should stop them from -- er, well, doing whatever they're doing up there."
Koko herself has made her own attitude clear.
When Mr. Pankowski ambled up the wooded pathway near her cage last summer, Koko pelted him with dung.
And in a rare recent interview, Koko was asked what she thinks of logging.
She launched into a flurry of hand signals like some confused traffic cop.
She grabbed her head with both hands, traced a frown across her face, slapped her breast.
Dr. Patterson's translation: "Koko not like . . . .
Bad, sad, no."
