Kemper Corp.'s directors unanimously rejected the $2.2 billion bid from GE Capital Corp. amid intensifying pressure from shareholders to sell the company.
In a stinging letter to General Electric Co.
Chairman John F. Welch, Kemper chairman David Mathis accused the GE unit of "stealing Kemper with a `low-ball' proposal."
He suggested that GE is a "corporate raider" and warned Mr. Welch to "attend your own business."
In defending the decision, Mr. Mathis reiterated that stockholders of the money management, brokerage and insurance company are best served by providing current management with the "opportunity to realize Kemper's tremendous upside potential."
While the move was widely expected, the harsh language could also be a tactical move to force Fairfield, Conn.-based GE to up the ante on its $55-a-share offer, some investors said.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Kemper's shares rose $1 to $60.75, although the announcement was made after the markets closed.
The stock is up 49% since the bid was announced.
GE's stock fell 75 cents to $103, also on the Big Board.
"Everyone agrees the bid is too low," said one trader who believes Kemper, based in Long Grove, Ill., is open to higher offers.
"This is the normal mating dance."
"I think this is just tactics," said Robert Gensler, an insurance analyst at T.RRowe Price Associates, which owns about 900,000 shares of Kemper stock.
"I hope that GE bids higher.
GE is not a corporate raider, it's a wonderful purchase for GE and it will create value for Kemper shareholders."
Although Kemper executives could lose their jobs in a GE takeover, Mr. Mathis denied in his letter that management had an interest in "entrenching" itself.
Four of Kemper's 13 board members are currently executives of the company and a fifth is a former chief executive.
Kemper's response now puts the onus on GE to make a formal tender for Kemper shares at the current $55-a-share price or to up that price.
GE might also take the battle directly to shareholders in the form of a proxy fight, but GE is hoping that angry shareholders will pressure Kemper to surrender, albeit perhaps at a higher price.
GE had no immediate reaction to Kemper's rejection.
"The board must know the handwriting is on the wall," said Richard Pike, an analyst at the money-management firm of Chancellor Capital Management, which owned nearly 700,000 shares earlier this week.
"In the final analysis money talks."
Stockholders are praising Kemper's management for turning the company around and shedding disparate operations.
At the same time shareholders who were interviewed say management probably won't be able to raise the stock's value to levels that can be reached through an acquisition.
They say it's time for management to sell the company.
"I don't think remaining independent is an option," said Mr. Pike.
To remain independent, Kemper will have to argue that unless a case can be made that investors are definitely better off with an acquisition, then the company's own strategy will better enhance shareholder value.
"Obviously, if they reject the offer, they're going to have to come back with some kind of way to enhance the value of the stock," said Luther Jones, manager of corporate affairs for the Florida State Board of Administration, which owns 457,000 shares of Kemper as well as a big stake in GE.
"If Kemper continues to stand alone, it appears that it is dealing with strategic issues but not shareholder values."
But investors are unlikely to sit still.
Already Southeast Asset Management, a Memphis, Tenn.-based money-management firm that owns over 8% of Kemper's shares, said in a regulatory filing that it may seek to meet with management or the board.
Mr. Jones anticipates that big shareholders like himself will make heavy use of the liberalized proxy rules for shareholder communication to make clear that they want stock-price appreciation considered as a factor.
Specific shareholder actions "will be a major issue for us to look at," he said.
Most investors say they expect the company will be sold for more than $55 a share since GE Capital said it might raise its bid if it could take a peek at the company's books.
"I don't think they can get it at $55, although that's higher than stock ever sold for," said Mr. Pike.
"As an opener, it's a serious bid, and will probably go higher.
The options are to come to terms with GE or to find another buyer that would be willing to pay a full price."
Brian Walton, senior equity analyst at NationsBank Corp., whose investment-management unit owns substantially more than half a million Kemper shares, said, "We have a lot of confidence that management and the board will continue to enhance in the highest possible way shareholder value.
A combination with an entity such as GE Capital does make secular sense from the framework of the financial services industry."
Mr. Walton said the business of asset management is a booming business, but that there are very few successful players with brand names and distribution networks.
"That's why we feel the value of Kemper is still so low," he says.
But he adds that "management at Kemper has done an outstanding job."
