Americans who were used as guinea pigs in Cold War radiation experiments may find it easier to win sympathy than legal damages.
Consider the case of the late Elmer Allen, a railworker who was injured falling off a train in 1946 and whose leg was injected with plutonium in an alleged government-sponsored experiment the following year.
Ultimately, the leg was amputated, and Mr. Allen developed a variety of problems, described movingly by his daughter Elmerine Whitfield at a congressional hearing last week.
His ailments included epileptic-type seizures and "alcoholic binges and irrational babblings," Ms. Whitfield told the House Subcommittee on Energy and Power.
Horrific as Mr. Allen's story sounds, it may not play in court.
Because Mr. Allen, like many of the radiation victims, is dead and because his ailments are fairly common, it's difficult to say what caused his condition, says Arvin Maskin, a New York defense lawyer who formerly represented the Justice Department in litigation over the defoliant Agent Orange.
In addition, federal law prohibits jury trials in cases against the U.S. government, and "juries are much more likely to distrust state officials than are . . . judges," says Robert Hager, a plaintiffs' lawyer who represents Vietnam veterans who are challenging the outcome of the Agent Orange case.
Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary and other administration officials have acknowledged the government's role in the plutonium experiments and pledged to release additional data about them.
But that doesn't mean the government will be compelled to compensate participants in the experiments.
The courts have given the federal government extremely broad protection from personal-injury lawsuits, especially in cases involving events that occurred many years ago.
In addition, scientists differ widely about the health consequences of radiation exposure.
So even if participants -- some of whom have already sued -- succeed in bringing the government to court, it will be very hard to prove that particular illnesses or injuries are linked to the tests.
"Even though morally people find this offensive, the fact of the matter is that's not the yardstick by which the United States's conduct is judged" in court, says Mr. Maskin.
"The practical effect may be that the United States is essentially immune."
Despite the odds, hundreds of victims and families of victims such as Mr. Allen are expected to sue the government.
Already, San Francisco plaintiffs' lawyer Melvin Belli has filed a claim seeking $10 million on behalf of Richard Reece, a mentally disabled man who says he was involuntarily injected with radioactive material at a California hospital in the 1940s.
Mr. Belli says he has received hundreds of solicitations from other alleged victims and is preparing a class-action lawsuit.
"Some of them sound like nuts," Mr. Belli says.
"They are, and that's the big thing.
Some of them were made crazy by this radiation."
Congress, of course, could decide on its own to compensate victims, and Ms. O'Leary has suggested such action might be warranted.
But administration officials have been vague about whether and how participants in the tests would be compensated, and similar federal programs for other victims of nuclear testing, such as the 1950s residents of the Marshall Islands, have been criticized for moving too slowly or offering too little money.
Even if the government implements such a program, lawsuits over which participants deserve compensation are certain to proliferate.
The administration, for instance, has already said that its new task force on the experiments will only address "intentional" or "deliberate" exposures of individuals to the radiation.
The study group won't deal with individuals who lived near nuclear test areas and may not include veterans who were exposed in the course of duty.
Many victims who do sue the government will have a difficult time even getting their case heard.
A federal statute allows the government to be sued over petty negligence, such as when people slip and fall in a post office.
But the government is legally immune from most accidents and injuries that result from high-level policy decisions.
In 1987, for example, a federal appeals court threw out a lower court's decision that the government was liable for the injuries of 14 people who lived near atomic bomb tests conducted in Nevada in the 1950s and 1960s.
Judges shouldn't "`second guess' the political, social and economic judgments of an agency," the appeals court ruled.
"However erroneous or misguided these deliberations may seem today, it is not the place of the judicial branch to question them now."
The government also has successfully defended similar lawsuits on the ground that the victims waited too long after the injury occurred to file their suits.
And it has invoked the so-called Feres doctrine, created by the Supreme Court in 1950, which protects the government from suits by soldiers injured in the line of duty.
The doctrine is designed to prevent disputes such as "suing your sergeant for negligence for telling you to take one hill rather than another hill," says Mr. Maskin, the defense lawyer.
Still, some lawyers say, there will be heavy pressure on the government to settle some cases.
That's because, despite the government's apparently strong legal position, officials must deal with the court of public opinion.
"They're going to claim immunity," says Stanley Chesley, who represents plaintiffs in several radiation cases.
But, he says, "an enlightened public and enlightened courts aren't going to put up with those defenses."
New York state has agreed to pay Delaware $200 million to settle a dispute over unclaimed dividends and interest held by New York brokerage firms.
The settlement, a follow-up to a U.S. Supreme Court decision last March, will be paid over five years, the states announced.
Delaware at one time estimated that it was owed $891 million.
New York officials had said the tab would be $300 million to $350 million after the high court ruled last March that Delaware has the right to collect two decades' worth of these dividends and interest when the brokerage houses holding the assets are incorporated in Delaware.
The settlement won't necessarily end the fight, as most other states are involved as well.
Other states that intervened in the case contended that unclaimed assets totaling $1 billion should be spread more broadly.
And legislation pending in Congress would negate Delaware's high-court victory and divide the disputed assets more evenly.
The Supreme Court case involved dividends and interest collected by New York since 1972 from brokerage and bank accounts whose owners couldn't be located.
New York took the money on the theory that it could assume ownership of property abandoned within the state.
Delaware, which sued New York in 1988, contended that the state in which brokerage firms are incorporated ought to be the one that collects the abandoned assets.
Many major brokerage firms are incorporated in Delaware because of the state's favorable corporate laws and well-regarded court system.
In its ruling in March, the Supreme Court essentially agreed with Delaware's position.
In connection with the settlement, Delaware has filed a motion asking the Supreme Court to dismiss its pending claims against New York.
California stockbroker Rafi Khan sued the New York Times for allegedly libeling him in three articles.
The complaint in state court in Mineola, N.Y., which also names reporter Susan Antilla and editor Sallie Hofmeister, alleges that the paper falsely stated that Mr. Khan was fined in Canada in 1976 for securities fraud and was recently sued by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
In addition, Mr. Khan claims in his suit that Ms. Antilla falsely wrote in an article appearing in the Orange County Register that Mr. Khan did improper favors for clients.
The Register wasn't named in the suit, which seeks $210 million in damages.
The articles ran between October 1993 and Jan. 13.
The Times published corrections on Oct. 25 and Jan. 14 stating that Mr. Khan was never fined in Canada for stock fraud and that he wasn't sued by the SEC.
Bernard L. Burton, a Melville, N.Y., attorney for Mr. Khan, said his client fears that the articles damaged his chances of winning an ongoing proxy fight to oust management of ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc., Costa Mesa, Calif.
The shareholder votes will be announced at ICN's annual meeting Feb. 1.
A federal court in New York last month allowed ICN to block Mr. Khan's plan to unseat the company's current management through a consent solicitation, which requires approval by holders of a majority of ICN's total shares outstanding.
Judge John Sprizzo, in an oral ruling highly critical of Mr. Khan, said he probably will ask U.S. authorities to investigate Mr. Khan's involvement in a 1986 British Gas PLC securities scheme.
Mr. Khan has denied any wrongdoing.
The Times, published by the New York Times Co., New York, and Ms. Hofmeister had no comment on the libel suit.
Ms. Antilla didn't return a phone call seeking comment.
(Rafi M. Khan vs. New York Times Co., N.Y. Supreme Court, County of Nassau, 94-001904.)
Paul M. Barrett in Washington and Junda Woo in New York contributed to this article.
