Spanish trade unions held a one-day general strike, declared victory and called for new talks on government job-security and vacation cutbacks to combat a deep recession and 23% unemployment rate.
Unions claimed 90% support for the nationwide walkout, but a business group put it at just 30%.
The protest followed the breakdown late last year of negotiations by government, business and unions on reforming Spain's rigid labor market.
The government promptly tabled labor reforms, making layoffs easier and allowing hiring of apprentices at less than the minimum wage in a bid to widen access to jobs.
Unions said this undermined workers' rights and job security.
The government has offered to consider some changes but insists that Spain's economic problems bar it from retreating from the labor market overhaul.
Taiwan might make Subic Bay in the Philippines its gateway to China if it is shut out of Hong Kong when the British colony reverts to Chinese control in 1997.
As Taiwan and China don't officially recognize each other, contacts go through other countries.
The main conduit is Hong Kong, linked with Taiwan by 195 flights a week under an aviation pact that expires next year and that China might oppose renewing.
Using Subic Bay also would offer Taiwan less expensive labor, infrastructure on the former U.S. Navy base and proximity to China.
Other possible sites include Bangkok, Hanoi, Manila, Singapore, and Seoul and Pusan, South Korea.
CHINA SLAPS U.S. RADIO PLAN
China demanded that the U.S. drop plans to set up Radio Free Asia.
"The real objective of establishing this station is to use the news media to interfere in the internal affairs of China and other Asian countries and to create confusion," China's Foreign Ministry said.
Pending U.S. legislation would create Radio Free Asia to beam news, information and commentary to Burma, Cambodia, Laos, North Korea, China and Vietnam.
Vietnamese-owned banks in Hanoi in 1993 lent $1.4 billion, a ninefold jump from 1992, accounting for 58% of all new credits in the country.
The number of privately owned industrial firms in the capital soared to 244 from 100, private businesses' sales surged 80% to $3.5 million, and new investment in the private sector totaled $4.9 million.
Meanwhile, highway specialists at a Hanoi seminar said Vietnam needs at least $20 billion to rebuild its 66,000-mile road system, half of which is in poor condition.
A six-lane expressway linking Hanoi and Noi Bai International Airport is to open next month, reducing congestion and the hourlong trip.
The pace of eastern German wage adjustment to levels in the western region slowed significantly last year in the effort to reach parity gradually in the reunified nation.
In 1992, most labor agreements in the east raised pay between 15% and 20%, about double the 1993 increases between 9% and 10%.
Overall last year, eastern German wages in 1993 represented 75% to 85% of those in the west.
As a walkout by miners in Romania expanded to involve 65,000 pit workers, an organizer said the strike would continue even if the country's highest court ordered it halted.
About 17,000 miners left their jobs this week in the southern city of Rovinari to demand a month's back pay from the cash-strapped government.
The protest expanded nationwide, as miners from five other counties joined in.
Thousands of miners rallied in the cities of Rovinari and Tirgu Jiu.
The European Union is preparing to issue a sweeping charter of rights for the nine million people who are legal residents but not citizens of EU member states.
The policy paper on immigration and asylum emphasizes allowing such legal EU residents -- concentrated in Germany, France and Britain -- to work throughout the 12-country trade bloc, formerly named the European Community.
This could be a hot issue, as the EU unemployment rate is almost 11%.
The proposal also seeks to ease a legal resident's obtaining dual nationality of the EU host nation as well as the person's native country.
In aiming to integrate these legal residents fully into the EU, the plan focuses on greater training and educational opportunities for them, new laws in member countries to guarantee equal rights, and steps to counter racism and xenophobia.
The charter, which the EU Commission could adopt next month, also urges steps to assure EU citizens of controls on new immigration, including sanctions on employers for hiring illegal immigrants and organized policies on repatriation of people residing illegally in the EU.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
To spur public demand for autos that are kinder to the environment, European Union Tax Commissioner Christiane Scrivener said she would propose by year end an unprecedented system of road taxes based on cars' potential to pollute. . . .
Germany and the Netherlands, setting up a joint army corps to strengthen Europe's post-Cold War defenses, agreed to use English as the common language for the 50,000-member force in an effort to ward off linguistic disputes that marred the start of a Franco-German corps.
