Millions of patients suffering ills ranging from allergies to arthritis could see their drug costs drop sharply in the next year.
This year and next, some of the country's biggest-selling drugs will lose patent protection and face competition from cheaper generic versions.
At the same time, there are hints that a price war may be breaking out in the branded prescription-pharmaceutical business.
Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corp., a unit of Sandoz AG, earlier this week said it would introduce its new cholesterol-reducing drug, Lescol, at half the price commanded by brands of similar cholesterol-reducing drugs already on the market.
Historically, new branded prescription drugs were marketed at competing or higher prices than older similar drugs on the ground that the new version was more effective or safer.
Steep price deflation of drugs will result in the first yearly decline of U.S. drug-industry revenue, predicts Hemant Shah, an independent analyst.
But the industry's woes could mean huge savings for patients who pay for prescriptions out of pocket and for managed-care organizations, which pay for about half of prescriptions.
Because managed-care plans are looking for ways to cut their drug costs, the cheaper generic versions of widely used drugs are quickly taking huge chunks of sales from branded pharmaceuticals.
A recent example is Syntex Corp.'s antiarthritis drugs Naprosyn and Anaprox, which together had about $700 million in U.S. sales.
In December, patents on the drugs expired; within a month, two-thirds of the prescriptions were filled with generic versions, and the price of a prescription plunged more than 80%.
As a result, a Boston health-maintenance organization operated by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts expects its spending on Naprosyn will fall to $66,700 this year from $344,000 last year, says Edward S. Curran Jr., director of the HMO's pharmacy.
Patients and other drug buyers can expect big savings when SmithKline Beecham's Tagamet brand of the antiulcer drug cimetidine loses its patent protection in May.
Mylan Laboratories Inc. plans to introduce a generic version of cimetidine on May 18 at a 30% discount from the price of the branded drug; a Mylan spokeswoman says that even bigger discounts could be negotiated with managed-care buyers.
As competition grows, the price could drop by as much as 80%, Mr. Curran predicts.
But the impact of a low-cost generic cimetidine likely will benefit patients using other ulcer medications.
Many managed-care buyers consider all drugs that heal ulcers in the same way as cimetidine to be interchangeable.
And they have a big incentive to cut those costs because ulcer drugs are usually their single biggest drug expense.
Thus, many doctors and managed care plans may suggest that ulcer patients abandon their current medication in favor of the cheaper generic cimetidine.
This is the threat facing Glaxo Holdings PLC's popular Zantac, Merck & Co.'s Pepcid and Eli Lilly & Co.'s Axid.
Mr. Shah estimates that the collective U.S. sales of these so-called H-2 blockers could drop by a billion dollars or more this year from $4.1 billion last year.
One managed health-care drug purchaser, Nathan J. Schultz, head of pharmaceutical contracting at Diversified Pharmaceutical Services Inc., says he is waiting to see the price of generic cimetidine before deciding whether to switch to cimetidine from Zantac.
Diversified, a unit of United HealthCare Corp., manages the prescription-drug benefits for 14 million people in health plans.
Mr. Curran in Boston says the availability of a generic cimetidine will allow the organization to reduce its outlay for antiulcer drugs by a minimum of 30%, or $300,000 a year.
Massachusetts state law requires automatic generic substitution unless the physician indicates otherwise, he notes.
While the organization won't automatically switch Zantac patients to cimetidine, it will strongly urge physicians to prescribe the generic, he says.
Allergy sufferers and heart patients may see similar cost cuts soon.
Patents are expiring on Marion Merrell Dow Inc.'s antiallergy medication Seldane and its heart drug Cardizem CD.
The threat of generic competition is prodding many makers of branded drugs to decide that if they can't beat them, join them.
Syntex offered its own generic versions of Naprosyn and Anaprox, garnering a considerable share of the generic sales, albeit at a fraction of the price of the branded drugs.
It also sells bulk Naprosyn to most of its competitors.
Glaxo's Zantac has always been priced at a premium over Tagamet but has done well anyway, even in the most cost-sensitive market segments, says George Abercrombie, vice president and general manager of Glaxo's U.S. drug business.
He adds: "We believe Zantac will remain a vigorous product."
In some cases, the impact of a cheap generic version of a drug may be softened by brand loyalty of the patient or physician.
Often, doctors won't suggest changing a patient's prescription as long as the patient seems satisfied with the branded drug.
Mr. Shah notes that even in the case of Syntex's Naprosyn, where the generic is made by the same manufacturer as the branded version, 25% of prescriptions are still for the branded drug, which costs five times more, he says, adding: "The question is: Why?"
Meanwhile, the intense competition to sell to the big managed-care plans is spawning threats of price wars even on drugs that are still protected by patents.
Some companies are selling blood-pressure drugs called ACE inhibitors to managed-care buyers at a 50% discount under Merck's Vasotec, says Mr. Schultz of Diversified.
Next year, the pressure on prices of ACE inhibitors will be intense when the patent on Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.'s Capoten expires, opening the $2 billion ACE-inhibitor market to generic competition.
Sandoz's imminent launch of its cholesterol-lowering drug at half the price of market leaders is already putting pressure on Merck to lower the prices of its Mevacor and Zocor and on Bristol-Myers Squibb to cut the price of its Pravachol.
For example, upon learning of Lescol's sharply lower price, Mr. Curran immediately called Bristol-Myers to ask for a lower price on Pravachol, his organization's preferred drug.
"They seem willing to talk," Mr. Curran says.
