Policy Management Systems Corp., in a filing in federal court last week, acknowledged that it recognized on its financial statements some revenue from license agreements before the agreements were formally signed.
The company, in a written response to a shareholder lawsuit filed in U.S. District Court in Columbia, S.C., denied that it misrepresented the company's financial health in an effort to achieve a consistent 20% growth, as the lawsuit charges.
It also denied a series of allegations charging the company with improper accounting practices.
But Policy Management said in the filing that it recognized revenue in the fourth-quarter of 1992 from license agreements that were not formally signed by the parties until the first-quarter of 1993.
In April, Policy Management disclosed that first-quarter results would fall well below the company's expectations because several contracts hadn't closed as expected.
That news prompted Policy Management's share price to fall 43%, or $36.25, in a single day.
Since then, the accuracy of the Blythewood, S.C., company's financial reporting has become the subject of federal and internal investigations.
In the court filing, the company also said that, on occasion, its employees agreed with customers that the customer would receive future services in exchange for payments of certain invoices.
In those cases, the company said, it recognized the revenue from the invoices in quarters before the customer received the services, according to the filing.
Furthermore, Policy Management said it discovered that some of its employees may have agreed with customers that amounts paid to Policy Management as license fees, and booked as current income, would be refunded to the customer, according to the filing.
In those cases, the company denied that "such conduct was a regular practice of Policy Management or that it was intended to, or in fact did, mislead any investors," according to the filing.
A company spokesman said that the statements in the filing are "not an admission that the company broke any accounting rules."
He did acknowledge that "some of our employees went against company accounting practices."
But, he said: "these were three or four isolated practices" that did not have any impact on the company's share price.
The spokesman said yesterday that an internal audit by Coopers & Lybrand will be released in mid-February.
In August, Policy Management dismissed its independent accountant, Arthur Andersen & Co., and hired Coopers & Lybrand.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday, the company's stock rose $1 to $33.25.
Information about the filing was not widely known at the time the market closed.
Several shareholder lawsuits have charged that Policy Management, and certain of its executives, artificially inflated the company's results.
The company has denied any wrongdoing and says that its accounting practices are sound.
