Investment bankers and investors expecting to reap huge profits as South Africa's giant conglomerates break up into smaller companies could be in for a disappointment.
That's because the big pressure to force South Africa's largest companies to slim down -- which was gaining strength just a few months ago -- has abated, partly because of a rip-roaring stock market.
American and European investment bankers have been scrambling to set up shop in South Africa so they could, among other things, make hay in a mergers-and-acquisitions boom.
But the boom they were expecting will likely be postponed.
Until the stock market lifted prices of some South African stocks by as much as 50% since November, South Africa's largest corporations had been under pressure to "unbundle" their pyramid of interlocking corporate holdings by spinning off companies that are unrelated to their core business and selling their large stakes in others.
Many political leaders, especially black leaders, have been strong vocal advocates of unbundling, contending that breaking up South Africa's conglomerates would help diversify the economy, stimulate competition and promote wider ownership of South African assets.
Although the prime motive for unbundling is a political one, some stock analysts quickly jumped on the unbundling bandwagon.
They say unbundling would add badly needed liquidity to the Johannesburg exchange while boosting stock prices, which for many companies were trading at huge discounts to their net-asset values.
South Africa's 10 largest corporations, the unbundling advocates frequently noted, control 80% of the nation's major business activity through either direct ownership or pyramid-like cross-ownership structures.
For example, gold-mining concern Anglo American Corp., with a market capitalization of about 48.3 billion rand ($14.6 billion), is not only the biggest company on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange -- it's also the controlling shareholder of diamond cartel leader DeBeers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the second-largest company on the Johannesburg exchange.
In turn, DeBeers owns shares in food concern Premier Group Holdings Ltd., another company that is controlled by Anglo American.
These relationships are so disliked by politicians that some have threatened to introduce antitrust laws to force the companies to separate.
Although political leaders and economists will likely continue to push for unbundling, many people in the investment community doubt that many companies will freely adopt the strategy as a restructuring method.
They say the sharp rise in stock prices has caused the discount that existed on many stocks to disappear or narrow on their own -- eliminating one argument for unbundling.
"I think the whole concept of unbundling has gone by the wayside," said Peter Davey, director of research at Frankel Pollack Vinderine in Johannesburg.
Most analysts point to the unbundling of Gencor Ltd., which has been only moderately successful in achieving the financial results investors had expected.
Gencor is the world's second-largest mining house after Anglo American with a preunbundling market capitalization of 21 billion rand.
Last summer, Gencor Chairman Brian Gilbertson said the company would relinquish control of its nonmining assets to Gencor shareholders in an effort to "unlock shareholder wealth" and improve operating efficiency.
The transactions, which reduced Gencor's assets by more than 1 billion rand, involved the concern divesting itself of Sappi Ltd., a paper and pulp company; Engen, formerly Mobil Oil Co.'s South African operation before Mobil Corp. was pressured by the antiapartheid movement to divest itself of holdings in 1989; Malbak, a food and engineering company that, among other things, distributes Pillsbury brand food products in Africa; and Genbel, an investment company.
Prior to the unbundling, Gencor's stock was trading at about 5.20 rand a share, a discount of about 35% to its net-asset value of 8 rand a share (excluding the subsidiaries it divested itself of; including those subsidiaries Gencor's net-asset value was 13 rand a share).
One month after the unbundling, Gencor's stock is trading at about 8.60 rand a share, a 14% discount to its new net-asset value of 10 rand a share.
While that's a good improvement, it's not as significant as some investors had hoped.
Owen Ryan, a stock analyst at J.D. Anderson & Co. here, said the narrowing in Gencor's discount "is a function of the market running higher, commodity prices moving up, foreign investors coming in and a turnaround in Europe.
Gencor's unbundling may have had something to do with the rise in the stock price, but it certainly was not the major factor."
What about the political effect of Gencor's unbundling?
The results have been mixed.
The stock of Gencor and its former subsidiaries are easier to buy and sell, resulting in greater trading liquidity for investors.
And the stocks are slightly more widely held by the public.
Foreign and even some domestic investors are far more interested in buying Anglo American shares than they are in buying Gencor stock.
Anglo American appeals to a broad array of investors who like the fact that its industry diversity makes it a good proxy for the entire South African economy.
Indeed, Anglo American stock more than doubled last year, partly because of a sharp rise in gold and avid buying by American investors.
The sharp price gain caused the discount to net-asset value, once as high as 25%, to disappear.
As a result, it is easier for Anglo American to dismiss unbundling as a restructuring method.
It has repeatedly argued that South African companies should not be forced to slim down until the government lifts monetary exchange controls, which make it difficult for South Africans to invest outside of the country.
As a result, most corporations here have been using their profits to buy other companies or to invest in the stock market, rather than expand internationally as many would prefer.
"It's no good restructuring if you can't invest the proceeds," said Michael Spicer, an Anglo American spokesman.
"If the government eliminates exchange controls, then we may consider" unbundling.
