The IRS doesn't think much of travelers mixing business and pleasure.
Because of a new tax law signed by President Clinton last October, many travelers won't be able to deduct as much of their expenses as they once did.
For example, the new law cuts the amount that travelers -- and nontravelers, for that matter -- may deduct for business meals and entertainment to 50% from 80%.
That change is effective beginning in 1994.
The new law also makes it much tougher for business travelers to deduct many expenses of a spouse or any other person traveling with them, warns Sidney Kess, a tax lawyer and consulting editor at CCH Inc., a Riverwoods, Ill.-based publisher of tax information.
Under the new law, which became effective Jan. 1 of this year, there are now three tests that determine whether such expenses are deductible.
The first may be the strictest: The traveling companion must be an employee of the person paying for the trip or claiming the expenses.
Second, the presence of the other person must be for a "bona fide business purpose," not just for fun.
And finally, the expenses of that person must "otherwise be deductible" as an ordinary and necessary business expense.
So don't try telling the IRS that your loyal spouse or friend performed an invaluable service to you and your employer by helping write your speech or entertain clients.
Some people may be tempted to "hire" their spouse for $1 a day, but Sidney Weinman, a lawyer and senior editor at Research Institute of America, warns, with mild understatement, "the IRS isn't likely to buy it."
But when calculating how much of your hotel room to deduct when your companion isn't deductible, you don't have to limit it to half the price of a double room, says Mary B. Hevener, a lawyer at McDermott, Will & Emery in Washington.
Claim the cost of a single room, she says.
"Also, remember many hotels don't differentiate between the cost of a single and a double; they charge the same," she adds.
Other general rules: Travel costs to and from your destination are deductible only if your trip was primarily related to your trade or business.
If the trip was mainly for fun, travel expenses to and from your destination are not deductible; but any expenses while there that are clearly related to business would be.
The new law eliminates deductions for club dues, including airline clubs that are highly popular with business travelers, says Ms. Hevener of McDermott, Will & Emery.
There is a snippet of good news for some travelers, though.
If you drive, the standard deductible rate for mileage rose to 29 cents a mile in 1994 from 28 cents.
That's $10 for every 1,000 miles of business-related driving.
Be sure to keep good records.
If you travel extensively, it might pay to hire an accountant or tax lawyer.
"This is not an easy subject," says Mr. Kess of CCH.
For example, some rules may differ depending on whether or not you leave the U.S. and how long your trip is.
