After a rebound in real-estate stocks, mall developer Edward DeBartolo has decided to try again to raise $575 million by selling the public a 48% stake in his retail empire.
Yesterday, three months after calling off its initial public offering, Youngstown, Ohio-based DeBartolo Realty Corp. filed a new plan with the Securities and Exchange Commission to tap the public market to raise capital to pay off Mr. DeBartolo's lenders.
Last December, the 84-year old Mr. DeBartolo, with the approval of his lenders, decided to halt creation of the real-estate investment trust at the 11th hour, when it became apparent he would have to offer investors a higher-than-anticipated dividend yield.
At the time, the IPO market was clogged with competing offerings, including the $840 million offering of fellow mall tycoon Melvin Simon, which some analysts rated more attractive.
Several other retail offerings were also postponed.
But Mr. DeBartolo was still under pressure from his lenders to raise capital.
In 1992, they agreed to restructure more than $4 billion in debt, after the plunge in commercial property values, coupled with various strategic errors, led to a financial crisis.
It halted the company's growth and put a cloud over the family's other holdings, which include the San Francisco 49ers.
But after a 0.6% drop in equity REIT prices in December, the market rebounded 6.2% in January and February.
Shares in Mr. Simon's REIT have traded up by about 24% and the market is no longer as crowded with new offerings.
Several other retailers who postponed offerings in December have already completed them.
Mr. DeBartolo has evidently concluded that going public is preferable to trying to sell his holdings privately.
Because of SEC prohibitions against discussing pending offerings, officials at DeBartolo declined to comment, as did those at Morgan Stanley & Co., lead underwriter on the deal.
The new structure of the offering is expected to make it more attractive to investors.
In the original deal, Mr. DeBartolo would have retained a separate ownership stake in some of the properties.
The current offering includes his entire stake in 51 malls and 11 community centers.
Some REIT analysts and institutional buyers had complained that by withholding some equity from the first offering, Mr. DeBartolo faced a conflict of interest.
The SEC filing also disclosed that Blackstone Group, one of Mr. DeBartolo's lenders, had agreed to convert $121 million of debt into a 8% stake in the properties, and would hold a seat on the REIT's board.
In addition, using money from its real-estate investment fund, Morgan Stanley will buy a 1% stake, and another lender will hold another 1%, leaving the DeBartolo family with 42% ownership.
Under the previous deal, it would have held 48%.
The filing indicated that the underwriters will offer investors an annual cash dividend yield between 8% and 8.7% of the offering price.
