After decades of glorifying consumption, Town & Country is grappling with what the wealthy want from a magazine in the '90s.
Having seen a staggering 66% plunge in advertising over the past decade -- from more than 1,900 pages in 1984 to fewer than 650 pages in 1993 -- the current soul searching at the 148-year-old Hearst Corp. publication shows how hard it is to maintain a magazine's franchise over a very long time, as well as how competitive the magazine market has become for affluent readers and luxury advertisers.
Such titles as the New Yorker, Vanity Fair and Gourmet have become more formidable competitors, while sales of luxury goods have plummeted and cut into marketers' ad budgets.
Some readers felt Town & Country -- long famous for its gushing descriptions of dowagers and its debutante-of-the-month covers -- didn't change with the times as they did.
But the deepest discontent came from advertisers.
"It got to be a place you were afraid to be seen as an advertiser because it had such a narrow '80s focus on consumption above all," says Cindy Mallin, director of advertising for Louis Vuitton, the maker of luxury luggage and handbags.
All that is changing under the direction of Pamela Fiori, who was installed as editor of Town & Country last fall -- the magazine's fourth editor in four years.
Ms. Fiori, who is 50 years old, vows that as long as she is in the job Town & Country will never again carry photos of diamond-bedecked socialites posing in their swimming pools.
In the past few months, she has overhauled the country's second-oldest magazine (the oldest is Scientific American), squeezing pages of nationwide social events into a small box, adding a personal-finance column and publishing serious articles like a first-person account of heroin addiction.
"I want the magazine to be less snobby -- more about what people accomplish instead of what family they were born into," says Ms. Fiori, a onetime high-school English teacher whose magazine background includes a long stint as editor of Travel & Leisure.
Even some holdovers from former Town & Country regimes admit that the magazine had to change or die, but questions remain about whether Ms. Fiori's approach is the answer.
"I don't think advertisers get Pamela's editorial mission even after five issues," says Roberta Garfinkle, director of print media for McCann Erickson.
"There are so many more magazines now and less advertising money.
Town & Country no longer goes to the top of your list for things like makeup, liquor and cars."
Louis Vuitton is one of a handful of disgruntled former advertisers who recently returned to Town & Country's pages because they think the magazine is improving, but they aren't exactly part of a stampede.
In the first five months of 1994, advertising pages rose a modest 5.2%.
That is a marked contrast to another retooled Hearst publication, Harper's Bazaar, which nearly doubled its advertising revenue last year after Liz Tilberis took over as editor in late 1992.
Town & Country's circulation at the end of 1993 was below 500,000, down about 13% from the year before, but actually higher than it was in the early 1980s, when it was stuck below 425,000.
It's too early to judge Ms. Fiori's impact on subscriptions, but she says that newsstand sales are up 10% and that she has received mostly supportive mail from subscribers.
Still, she has clearly miffed some.
"It looks handsome, but I think it's trying too hard to be politically correct," says Sugar Rautbord, a Chicago socialite who used to occasionally contribute articles and once posed in Town & Country wearing leotards and jewels, pretending to spar with an Olympic boxer.
"It used to be like an exclusive club you belonged to, a seal of approval for a lifestyle."
"Town & Country is too focused on New York now and too little about real people," grumbles New York decorator Mario Buatta.
"It used to be about society people in Tulsa and Houston and St. Louis.
It used to be great."
But Hearst's top magazine executive, D. Claeys Bahrenburg, insists he is pleased.
"I think Pamela has a strong sense of style and knows how to build a service magazine," Mr. Bahrenburg says.
He won't comment on speculation that the magazine continues to lose money but concedes he doesn't think it will match the high of 1984.
"I do think we could climb back up to 1,500 pages," he adds.
Ms. Fiori insists she is on the right track to getting there.
"The rich are a lot more active and concerned about issues than they're given credit for," she says, adding that a year-long Roper poll just completed for the magazine confirms her views.
According to the poll, the median age for the wealthy (household income of more than $100,000) is 42.5 years, and three times as many of the rich run their own businesses as the general populace.
Roper didn't find many silver-haired coupon-clippers.
While the magazine still carries articles about extravagant items like a $4,000 canopy bed for dogs, Ms. Fiori says it will showcase the meaningful as well as the beautiful.
The January issue featured environmental lawyer Larry Rockefeller (grandson of John D.) in khakis instead of a tux, clearing trails by hand in a wilderness preserve.
Ms. Fiori's biggest regret is that "most people don't realize the magazine has changed," but Hearst promises that it will soon start an ad campaign to spread the word about the revamped Town & Country.
And two years from now, when the magazine turns 150 years old, Hearst's Mr. Bahrenburg promises a big celebration.
"We're working on a television special, a book and other projects," he says.
"This magazine has survived wars and depressions.
It still has a role to fill as the chronicle of society."
Shin's, a trendy "Japanese fusion" eatery in Manhattan, received such a scathing review last month in the New York Times that the restaurant is running ads to brag about it.
Times reviewer Ruth Reichl deemed the restaurant "poor" in her review last month.
She wrote detailed descriptions of unappealing atmosphere and unappetizing fare, such as "asparagus-raisin sorbet" and a half-orange filled with crabmeat, herring roe, mayonaise and green olives" -- one of the least appealing dishes I've ever struggled to eat."
The crowning moment came when an inept busboy spilled ice water and sake into Ms. Reichl's lap.
Now, Shin's and ad agency Weiss Whitten Stagliano are trying to capitalize on the bad press.
In the Times this Sunday, they plan to run a full-page ad in the guise of a Help Wanted notice.
Under the headline, "Exprncd, Agile Busboy," the ad pairs two of the review's only complimentary remarks about Shin's food with an account of the busboy incident.
The tagline: "A dining experience you won't soon forget."
A spokesman for Shin's says business has "held steady" since the review ran.
For her part, Ms. Reichl observes, "My basic feeling is that good reviews are good for restaurants, and terrible ones are, too.
It's the ones in between that get overlooked."
The New York Attorney General's office attacked New York Telephone Co. for claiming credit for rate cuts that the company had opposed.
The attorney general's office said the rate cuts this year came about only after strong pressure from itself and consumer groups.
But it says New York Telephone's print ad, which advertises the lower rates, and its name change to Nynex, misleads consumers into believing the name change is related to the rate cut.
The ad, created by Young & Rubicam's Chapman Direct Advertising, shows the old and new names side by side, next to the caption, "New identity.
New commitment.
And new savings to prove it."
"Like, they were bringing in the savings," says Charlie Donaldson, an attorney in the attorney general's office.
The rates were reduced, he says, "only because people like us made them do it."
A New York Telephone spokesman acknowledges the company opposed the rate cuts, but says the ad is merely trying to inform consumers of both the name change and the rate cuts.
The attorney general's office is also complaining that New York Telephone asked the Public Service Commission last week to restore some of the rate cuts.
What's more, the office says it's trying to determine whether the company is making consumers pay for its ads.
After a three-month evaluation, Sprint Corp. selected Grey Advertising in New York as its second agency, to handle its business services group, a part of its long-distance division.
The company didn't disclose billings, which have been estimated at more than $30 million.
Sprint said it needed a new agency to focus specifically on its fast-growing business long distance operation.
The appointment doesn't affect Sprint's relationship with WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson, whose San Francisco office will continue to handle Sprint's other businesses, including consumer long-distance service.
Grey was among three finalists; the others were Wells Rich Greene BDDP and Interpublic Group's Lintas, both of New York.
Ad Notes. . . .
WELLS RICH: Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York, said it was folding the local TV media-buying portion of its inhouse media department and moving those duties to a joint venture formed with independent media firm KSL Media, New York.
Estimated billings, according to the trade publication Inside Media, are $30 million to $45 million.
AIRWICK: Reckitt & Colman moved its $5 million to $7 million Airwick air freshener account from Wells Rich Greene BDDP to Omnicom Group's TBWA Advertising, which also handles Reckitt's Woolite brand.
Wells Rich said it resigned from the account; TBWA president Dick Costello said his agency won the assignment "thanks to our good work for Woolite."
Reckitt officials couldn't be reached.
OGILVY: Automatic Data Processing selected Ogilvy & Mather Direct, the direct marketing division of WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather, as agency of record for its $6 million account.
FINALISTS: Shawmut National Corp., a financial-services company, said it named three agencies as finalists for its $12 million account: Rotando Partners of Stamford, Conn., and two Boston companies, Houston Effler & Partners and Ingalls, Quinn & Johnson.
ACCOUNT: Harris Drury Cohen of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was awarded creative responsibility for Country Weekly, a new supermarket tabloid about country music published by the Enquirer/Star Group Inc.
Billings couldn't be determined.
YOUNG & RUBICAM NEW YORK created a print ad for New York Telephone Co. that has come under attack by the New York Attorney General's office.
Friday's Advertising column listed the incorrect advertising agency because of inaccurate information from New York Telephone.
