HEALTHIER FINANCES in many states and cities ease pressures to raise taxes.
"For the first time in recent memory, no region is in decline, and even the more troubled economies of California and the Northeast seem to have bottomed out," says a report by Moody's Investors Service Inc.
Many state and local governments benefit from stronger economic growth, higher tax revenue and sharply lower borrowing costs, says Daniel Heimowitz, Moody's executive vice president.
But warning flags still fly in some places.
Moody's remains concerned about California, especially in the aftermath of the earthquake.
The economic slump in the Los Angeles area has been "deeper and more prolonged than any since World War II," the report says.
School finance reform in Michigan has created "great uncertainty for schools and cities" there.
But a Price Waterhouse report says that with elections coming up, 1994 "will not be a big year for tax increases" for a majority of states.
More states, such as Ohio and Minnesota, may even consider tax cuts, says Doug Lindholm of Price Waterhouse.
SOME HOMEOWNERS who refinanced may be overlooking a valuable deduction.
Many people took advantage of low interest rates last year to refinance their mortgage for a second or third time.
Some of those people now may be able to deduct more of the "points" they paid on the earlier refinancing than they realize, says Larry Axelrod, a partner at Deloitte & Touche.
Points are a form of prepaid interest that lenders typically charge as an upfront fee.
Points paid on a refinancing generally are deducted over the life of the loan.
Suppose someone who refinanced in 1992 and paid points did so again in 1993 from a different lender, paying points again.
Points paid on the 1993 refinancing should be deducted over the life of the new loan.
But points from the earlier refinancing that haven't yet been deducted may be deducted in full for 1993, Mr. Axelrod says.
FEWER TAX BATTLES clog the courts, but the stakes are higher.
These trends emerge from a report to be presented today by David L. Jordan, the IRS's acting chief counsel, to new members of the IRS Commissioner's advisory group.
As of Sept. 30, the Tax Court faced a backlog of 42,074 cases, down from 54,135 three years earlier.
But the amount of money at stake rose to $36 billion as of Sept. 30 from $33.4 billion three years earlier, Mr. Jordan says.
An additional $3.1 billion was at stake in other courts as of Sept. 30, up from $2 billion in 1990.
"We're getting fewer cases, but the cases we're getting are much larger," says Mr. Jordan.
As of Sept. 30, there were 286 Tax Court cases that each involved more than $10 million.
Of those, 180 involved corporate income-tax issues, 64 dealt with individual income-tax issues and the other 42 were on estate and gift-tax issues.
The corporate cases involved $21.1 billion.
The individual income-tax cases involved $2.1 billion, and the estate and gift-tax cases, $2.4 billion.
Less than 1% of all Tax Court cases accounted for more than 70% of the dollars at stake in all cases.
AT LAST: An administration official says "we are very close" to announcing a nominee for the job of IRS chief counsel.
The position has been vacant for about a year.
EARTHQUAKE VICTIMS in California get a new break: They won't owe penalties on returns or taxes due between Jan. 15 and Feb. 28 if the return or tax payment is postmarked by Feb. 28.
But the IRS says payment of interest is required by law.
TAX-REFUND FRAUD will be studied at a Feb. 10 hearing of a House Ways and Means subcommittee chaired by Rep. Pickle (D., Texas).
The hearing will focus especially on the growing problem of fraud stemming from electronically filed returns.
NEW BUSINESSES in New York City face tough odds.
A city report shows, on average, nearly 25% of them are no longer on the tax rolls after a year -- and more than 50% are out of business, or no longer doing business in the city, after five years.
IMPORTANT IRS DATA is "unavailable or unreliable," a congressional agency says.
For example, the IRS can't even provide detailed information on how much it collects in excise and Social Security taxes, according to a General Accounting Office report.
That is because payment information for some types of taxes is lumped together, the watchdog agency says.
Social Security and individual income taxes withheld from employees are combined into a single category, as are about 50 different excise taxes, the report says.
The GAO says excise taxes that should be distributed to various government trust funds based on actual IRS collections are, instead, distributed on the basis of tax "assessments."
Naturally, assessments exceed collections.
Thus, sloppy IRS bookkeeping effectively results in subsidies from the general revenue fund to trust funds, the GAO says.
The IRS agrees with some recommendations, but says many require coordination with other agencies or legislative changes.
BRIEFS: How's that?
An IRS lawyer describes the IRS's efforts to move into the electronic age as "electronicization." . . .
A booklet by tax lawyer Conrad Teitell on estate planning and gifts is titled: "God's Will Is Not Subject to Probate, but yours is."
