With investors still struggling to recover from last week's massive sell-off, the Treasury market plunged again yesterday.
Rumors of political skulduggery, combined with widespread nervousness about weakness in the nation's bond markets, pushed down the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond more than 1 5/8 points to 90 27/32.
That means a price drop of $16.25 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
The yield, which moves in the opposite direction of price, soard to 6.98%, the highest since May 1993.
Since the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates on Feb. 4, the price of the 30-year bond has dropped more than 8 1/4 points, or more than $82.50 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
Fallout from wild speculation regarding the suicide last year of deputy White House counsel Vincent Foster as well as President Clinton's past financial dealings moved from Washington to Wall Street, where stock and bond markets tumbled.
Some analysts pointed to a financial-gossip newsletter published by Johnson Smick International that said staffers in the office of Sen. Daniel Moynihan (D., N.Y.) were saying that the body of Mr. Foster was moved from an administration apartment in Virginia to the park where it was found.
The newsletter has been known to print wild speculation, which sometimes moves markets.
Stunned by the market's response, White House Press Secretary Dee Dee Myers said, "It is ridiculous.
There is not a shred of evidence to suggest that this is true.
It is a complete fabrication.
Why are we taking seriously a little-known newsletter that makes allegations with no evidence?"
A spokesman for Mr. Moynihan, Lawrence O'Donnell, said no one from the office had spoken to anyone from the newsletter.
"They charge people a lot of money to send them something," he said.
"I don't know where to begin in dismissing this.
This is below the National Enquirer in terms of journalistic standards."
"I hate this," said Thomas D. Gallagher, a political analyst for Lehman Brothers Inc. in Washington.
The rumors affected the value of the dollar in foreign-exchange markets as well as gold prices, Mr. Gallagher pointed out.
"That's going to have an effect on bonds" as well, he said.
Mr. Gallagher said he tried to calm the bond traders at Lehman in New York with this interpretation of the political speculation: "You have to discipline yourself when you think about Whitewater and ask when it matters to the markets.
Has Washington become so consumed with this that it affects the president's agenda and his ability to govern?"
Mr. Gallagher isn't so sure that it has, but he is still worried.
"We're in a situation where the scandal has taken on a life of its own and the markets are going to be susceptible to rumors," he said.
"What are the allegations that are really going to cripple the presidency?"
But these days in the bond market, a rumor is enough when facts aren't around to justify selling.
For the past month, bond investors have been unloading their holdings.
Particularly hard hit has been the U.S. market for corporate junk bonds, from which investors are fleeing.
Last week there were large outflows from junkbond mutual funds, but this week the flows have turned into a tidal wave.
Investors have ignored plenty of reports showing that the economy is strengthening -- which is usually good news for junk-bond issuers, who have much to gain from an economic rebound.
According to AMG Data Services of Arcata, Calif., investors have yanked more than $1.36 billion out of junk-bond mutual funds over the past two weeks, $920 million of that over the week ending Wednesday.
"It's the most we've ever seen over a two-week period," said Robert Adler, president of AMG.
According to AMG, certain mutual funds have seen a drop in their assets of more than $100 million over the week.
Many investors are worried that inflationary pressures are growing, something many Wall Street economists doubt.
When the Fed raised short-term interest rates, the market began a round of second-guessing the Fed's anti-inflationary policies.
With its February rise, The Fed intended to wage a psychological battle against inflationary fears before actual price increases occurred.
But the move has had the opposite effect on many investors, who have begun to believe that perhaps the Fed moved just as inflation was picking up, even though most recent economic reports don't show this.
News that the gross domestic product jumped 7.5% in last year's fourth quarter didn't help matters.
In bond-market logic, a rapidly growing economy is bad news because it could lead to rising inflation, which reduces the value of an investment with a fixed rate of return.
"The market is going out of its way to find bearish news," said Dana Johnson, head of market analysis at First Chicago Capital Markets.
James Snyder, head of fixed income at Northern Trust, added that participants are "building a risk premium into the market because of what we are hearing and reading about in terms of the leadership of our country."
Although Treasury securities never really made it into positive territory yesterday, there was some scattered, early buying.
However, the sellers quickly overwhelmed the market and prices ground lower through most of the day.
Ron Connors, head of government-securities trading at Bear Stearns & Co., noted "huge selling" by investors during the afternoon as contributing to the downdraft.
That only added to the pressure created by selling from dealers.
"The Street remains littered with huge positions in corporates, mortgage-backed securities and emerging markets.
The positions are big and there are no retail buyers," Mr. Connors said.
But for the most part, market participants said the sell-off simply reflected the extremely bearish sentiment pervasive in the bond market.
As a result, the selling is continuing, even though many players feel the declines have gone too far.
"It's very emotional and has very little to do with any sort of a sober analysis of the fundamentals," said Mr. Johnson of First Chicago.
In an unusual move, the Republic of Turkey switched the lead manager "in the 11th hour" of its planned $1 billion global bond to CS First Boston Inc. from Merrill Lynch & Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc., a source involved with the transaction said.
Trading in the secondary markets was light, with prices down.
But the bonds of R.H. Macy & Co. traded up by several points on a reportedly bullish research report
Turkey had been slated to sell the 10-year global bond Wednesday, but postponed the offering because of market conditions.
Up until last week, Merrill and Salomon were said to be marketing the $1 billion offering to yield 9%.
With CS First Boston, Turkey hopes to get a yield 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point lower, the source said.
Salomon confirmed that they lost the deal.
"The global deal for the Republic of Turkey has been officially postponed due to market conditions and the mandate has been withdrawn from Salomon and Merrill," said a Salomon official, who declined further comment.
Officials at Merrill Lynch declined to comment, as did officials at CS First Boston.
Despite a near currency crisis, Turkey still is "hell bent on selling bonds," one sovereign debt analyst said.
"Their reserve is under pressure, their deficit is high," the analyst said.
"They've been out of the bond market for months and their fiscal situation has worsened even further."
Merrill and Salomon were marketing the global bond at a yield spread of 3.5 percentage points above the yield of comparable U.S. Treasurys.
According to the source close to the deal, CS First Boston is hoping to sell Turkey's debt at a considerably cheaper yield spread of 3.15 percentage points.
The bonds are expected to mature in 10 years and carry a three-year put option that will allow investors to sell back the bonds after three years at a preset price.
Merrill and Salomon were marketing a deal with a similar structure, the source said.
Global bonds are securities sold in the world's major markets and are intended to be more liquid than other types of securities.
Turkey's debt is rated triple-B-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp. and Ba-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc.
Both rating agencies recently downgraded Turkey's debt and cited, among other things, the country's inability to reduce a large deficit and combat inflation.
Meanwhile prices of Macy senior bonds soared yesterday in anticipation of a forthcoming Morgan Stanley research report on the troubled retailer, according to traders.
According one investor, who didn't wish to be identified, Morgan Stanley representatives were calling clients about the bonds and the report as long as two days ago.
A Morgan Stanley spokeswoman said that the report would be issued today but wouldn't comment further.
The 14 5/8s due in 1998, a $379 million issue that is the most senior of Macy's three bond issues outstanding, closed at 44, down slightly from the day's high but up two points from Wednesday's close.
That price movement represents a $20 gain for every $1,000 face amount of bonds.
However, since the bonds trade at a steep discount to face value, they have actually actually risen nearly 7% in price over the past two days.
Macy bonds have been particularly prone to rumors because they are one of the few remaining big bankruptcy-court speculations.
Macy is expected to present an outline of its reorganization plan to Cyrus Vance, the court-appointed mediator, by March 23.
As previously reported, the company's plan is expected to include an investment from GE Capital, a unit of General Electric Co., and Fidelity Investments.
According to traders, Morgan Stanley's report is expected to place a value of $4 billion on the reorganized retailer, about $500 million more than the current market value of the company's debt and far more than other distrssed-debt experts believe the company is worth.
"If they make that bid they'll own it," said Max Holmes, head of high yield at Salomon Brothers.
A Morgan Stanley officials confirmed that the firm has owned and traded Macy's bonds for a long time and called the report a "valuation road map" for investors that reflects opinions held by the firm for a long time.
The municipal bond market's consolidation came to an abrupt halt.
Tax-exempt issues were as much as a full point lower in late trading.
Although the muni market "is in much, much better shape" than it was recently, it isn't strong enough to stand on its own when Treasurys slide, a New York-based trader said.
Among the issues hit by sales were California's 5.15% of 2019 general-obligation bonds.
They were 3/4 lower at 87 5/8 in late dealings, yielding 6.11%.
Despite the renewed weakness, tax-exempt-bond traders said there were developments that bode well for the near term.
Individual investors, for example, have been seen doing some bargain hunting after shunning the market recently.
"I've definitely seen retail" purchases, said Daniel Keating, senior managing director of the muni department at Bear, Stearns & Co.
Another plus is a fall in dealer inventories after a big buildup of secondary-market bonds in recent weeks, traders said.
The recent slowdown in muni issuance has also helped the market, traders said.
With nary a bull to be found, mortgage bonds went bust yesterday.
Most in the market couldn't come up with reasons beyond Whitewater for the sell-off.
It is likely, observers said, that the headlines were being cited as an excuse by a market that simply wants to sell.
In late trading among the 7% coupons for March delivery, Government National Mortgage Association issues were down 28/32 at 97 27/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues were off 26/32 at 98 14/32 and Federal National Mortgage Association issues were at 98 5/32, down 28/32.
Until the market can stake out some sort of bottom support level for prices, mutual-fund managers, some of the market's most important customers, aren't likely to do much trading even if they have new funds they need to put to work.
Thomas D. Lauricella contributed to this article.
