Brazil's government is about to implement yet another stabilization plan to curb runaway inflation.
But there's a problem: Few seem to understand it.
"Reading the newspapers, I can't understand myself what I'm about to do," Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso was quoted as saying.
Join the club.
"I got it, but I didn't understand," is how business magazine Exame summed up the general perplexity here as the government prepares to detail today how it intends to phase in a new currency, the centerpiece of the plan.
In the past few days, there have been so many confusing actions by Congress, contradictory statements by officials and conflicting media accounts that the Finance Ministry's adviser on prices, Milton Dallari, has held as many as five meetings with businessmen to try to answer their questions.
One Sao Paulo executive has forbidden his staff from studying the proposed measures because he sees it as a waste of time.
"Every day comes something new," says Sergio Haberfeld, chairman of the Toga packaging group, explaining why he has banned his advisers from carrying out studies and simulations.
"There's no use preparing to play football if the government is going to announce we're playing tennis."
In fact, the outline of the plan has been known since December, and it seems relatively straightforward.
Eschewing Brazil's traditional recipe of wage-and-price freezes and other pyrotechnics such as temporarily confiscating assets, the government intends to attack Brazil's 37% monthly inflation through a mixture of fiscal orthodoxy and monetary magic.
In a first stage, the government intends to wipe out what many see as the basic cause of inflation, gaping deficits, by enacting a balanced budget.
Then, it intends to introduce a new inflation index that will progressively be turned into a currency -- Brazil's sixth in eight years.
Implementation, however, is another matter.
The government appeared to make a big stride forward toward a balanced budget when a $15.5 billion emergency social fund was approved by Congress last week.
But Congress failed to pass the legislation allowing that fund to come into effect immediately, and unless this is done by March 1, the government could lose a month's worth of tax revenue.
Moreover, the fund itself was cut by about $600 million because of political bargaining, and the government now has to revise the 1994 budget for the third time.
Stage 2 -- introducing a new inflation index -- is proving even more complicated.
The basic idea is to create a stable reference point for Brazil's prices by introducing a unit of account, to be called the Real Value Unit, known by the abbreviation URV.
The value of that unit would fluctuate daily, like a currency.
For instance, a loaf of bread would cost 1 URV, but 1 URV could be worth 1 cruzeiro real today and 1.1 cruzeiros reais the next day.
As Brazilians progressively get used to this new unit, the government intends to phase out the cruzeiro real and make the URV its new currency -- hopefully a more stable one than the cruzeiro real, which loses more than 1% of its value daily.
Mr. Cardoso initially said that use of the URV wouldn't be compulsory.
But officials now say that all salaries will have to be converted into URVs when the unit of account is introduced this week.
At the same time, however, prices will continue to be expressed in cruzeiros reals, which has wage earners and businessmen completely confused.
Since the government hasn't yet announced the parity between the URV and cruzeiro real, workers don't know whether they will be earning more, less or the same as of next week.
Unions are already warning of strikes if the conversion leads to a real drop in wages.
Moreover, many businesses, fearing that the government might make prices in URVs compulsory too, have been marking up their prices preventively, leading to fears of higher inflation.
Other companies say business has dried up pending clarification of the rules.
"Our clients aren't buying or ordering anything," says Miguel Ribeiro, planning manager of Bon Zon, a Rio rubber and trading company.
"Nobody understands anything about the URV."
