AMERICA IS RESOUNDING to the sound of one hand doing just about anything.
There's a one-hand tape dispenser, a one-hand peppermill and a one-hand egg beater.
"One-hand gives you the ability to handle multiple tasks, to pack as much into the day as you can," says William Hull Faust, a vice president at Fitch, a Worthington, Ohio, design firm.
It has designed a new one-hand binder for Morningstar Mutual Funds, a subscription service that analyzes mutual fund performance.
Morningstar found that its old three-ring binder was awkward.
So Fitch designed a stiff plastic book.
The subscriber must put a plastic clip on each issue before popping it into the binder.
The issue can be popped out in order to photocopy a page.
"It takes less time and only one hand," says Mr. Faust.
Value Line, Morningstar's main rival, isn't amused.
CEO Jean Bernhard Buttner says her company used a conventional three-ring notebook until the 1960s and switched to a binder with closed metal rings and clipped holes that allow the booklets to be slipped on and off.
"Nothing works as well," she says.
The new Morningstar binder "takes a lot of time to put things in and out and weighs a lot more than ours," adds Ms. Buttner.
(It weighs two ounces more.)
Morningstar Vice President Kurt Hermann says the Value Line binder is easy to use but "looks ratty" because the clipped holes "drop little pieces of paper all over your lap."
NOT EVERY DESIGNER in the Land of Plenty concentrates on creating better toasters, computer mice and microwaveable baggies.
A few make products to meet the needs of Third World people, for whom survival means more than shopping.
Take Ralf Hotchkiss and the rough-terrain wheelchair.
Most U.S. wheelchairs do poorly in poor countries; they're expensive, heavy and fragile, and they don't negotiate ruts, mud and potholes.
Confined to a wheelchair since a 1966 motorcycle accident, Mr. Hotchkiss is technical director of the Wheeled Mobility Center at San Francisco State University and codesigner of the Whirlwind wheelchair.
Made with local materials and labor, the Whirlwind costs as little as $150.
It weighs 35 pounds, 30% less than a conventional wheelchair.
Its strong, flexible frame survives rough ground and all kinds of weather.
The Whirlwind's front caster wheels are adapted from pushcart wheels in Zimbabwe.
Made of soft rubber, they are wide and flattish, roll easily over rocks and sand and never go flat.
The Whirlwind is made in 24 countries.
Mr. Hotchkiss and his partner, Peter Pfaelzer, apprise each shop of improvements.
Another U.S.-based design that's helping the developing world is a solar box cooker that is useful where fuel is scarce.
Solar Cookers International, Sacramento, Calif., has sold a few thousand ovens at $58 and thousands of sets of plans.
ART MARRIES SCIENCE to bring forth a better dump.
American cities are beginning to reawaken to the idea that roads, bridges, sewage-treatment plants and other bits of infrastructure are more than mere utilities; they are also creations of the public spirit.
"The new infrastructure," says Ron Jensen, public works director for Phoenix, "can meet a community's cultural, aesthetic and educational needs, as well as providing a basic service."
Many cities, including Miami, San Diego and Boston, are struggling to inject art into infrastructure in ways that go deeper than ornamentation.
Phoenix is probably farthest along, making artists part of the design team from the start.
Engineer Jerry Cannon proposed columns to help the Squaw Peak Parkway pass over a road, instead of the planned freestanding span.
Artist Marilyn Zwak designed the columns in the shape of frogs, after Hohokam Indian artifacts.
They allow for a narrower, more graceful parkway above and provide more space for walkways below, as well as a better division between the road and the paths.
Artists Michael Singer and Linnea Glatt did the conceptual design for a new solid-waste management facility, proposing to support the roof externally.
The steel trusses outside are attractive and also eliminate all but two columns inside, allowing for space that will accommodate changes in solid-waste technology.
Phoenix engineers say this artistry wins public support for public works.
It also saves money.
The Squaw Peak columns cut $500,000 from the overpass's budget.
