In presenting his health care plan to the American public, President Clinton has repeatedly declared himself firmly for choice.
In his first statement on health care this year, Mr. Clinton even claimed that his plan "guarantees more choices of health care not only to the patients who really matter, but also to the doctors and the health care providers."
But while claiming that his plan protects consumer sovereignty in health care, the president is in fact engaged in doublespeak aimed at misleading the public.
To most Americans, the meaning of "choice" couldn't be clearer.
I enjoy freedom of choice if I can go to the doctor I prefer, if I can pick my insurance, and if I can switch when I find another plan that suits me better.
I have no real choice if the government forces me to abandon a plan that I like, if it forces me into a health care plan I don't like, and if it bars me from going outside the government-run system to buy health insurance.
By any honest definition of choice, the Clinton health care plan eliminates the basic elements of free choice.
Under the Clinton plan, unless you are one of the privileged few who work for the government or for huge companies that employ more than 5,000 people, your health insurance will be canceled, whether you like it or not.
Under the Clinton plan, you will be forced to pay money into a government-run collective called a "regional alliance" to purchase a "Standard Benefits Package" full of services that you may neither want nor need.
And under the Clinton plan you will be prohibited from purchasing private health insurance as an alternative to the government-designed package.
But the president doesn't dare own up to the fact that in his plan bureaucrats choose and consumers cannot opt out.
Instead, Mr. Clinton defines "choice" to mean something that will astonish most Americans.
Page 15 of the president's Health Security Act offers a subsection titled "Protection of Consumer Choice," and it begins: "Nothing in this act shall be construed as prohibiting . . . an individual from purchasing any health care services."
So nothing in the Clinton plan will prevent me from going to the doctor of my choice and purchasing the health care I need?
Fair enough.
But what if the surgeon I want isn't included in the government-designed plan?
How am I supposed to pay for that?
So we read on . . . and on . . . and on.
On page 239, we come to the relevant provision: "No health plan insurer, or any other person, may offer to any eligible individual a supplemental health benefit policy that duplicates any coverage provided in the comprehensive benefit package."
Wait a minute: As an "eligible individual" (and judging from page 14, only illegal aliens are ineligible), I must buy health care from a government-run or government-approved collective under the Clinton plan, and I cannot buy a private plan, like many on the market today, that allows me to pick my surgeon, not their surgeon!
Anybody who tries to sell me a private insurance policy "shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty (not to exceed $10,000) for each such violation."
(Page 241.)
Now back to page 15.
"Nothing in this act shall be constructed as prohibiting . . . an individual from purchasing any health care services."
But everything else in the Health Security Act prohibits an individual from financing health care services bought outside the government plan.
So what does "choice" amount to under the Clinton plan?
It means that after forcing me and my employer to buy into the government plan, I get the choice of either using the government's plan or paying twice for health care: Once for a government plan I might not want and once for the private health care I do want, with the doctor I want at the hospital I want.
But even if I pay twice, the second payment cannot be under an insurance arrangement.
Needless to say, this is not how most of us would interpret the word "choice."
Moreover, paying once for medical care is hard enough; paying twice to obtain quality care will be prohibitive for most Americans.
Indeed, the only Americans who will continue to enjoy real choice under the Clinton plan are those who can afford to pay twice, and pay the second time without the assistance of health insurance to get the doctor, the hospital and the care that they, not the government, judge necessary -- if it's available at all.
Under the Clinton plan, the supply of doctors who are willing to provide noninsured services may be severely limited, since even such services will be subject to the plan's price controls.
In his efforts to nationalize the American health care system, Mr. Clinton has argued that under the current system some Americans are simply unable to purchase the medical care of their choice.
But his way of rectifying this problem is by making certain that few of us can afford the medical care of our choice.
The president says he wants to fix what's broken in American health care.
The truth is, he wants to use what's broken as a justification for throwing out the whole system and adopting socialized medicine.
When Americans discover this simple fact about the Clinton plan, one hopes, his credibility will once again be lost and his plan will die.
Then maybe we can write a real health reform plan -- a plan that ensures (for example) access to health care to all through reform of our misguided tax law; that guarantees all Americans the right to pick their doctors and hospitals; that controls health care inflation by letting Americans keep what they save through the creation of medical savings accounts.
But the health care reform America wants cannot occur until the president's socialized medicine plan is rejected.
Mr. Gramm, a Republican, is the senior U.S. senator from Texas.
