Along the red-dirt road running beside this mud-hut village, the main economic indicator is the frequency of "mammy trucks" that rattle by to carry local farmers and their produce to the nearby town of Kasua.
As Charle Ayietey reads that indicator, things aren't going well.
"We used to find a big truck once a day," the slight, middle-aged farmer says.
But a strapped government has cut back on maintenance, and this road, like thousands of others, has become an axle-bending roller coaster of gullets and ditches.
As a result, the trucks only come once a week.
"Today is Monday," he says.
"They'll come today."
He will ride to town with his tomatoes and cassavas, sit all night with his produce beside the road and sell it the next day.
This is the "footpath economy" of rural Ghana -- a nation that development specialists say is the nearest thing to an economic success story in black Africa.
During the past decade, market-based economic reforms have brought remarkable transformations in every other region.
From Chile to the Czech Republic to China, countries have used Adam Smith's formulas to revive economies previously rendered moribund by government controls.
But this economic revolution, and its payoff of higher living standards, have largely eluded sub-Saharan Africa, where the number of poor people is expected to increase in the next decade.
At best, there is Ghana, on the southern coast of the bulge of West Africa.
This country has tried.
For 10 years, it has won praise and hard cash by generally following the dictates of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Exchange rates have been realigned, triple-digit inflation has been tamed (to roughly 20% a year), and signs of progress have cropped up.
A five-star hotel stands outside Accra, the capital, and a few international businesspeople chat on cordless telephones about joint ventures and privatizations.
Finance Minister Kwesi Botchwey even holds out the prospect that Ghana, which in 1957 became the first black African state to win its independence from a European country, will also pioneer the first Asian-style economic miracle on the continent.
But Ghana's economic ascent is agonizingly slow.
The average citizen scrapes by on the equivalent of about $420 a year.
The rural population struggles not only with bad roads but also with underfunded schools and malaria.
Adjusted for galloping population growth, the Ghanaian economy expands 2% per person each year -- a barely noticeable increase at the bottom rungs of society.
And Ghanaians wonder why they, unlike many developing nations, can't reap the fruits of economic success.
"Africa has been a terrible story," says Sir William Ryrie, who recently retired as head of the International Finance Corp., the private-sector arm of the World Bank.
Against this discouraging backdrop, economists have invested considerable hope that Ghana's halting progress can become a clear success, showing the way to other stagnant or unstable African states.
Ghana's experience stands in contrast to that of Malaysia, which also became independent from Britain in 1957.
Both former colonies began with British institutions, a rich mix of resources, foreign-currency reserves and annual per-capita income of about $750.
But 3 1/2 decades later, Malaysia is far ahead.
Its average citizen earns about $2,500 a year, nearly six times the amount in Ghana.
Foreign investors are rare in Ghana but are pouring into Malaysia.
The reasons for this divergence in development are complex, but they clearly go beyond the reach of the IMF's macroeconomic fixes.
One stark difference between Ghana and Malaysia lies in their approaches to investment in education and health.
Ghana has used its resources to run three prestigious universities and produce a talented elite.
But Malaysia, like South Korea before it, poured its early money into primary education.
Today, 80% of Malaysia's adult population can read and write, while Ghana has an official literacy rate of 60% -- and local officials put the functional literacy rate closer to 40%.
Illiteracy keeps farmers from learning new growing methods and a larger slice of the population from working in export-oriented manufacturing.
"No country has been successful economically with less than 50% literacy," says Katherine Marshall, a World Bank Africa specialist whose grandfather, George C. Marshall, mounted the rapid reconstruction of postwar Europe.
In Matsekope, a Ghanaian hamlet that mainly produces sacks of salt from a lagoon, the primary school consists of two dilapidated sheds with gaping holes in the roofs.
Not all the classrooms have blackboards, enough desks or even teachers.
In one room, David Appronti, a stern-faced nine-year-old, leads 47 children in song.
Outside, under a shade tree, James Osei Kofi, a visiting official from the education ministry, tells the teachers not to expect much help from the capital.
His warning that "times are hard -- you've got to organize yourselves" elicits snickers.
One teacher asks for a small library at the school, which serves 264 children.
"You're just dreaming," Mr. Kofi responds.
Another teacher asks about prospects for higher pay, now running about $600 a year.
Mr. Kofi shakes his head.
In lieu of a raise, he suggests, the government might declare a "national teachers' day" and award bicycles to especially dedicated ones.
"It must be cash," the teacher responds.
A test of 12,000 students here by the U.S. Agency for International Development last year found that fewer than 2% read at levels the AID officials had expected and that half couldn't read at all -- despite $225 million that industrial-world donors poured into Ghana's education from 1988 through 1993.
And of 64,000 primary-school teachers, half hadn't had any teacher training; about 16,000 hadn't finished high school.
"Some," an AID official adds, "can't even write their names."
Ghana and Malaysia also provide a telling contrast in health care.
While Ghana built several urban hospitals, Malaysia set up small clinics to deliver basic care and immunizations.
Ghana has one physician for every 22,970 citizens; Malaysia has one for every 2,700.
A child in Ghana can expect to live to age 55; a Malaysian's life expectancy is 71 years.
At times, the sheer burden of culture seems to impede creation of a thriving private sector.
Ghanaians are inveterate traders but hesitant producers.
In Accra's shantytowns, the poor eke out a living selling everything from hubcaps to hairdos.
Every traffic light is thronged by hawkers of a curious array of Chinese-made products -- plastic coat hangers, dog collars, imitation Christian Dior deodorant and glue.
At toll stations just outside the capital, little girls sell puppies and plastic bags of cool water.
But apart from the traditional exports of gold and cocoa, Ghanaians don't produce much.
And despite a decade of economic liberalization under dictator-turned-president Jerry Rawlings, the habit of state control clearly lingers on from his early allegiance to socialist leaders in other nations and to socialism itself.
Even now, rigid state control shows up on dozens of half-built structures with the bureaucratic command emblazoned in red paint: "Stop work.
Produce permit."
Statutes impose stiff penalties on anyone carrying out "any act with intent to sabotage the economy" -- a vague prohibition that businesspeople say lets the government harass them.
Cynthia Agyekum, who founded Cessa Ltd., a textile concern, is a testament to both the energy and the difficulties of the country's businesspeople.
Taught as a child to sew, she began stitching together accessories such as belts and satchels from kente cloth and dyed fabric.
After selling her wares through trade shows and occasional contacts with U.S. retailers, Ms. Agyekum got a break: Adrian Long, senior vice president at Pier 1 Imports Inc., showed up early last year and was so impressed with her designs and workmanship that he ordered 17,000 pieces.
The mother of three young children managed to set up a lease for a defunct, boarded-up textile plant.
Its sewing machines could be refurbished, and many of its former workers, who hadn't held regular jobs since it closed 12 years earlier, were eager to sign on.
But Ms. Agyekum needed money to get started.
A government-established export finance company told her it had no funds to lend.
Ghanaian banks, still under state control, weren't used to financing local businesses.
Besides, Pier 1's order meant nothing to them; they had never heard of the big retailer.
Informal moneylenders demanded terms she considered confiscatory: 5% interest every two weeks.
About to give up, she met with lenders from Continental Acceptances Ltd., a Ghanaian merchant bank that was beginning to open up to new businesses after an investment by the International Finance Corp.
After much negotiation, Continental provided the financing for Ms. Agyekum to reopen the plant and hire workers.
Then a power blackout left the area without electricity for four days.
Rather than risk missing a shipment date, Ms. Agyekum added a second shift as soon as electricity was restored.
"It's an uphill struggle," she says.
"But Ghanaians are used to fighting uphill struggles."
Pier 1's Mr. Long says that while Ms. Agyekum surmounted the problems, other Ghanaian artisans with whom he left orders backed out because of the lack of financing.
"The bottom line is, everybody's trying, but we won't get all we expected," he says.
However, there are other signs of hope.
Just beyond Fotobi, a village of mud huts, meandering goats and naked children, Daniel Safo surveys his pineapple plantation.
About 60 workers scramble up and down hilly rows of the plants, which stretch toward the horizon, and cut ripe pineapples with machetes.
Then they put the fruit into tubs that village women carry on their heads to a truck revving its engine for a late-afternoon run to Accra's airport.
The next morning, the pineapples -- considered exceptionally tender and sweet -- will be unloaded in Zurich.
"This guy could be sitting on a gold mine," says David LeGrice, a World Bank consultant advising Mr. Safo's company, Combined Farmers Ltd.
The workers earn $1 a day, the growing cycle is half that of farms farther from the equator, and few pesticides and fertilizers are needed.
"If you look at the rest of Africa, other than South Africa, this country's got the best potential," he adds.
Another new export is shrimp.
Over cocktails at a Western diplomat's home in Accra, an aquatic consultant explains to local business leaders and an American venture capitalist how to speed up a female shrimp's reproductive cycle and why the estuary south of the Volta River dam is ideal for shrimp farming.
Ben Addai, an Ashanti tribal leader who owns a shrimping fleet, says he may expand into shrimp farming as well.
Overall, he says, "If we're going to make it, it's going to be on export performance."
And though business development is slow, the average Ghanaian is better off than 10 years ago, when, after two decades of coups, corruption and disastrous economic controls, the economy imploded.
Inflation surged to 123%, basic government services broke down and fuel and food shortages became so acute that even civil servants went hungry.
Moreover, Ghana's current problems pale next to those in countries like Somalia, Burundi or Angola that are plagued with factional killing and widespread starvation.
Optimists believe that sub-Saharan economies may eventually pick up.
They note that the region's economic profile today is remarkably similar to that of Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia in 1965.
In 25 years, they say, Africa may boast a few economic miracles.
For Ghana, suspended somewhere between the African economic nightmare and a hoped-for Asian-style prosperity, it is a long wait.
"For the average Ghanaian, it's been a hardship," says 74-year-old Esther Ocloo, whose food-processing company, Nkulenu Industries Ltd., is one of a handful of private concerns that have survived since pre-independence days.
"The only prayer and hope is that it's sustainable, because if it's not, the very souls of the people will be crying."
