Even as Los Angeles picks up its pieces, civil engineers are working on the next generation of quakeproofing for buildings and bridges.
In a relatively new approach to earthquake-resistance engineering, researchers are developing systems that would allow a structure to react to the force of a quake very much as a human would.
The structure would instantly yield to the force, but only so much, before mustering strength to push back.
These "active" technologies are different from the "passive" quake-resistant systems used since the 1971 earthquake in California's San Fernando Valley.
The passive systems include specially engineered connecting joints, reinforced supports and "isolation" mechanisms that absorb the energy of a quake's vibrations.
Passive systems do, in fact, minimize damage.
Researchers point to the 1989 quake in San Francisco and to Monday's in Los Angeles to illustrate how buildings and bridges built or retrofitted with these mechanisms held up well compared with those that didn't have them.
Still, the passive systems are designed to make structures simply tolerate the blows of an earthquake.
"We are no longer looking at buildings as passive structures; they should have some responsiveness," says Tsu Soong, professor of civil engineering at the State University of New York in Buffalo, which is the headquarters for the National Center for Earthquake Research.
Major earthquake engineering-research centers, at SUNY Buffalo on the East Coast and California Institute of Technology in Pasadena on the West, are pursuing several approaches to making structures play an active role in an earthquake.
One approach includes the use of automatic hydraulic systems and steel tension wires to produce repelling forces.
In another, a heavy weight strategically located on a structure is manipulated by a computer-controlled system to counterbalance the structure against the jolts of an earthquake.
Engineers are also testing fluids that change their mechanical properties to counter the quake forces.
Most of these technologies are still in the development stage in the U.S., but some have been installed in several buildings in Japan, which has installed more earthquake-resistant devices than any other country.
Although these active systems are considerably more expensive than passive technologies, they offer significantly better protection against earthquakes, making them a system of choice in important bridges, natural-gas pipelines and other strategic structures, researchers say.
Robert Hanson, professor of civil engineering at the University of Michigan, says that some of these active systems can help structures "withstand the most severe of earthquakes," as destructive as 8.2 on the Richter scale.
Monday's earthquake in Los Angeles measured 6.6 on the scale.
SUNY Buffalo's research includes a technology that uses hydraulic systems and special braces to generate forces to oppose those imparted by a quake.
Steel braces and pistons, or "actuators," are located inside the walls in the lower part of the structure.
Pumps and other parts of the hydraulic systems are located in the base of the building.
Special sensors, mounted on different floors, measure vibrations caused by the quake and relay the information to a computer.
The computer then calculates the necessary opposing forces and triggers movements of the pistons to apply them.
Researchers are using the same principle in another mechanism in which a massive weight atop the structure replaces the hydraulic system and pistons.
The weight, usually about 1% to 2% of the weight of the building, moves in response to computer commands, generating counterforces on the structure.
"The motion of the weight is completely automatic," Prof. Soong says.
He says choice of the weight system or the hydraulic actuators will depend on the available space and nature of the structure.
At the University of Michigan, Prof. Hanson's group is working on an active system that doesn't deploy many moving parts.
The key to the technology is a fluid, a mixture of mineral oil and aluminum oxide.
When electricity is passed through the fluid, its mechanical property changes: It turns viscous.
The higher the voltage, the greater the viscosity.
The change is similar to milk turning into cottage cheese, Prof. Hanson says.
The fluid device is placed between the structure and its base.
By increasing its viscosity -- when current is automatically transmitted by the vibrations from an earthquake -- the fluid allows the structure to "fix" itself to the base; by lowering its viscosity, the fluid allows the structure to "free" itself.
"If the quake wants to put the structure in motion, you want to free it from the base," Dr. Hanson says.
"Then, when the building is settling back on the ground, you want it to be refixed to the base so that it transmits the {quake} energy back into the ground," he explains.
Since the structure wouldn't take one big blow suddenly but instead would slowly yield, damage can be minimized, and even eliminated, he says.
The use of such "smart" material in bridges is the subject of research at the University of Nevada in Reno.
Saiid Saiidi, professor of civil engineering at the university, says certain viscous materials that change their mechanical properties have demonstrated that they "can absorb a great deal of energy."
He says such materials can allow bridges to sway without collapsing.
However, the technology is still three to four years away from application, the professor says.
The earthquake-resistant technologies have come a long way in the last 40 years.
"In the 1930s, the prevailing engineering pronouncement was that nothing can be done about earthquakes," says Theodor Krauthammer, professor of civil engineering at Pennsylvania State University.
That view changed after World War II, when money became available for new research and when seismology and structural engineering began to get some attention because "earthquakes kept coming back," he says.
Indeed, practically every civil engineer researching earthquake-proof designs is in Los Angeles this week, surveying ruins as well as structures that held up well in the quake for clues to better engineering.
Meanwhile, new seismological studies are under way that would help engineers perfect the systems they are developing.
In December 1993, civil engineers and computer scientists at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh received a $2.15 million grant from the National Science Foundation to develop models of how the ground moves during an earthquake.
The goal, says Jacobo Bielak, a professor of civil engineering at the university, is to use the models to determine how structures can be made safer in an earthquake.
