Premier Li Peng struck a note of caution in his annual work report to the legislature, underscoring the government's concern over China's varied economic and social problems.
In a speech at the opening of the National People's Congress, Mr. Li called for a balance between growth and reform on the one hand, and stability on the other.
His address reflected the worry among top leaders about China's double-digit inflation and disgruntled masses.
Mr. Li presented his report as some 2,800 delegates gathered from around the country for the annual convention of China's largely rubber-stamp legislature.
Besides approving his report, the representatives are expected to pass the 1994 budget and two laws during the 13-day session.
Rarely looking up from his text, which he followed with one finger, the premier said China faces "some failings and mistakes in the work of the government and . . . some major contradictions and problems in the midst of progress."
As a result, it needs to "correctly handle the relations between reform, development and stability," Mr. Li added from behind a podium surrounded by pots of pink and purple azalea.
Thus, while pledging to push ahead with a raft of economic and financial reforms unveiled late last year, Mr. Li also proposed support for industry and agriculture that was more reminiscent of the central-planning era.
He called for a sharp reduction in China's growth rate, from more than 13% last year to 9% in 1994.
Inflation, which is running at 23% in major cities, should ease to less than 10% for the year, he said.
Mr. Li touched on a variety of other subjects, including the need to oppose "money-worship, ultra-individualism and decadent lifestyles" and to continue the crackdown on corruption and crime.
He misspoke in saying that a breakdown in Sino-British talks on Hong Kong's future was the fault of China, instead of Britain.
He won the loudest and longest applause for his comments on China's policies on Hong Kong and Taiwan and on its ongoing row with the U.S. over human rights.
Mr. Li said maintaining stability will require two difficult, sometimes contradictory, tasks.
The first is to rein in inflation, which is eating away at the purchasing power and patience of workers and farmers.
In the past month, for example, the price of milk has almost doubled.
The second task is to ensure a steady rate of growth.
Last June, Beijing started to squeeze credit in an attempt to cool the country's speculative fever and the inflation that ensued.
Scattered worker protests and complaints from hurting state enterprises have since forced Beijing to take steps to ensure that growth continues amid the austerity.
But pumping fresh funds into the system -- as Beijing did during the last quarter of 1993 -- is inflationary.
(Economists say the government began to tighten credit again in January.)
So potentially are two measures that Mr. Li proposed -- guaranteeing certain prices for grain and cotton and allocating special funds to bail out industries.
Xiao Geng, who teaches economics at the University of Hong Kong, said his fear is that the bulk of government funds is now going to inefficient state enterprises.
Although this was technically true in the past, much of the funds used to find their way into the vibrant private sector before Beijing began to crack down on such practices.
"Before China had high inflation and real growth.
Now it could have high inflation but no real growth," he said.
Beijing is sure to try this year to enforce its new, unpopular tax system.
Mr. Li also reiterated that the government would impose a cap on new construction projects and ban the establishment of new development zones this year.
Despite such efforts, many economists doubt the government will succeed in hitting its inflation target.
"The average analyst feels it will be very, very difficult to keep inflation within 10%," said one Chinese economist.
"Some say it will be 12%, others say 15%.
But most don't think it will go beyond 18%."
If attitudes among local representatives to the congress are any clue, Beijing will also have difficulty keeping economic growth in check.
Wang Xianyi, head of Hunan province's planning commission and a congress delegate, said Mr. Li's 9% growth rate "is too slow.
We have to develop faster according to our conditions."
He adds that his province is targeting growth of 10%.
Another delegate, Hu Jiduo predicted that his district in the poor central province of Anhui would grow at a breathtaking 20% this year.
"The confidence in development is strong and the conditions are all good," he said.
"We hope Beijing can support our local projects, so we can build a good foundation."
Mr. Hu said that with Anhui feeling the credit crunch, he would fight for more funds during the congress.
He dismissed Beijing's worries over inflation.
"The people can take inflation more than before," he said.
