When the Group of Seven jobs summit opens here Monday, Clinton administration officials are likely to portray Detroit's most famous industry as an example of successful revitalization.
But despite the auto industry's recent strong comeback, Detroit's new mayor, Dennis Archer, knows this is still one of the sickest U.S. municipal economies.
"There is no bigger turnaround task in the country than this one," says Jay Alix, a corporate turnaround expert who is helping with the mayor's financial overhaul.
"Solving a crime problem and social ills is not necessarily consistent with cutting costs."
A couple of sobering statistics tell it all.
One-third of Detroit's one million residents live below the poverty line, the highest such ratio for a big U.S. city.
The 115,000 unemployed give this city a jobless rate nearly twice the national average of 6.5%.
Nonetheless, the two-month-old Archer administration plans to greet visitors next week with an audacious brochure entitled "Doing Business in Detroit: An Invitation to Participate in One of the Biggest Urban Comebacks in U.S. History."
What will it take to turn around Detroit?
In an interview, Mayor Archer outlines a nuts-and-bolts strategy for making it happen.
It starts with "demonstrating that we can do the basics, like pick up the garbage on time" and offer safety and security on the streets, he says, echoing his major campaign themes.
It also involves making Detroit userfriendly for businesses by cutting red tape and encouraging employers to put some of the city's vast tracts of vacant land and abandoned buildings to use, the mayor adds.
And it requires an overhaul of city operations and finances to reverse an $88 million budget deficit for this year.
While there is no clear prescription for rebuilding an urban economy as sadly ravaged as Detroit's, urban economics experts say Mr. Archer's approach has as good a chance of success as any.
"It sounds like a reasonable strategy for a new urban mayor," says Harry Hatry, the director of state and local government programs for the Urban Institute.
Mayor Archer's efforts come after decades of failed attempts to revitalize Detroit, and clearly there isn't any guarantee that he will be any more successful.
Former Mayor Coleman Young tended to favor big bricks-and-mortar projects.
But construction of the huge, fortress-like Renaissance Center complex on the Detroit riverfront and, later, of a $200 million-plus elevated People Mover transit loop failed to halt the decline of downtown.
And private redevelopment initiatives, such as the Riverfront Place apartment-and-hotel complex in an old factory compound have caused barely an economic ripple.
Nonetheless, Mayor Archer has already plunged in.
When he took office in early January, "We were three weeks to a month behind" in collecting garbage, he says.
Now, collections are back on schedule, even though the crews also remove snow.
The mayor predicts collection will be accelerated to once every 10 days by May and to weekly pickups by June.
At the same time, Mayor Archer and his new police chief moved 303 officers from administrative tasks to active police work.
Whereas the previous administration had cut back on special groups aimed at crime prevention, gang violence and narcotics, Mayor Archer is refocusing resources on those problems.
He says other priorities include protecting schoolchildren from gangs and making the buses safe.
His other thrust requires an overhaul of the city's image with business.
"The city of Detroit was not known for having a pro-business attitude," the mayor concedes.
Indeed, the 20-year administration of Mayor Young was known for outright hostility.
Mayor Archer gave a task force 120 days to recommend ways to cut red tape "to make things easier for businesses," he says.
"We are embracing total quality management for City of Detroit employees, to get them to listen and better serve our customers."
The economic-development department is pushing for one-stop shopping for permits and regulatory clearances.
And it vows to solve business problems within 72 hours and to go to bat for employers.
What does Detroit have to offer potential new employers?
Land, the mayor says.
From 1980 and 1990, the city lost 61,000 housing units as flight to the suburbs continued.
Now there are huge stretches of land available to be developed.
To Mayor Archer, though, "this is an entrepreneur's dream.
Most of the available land is 90% free of environmental problems because it has been residential."
Conservative economists point out that the city's income tax on individuals and businesses together with other fees and levies would tend to discourage business investment.
"According to the laws of economics, you cannot attract or retain business if your tax rates are seven to eight times the average of other municipalities in the area," says David Littmann, the senior economist of Comerica Bank.
Mayor Archer's advisers acknowledge that taxes in the city may be high but argue that they are just one aspect of a complicated problem.
The mayor himself puts a higher priority on balancing the budget.
In the fiscal year ending June 30, the city's $1 billion general-fund budget is expected to plunge $88 million into the red.
That comes on top of accumulated deficits totaling $80 million, for which the city has issued bonds.
If the city continued operating as in the past, next year's deficit could come to a further $50 million to $80 million.
Mr. Alix, the turnaround expert, is helping figure out how to refinance the old bonds and finance this year's deficit -- an effort made more difficult by a low credit rating.
Other groups are trying to restructure city operations, cut costs and find ways to boost revenues.
These efforts include pressng state and federal authorities for help.
Mayor Archer is pushing a bid for one of the administration's $100 million "empowerment zones."
