The Clinton administration is trying to transform the way people think about job security.
As a two-day jobs conference involving ministers from the Group of Seven industrialized nations pulled to a close, U.S. officials stressed the idea that job security is based on the skills that workers acquire, not on enduring relationships with employers.
For generations, U.S. workers saw their jobs as based on a lifelong commitment and bond with employers.
But following the wrenching decade of the 1980s, with its corporate restructurings and waves of cutbacks, White House officials now are trying to shake workers from the view that staying with one employer or having one set of job skills is enough.
Administration officials and ministers of other nations appeared pleased with the give-and-take of employment ideas at the jobs conference.
The nations agreed on such broad concepts as the need for international trade as a job creator and that all industrialized nations must lift the job skills of people in their worst-off sectors.
But they also agreed, as U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said in his summary, that "there is no single solution, no one idea or action that will work for every country."
The conference brought economic, finance and labor officials from the U.S., Japan, Germany, Britain, Canada, France and Italy to discuss the jobs issue.
But it largely was aimed, in U.S. officials' eyes, at skittish U.S. workers.
So White House aides hammered home the ideas of flexibility and openness to change.
These days, the "new definition of job security" is one in which workers are "equipped to handle the next job" in a changing economy, said Robert Rubin, White House economic adviser.
Some administration officials even are trying to steer clear of the phrase "job security," and to switch instead to "employment security."
Simply put, "that means having skills that are portable and benefits that are portable," said Lawrence Katz, the Labor Department's chief economist.
Worker acceptance of that theory is critical to helping the economy grow and adapt, President Clinton said in a speech Monday to the foreign officials who attended the meeting here.
In particular, he argued, workers won't accept changes that come from trade agreements, productivity gains and technological advances if they aren't confident they can get new jobs.
"That is the trick," the president said.
"We've got to prove to our people that change can work for them."
He and other officials estimated that the average American will change jobs seven or eight times in his or her lifetime.
The White House has set in place a string of legislative proposals designed to make job transitions easier.
Health-care reform, for example, is aimed in part at not tying people's health insurance to specific jobs.
And the White House's proposed Re-Employment Act, introduced by the president last week, is targeted at helping fired workers find work faster and improving the federal government's job-training programs.
