CLINTONITES RUSH to divert public attention from the Whitewater flap.
Having caved in to calls to name a special counsel, White House officials plan to quit talking about the issue.
They will focus on Clinton's European trip and especially his State of the Union address Jan. 25; aides plan to give Clinton his third draft of the speech when he returns from Moscow.
Health care and crime will be stressed.
Republicans will focus on Clinton's credibility as the central thread through his troubles with tax proposals, Whitewater and personal allegations.
"Credibility is the . . . linchpin of any office of authority," says GOP chairman Haley Barbour, though similar themes couldn't save Bush in his race against Clinton.
One Clinton adviser says that, with a special counsel, Dole's call for a special congressional committee to investigate Whitewater is "dead on arrival."
HEALTH-CARE REFORM will get a renewed push from the first lady.
Hillary Rodham Clinton plans to go to Pennsylvania, California, Maine and North Carolina soon after Russia.
Democratic lawmakers are friendly hosts, but Republicans also are targeted.
Maine Sen. Cohen is important on Medicare issues.
Rep. Greenwood in suburban Philadelphia and Rep. McMillan in Charlotte are swing GOP votes on the House Commerce Committee.
White House advisers try to find ways to convince lawmakers that the public, as shown in polls, prefers Clinton's plan to alternative bills.
But Senate Finance Chairman Moynihan's lengthy hearing schedule suggests no action on health-care legislation before late spring.
Some Republicans, including would-be presidential contender Cheney, press the conservative theme that there is "no health crisis."
TRADE TALKS between the U.S. and Japan head for more trouble.
Both sides give up hope of reaching a preliminary agreement at a two-day conference in Washington slated to begin Jan. 24.
Instead, U.S. negotiators plan an emergency trip to Tokyo before Prime Minister Hosokawa visits Clinton Feb. 11.
The main hangup: U.S. insistence that Japan agree to targets to increase purchases of U.S. goods.
Japanese negotiators say they will never do that.
U.S. trade official Charlene Barshefsky says the U.S., if pushed, will set targets itself.
U.S. negotiators complain that Japanese bureaucrats are blocking a deal, hoping that political leaders will overrule them and make concessions.
Concern grows that the dollar, which has surged past the 110-yen mark in global trading, will exacerbate the U.S.-Japan trade deficit.
SPECULATION BEGINS on the special counsel to probe Whitewater.
Some suggest a GOP lawyer who might be seen as truly independent, such as former New Hampshire Sen. Rudman or Iran-Contra prosecutor Dan Webb.
Also mentioned: former Justice Byron White.
CHINA BRAWL: The U.S., claiming that China has licensed 26 factories to produce "pirated" compact disks, threatens trade sanctions if the Chinese don't improve protection of copyrights.
The factories are said to export 54 million disks a year.
NOW OVERHEAR THIS: The Fed quietly agreed to let the House Banking Committee staff listen yesterday to a tape of an Oct. 15 conference call in which Fed officials discussed strategy for a hearing before the panel.
The goal: to defuse Chairman Gonzalez's charges that he was misled about the existence of Fed transcripts.
CIVIL RIGHTS leader Ben Chavis, of the NAACP, will announce a coalition with businesses to push his plan for redoing the Superfund toxic-waste cleanup law.
The plan would reduce business liability more than Clinton's expected proposal and would help fund economic development in low-income areas near waste sites.
HOUSE DEPARTURES promise to make this year's races unusually volatile.
House members who will retire or run for a different office now number 30.
More departures are sure to come.
But no big shift is expected by party.
Republicans now are expected to pick up 15 to 20 seats, well below forecasts made last year.
Potential GOP candidates include 21 physicians, who could bolster attacks on Clinton's health plan.
For their part, Democrats see a potential star in Ohio businesswoman Cynthia Ruccia, who will face GOP budget cruncher Rep. Kasich.
Democrats also are high on Greencastle, Ind., Mayor Mike Harmless, who is running against longtime GOP Rep. Myers.
One big uncertainty: Whether an increasingly unpopular Ross Perot will field or back independent candidates in House races.
Kennedys may run for House seats in two more states: Sen. Kennedy's son Patrick in Rhode Island and Robert Kennedy's daughter Kathleen Townsend in Maryland.
MINOR MEMOS: In Moscow, a Russian shouting "Eddie Bauer" chases down White House stenographer Susan Leander and trades a new fur hat for her $6 neck-warmer made by Eddie Bauer, a hot brand name there. . . .
Information-highway pothole: Needing to discuss last-minute changes to Gore's telecommunications speech, aide Greg Simon picked up a special White House phone at the Kennedy Center Monday night; it didn't work. . . .
An AFL-CIO training manual coaches instructors to say "in your own words" that a U.S. health-care crisis "is something on which we all agree -- except perhaps the insurance industry."
