Republicans are debating health care in Maryland today, but maybe they should just watch "Bridge on the River Kwai."
The British colonel played by Alec Guinness in that movie becomes so attached to the bridge he builds for his Japanese captors that in the end he won't blow it up even to help win the war.
Some Republican colonels have become so attached to their own health care plans that they are losing sight of the larger philosophical, and political, stakes in the health debate.
They could yet help liberal Democrats win the war.
The good news for Republicans is that President Clinton's plan is fast losing public support, but the bad news is that this owes little to Republicans.
ClintonCare is collapsing of its own complexity.
Businesses, doctors and insurers have all fanned the doubts of a public highly skeptical about any new government program, especially one loaded with "alliances" and other Beltway mysteries.
Mr. Clinton is even losing among the very people his program is designed to lure -- the voting middle class.
The latest ABC/Washington Post poll shows that 48% of Americans think ClintonCare will hurt the middle class, while 58% think it will help the poor.
Voters smell the Old Democrat politics of redistribution.
Bill McInturff, a GOP pollster, adds that the plan is suffering among all groups except core Democrats.
By 63% to 26%, for example, Ross Perot voters say they like the plan less the more they learn about it.
So why does Mr. Clinton still seem so relaxed?
Perhaps he knows that while his plan as written is dead, a "compromise" that contains the core of the Clinton vision remains alive.
And because Republicans haven't offered an alternative vision of their own, they may yet try to play Alec Guinness.
The GOP's intellectual disarray has been obvious even in the planning for this week's two-day health "retreat," a word that could yet be prophetic.
Planned by Rhode Island Sen. John Chafee and his liberal staffer, Christine Ferguson, the agenda could have been suggested by Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Debate over the various GOP health plans, for example, was going to be led last evening by a former aide to that legendary Republican, Ted Kennedy.
Then Harvard economist Robert Blendon was invited to lead the discussion on public opinion.
He's often briefed the Clintons and has favored an employer mandate, supposedly a GOP taboo, for years.
Could this be a sly plan to know thy enemy?
Doubtful: The "response" to Mr. Blendon was offered by Robert Teeter, the same pollster who advised Richard Thornburgh on health care in his disastrous 1991 Senate race.
Choosing these two to debate health care is like asking the Gallo brothers to debate wine.
All of this caused a stir among GOP senators, who talked about boycotting the retreat if Mr. Chafee didn't open up the agenda (which he did).
Their ire was further raised by news reports that Mr. Chafee was meeting secretly with Democrats to strike a deal to rescue Mr. Clinton.
Mr. Chafee's office denies it, although he remains Bill's favorite Republican.
Only yesterday Mr. Clinton predicted that "people of good faith like Senator Chafee . . . will get together and come up with a system that meets the criteria I have laid out."
That's the rub: "The criteria I have laid out."
Mr. Clinton will give up everything if he can plant even the seed of what he calls "universal coverage," by which he means an entitlement policed by the government.
He knows the politics ever after would be splendid for liberal Democrats.
Every year they would force a vote in Congress on expanding this "benefit" or that rule, while Republicans would look like skinflints.
This is how Medicare became laced with price controls and Medicaid grew like Topsy.
Mr. Chafee can be a partisan Republican, but he and some others have been building the health bridge for so long that their plan accepts Mr. Clinton's government entitlement.
"This is a slippery slope," says New Hampshire Sen. Judd Gregg.
"Every one of the plans -- Clinton, Cooper, Chafee -- is a precursor to single-payer," which is the Canadian plan.
"Not today, but in a decade," he says.
"Government always moves left."
That's why smart Republicans want their party to unite behind reform principles rooted in individual choice, not in state coercion.
Mr. Gregg, Paul Coverdell of Georgia and the other GOP Senate freshmen are pushing the ideas of a "consensus group" of health economists.
Instead of redoing the entire health system, they want to offer Senate amendments to solve the specific problems that worry the middle-class -- insurance portability, pre-existing conditions, and so on.
With some differences, this is also the strategy endorsed by GOP Chairman Haley Barbour and strategists Don Devine and William Kristol.
By supporting these specific reforms now -- instead of joining a grand Clinton summit -- Republicans would also apply some pressure on moderate Democrats to move their way.
Rep. Roy Rowland, a doctor and Georgia Democrat, introduced a promising bill yesterday with 15 Democratic and 15 GOP co-sponsors.
But if Republicans are divided and incoherent, then Democrats will only have incentive to move left.
Mr. Clinton is trying to replay the entitlement politics of the 1960s, but Americans are vastly more skeptical of government now.
Republicans might even be able to "win" a health care debate, putting together a Nafta-like reform coalition that fixes the system without destroying it.
That's at least a bridge worth building.
