Needless to say, we don't think Webster Hubbell's resignation closes the book on any aspect of this affair.
An anonymous White House official tried to spin the story toward closure when news was dribbling out yesterday afternoon about a resignation by the presidential golfing partner-Rose Law Firm partner-Associate Attorney General.
It's a private individual's problems that arose prior to his government service, problems with his prior law firm," said the official.
That won't wash.
It was just over a year ago that we first raised a flag in an editorial titled "Who Is Webster Hubbell?"
(March 2, 1993).
The Clinton Administration was less than two months old.
It had no Attorney General of its own, no Deputy Attorney General and few quality people in top positions.
Instead it stuffed the White House with cronies from Little Rock, notably putting two of Hillary's Rose Law Firm partners in the general counsel's office and sending a third Rose partner named Webster Hubbell to be their "liaison" at the Justice Department.
The issue then was Webster Hubbell's interventions into Justice Department policy toward the federal legal troubles of Rep. Harold Ford, a prominent member of the Black Caucus.
We wrote at the time: "We seem to have the spectacle of Hillary Clinton's former law partner fixing meetings between Justice officials and demand-waving pols, with the pols getting Justice to do their bidding."
And concluded, "We are left to wonder what kind of Justice Department this will be, and what kind of administration."
We have pursued this initial question for 12 months now.
So we were not shocked when it came out that the Treasury and White House counsel's office were holding "heads up" meetings over Bill and Hillary's potential problems with Resolution Trust investigations, the parties to which are now subject to special subpoenas.
Nominally, Mr. Hubbell's resignation has to do with allegedly unethical billing practices while back at the Rose firm.
But we draw your attention to the nearby article, published last summer by the Des Moines Register (see related article: A Rose Law Firm Deal, Revisited" -- WSJ March 15, 1994).
It's a fascinating tale of transactions involving a string of Iowa nursing homes, an effort that was brokered by then-Rose partner William Kennedy III, who is now Associate White House Counsel.
Two Iowa court rulings refused to allow what the district judge called the deal's "excess profits," though the Rose firm's efforts kept its clients skating along the defensible side of the law.
Once in the White House, William Kennedy's name surfaced for playing fast and loose with the FBI and IRS over Travelgate.
Janet Reno, announcing the Hubbell resignation yesterday, said: "He has been a tireless crusader for doing justice, for doing the right thing."
Incredibly, she then added: "Webb was directly responsible for changes in the Justice Department's information policy, which had made the Justice Department and government more open and accountable."
This is Orwellian doublespeak, or perhaps Ms. Reno has just been out of the loop.
After Ms. Reno loosened the rules governing requests under the Freedom of Information Act last October, Mr. Hubbell tightened the rules the following month for White House-related requests.
Most pointedly, his order expanded the act's coverage to include the activities of the First Lady, specifically her top-secret health-care task force.
Ms. Reno's euphoria over Webster Hubbell leaving a legacy of "more open and accountable" government is so much blather.
With interest in Whitewater now running at full tide, we have a public information blackout that has turned into an unbridgeable moat around the Clinton presidency.
As we editorialized yesterday, our own FOIA request for the Park Police report on the suicide of former Rose partner Vincent Foster has now hit the ultimate contraction with Special Counsel Robert Fiske's blanket suppression of all documents and information relating to Whitewater/Madison.
Rose Partner No. 1, Hillary Clinton, is now appearing in newsmagazine interviews to announce that Whitewater has been blown out of proportion.
That script may still play in various journalistic backwaters, but the more likely scenario is that there will be growing pressure to expose Arkansas mores to more public scrutiny.
Moreover, someone should put out a protective order for the Justice Department.
After former deputy Philip Heymann threw in the towel, the White House nominated as his replacement Defense Department general counsel Jamie Gorelick, a Beltway criminal lawyer whose client list included BCCI celebrities Clark Clifford and Robert A. Altman.
Indiana basketball coach Bobby Knight drew boos for benching his first-string for a whole half this year, but Bill and Hillary Clinton seem intent on keeping their party's best people on the bench for the entire presidency.
Why are they doing this?
With Webster Hubbell's resignation, this administration has lost its Bert Lance, the Jimmy Carter confidante who at least brought animal survival skills to a floundering administration.
There's an important difference, though.
Jimmy Carter and Bert Lance were on different planets.
The Little Rock crowd travels in a fixed orbit around the same Sun.
Webster Hubbell's saying he quits doesn't change that.
We still want to know who these people are.
