London share prices rebounded from opening lows Friday to end higher and recoup part of the previous day's plunge.
But European exchanges overall put in a mixed to weaker performance, prolonging Thursday's debacle from fears of climbing interest rates.
Frankfurt equities fell, dragged down by uncertainty in the bond market.
With many world bourses stumbling late last week and the Japanese yen strengthening, Tokyo stocks showed resiliency as the main index ended slightly higher while the broader market was mixed.
Prices crumbled throughout Asia and the Pacific.
Sydney stocks skidded 2.2%, partly on concerns about higher U.S. interest rates.
Hong Kong shares plunged 3.2% on political anxieties about electoral reform in the territory.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.72, up 0.09, reflecting increases in markets in the Americas and Europe and a drop in Asia/Pacific markets.
Consumer-electronics stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 141.77, up 3.02, or 2.2%, with Matsushita-Kotobuki Electronics Industries Ltd. of Japan posting a 6.6% gain in its local currency.
Real-estate stocks trailed, at 134.23, down 2.79, or 2%, with Great Eagle Holdings Ltd. of Hong Kong sliding 7.3% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index rose 13.7 points to 3281.2, just 2.1 points off the session's high and 37.8 points above the low.
The FT 30-stock index climbed 7.8 points to 2535.9.
Volume was 792.4 million shares, up from 754 million shares a day earlier.
The market slide's halt stemmed from investors' refocusing on fundamentals of good British economic and corporate growth and low inflation, and from a recovery in bond and stock-futures mar kets.
Prices rallied on a rumor that Britain's central bank had stepped in to support sagging prices of gilts, or government bonds.
Yet the FT 100 issues overall had a mixed performance on Friday, the last day of a two-week trading account.
Though the London market expects Britain's base lending rate to fall further, it still was viewed as vulnerable to persistent fears that world interest rates will rise, a factor that helped produce big drops on global bourses Thursday.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index dropped 15.37 points to 2074.92 in low volume.
A plunge in the German bond market early Friday was mainly to blame for the slumping DAX, and even when bonds recovered later, the stock market remained depressed.
In Paris, stocks dropped in featureless trading, though they did bounce up from lows as some of the disappointment about Thursday's smaller-than-expected rate cut by France's central bank waned.
In Amsterdam, shares fell because of the U.S. dollar's decline, broadly lower bond prices and a weak start on Wall Street.
In Milan, shares opened weakly but ended higher, lifted by technical factors following sharp drops earlier last week.
In Madrid, stocks fell, damped by a weak bond market performance.
In Stockholm, prices slipped as attention focused on higher interest rates and Swedish corporate earnings.
In Zurich, the market thudded 1% in choppy trading, dragged lower by futures-related selling, weakness in the Swiss bond market, and strong downward pressure on the banking sector.
But in Brussels, stocks ended mainly higher, after losses were reversed by a surprise cut by the Belgian central bank in two of its lending rates.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which soared 423.65 points Thursday, eked out a 37.90-point rise to 19803.38, near the day's high.
Losers narrowly topped gainers, 540-481.
On Monday in Tokyo, the Nikkei rose 262.73 points to close the morning session at 20066.11.
Friday's first-section volume was estimated at a relatively brisk 430 million shares, down from 483.1 million shares Thursday.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which gained 29.77 points Thursday, edged up 2.25 to 1609.87.
Given global exchanges' recent bearish trend, even the Nikkei's small advance was viewed as positive.
Strong buying came from overseas investors and 16 Japanese investment trust funds that were set up Friday.
In Sydney, shares tumbled as confidence was undermined by anxiety about higher interest rates in the U.S., weaker bond prices in Australia and the Thursday slump on Wall Street; though investors didn't expect an increase soon in Australian interest rates, they sensed that rates mightn't fall any further.
In Hong Kong, stocks' sharp drop was sparked by weakness in overseas markets and worsened jitters about the Hong Kong government's push to reform the electoral system without approval by China, which regains sovereignty over the British colony in 1997.
The main index managed to claw its way up from severe lows, when the main gauge was down 4.6%, but still finished at its lowest level since Dec. 15.
In Singapore, prices ended broadly lower, taking the benchmark index down 1.2%.
Early losses came in response to New York stocks' plunge on Thursday, then equities were battered by news reports that Malaysia would boycott British firms in retaliation for allegedly bribing senior Malaysian politicians in an aid-for-arms deal.
In Kuala Lumpur, shares slumped 1.9% in a broad swath from heavy profit-taking, as investors were unwilling to hold positions over the weekend in light of regional bourses' losses; bargain hunting helped pull prices up from lows, but investors remained nervous about Wall Street's direction.
In Taipei, equities slipped, as the market extended its consolidation, though bargain hunters helped lift prices from early losses; investors were disappointed by the lack of news on Taiwan central-bank intentions on market liquidity.
In Seoul, stocks closed 1.3% lower, as institutional and small investors stayed away from the market; selling pressure applied across the board, as many investors were concerned about any liquidity-tightening move by South Korea's central bank.
In Wellington, stocks slumped 2.3%, after some U.S.-based investors sold out of the market to repatriate funds; most of the weakness was in issues that foreign investors had bought earlier this year.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
