The Texas grocery wars appear to be headed for a cease-fire.
After three years of ruthless warfare for the hearts and pocketbooks of Texas shoppers, major grocery-store chains are starting to nudge up prices, or at least slow the free fall, according to anecdotal evidence backed up by a study done for Texas Journal by Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
By analyzing cash-register receipts from stores around the state, the Chicago-based market-research company concluded that the cost of a sample basket of three-dozen national-brand goods, ranging from Bounty paper towels to Velveeta cheese, dropped to $81.66 in 1993, just six cents less than the average price during 1992.
By contrast, the average price for the 12 months ended July 25 was $81.40, down $1.19 over the year-earlier period.
(Some of the difference between the two periods may be the result of seasonal variations.)
While the difference may seem subtle, analysts and industry officials say it indicates hostilities are lessening here, where grocers compete for about $21 billion in annual sales.
Concerned about dwindling profit margins, and, in many cases, copious red ink, stores are cutting back expansion plans, curtailing promotions and most important, holding the line on price cuts.
As a result, the pendulum is starting to swing against the consumer.
"Frankly, I think the worst of it is over," says Randall Onstead, president of Randall's Food Markets Inc. in Houston.
The latest Information Resources numbers, which are buttressed by the Labor Department's consumer-price figures, also place Texas at odds with national trends.
In contrast with years past, when cutthroat competition forced Texas grocery prices down faster than those in the rest of the nation, InfoScan found that in 1993 the average national price of the sample basket fell $1.06 to $81.38.
One major factor in the shift has been the blunting of the invasion of Texas launched by Food Lion Inc., the aggressive North Carolina-based unit of Delhaize Le Lion SA of Belgium, in 1991.
Initially, Food Lion's rock-bottom prices forced competitors into a nasty price war.
But marketing stumbles, along with an investigation by PrimeTime Live in November 1992 into alleged improprieties in the chain's meat department, stalled Food Lion's momentum, and now it says it will close 36 of its 82 Texas stores this year.
Food Lion wasn't the only casualty.
Houston-based Fiesta Mart Inc. closed a big Clear Lake store last year, and has postponed plans to add six stores in Dallas.
It will add only one for now.
Even San Antonio-based H.E.B. Grocery Co., while remaining strong, has slowed its Houston building schedule after opening a store a week at one point in 1992.
Overall, the 30 grocery-store chains competing in the state's market say that, after store closings and openings are taken into account, they added a net of only about 30 stores statewide in 1993, compared with 40 in 1992 and nearly 60 in 1991.
Stanley Shipley, a senior economist at Lehman Brothers, gives another reason for the turnaround.
"The Texas economy is probably better than most places across the nation," he says.
"So the pressure on retailers to grab someone else's market share is lower."
Since the Texas grocery picture varies a lot within the state, it pays to look at it region by region.
Here's a snapshot of four major areas in Texas:
DALLAS-FORT WORTH -- The mother of all Texas grocery wars began here in 1991, when Food Lion stormed in and opened 42 stores in just four months.
Weeks before the openings, established grocers such as Albertson's Inc. of Boise, Idaho, Dallas-based Cullum Co.'s Tom Thumb stores (since bought by Randall's) and Cincinnati-based Kroger Co., slashed their own prices to solidify customer loyalty.
But Food Lion's roar turned out to be worse than its bite.
The chain's Texas grand opening was on a Friday the 13th, and store managers jokingly passed around rabbits' feet.
But the good-luck charm apparently didn't work.
By the end of 1993, Food Lion had captured only 5.8% of grocery sales in Greater Dallas, according to estimates from Market Metrics Inc., a consulting firm in Lancaster, Pa.
While many observers, including Food Lion itself, blame its troubles on the PrimeTime Live show, the chain's Texas troubles actually began much earlier.
"Food Lion was in trouble in Texas before PrimeTime ever aired," says AppleTree Markets Inc.
Vice President Richard Goeggel.
"They made a strategic error to purchase using North Carolina brokers; they misunderstood how wedded the Texan is to certain consumer brands such as Ranch Style Beans."
Food Lion, while it still uses North Carolina brokers, now tailors its selection to Texas tastes, a spokesman says.
As Food Lion faltered, so did the grocery wars.
According to Information Resources, the price of the basket of goods in Dallas stores in 1993 was up 67 cents over 1992.
(Information Resources won't give the absolute cost of the basket in each market; only how much it changed.)
CPI data, meanwhile, show that Dallas-area supermarket prices rose 3.3% in December 1993 from the year-earlier period.
HOUSTON -- While Dallas saw some of the earliest grocery wars, Houston saw the fiercest, particularly in the first six months of 1993.
The average price of the Information Resources grocery basket in Houston during 1993 dropped $1.30 from the 1992 average price.
It was the only dip of any Texas region and singlehandedly dragged down the state average.
The intense war has claimed many victims.
Unable to make money at rockbottom prices, small closely held Food King Corp. closed six stores in 1992 and sold off three last year, says controller Carol Vykukal.
California-based Price Co. closed its Houston Price Club store in September.
And Food Lion, which H.E.B.'s similar-sized Pantry stores beat into the market by nearly a year, got pummeled by competition, and is closing half of its 13 Houston-area stores this year.
But now the worst appears to be over, and the players that are left may see profits improve.
Stores say sales rose significantly in the fourth quarter, and the Houston CPI index shows food prices rose 8% from June to December.
Albertson's, which is already in most other Texas areas, is the wild card.
It could reignite the battle if it decides to enter the market.
"We have looked around Houston, but haven't made any commitments," says Michael Reuling, executive vice president of store development.
At the earliest, he says, new stores could open in late 1995.
SOUTH AND CENTRAL TEXAS -- What has been happening in San Antonio, Corpus Christi and Austin is best described not as a grocery war, but as H.E.B. shooting down everyone who threatens its home turf.
Kroger was the latest victim.
Unable to match H.E.B.'s bargain-basement prices because of higher, unionized labor costs, the chain last summer sold its 15 San Antonio stores to Megafoods Stores Inc. of Mesa, Ariz.
H.E.B.'s price vigilance could explain why south central Texas is the cheapest region in Information Resources' survey of the state.
Still, Texans in the region found in 1993 that, while the getting was good, it was as good as it was going to get.
Prices on the basket were up 11 cents in 1993, according to Information Resources.
WEST TEXAS -- West Texas seems to be the region th at the grocery wars forgot.
Double and triple coupons are rare.
The West Texas-New Mexico region, in the Information Resources survey, was already the most expensive of all Texas regions in 1993, and the price of the basket rose 61 cents over 1992 levels.
Competition is rarer here because big chains mostly steer clear of the area, which is sparsely populated and far from chains' big-city distribution centers.
But don't write off West Texas entirely.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., based in Bentonville, Ark., built a supercenter in Odessa last year, offering some new competition to Albertson's, which had nearly half the market share in that city at the end of last year, according to Market Metrics.
Meanwhile, in El Paso, Midland and Odessa, a chain of stores is becoming a rival to Albertson's.
"Our philosophy is everyday low prices," says Buz Doyle, vice president of marketing at Furr's Supermarket Inc., formed in 1991 by a management-led buyout of Furr's Inc.
Specialty retailer Limited Inc., faced with soft industry-wide women's apparel sales, said net income for the fiscal fourth quarter fell 20%.
Net income also fell significantly for the fiscal year ended Jan. 29, but Limited said it will continue an aggressive store-remodeling campaign across its various retailing formats that includes opening 400 new stores.
In addition, Limited will close about 100 stores this year, largely among the Lerner and Limited store divisions.
The closings are part of a previously announced reduction in stores.
Limited reported that for the fiscal fourth quarter net income totaled $196.3 million, or 54 cents a share, compared with $243.9 million, or 67 cents a share, for the year-earlier quarter.
Sales rose 4.3% to $2.42 billion from $2.32 billion for the year-earlier quarter, excluding sales from the Brylane division in each period.
In August 1993, Limited sold a 60% interest in the Brylane division.
The retailer operates 4,623 specialty stores under the names Limited Stores, Victoria's Secret and Bath & Body Works, among others.
For the fiscal year, net income fell 14% to $391 million, or $1.08 a share, from $455.5 million, or $1.25 a share, for the year-earlier period.
Sales, however, rose 7.6% to $7.25 billion from $6.73 billion for the year-earlier period, excluding Brylane sales in each comparable period.
Leslie H. Wexner, Limited's chairman and chief executive, gave no reason for the drop in net income, but previously had said 1993 results would be slightly below earlier forecasts due to severe January weather and the Los Angeles earthquake.
Analysts expected the net declines but noted they are indicative of an industrywide decline in women's apparel sales.
"Limited didn't have a great Christmas, but apparel sales overall didn't do well," said Linda Morris, an analyst with PNC Bank.
"What's needed is a new fashion statement the consumer will go for, whether it's at the Limited or throughout the whole industry."
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Limited shares rose 25 cents to $17.125.
