International inspectors were barred from conducting a full inspection of North Korean nuclear sites, officials said, increasing the chances of a diplomatic showdown between the U.S. and Pyongyang.
Inspectors from the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency were prevented from taking samples from at least one site, and they also found evidence that seals on bins of some nuclear materials had been tampered with, according to U.S. officials.
The seals had been placed during previous inspections to ensure that nuclear materials weren't diverted.
The U.S. has said it will break off talks with North Korea if the IAEA says it can't certify that safeguards on nuclear materials have been maintained.
The U.S. officials said they expect a report from IAEA chief Hans Blix today.
An agency spokesman said yesterday that "certain restrictions" had been placed on the inspectors at at least one site.
But he said the agency couldn't assess the significance of those restrictions until the inspectors return to Vienna to make their report.
The inspections, which North Korea allowed only reluctantly, were designed to determine whether North Korea has secretly diverted materials that could be used to make nuclear weapons.
One senior U.S. official called the two-week inspection by the IAEA "disappointing, but not a disaster, at least as far as we can tell."
Another U.S. official minimized the significance of the state of the seals, saying, "Seals are broken all the time in the course of routine operations."
If the IAEA declines to certify the continuity of nuclear safeguards in North Korea, the administration will have to consider whether to ask the United Nations to impose economic sanctions on Pyongyang, noted Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, a private arms-control research group.
"The pressure would be irresistible" to move toward sanctions, he predicted.
The U.S. course of action also will be affected by the outcome of talks set for today between North Korea and South Korea.
The U.S. promised last month to suspend planned "Team Spirit" military-training exercises with South Korea and to conduct high-level talks with North Korea, on the condition that North Korea allow a full inspection of Pyongyang's seven declared nuclear sites.
In addition, North Korea was to agree to exchange diplomatic envoys with the south.
The senior U.S. official speculated that the North Koreans might seek in the coming days to shift attention from the nuclear-inspection issue by becoming more forthcoming on the diplomatic front and moving toward an exchange of envoys.
But the official said the U.S. wouldn't succumb to such a ploy, and would continue to insist on full inspections.
The official also held out the possibility that an additional inspection could be held during the six days left before U.S. talks with North Korea are scheduled to resume.
It would be difficult, but not impossible, to have the inspection team return so quickly, he said.
"That is up to Blix," he said, referring to the IAEA's chief.
