The dollar was pushed over a precipice yesterday by liquidations in the U.S. stock and bond markets.
And the plunge was accelerated by instability in the North American political and economic arenas.
The U.S. currency posted its biggest drops against the mark and yen.
It hit a five-month low of 1.6650 marks -- a level last reached Oct. 22 when it was at a low of 1.6635 marks -- and was never able to rebound much.
The dollar also lost about two yen, as it broke into low ranges it was in early this month.
As dollar-denominated assets fell, traders grappled for explanations and came up with a variety of factors.
Everything from the fear of fresh revelations in the Whitewater affair, to the assassination of Mexican presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio, to points on analysts' charts seemed to play some role in the dollar's downward spiral.
But the biggest factor may have been yet another outflow of investor confidence that waned greatly with the tumbles in the U.S. stock and bond markets.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average ended down 48.37 points to 3821.09.
Its 50-point plunge earlier in the day triggered the "uptick" rule that places strict restrictions on program trading and tends to shake investor confidence.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.6655 marks, down sharply from 1.6802 marks late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 104.55 yen, down from 106.25 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4975, off a bit from $1.4984.
About noon Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.20 yen and at 1.6696 marks.
Analysts said the fall in the stock market, and thus in the dollar, was largely propelled by tightening credit conditions in the U.S., which may slow the pace of economic recovery.
Major U.S. banks announced a rise in their prime lending rates -- to 6.25% from 6% -- citing Tuesday's move by the Federal Reserve to raise short-term credit rates 25 basis points.
"It's like a snowball," said Bernd Becker, assistant vice president at Bank Julius Baer in New York.
"As bonds go down and stocks go down, the dollar goes down."
Meanwhile, political factors also played a part in uncertainty, with President Clinton due to answer questions about the Whitewater issue in a news conference scheduled last evening.
"The assassination of the presidential candidate in Mexico, the president's address on Whitewater, political instability in Korea and Russia -- all these things add to the puzzle, and are perceived by the market as dollar negative," Mr. Becker said.
Technical factors were also an issue, said Joseph Francomano, a trader at DaiIchi Kangyo Bank Ltd. in New York, noting the dollar had been sold off heavily during the past two days as traders bailed out to play the volatile mark-yen cross.
As the mark hit a wall of resistance at about 63.50 yen, it sank to around 62.50 yen, carrying the dollar down with it.
Ironically, traders noted that the opposite play on Wednesday -- when the mark blew above the critical 63-yen level to reach 63.50 yen -- also badly hurt the U.S. currency.
Yesterday, the mark was trading at 62.71 yen in late New York trading, compared with 63.22 late Wednesday.
Traders noted the mark's drop against the yen appeared to be a purely technical move because fundamental factors appeared to favor the mark.
Elsewhere, the the Canadian dollar made no strides against a weaker U.S. currency -- as it took more losses on the back of some apparent Japanese disinvestment from Canada.
As the U.S. dollar broke above a major trend line of 1.3705 Canadian dollars in Asian trading, it soared to about 1.3750 Canadian dollars, a move that was stemmed somewhat by repeated Bank of Canada intervention.
