WordPerfect Corp., tightening its belt in response to sagging personal-computer software prices, said it will dismiss 1,000 workers, or 17.5%, of its world-wide force.
Best-known for its flagship family of word-processing programs, WordPerfect has faced stiffer competition in recent years and seen profits contract and sales growth slow.
"We need a leaner, more efficient organization," said Adrian Rietveld, WordPerfect's chief executive officer.
The closely held Orem, Utah, company said it posted revenue in excess of $700 million in 1993, an increase of about 20%.
But profits, which the company would not disclose, aren't keeping pace with growth.
John Lewis, an executive vice president at WordPerfect, acknowledged that the layoffs are partly aimed at improving profits in order to brighten chances for a future initial public stock offering.
WordPerfect's action seems prudent, given the precipitious collapse in software prices over the past few years, observers said.
"Products that once sold for $500 are now selling for a tenth of that" when bundled in a so-called suite of programs, said Richard Shaffer, editor of the Computer Letter, a newsletter.
WordPerfect was especially vulnerable to price cuts, because the company was loosely managed in the past.
Until last October, when WordPerfect incorporated in the state of Delaware, the company was essentially a partnership between two exexecutives, who are still the sole owners.
Despite developing one of the premier brands in software during the 1980s, the company is only just now acquiring sophisticated financial planning; as lately as a year ago, some executives worked without budgets and business was conducted on a cash basis.
"This was a company that grew fast enough not to worry about expenses," said Mary Conti Loffredo, an analyst at International Data Corp., Framingham, Mass.
"But those days are numbered.
Now it has to start running like a business."
Mr. Lewis said WordPerfect has adopted sophisticated planning and financial practices over the past two years.
"This is much healthier for us as an organization," he said.
For many years the undisputed leader in the $1.3 billion-a-year word-processing market, WordPerfect lost the top spot to Microsoft Corp. last year despite selling 4.6 million copies of its word-processing programs, according to International Data.
Laid-off employees, regardless of tenure, will receive 60 days' severance.
Most work in Utah.
