The Clinton administration, reversing a Bush administration policy, said colleges and universities may target scholarships to minorities to promote campus diversity or make up for past discrimination.
The Bush administration had proposed sharply limiting the extent to which race can be the basis for awarding scholarships.
Specifically, it proposed allowing race-targeted scholarships only in cases where there are formal findings of discrimination by a court, legislative body or the Justice Department.
In addition, it said race should only be one of several eligibility criteria for scholarships designed to promote diversity.
The new Clinton policy allows schools to act on their own, provided they have substantial evidence of discrimination, said Judith Winston, general council of the Education Department.
And it allows colleges to use race as the deciding factor in awarding scholarships designed to promote diversity -- provided they prove that other, "less-intrusive" methods of achieving diversity would be ineffective.
Critics say race-targeted scholarships give minorities an unfair advantage.
"Race-targeted scholarships, like racial quotas, are illegal except under very limited circumstances," said Richard Komer, who was the Education Department's deputy assistant secretary for civil rights in the Bush administration.
For instance, he said, race-targeted scholarships should be confined to countering recent discrimination.
Mr. Komer faulted the Clinton administration for allowing colleges to target scholarship money to specific minority groups to achieve diversity.
He suggested that gets dangerously close to establishing racial quotas, which he said would be illegal.
Because of their unique circumstances, the 116 historically black colleges may put up some of their own money toward racially targeted scholarships in conjunction with private or other third-party donors, the Education Department said.
Under the old policy, this was prohibited.
The General Accounting Office reported recently that 3% of undergraduate and graduate scholarships used race or national origin as an eligibility criterion.
But it found that those scholarships play a vital role in providing minority students access to higher education.
