The gorgeously atmospheric French movie "The Accompanist," certainly has the stuff of operatic melodrama: Set in occupied Paris during World War II, its heroine is Irene Brice, a classical soprano who has used her lovely voice and careful interpretations of music, as well as her pale beauty, to build a successful performing career.
The life of this high-strung and charming artist appears glamorously complicated as she tries to keep its elements all afloat: her rich and loving husband, Charles, her handsome, mysterious lover, Jacques, and her work.
This private drama derives extra passion and tension because it is intertwined with the bigger drama and bigger moral questions raised by war.
But the focus is kept on Irene and Charles and Jacques, and, eventually, whether any of them will use the pistol Charles keeps in his desk drawer.
If all this sounds like the high-flown vision of a young girl, it's meant to.
Irene (Elena Safonova) and her husband, Charles (Richard Bohringer), and Jacques (Samuel Labarthe), her lover, are certainly romantic figures, but they seem breathlessly so when seen from the point of view of the character presenting them.
She is Sophie Vasseur (Romane Bohringer), the young woman Irene hires to be her accompanist (and the real-life daughter of the man who plays Irene's film husband).
But Sophie becomes much more for her than that.
She becomes Irene's maid, her musical adviser, her confidante.
And Irene, for Sophie, becomes a kind of fairy godmother, the fabulous creature who has whisked her away from her drab life and dropped her into a grown-up version of Oz.
Once the pleasure of being in Irene's silky surroundings grows familiar, however, Sophie gets cranky as she realizes that proximity to these richly passionate and glamorous lives hasn't given her one of her own.
She may be a talented pianist, but the audience's huzzahs are for Irene.
She may have better clothes than she did before, and the chance to eat oysters, but she has no time for romance.
She's too busy tending to Irene.
Sophie is a familiar novelistic character, the observer-narrator who is willing to become a cipher in order to tell the story of the more flamboyant characters around her.
But Sophie isn't simply the conduit for Irene's story.
Ms. Bohringer's watchful intensity makes it very clear that Sophie most emphatically doesn't want to be a zero.
She herself doesn't know this when she accepts the job, in a scene shrewdly played by Ms. Bohringer and Ms. Safonova.
She is simply flattered that the charming Irene thinks she's worthy of the position.
Yet even in this early stage of their relationship Sophie shows signs of unusual self-confidence.
When Irene questions her interpretation of a piece of music, she firmly and completely explains her reasons for playing it that way.
Irene recognizes that toughness and likes her for it.
Yet she makes it clear to Sophie that nothing can be more important to her than Irene.
And nothing is, a fact Sophie comes to resent, even more so because Irene is so kind to her.
One night, when Irene comes to her room to thank her for playing so well at her first concert, Sophie stares at her, thinking: "I love you more and more.
I hate you more and more."
Claude Miller has directed "The Accompanist" with a lyrical refinement that at times seems to be a parody of the quintessentially French movie.
It's all exquisite; the Brice apartment, Irene's clothes, the tears that almost everyone eventually sheds.
The movie's mood is reinforced at almost every turn by the music, deftly scored by Alain Jomy.
Laurence Monteyrol actually recorded the arias that Irene "sings."
As she lip-synchs them, Ms. Safonova manages to make Ms. Monteyrol's voice part of her soul.
"Geronimo: An American Legend" has the stately grandeur of the old Westerns.
Everything about it is writ large, including its cliches.
But that's part of its beauty.
Director Walter Hill and screenwriters John Milius and Larry Gross have more or less imagined what the last days of Geronimo might have been like, before the famous Chiricahua Apache warrior finally surrendered to the U.S. Army.
Wes Studi is sadly noble as Geronimo, and Jason Patric admirably matches him in sadness and nobility, as the Southern gentleman-soldier who negotiates his final surrender.
The landscape may seem familiar; some of the film was shot in the red canyons of Moab, Utah, the "set" for many classic Westerns.
The battles may seem familiar, too, but that doesn't make them any less exciting to watch.
That goes for Robert Duvall and Gene Hackman as well.
I have fond memories of a certain kind of Walt Disney movie, in which a brave young person succeeds in some superhuman effort, often with the help of an animal, usually a dog.
"Iron Will," the story of a historic dog sled race, is exactly that kind of movie (indeed, I think it contains much of the same dialogue as the others).
In this film, based on a true story, young Will Stoneman makes a heroic effort to win a 500-mile run (from Winnipeg, Manitoba, to St. Paul, Minn. and he is inspired by a white Husky named Gus).
This period piece, set just before the onset of World War I, is a fine family movie -- exciting scenery for the parents, a whole new world for the kids.
VIDEO TIP: For adults who like movies about people winning races, there's always "Chariots of Fire," the lyrical 1981 film about the two young runners who represented Britain in the 1924 Olympics.
