Producer prices fell 0.1% in December, the Labor Department said, driven down by sharply falling energy prices.
It was lower energy prices that helped keep wholesale prices in check for the entire year, led by a 16.8% drop in gasoline prices.
The price of finished goods edged up only 0.2% in 1993, following a 1.6% increase in 1992.
Prices in 1991 fell 0.1%.
Energy prices in December fell 3.5%, but other factors also helped keep inflation in check.
The core rate of inflation, which excludes the food and energy sectors, rose by a modest 0.2% in December and 0.4% for the year -- the best showing since 1974, when the department began tracking these prices.
Analysts say the sluggish worldwide economy and the slack U.S. labor market has kept the lid on prices as well, and expect the good inflation news to last at least for the next two years.
Analysts expect the news on consumer prices, scheduled to be released today, to be just as good.
For the 12 months ended in November, consumer prices were up just 2.7%.
The fact that prices are steady despite recent improvements in economic activity is particularly encouraging.
In recent months, the manufacturing sector has gained momentum, and retail sales are rising consistently as well.
The fact that inflation has been well-behaved has helped to ease fears that the Federal Reserve may be readying itself for a boost in interest rates.
Despite the low inflation overall, last month had a few large increases at the wholesale level.
Car prices rose 0.6% and tobacco prices jumped 1.7%.
Much like food and energy, these two products have shown volatile changes from month to month.
Prices of intermediate goods fell 0.2% in December, while prices of crude goods declined 2.2%.
Without food and energy, intermediate goods edged up 0.2%, while crude goods on this basis jumped 2.4%.
Analysts noted that this rise comes on top of increases of 1.7% in November and 0.9% in October.
"Inflation at the crude level of production typically doesn't find its way into finished goods, but these increases are nevertheless worth watching," said Marilyn Schaja, money-market economist at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.
Most of the rise in crude prices has been due to increases in the cost of metal and lumber, she said.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Karen R. Osar was named vice president and treasurer of this industrial corporation.
Ms. Osar, 44 years old, was previously managing director in the corporate finance group of J.P. Morgan & Co.
She succeeds James N. Cauble, who was promoted last year to senior vice president for finance and administration for Tenneco Europe Ltd.
