The Securities and Exchange Commission staff appears to be giving closer scrutiny to personal stock trading by mutual-fund managers nationwide.
Last week's firing of star manager John Kaweske for allegedly failing to tell his employer, Invesco Funds Group, about personal stock trades may be just the tip of the iceberg.
When it comes to possible abuses of personal trading, "any question in any fund has to strike fear into the heart of the fund industry," says Barry Barbash, director of the SEC's Division of Investment Management in Washington.
"It goes to the heart of the fiduciary responsibility."
Another SEC official says: "When something like this happens, there is a lot of activity to find out how widespread it is . . . everybody is examining their region to find out what exactly is happening."
The scrutiny challenges a longstanding fund industry practice of taking personal trading as a point of pride.
At Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual-fund group, "most portfolio managers, maybe all of them, buy and sell stocks for their own account," says Stuart Williams-Ley, a former Fidelity fund manager who is now starting a private-school company on the West Coast.
"It's encouraged, it's part of the culture. . . .
The firm feels investing your own money is educational."
He adds: "It's always been one of the principal aspects of the culture that people traded aggressively for their own accounts."
Mr. Williams-Ley said there is talk at Fidelity that three fund managers were taken to the woodshed in late 1993 for personal trades that violated the spirit, if not the letter, of Fidelity's ethics code.
He declined to identify the managers.
William Hayes, managing director and head of the equities group at Fidelity, said, "We have seen no evidence of this happening -- the allegation about what three of our fund managers have done."
He added: "We have taken some disciplinary actions in the past, but I'm not going to discuss the particulars."
Fidelity tightened its personal-trading rules in November.
And one fund manager at Fidelity says he expects to see even stricter standards in the near future.
The rules are meant to discourage abuses such as "front-running" -- trading in a stock that might be affected soon afterward by a powerful fund's buying or selling.
Fund industry executives didn't pay much attention to personal trading as an ethical issue before 1993.
But now all that has changed.
The mutual-fund industry is worried.
Its chief trade group, the Investment Company Institute, is circulating a 60-page new-and-improved manual on how to write a code of ethics.
The revised tome, "Drafting Guides for Codes of Ethics and Procedures to Prevent Insider Trading," has been making the rounds for months, since well before last week's ouster of Mr. Kaweske by Denver-based Invesco.
The SEC used to devote more time and attention to money-market funds, says the agency's Mr. Barbash.
At these humdrum, cash-like funds, personal trading wasn't much of an issue.
But now under Chairman Arthur Levitt, the SEC has decided that its "inspection focus needed to be shifted" to stock and bond funds, including smaller fund groups and newcomers, Mr. Barbash says.
(These upstarts and little fund companies didn't always get such a close look in the past.)
The SEC's new mood hasn't escaped notice at fund companies.
One company in the midst of an otherwise-routine SEC exam was surprised to be asked for 1 1/2 years of records of personal trades by portfolio managers, a lawyer says.
The SEC is also scrutinizing related questions, such as how money managers allocate the daily blizzard of stock trades among the various accounts they manage.
Increasingly, fund managers do double, triple or quadruple duty, managing separate accounts for pension funds, private individuals, their own accounts or profitsharing plans for their employers.
Kemper Corp. last fall agreed to pay more than $9 million to settle civil SEC charges that one of its mutual fund managers had given winning trades to a Kemper profit-sharing plan, while dumping losing trades in two Kemper mutual funds.
"Mutual funds are an increasingly preferred vehicle for individual investors, {so} we will be spending more of our limited resources" on areas such as fund-manager trading and allocation, says SEC Commissioner J. Carter Beese Jr.
He says much of the watchdog duty falls on the shoulders of fund directors, elected by shareholders to watch out for their interests.
In his view, fund directors need to take the initiative to make sure funds and their managers behave appropriately.
Says Mr. Beese: "The corporate governance wave that revolutionized boards of directors across the U.S. seems to be manifesting itself in the boardrooms of investment companies."
And an upgrading of standards is certainly due, says Kathryn McGrath, former head of the SEC Investment Management Division and now a partner at the Washington law firm Morgan Lewis & Bockius.
The mutual-fund industry "has a very clean reputation," she says.
But because of the industry's explosive growth, "there is so much more money being handled in the care of these folks that the standards for watching them need to be raised."
