Northwest Airlines Corp. filed for an initial public offering of 23 million common shares at a price of as much as $20 apiece, or a total of $460 million.
The offering would return Northwest, the nation's fourth-largest airline, to the public marketplace for the first time since 1989, when it was taken private in a $3.6 billion leveraged buyout.
A preliminary prospectus for the offer provides the first detailed look at how Northwest has reduced staffing, deferred sizable aircraft orders and slimmed down hubs in the four years since it dropped off investor radar screens.
The offering plan, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, comes after a tumultuous 1993 for the airline.
Facing a cash squeeze, the company narrowly averted a bankruptcy-law filing last summer when employees agreed to $886 million in wage and work-rule concessions in exchange for equity in the company.
Proceeds from the offering, planned for the first quarter, will be used to help reduce Northwest's debt load.
As of Sept. 30, 1993, Northwest's long-term debt totaled $4.53 billion.
In the past two years, Northwest reduced its staff by about 4,300 positions, including 1,200 management jobs, the filing said, for an annual saving of about $142 million.
At the end of September, Northwest had 43,142 employees.
Like other major airlines, Northwest has been scaling back its once-ambitious aircraft-purchase plans.
Since late 1992, Northwest said, it has canceled firm orders for $4 billion in new aircraft and deferred deliveries by an average of 3 1/2 years on $3.8 billion of new aircraft.
Northwest said that in the meantime, it is considering a major refurbishing program of most of its DC-9 planes, which could cost about $150 million.
While that would be less costly than buying new aircraft, the company could suffer a competitive disadvantage because it would still be flying older planes.
The filing notes that if Northwest proceeds with the refurbishing program, the age of its fleet will be somewhat higher than industry averages.
Northwest also said that since 1991, it has eliminated unprofitable mini-hubs at Milwaukee and at Washington's National Airport, moving planes to beef up schedules at its big hubs at Minneapolis/St.
Paul and Detroit.
Northwest said that it plans a big expansion of joint operations with KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, which holds a 7.5% stake in Northwest.
The two airlines have joint marketing agreements in 17 cities in Europe and 44 cities in the U.S.
And this year, the filing said, they plan to add 100 cities, subject to government approvals.
The two airlines are also considering a further consolidation of their operations, including a possible merger of their cargo businesses.
In the prospectus, Northwest said such a combination would create the world's second-largest cargo company.
According to the filing, the original investors in the 1989 leveraged buyout of Northwest would hold about 52% of the voting equity and about 57% of the common equity of the airline once the offering is completed.
None of the original investors are selling any shares in the offering, the filing said.
Northwest Airlines Corp., the parent of the airline, was formerly known as Wings Holdings Inc.
