"I'm raw meat," he broods at the end of a recent campaign day.
Four Democrats vie daily for the kill that would end the 66-year-old Mr. Rostenkowski's congressional career, which spans 36 years.
Reporters press for comment about his legal problems, not about the national problems such as health care, the budget and welfare reform over which he holds sway in Congress.
Worst of all, early polls showed that just one in four likely Democratic voters supported his re-election.
In a real sense, it's a tribute to the man and his stature that he's given any chance at all of winning the March 15 primary.
Last week, with just a month before election day, the candidate and his campaign finally rumbled to life -- a late start that itself betrays the toll the nearly two-year-old grand-jury investigation has taken on Mr. Rostenkowski's spirit and his vaunted political finances.
Home during a week-long recess of Congress, he made a variety of appearances in benign settings -- an orphanage, for example.
The visits were designed to trumpet his accomplishments and his campaign's theme: "Leadership we can't afford to lose."
By "we," the campaign doesn't mean just Chicago, or Mr. Rostenkowski's multi-ethnic district that sprawls from the affluent lakefront high-rises westward to the working-class suburbs.
Given the reliance in Illinois on the Democrat's clout, even Republican Gov. Jim Edgar has stopped just short of an endorsement.
And President Clinton has volunteered to campaign, perhaps next week, to plead the importance of Mr. Rostenkowski's survival to the nation -- and to Mr. Clinton's own ambitious plans for health and welfare reform.
Yet for all the kudos from on high, this chairman who's usually the object of solicitations -- from CEOs to presidents -- now must ask voters for their favor.
"I need your help," he humbly tells an audience of about 70 fellow Polish-Americans as he receives the endorsement of the newspaper for the Polish National Alliance.
They applaud, if tepidly, and one woman gives him a standing ovation.
"I don't find it a problem to endorse Congressman Rostenkowski.
I find it a privilege," declares the group's president, Edward Moskal.
The lawmaker, Mr. Moskal continues, serves "in a fine manner, a very professional manner, regardless of the other side that perhaps doesn't find him as fine as we find him."
Defeat next month would make Mr. Rostenkowski a lame-duck chairman for the rest of the year.
Lawmakers in both parties say he could still wield leverage, thanks to his personal relationships with other members and his legislative mastery.
Their only question is whether he would want to -- or whether he would be too traumatized by voters' rejection.
The congressman has an answer: "I'm going to be the same person.
With all the problems I've had, you'd expect I couldn't do the budget, but I did.
I'm going to continue to do what I have to do.
I believe in Bill Clinton."
But even if he ekes out a victory, he won't be in the clear; he's vulnerable as well to a Republican challenger in November.
Worst of all, he could still be indicted.
Under House Democrats' rules, he would then have to step aside until absolved.
That could strip him of his strongest argument for re-election -- the power that comes from his position -- and leave the pivotal Ways and Means panel in chaos, without his consensus-building savvy just as it is turning to the health and welfare issues so crucial to Mr. Clinton's own future.
The ethics investigation shadows every effort of the campaign to generate good news.
A day after the Chicago Tribune endorsed Mr. Rostenkowski last week, the media reported that a former aide, alleged to have been a ghost employee, testifed before the grand jury in Washington.
There's irony in the proud chairman's predicament.
Two years ago, he sought re-election partly to defy expectations that he'd retire to pocket his $1 million-plus campaign surplus; after 1992, departing House members could no longer keep such cash for personal use.
Mr. Rostenkowski said then that he didn't want his epitaph to read: He took the money and ran.
But within weeks of his 1992 primary victory, news broke of the criminal grandjury probe that continues today.
First called to investigate alleged swaps of official stamps for cash at the House Post Office, the net has apparently widened to envelop Mr. Rostenkowski's congressional and campaign spending since he was elected in 1958.
In the process, leaks and parallel media digging have tarred his reputation far worse than the retirement would have.
Mr. Rostenkowski acknowledges he's not sleeping well these days, and it shows; the bulldog face is more lined.
Strangers still approach to warmly pump his hands, but if acquaintances look away, he wonders at times if it's inadvertant.
"For a proud person to campaign in an environment in which he's hit with charges he can't really answer, to be an object of suspicion, is very difficult and very dispiriting," says David Axelrod, his media adviser.
The congressman's hopes for survival largely hinge on the sheer number of foes he's drawn.
In fact, 53-year-old former city Alderman Dick Simpson -- back after losing with 43% in 1992 -- isn't alone in suggesting that state Sen. John Cullerton, 45, and Alderman Mike Wojcik, 41, joined the race with the Daley machine's blessing, to splinter the anti-Rostenkowski vote so that the lawmaker can win with as little as a third of the ballots.
The fourth challenger, John McCarthy, is a follower of fringe politician Lyndon LaRouche, but his Irish name will draw some votes.
"There's always safety in numbers," Mr. Rostenkowski says.
Mr. Simpson is once again waging a frontal attack.
At Our Lady of Grace Catholic school on the northwest side, two dozen elderly women who have gathered for Bingo nod as Mr. Simpson tells how the incumbent is "the very symbol of corruption."
But the emergence of Mr. Cullerton, who stresses gun control and education and largely leaves others to bloody Mr. Rostenkowski, is causing Mr. Simpson to shift some of his fire.
"He's a little Rostenkowski," Mr. Simpson snipes of Mr. Cullerton's links to unspecified "backroom deals" in the state Senate and in his law firm's bond business.
Mr. Cullerton, in turn, dismissively invites Mr. Simpson to drop out of the race.
Meanwhile, the incumbent clings to other advantages.
He had $1.1 million when the year began, though he'll husband some of that for future legal costs.
To date, he's paid nearly three-quarters of a million dollars for his own and staffers' legal bills.
The city's creaky Democratic machine still can get out the vote for "Rosty" in several wards of his district.
"We'll find every single Rostenkowski voter out there," boasts Alderman Dick Mell, who's interested in seeing his son-in-law succeed the incumbent someday.
Then there's the fact of Mr. Rostenkowski's power, which sways even alienated voters.
Aides say campaign polls last week showed encouraging support in the upper-income enclaves near Lake Michigan, which encompasses Mr. Simpson's liberal base and part of Mr. Cullerton's state Senate district.
These are pragmatic voters like Pete Adams, a young professional in upscale Lincoln Park.
In 1992, he attended a coffee for Mr. Rostenkowski, but opted not to vote, rather than to boost the lawmaker's winning percentage.
Now, with Mr. Rostenkowski in mortal danger, he reluctantly considers voting for him.
"The only thing he's got going for him," Mr. Adams says, "is the clout he carries in Washington."
