LAWMAKERS ARE trying to spark cruise-ship travel between U.S. markets.
A bill introduced in Congress in February would give cruise operators temporary relief from an 1886 law that permits only U.S.-built ships with U.S. crews to cruise between U.S. ports.
Despite the requirement, no large cruise ships have been built in this country for decades, and only two are operating -- both within Hawaii.
Cruise lines serving U.S. ports sidestep the requirement for U.S. ships by stopping in foreign ports such as Nassau, Vancouver or Ensanada, Mexico.
Alaska-bound passengers often fly to Seattle and immediately board a bus to Vancouver, where the ship departs.
"They don't spend a dime in Seattle," says Democratic Rep. Jolene Unsoeld of Washington, sponsor of the legislation.
Seattle has tried to get an exemption from the U.S.-ship law, but shipyards and labor groups have blocked efforts to weaken it.
Those groups are happier with Rep. Unsoeld's bill, which would let cruise ships use foreign-built ships now if they agreed to build a ship in the U.S. within three years.
And Seattle boosters have gained the support of other port cities, which hope to create cruises such as Boston to Miami, Houston to Tampa and Los Angeles to San Francisco.
While cruise lines say they're interested in those markets, they're reluctant to enter contracts with shipyards that have been building naval vessels.
"I don't think U.S. yards have the technical sophistication to build a modern-day cruise vessel," says Tim Gallagher, a spokesman for Carnival Cruise Lines in Miami.
Marc Frazer of the Seattle-based National Cruise Ship Alliance, which is trying to drum up support for Rep. Unsoeld's bill, concedes that cruise lines have been "very quiet" about it.
But he predicts hotel chains and other new operators will step in to develop an American cruise market.
"The fastest-growing sector of the cruise market is three- to four-day cruises," he says.
AN AIRLINE CANCELS a half-empty flight and cites weather or mechanical problems.
Is the airline lying?
Transportation Secretary Federico Pena is among the many passengers who have suspected so, but haven't been able to prove it.
Mr. Pena, who took some 150 commercial flights in his first year as a cabinet member, says four flights were canceled.
He asked his staff to investigate whether the real reasons were economic.
In one case, Continental Airlines canceled an afternoon flight from Newark to Washington, citing "mechanical problems," and combined it with a flight an hour later.
A check of maintenance records on file with the Federal Aviation Administration showed "there was some sort of broken fuel gauge," says Richard Mintz, an aide to Mr. Pena.
Before a flight from Washington to Atlanta, Delta Air Lines gate agents told passengers their connection to Birmingham, Ala., would be canceled because ice had closed the airport, Mr. Pena says.
He checked with the FAA and learned that the Birmingham airport was open.
Mr. Pena, who hitched a ride with a Delta flight attendant who drove to Birmingham, concluded that Delta knew it could get the plane to Birmingham, but didn't want it to be stuck there if a storm hit.
A Delta spokeswoman, Frances Conner, says Delta canceled the flight for "marginal weather."
She adds: "We try to deal with passengers as honestly as we can."
Federal officials say they have never had enough evidence to prove that an airline used weather or mechanical problems as a ruse to cancel an unprofitable flight.
But the Transportation Department has asked airlines to be more specific with passengers, says Hoyt Decker of the agency's consumer affairs office.
"Can you imagine an airline telling you they're having some kind of job action?" he says.
USING A corporate car-rental account for personal travel may be a bad idea, even if your employer doesn't mind.
These days, more companies are negotiating car-rental deals that allow employees to use the account for personal trips, the National Business Travel Association says.
"It allows them to maintain enough volume so they can keep the corporate rate," says E.J. Hewitt, president of the travel-manager's group.
Some employees like the express service and free upgrades that come with corporate accounts.
But the corporate rate can be higher than the leisure rate, especially on weekends and in cities where competition has spurred sales, car-rental firms note.
Also, many employers that pick up insurance for rented vehicles exclude pleasure trips from the coverage.
Hertz reservation agents sometimes ask corporate-account travelers, "Is this business or pleasure?"
The company says it doesn't block leisure travelers from using a corporate rate.
But Joe Brancatelli, travel adviser to Travel Holiday magazine, says Hertz once told him he couldn't use the corporate rate -- and offered him a leisure rate that was lower.
THE INTERNATIONAL Airline Passengers Association calls China the most dangerous area in the world for airline passengers and warns people not to fly internally there.
The group cites inadequate air-traffic control, among other concerns.
Other danger spots, according to the group: Korea, Central Africa, the Andes and the former Soviet Union. . . .
For a few traffic-weary Los Angelenos, public transportation means helicopters.
After January's earthquake, Heli-USA, a sightseeing company, began a commuting service between Los Angeles-area airports for as much as $180 a day.
"It's mostly attorneys and people in the movie business," says President Nigel Turner, adding, "We're trying to get a pad in Malibu."
