American Telephone & Telegraph Co. said it will take a $1.3 billion charge to comply with new accounting rules, and company insiders said the telecommunications giant will cut as many as 1,500 jobs in its internal computer-operations unit.
An AT&T spokesman, while confirming that cuts were planned at its Information Management Services unit, declined to specify how many.
"You could say it will be substantial," he said.
The charge against fourth-quarter earnings, announced on Friday, will amount to $2.1 billion before taxes, AT&T said, and reflects new accounting rules on post-employment benefits and payments.
On an after-tax, per-share basis, the charge will be 96 cents.
The costs of the job cuts aren't included in the charge.
Excluding the charge, earnings would have been about $1.15 billion, or 85 cents a share, for the fourth quarter, in line with analysts' expectations, AT&T said.
The company will report its fourth-quarter results by the end of January.
All companies are required to adopt the new accounting rule, known as Financial Accounting Standard 112, by their fiscal 1994 first quarter.
It requires that employers accrue for the estimated costs of benefits, such as workers' compensation and disability benefits, provided to former or inactive employees who aren't eligible for retirement.
In AT&T's case, about $1.1 billion of the after-tax charge reflects accumulated liabilities in 1992 and prior years.
An additional $200 million covers 1993.
"Going forward, we expect on average that we will have to book expenses of about $200 million a year, based on the new rule," an AT&T spokesman said.
But AT&T said the $200 million in additional annual expenses won't hamper its goal to show at least 10% earnings growth annually.
AT&T said its results also will reflect charges of about $120 million for previously announced restructuring and work-force reductions at its computer subsidiary, NCR Corp.
The change in accounting is "a nonevent," said Steven R. Yanis, an analyst at Kidder, Peabody & Co.
"A lot of companies are doing this."
U S West Inc., for example, recently said it would show a loss for 1993 after taking a $1.8 billion charge in part to comply with the new accounting rule.
The cuts of between 1,200 and 1,500 jobs at AT&T IMS, which employs about 8,000 workers, was disclosed in a Nov. 18 internal AT&T memo obtained by The Wall Street Journal.
It informed employees that IMS managers were "working agressively on plans to deliver dramatic improvements in our cost structure, quality and efficiency in 1994."
The notice, sent by IMS chief Ron J. Ponder through AT&T's electronic mail system, said the unit's "re-sizing" could lead to "a significant number of both management and occupational employees leaving IMS/Professional Services, either voluntarily or involuntarily."
He added that AT&T is "encouraging people to proactively pursue career options."
AT&T's spokesman said the company will send notices to IMS employees this week about the cutbacks.
Mr. Ponder isn't the only manager contemplating cutbacks in his force.
As already reported AT&T's giant long-distance unit is preparing thousands of job cuts as it resizes itself to compete on a cost-basis with leaner carriers such as MCI Communications Corp.
Other units will probably follow suit.
"We're expecting huge cutbacks this year at AT&T," says Don Smith, an expert on AT&T layoffs and retirements.
These cutbacks have so far trimmed more than 100,000 workers from AT&T's payroll of more than 400,000 since 1984.
Mr. Smith's company, Wordsmith Communications Group Inc., publishes the AT&T Alumni directory.
"We're adding names all the time," he said.
