Every year, American philanthropic foundations give away billions of dollars to various worthwhile" projects, more per capita than any other country in the world.
What is the political outlook of these foundations?
According to left-wing academics and activists, philanthropic foundations were created to preserve capitalism and are today controlled by conservative supporters of a conservative political order.
There is a kernel of truth in this assertion -- but only a kernel.
My co-authors, Althea Nagai and Robert Lerner, and I have just published a study of foundation trustees showing that the majority of them are politically moderate or conservative, as measured by a battery of questions we administered.
But we also found that the attitudes of the foundation world's movers and shakers are more sharply polarized than those of other leadership groups.
The trustees who are liberal are very liberal indeed.
What is more, most conservative or moderate foundation trustees shy away from public-policy issues.
They would much rather give their money to universities or hospitals or orchestras than to explicitly political activities.
If we examine only the grants of major foundations to individuals and groups involved with public-policy issues, the political outlook of the foundation world changes dramatically.
Such an analysis demonstrates that liberal foundations outnumber conservative ones by about 3 to 1, and the amount of money disbursed to liberal grant applicants is about four times as great as that disbursed to conservatives.
(In our study, we classified grants as liberal or conservative on the basis of reading a summary of the grant proposal and assessing the ideology of the group to which the funds were given.)
We all know the identity of the large liberal foundations, like the Ford Foundation and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
No conservative foundation even approaches Ford in the amount of money disbursed for public-policy issues.
It is clear, then, that foundations with public-policy concerns are likely to have a distinct liberal tilt.
But this is rarely acknowledged by the foundations themselves.
Foundation liberals are convinced, by the echoes they receive from the intellectual community, that they represent only simple decency as against the ideology and selfishness of their opponents.
The conventional wisdom about the conservatism of most foundations was probably more or less true until the 1950s, but it changed rapidly after that.
My colleagues and I once believed that the professionalization of the staffs of foundations played a substantial role in this leftward shift.
Professional staff members, we thought, were more liberal than trustees, and they pushed and pulled the trustees in that direction.
The evidence today points in the opposite direction.
Liberal foundation trustees and officers are more likely to rely on staff people than conservative foundation trustees, and they choose staffers who agree with them.
The change in foundations is, in fact, a reflection of generational change.
In many cases it is a result of a shift in the ideology of the children and grandchildren of the original donors and of the newer members of boards of trustees.
One by one, once-conservative foundations -- like the Pew Charitable Trusts -- have moved leftward.
As liberal dominance has increased, liberal and conservative foundations have changed their emphases.
In the old days conservative foundations were not inclined to give money to social science research, which they regarded as akin to socialism.
Contrariwise, liberal foundations like Ford did fund such research, believing that it was requisite to political and social change.
Today the situation is reversed.
In the late 1960s and 1970s conservatives began to turn to social science, convinced that social science studies would justify their views and provide clues to appropriate alternative futures.
Meanwhile, liberal foundations began to give relatively more money to activist groups, believing, one suspects, that we understand the world well enough -- the point now is to change it.
Of course, foundation grants aren't the whole story.
What about individual donors who disburse over $100 billion a year to various causes?
Certainly few think tanks share the ability of the conservative Heritage Foundation to raise large amounts of money from such people.
Does private giving tilt the political balance back to the right?
Not at all.
In our research we scrupulously classified all general public policy foundation grants to universities as neutral.
But the evidence is unequivocal: Social science and humanities faculties in American colleges and universities are overwhelmingly liberal in their social and political attitudes.
In a 1990 Carnegie study (the latest available), 70% of humanities professors classified themselves as liberal, compared with only 20% who identified themselves as conservative.
The attitudes of social science faculty members were a bit more skewed.
About 70% are self-described liberals, as compared with only 15% self-described conservatives.
We suspect that this academic work more than offsets the effects of individual giving.
Three or four conservative think tanks cannot compete with the production of hundreds of universities whose faculties produce studies of American institutions and whose graduates are likely to learn about social and political systems from a liberal point of view.
It is certainly no sin for public policy foundations to have a political outlook, but it is important that the predominance of liberal opinion be recognized as such.
As it is, liberal foundations convince themselves that they are committed in some neutral, apolitical way to democracy and empowerment" of the people.
But in fact they have spent their tax-sheltered money in ways that have substantially changed American society in accord with a liberal, or leftist, agenda.
Foundations have played a major role in moving high-school history texts in a feminist and multicultural" direction, for example.
They have also funded various public-law groups, which have altered the social and political ethos of our society.
A case in point is the Ford Foundation's funding of the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund, which encourages Mexican-Americans to define themselves as an oppressed racial group (read: victims) entitled to legal remedies.
Ford Foundation funds give Maldef enormous potential influence in the Mexican-American community.
To some, such efforts are the work of an elite using ordinary people to establish their own vision of the future.
In any case, that vision is anything but politically neutral.
The independence of America's foundations is of course to be defended, whatever their political agendas.
But it is time for them to examine the facile assumptions about their ideological innocence that have guided their behavior in the past and do so now.
Mr. Rothman, director of the Center for the Study of Social and Political Change at Smith College, is co-author of Giving for Social Change," just published by Praeger.
