In the Arnold Schwarzenegger film "Total Recall," the ultimate vacation in 2084 A.D. isn't a space trip.
It's a head trip: Just stop at the local shopping mall and get a brain implant that gives you the illusion of spending two weeks on Mars.
This science-fiction scenario isn't as far-fetched as it sounds.
Today, you can pop into an arcade, plunk down $8, and blast off on a simulated dogfight around the red planet, thanks to the much-ballyhooed technology of virtual reality, or VR for short.
Once an expensive toy for military pilots, VR is now within reach of flyboy-wannabes, allowing them to glide through three-dimensional, computer-generated battlescapes, shoot one another, and live to brag about it.
Technoheads say the potential to create digital fantasylands is almost limitless.
Forget spinning on merry-go-rounds and careening down roller coasters.
In the Disneyland of the future, patrons may get their kicks by strapping on high-tech goggles equipped with tiny computer monitors, and slip down virtual water slides with their favorite swimsuit models.
If the audio and visual cues are good enough, customers will have a hard time distinguishing virtual from real.
That's the theory, anyway.
The reality -- virtual or otherwise -- is that VR has a way to go before it lives up to its promise.
For now, virtual reality is a latter-day flea circus: high on hype, low on substance and only mildly entertaining.
"It's the new marketing buzzword," says Fred Newton, spokesman for the Amusement & Music Operators Association, Chicago, which showed off the latest VR offerings at a recent trade show in Anaheim, Calif.
Judging from the displays, VR is still in its infancy.
At Visions of Reality Corp.'s booth, Lycra-clad flight instructors beckon the curious to step into a Jetson's-style spacecraft, slip on a "vision immersion module" headset and head for the stars.
The intended effect was to immerse riders in a three-dimensional video game called Cybergate, where they would battle one another for control of the last remaining inhabitable planet in the universe.
But the crude, liquid-crystal visual displays in the headsets make Cybergate seem a closer cousin of Pong than Mortal Kombat.
And the blizzard of "pod control instructions" from the flight attendants are more daunting than a VCR manual.
Worse, more than a few novice cyberpilots walk away spacesick from the jarring visual displays and the claustrophobic, sweat-inducing feel of the headsets.
"It's been a real technical challenge," says Ken Stone, project administrator for Visions of Reality, based in Irvine, Calif.
Each Trip: $10 Despite the shortcomings ("It will constantly get better," Mr. Stone promises), the company is betting that folks will pay $10 each to get a peek at even primitive VR.
It is about to open its first arcade in Newport Beach, Calif., and says it will have a chain of 150 within 18 months.
Judging from the success of other attractions that bill themselves as "virtual," Visions of Reality's venture has a good chance to succeed.
At a storefront arcade called Virtual World in Walnut Creek, Calif., customers shell out $7 to $9 apiece for what amounts to a 10-minute video game with B-grade graphics, played in single-seat capsules decked out with stereo speakers and a dazzling array of useless buttons.
Do customers feel cheated?
Apparently not, given that some have played the game more than 2,000 times at Virtual World.
"A lot of people will argue whether what we present is virtual reality.
That misses the point.
We don't sell the graphics.
We sell a good time," says Tim Disney, chairman and chief executive of Virtual World Entertainment, the Burbank, Calif., company that is developing the Virtual World entertainment centers.
What Virtual World lacks in actual virtual-reality technology (no wraparound goggles or sensory mittens here), it tries to make up for with eye-catching packaging, an idea Mr. Disney has clearly borrowed from his famous great-uncle, Walt.
Virtual World players don't just sidle up to the video games, drop in some change and start shooting.
First, they're issued nicknames like "Blue-Comet" or "Pupster."
Then they watch a slick "mission briefing" video and go through a "decontamination" chamber before heading into the futuristic "containment bay" where the video games are tied together via a computer network, allowing players to compete against one another.
Afterward, players can kick back in a safari-themed "Explorer's Lounge" and nurse enzymerich "smart drinks" as they review a computer printout of their performance: "Awesome booster power shown by Pupster . . .
Blue-Comet's Speck goes down in flames."
Already, Virtual World has game centers in Chicago, Tokyo, San Diego and Houston, and Mr. Disney hopes to have 25 locations in the U.S. and 10 overseas within three years.
He believes the future of out-of-home entertainment isn't in billion-dollar theme parks, like those bearing his family moniker.
Rather, Mr. Disney thinks the growth will be in so-called location-based entertainment-arcades with high-tech motion-simulators and virtual-reality attractions that can be wedged into urban shopping malls at a fraction of the cost of a megapark.
A theme park takes up several hundred acres; Virtual World fits into a 6,000-square-foot shop.
Sega Enterprises Ltd., the Tokyo videogame maker, is also launching a chain of mini-theme parks using virtual-reality technology, with a prototype opening this month in Osaka, Japan.
In the U.S., Sega recently opened the $5.5 million VirtuaLand high-tech arcade at Luxor resort in Las Vegas, and it's planning an entertainment attraction at MCA Inc.'s Universal Studios Hollywood that will cost an estimated $20 million.
The strategy makes sense, given the runaway success of arcades, where teenagers plunk quarters into video games faster than gamblers at one-armed bandits.
Arcade games have become a $7.5 billion business in the U.S.
Though a nascent market segment, virtual-reality-type games already rake in more than $100 million annually.
At Circus Circus in Las Vegas, teens with cast-iron stomachs wait in long lines to ride Sega's R360, a video game played inside a twirling capsule that mimics the movements of a clothes dryer.
At San Francisco's Pier 39, tourists pay $3 to compete against one another as gunners on the starship Dragoon in Namco's Galaxian 3.
At the Sherman Oaks Galleria in the San Fernando Valley area of Los Angeles, valley girls and boys slip on virtual-reality helmets and stalk futuristic baddies in Dactyl Nightmare from Virtuality Group PLC of England.
Heavy-hitters such as Sony Corp., Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Time Warner Inc., Paramount Communications Inc., American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Walt Disney Co. are all looking into VR, but have so far held back from bringing entertainment products to market.
At least one big company, General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Aircraft Co., has already given up on virtual entertainment.
With much fanfare in late 1992, Hughes teamed with director George Lucas's LucasArts Entertainment Co. to develop a VR space-flight attraction called Mirage for amusement parks and entertainment centers.
But after building a prototype, Hughes gave up, finding that it just couldn't produce the product cheaply enough.
"The economic models didn't really pan out," says Dwight Humphrey, vice president of business development for entertainment and visual systems for the Hughes Training Inc. unit.
Hughes couldn't get the cost of each two-person Mirage game unit below the $200,000 to $300,000 that would have made ticket prices affordable, he says.
The problem with applying VR technology to theme-park rides is the low "throughput," or number of bodies you can get in and out of the ride each hour.
"In a virtual-reality arcade game, it can take three to four minutes just to put the headset on.
But in a theme park, we need to put a minimum of 1,000 to 1,500 people an hour through an attraction," explains Robert Pittman, who runs Time Warner's Six Flags theme parks.
Iwerks Entertainment Inc., Burbank, Calif., has tried to overcome this problem in its new Virtual Adventures submarine attraction by packing six players into each game station and doing away with expensive wraparound VR goggles in favor of 3-D glasses.
"The only way to have the low cost and the high-end graphics is to have a shared experience," says Iwerks Chairman Stan Kinsey, noting that the per-station cost of Virtual Adventures is only $40,000, allowing for a ticket price of about $5 per ride.
Still, sales of Virtual Adventures to theme parks and arcades haven't exactly been brisk -- only a handful of agreements are close to completion -- and Mr. Kinsey thinks it will take a big entertainment company jumping into VR before the business really flies.
"What we can't wait for is Disney's first virtual-reality attraction to legitimize the industry," he says.
It was Disney, after all, that made flight simulators a theme-park staple with its introduction of Star Tours at Disneyland in 1987, launching a slew of imitators, including Iwerks.
Disney has been tight-lipped about its plans for virtual reality.
But last year it acquired a Long Island consulting firm owned by VR guru Bran Ferren, who is now an executive at Disney's Imagineering unit, which dreams up new theme-park attractions.
Mr. Ferren won't say what exactly he's doing for Disney.
But he does allow that "virtual reality is the ultimate communications tool . . . profoundly important to the entire culture, society, and therefore theme parks."
Yet Mr. Ferren worries that consumers might get turned off by the virtual hype before they get to see the real thing.
"My only hope is that we survive the embarrassing display of really awful products people are calling virtual reality, so that it doesn't set the industry back 10 or 15 years," he says.
Mr. Jefferson is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau.
