The March 8 editorial-page piece by John J. Miller, "Immigrant-bashing's Latest Falsehood," employs not-so-subtle statistical manipulation to try to convince us that "immigrants are no more prone to criminal behavior than anybody else."
To buttress this point, Mr. Miller relies upon state-prison data on the percent of foreign-born to try to prove that, in general, aliens are less likely to be in the slammer than natives.
If Mr. Miller knew anything at all about the nation's immigrant problems, he would recognize that these data are inherently flawed because states have no meaningful way to determine alienage during pre-trial screening or prosecution.
Alienage data normally come from self-report information prior to arraignment.
If an alien makes a false claim to U.S. citizenship, state agencies usually do not challenge that assertion.
And to avoid deportation, aliens have a strong incentive to lie about alienage.
Therefore, the frequency of foreign-born in state prisons is likely to be grossly under-reported.
The high rate of criminal activity among some immigrant-nationality groups does reflect the internationalization of migrant-related organized crime.
But without a heavy level of immigration since 1975, this crime problem would be much reduced.
(And if you included the rarely prosecuted crime of "entry without inspection" across the nation's borders, Mr. Miller's argument would naturally fall to pieces.)
If immigration continues at its present extraordinarily high, uncontrolled rates, the immigrant population will soon be much younger than the native-born population.
That fact, of itself, is likely to produce higher crime rates among the foreign-born.
It isn't enough to claim that "immigrants are no more prone to criminal behavior than anybody else."
Immigrants are guests of the nation.
They are properly held to a higher standard of conduct than native-born, and can be deported if they commit a range of illegal -- and even legal -- activities.
Of the hundreds of millions who'd like to move here, those few who do make it are, and should be, held to much higher standards of behavior than the native-born population.
That's part of the deal.
