KLM Royal Dutch Airlines said it swung to a profit of around 15 million guilders ($7.7 million) in its third quarter, ended Dec. 31, from a loss of 437 million guilders a year earlier.
The third-quarter profit was much better than the 40 million-70 million guilders of losses analysts said they were expecting, although there had been rumors on the Amsterdam stock exchange that the company would report a small profit.
As expected, KLM also announced a long-awaited capital issue of 20 million common shares to be sold in March.
A filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission will be made shortly, the Dutch flag carrier said.
KLM added that the Dutch government intends to maintain its 38.2% stake in KLM by buying some of the common stock being offered in March as well as by purchasing preference shares to be issued by the company.
At the current KLM share price of around 48 guilders, the common stock issue alone would raise the equivalent of nearly one billion guilders.
The major factor behind the swing to a profit in the latest third quarter from the huge loss a year earlier is a 300 million-guilder charge KLM booked a year ago to cover the write-off of its then-remaining investment in Northwest Airlines.
KLM holds 20% of the common stock in Northwest, plus around $300 million of subordinated preferred bonds.
In the third quarter of fiscal 1994, KLM had a one million-guilder pretax loss on its minority holdings compared with a 355 million-guilder deficit that includes the charge a year earlier.
But due to last year's Northwest write-off, KLM isn't any longer exposed to the U.S. affiliate's losses.
Meantime, the latest fiscal third-quarter net profit was buoyed by 11 million guilders of pretax earning from asset sales.
There wasn't any such profit a year earlier.
Another factor for the return to profit last quarter was that KLM was able to hold operating costs steady, while revenue rose 7.1%.
For the first nine months of the current fiscal year, KLM swung to a net profit of 260 million guilders, or 4.39 guilders a share, from the year-earlier loss of 229 million guilders, or 4.34 guilders a share.
Revenue rose 3% to 6.62 billion guilders from 6.46 billion.
KLM reiterated its positive view that it will post a "slight" net profit for the full fiscal year ending next March 31.
But because of the usual seasonal slackness in the January-March period, the fourth quarter will show a loss, KLM added.
Separately, KLM said the chairman of the board of supervisors is stepping down for "health reasons."
The airline said 61-year-old Max Albrecht will be succeeded by the current vice chairman of the supervisors, C.J. Oort.
The supervisory board of a Dutch company oversees the board of directors and has a say in strategic matters.
