Ukraine's Parliament approved a program to sell off a broad swath of state-owned businesses by year end.
Privatizations were authorized more than a year ago but, as with most other economic reforms, little has been achieved.
The new program would increase the private sector's share in the former Soviet republic's economy to 28% from 2% by selling off 20,000 small enterprises, 8,000 medium-size and large firms, and 1,400 unfinished contruction projects.
Though most of the assets will be exchanged for privatization vouchers that were distributed free to Ukrainians, sales of minority stakes are expected to raise $230 million, officials said.
Foreigners bidding on the assets will be subject to a special exchange rate of 420 karbovanets to the U.S. dollar.
The currency's market rate has swung recently to 12,592 to the dollar from 31,000.
The Polish government was accused of wildly undervaluing Bank Slaski, as its shares scored a one-day jump to $313 from the $23 initial offering price.
The privatization chief and politicians said the underpriced sell-off, which had been held up as a privatization model, in effect robbed Poland's treasury.
Politicians also faulted Poland for its deal to sell a 25.9% strategic stake to the Dutch bank and insurer Internationale Nederlanden Groep BV, which now has a huge paper profit.
The German cabinet approved draft legislation to repeal strict limits, imposed in a 1933 rebate ban, on retailers' offering discounts.
Meanwhile, the HDE retail industry group predicted western German retail sales will shrink an inflation-adjusted 4% this year from $434 billion last year, possibly eliminating 30,000 jobs.
The cabinet also advanced reforms to streamline laws on corporate restructurings, making them more transparent with better regulatory oversight.
Both measures are part of a broad plan to combat unemployment and improve competitiveness.
China again berated the Hong Kong government for continuing to finance building of the British colony's new airport despite Beijing's opposition.
It said China won't be liable for any Hong Kong debt in the project and won't honor unilaterally awarded airport-related contracts extending beyond June 30, 1997, when the territory reverts to Chinese control.
Hong Kong noted it hasn't borrowed for the work and doesn't plan to do so, and hasn't granted franchises or contracts beyond 1997.
So China's broadside was linked to pressuring Britain on their dispute about broadening democracy in Hong Kong.
Companies in Germany appealed to the government for more protection from the spreading influence of organized crime and industrial espionage.
At a meeting called by Chancellor Helmut Kohl to discuss the rising crime rate, the Chamber of Industry and Commerce said companies and business associations needed the help of police and intelligence services to ward off mafia-style gangs.
The conference of business, police and social leaders was part of an effort by Mr. Kohl's center-right coalition, slumping in popularity polls ahead of October elections, to make law and order a top campaign issue.
China plans to open in April a meat futures exchange in Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan province, which is a major pork-producing region.
The exchange will admit domestic and foreign enterprises, brokerage companies and financial institutions as members.
Chengdu, in southwest China, also has the country's largest wholesale meat market, which has grown rapidly since it was set up in 1991.
In a move likely to renew calls for an independent European Union competition agency, the EU Commission cleared a steel-tubing merger over the objections of its own top antitrust officials.
The decision, allowing Mannesmann AG of Germany, Vallourec SA of France and Ilva SpA of Italy to combine their stainless-steel tubing units, marks a setback for the EU competition chief, who opposed the deal, and for those who want merger cases decided solely on competition factors such as market share in the EU, formerly the European Community.
It represents a victory for EU officials who maintain that the 12-member trade bloc needs an aggressive industrial policy in beleaguered sectors such as steel.
The commission was fiercely divided on the issue, sources said, noting this was certain to be seized upon by EU critics who seek an autonomous agency, removed from political considerations, to deal with European mergers; only one proposal has been blocked since the EU merger-control law took effect three years ago.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Hong Kong, which has 140,000 registered dogs, said all canines must have microchips implanted in their ears, so that owners of wandering pets can be identified.
The move followed a dog's fatal mauling of a girl in the British colony, which has 18,000 stray mutts. . . .
Indonesian authorities are detaining children who line roads by the hundreds to rent themselves to motorists who otherwise would be banned from main roads in morning rush hours.
A rule to combat chronic traffic problems requires cars to have at least three occupants.
