A NUCLEAR AGENCY GAVE North Korea another chance to allow inspections.
The International Atomic Energy Agency voted to urge Pyongyang to allow its inspectors full access to suspected weapons sites, and, laying the groundwork for eventual U.N. action, sent a copy of its resolution to the Security Council.
China abstained in the vote.
The U.S. has said that if the standoff continues, it will move for a Security Council resolution echoing the nuclear agency's.
That action probably will come next week.
President Clinton said the U.S., in what he termed a "purely defensive" move, soon will be sending Patriot antimissile batteries to South Korea.
U.N. peacekeepers in Bosnia ordered Serb forces to withdraw a group of tanks and artillery pieces from a 13-mile exclusion zone around Sarajevo, resulting in a tense standoff after the Serbs, who say the weapons are outside the zone, refused.
Talks to resolve the dispute continued, but NATO warned the arms are subject to air strikes.
Gonzalez postponed a hearing by his House Banking Committee that Republicans hoped to use this week to investigate the Whitewater affair.
He called instead for "full hearings," perhaps by a select panel.
Meanwhile, an indicted Arkansas ex-judge agreed to cooperate with the Whitewater special counsel.
White House aide Kennedy failed to pay about $1,300 in taxes for a nanny before he became associate counsel.
They were paid in early 1993 in his wife's previous married name.
The White House said Kennedy had disclosed the problem to Vincent Foster, the late Clinton aide.
El Salvador's ruling party candidate had a solid lead in presidential balloting, but appeared almost certain to fall short of the majority needed to avoid a runoff next month with the leader of a leftist coalition.
The elections, which also included voting for the National Assembly, were the first since the end of the country's 12-year civil war.
Mandela and de Klerk met with election officials to discuss mounting violence in the Zulu homeland as the first all-race South African elections approach.
Mandela later criticized de Klerk and his government for failing to accept responsibility for arming the Zulu-dominated Inkatha party in an effort to terrorize rival black groups.
Israeli artillery pounded southern Lebanon, killing a girl aboard a school bus.
The shelling was in retaliation for Hezbollah guerrilla attacks that killed two Israeli soldiers and three members of an allied Lebanese militia.
In Tunisia, talks aimed at reviving Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations recessed without reaching an accord.
The U.S. pledged $100 million in additional aid to Ukraine, including $50 million for the destruction of missile silos, during a visit to the former Soviet state by Defense Secretary Perry.
Ukraine also announced it sent a second trainload of nuclear warheads to Russia for dismantling, bringing to 120 the number of warheads shipped so far.
The U.S. is losing millions of dollars by subsidizing vacant units in large public housing facilities because the buildings can't legally be torn down, a HUD report concludes.
The report says that the growing number of such vacant units provides breeding grounds for drug dealers and other criminal elements.
Philadelphia reached an agreement with the Justice Department to force its emergency medical workers to treat HIV-infected people.
The accord, which settles a dispute in which a worker refused to treat a man who said he was taking an AIDS drug, is the first AIDS settlement reached under the 1992 Americans with Disabilities Act.
A grand jury in Oregon indicted three men who admitted carrying out the assault on Olympic figure skater Nancy Kerrigan, and said rival skater Tonya Harding and her former husband helped plan the attack.
Harding and ex-husband Jeff Gillooly have already pleaded guilty to lesser charges, and so weren't charged in the indictment.
Cambodian soldiers seized large caches of weapons and food when they overran the headquarters of the Khmer Rouge Sunday following a two-day offensive involving 5,000 troops, a Cambodian general said.
The operation sent 20,000 people, many of them supporters of the rebels, fleeing across the border to Thailand, officials there said.
