The Greek politician who headed marathon European Union membership talks with Austria, Finland, Sweden and Norway now says the decision to enlarge the 12-member EU was wrong.
Theodoros Pangalos, Greece's minister for European affairs, said the decision to allow the four countries to join the EU shouldn't have been made so soon.
"Now that I have done my duty, I honestly want to say that this decision was wrong," Mr. Pangalos said, adding that he would have preferred to wait until the end of the decade to expand EU membership.
The EU has yet to find a compromise on the difficult issue of voting rights in its governing council.
Mr. Pangalos lambasted Britain and Spain, which oppose giving the new members voting power that would change the current method for blocking legislation.
Abu Dhabi is seeking international bids for the construction of one of the Middle East's largest mosques.
The mosque, estimated to cost $150 million, will be built in the Persian Gulf emirate, close to a bridge that links Abu Dhabi island to the Arabian peninsula.
Its main prayer hall will be able to hold 7,000 worshipers.
Construction is to begin in a few months.
Four million square feet of Islamic-style gardens, water fountains and walkways will encircle the mosque, which will have a total area of 555,555 square feet.
China's central bank is investigating recent increases in prices charged to foreigners.
The emergence of a two-tier price system -- one price for Chinese, and a price at least 50% higher for foreigners -- followed the central bank's move Jan. 1 to phase out a special currency for foreigners.
The special currency was worth more in dollars than the yuan used by ordinary Chinese, but China officially treated the two currencies as equal in value.
Chinese airlines, insurance companies, telephone companies, landlords and others have demanded that foreigners, who now also use yuan, pay 50% more than Chinese clients.
Japan has drafted a proposal to ease curbs on foreign lawyers wishing to practice in the country.
The draft bill would let Japanese and foreign lawyers run joint law firms and provide legal consultation services under certain conditions.
It would continue to bar foreign lawyers from arguing criminal or civil cases in Japanese courts.
The government plans to introduce the amendment in parliament in early April.
If the measure is approved, it will take effect within a year.
The U.S. government demanded that 70 Japanese construction and other firms pay more than 1.1 billion yen ($10.4 million) in penalties for allegedly rigging bids on construction projects at a U.S. naval air station southwest of Tokyo.
The firms are accused of inflating contract fees for the construction projects from 1984 to 1990 through a contractors' group at the naval station in Atsugi.
The Japan Federation of Construction Contractors denied that bid-rigging occurred, saying the firms met only to discuss work quality.
Record numbers of tourists are flocking to the Vietnamese village where U.S. troops killed about 350 civilians during the Vietnam War in the My Lai massacre.
Since the 25th anniversary of the massacre last year, more than 7,000 people have visited Son My village.
More than half of them were foreign visitors, whose numbers increased fourfold from the previous year.
The number of Vietnamese visitors doubled.
My Lai is a commune in Son My, in what was then South Vietnam, where U.S. soldiers hunting for Viet Cong communist guerrillas committed the massacre on March 16, 1968.
Several thousand students and members of labor unions marched through Paris and other French cities under tight police supervision, waving banners denouncing Prime Minister Balladur's proposals to allow employers to pay less than the minimum wage for entry-level jobs.
In Paris, where police estimated about 32,000 demonstrators gathered, a number of cars were tipped over and burned by youths before riot police intervened.
Having already backed down in recent months in the face of angry airline workers, fishermen and teachers, senior government ministers wouldn't budge on the jobs issue.
But Mr. Balladur sent a more conciliatory message in an open letter to French youths.
Demonstrators had few new suggestions on how to cut France's record 12% unemployment rate.
"We want a guaranteed job.
What's the point in studying if you're going to be out of work?" said one 19-year-old high-school student.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Italy's Leaning Tower of Pisa has started straightening up, and visitors could be allowed to climb its 294 steps again.
Counterweights placed at the base of the 14th-century marble tower have pulled it half an inch closer to being vertical. . . .
The European Court of Justice told Spain to end its policy of charging foreigners to visit state museums while letting Spanish citizens in free.
