Guinness PLC and France's LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton SA restructured their cross-ownership, permitting Guinness to focus its investment on businesses they have in common and distance itself from LVMH's other activities.
The change disengages the British brewer and distiller from LVMH's perfume and luggage businesses while linking it closer to the French company's champagne-and-cognac unit.
At the same time, it will make it easier for LVMH to diversify further into businesses that don't interest Guinness.
"This is the first good news for Guinness in two years," said Graeme Eadie, an analyst at NatWest Securities, noting that the company has been hurt by the recession and the declining consumption of Scotch whisky.
Analysts cautioned that the change won't help Guinness overcome these shortterm problems any time soon.
Still, with investors focusing on the potential longer-term benefits, Guinness's shares jumped 49 pence, or 10%, to 521 pence in late trading on the stock exchange in London.
LVMH's stock, however, dropped amid concerns by investors that Chairman Bernard Arnault might use proceeds from the restructuring to build a media empire through costly acquisitions.
Last August, for instance, LVMH acquired control of the Groupe Desfosses International, a newspaper publisher.
LVMH's shares closed at 3,899 francs ($6.57), down 3.4%, in Paris.
Under the accord, Guinness will sell its 24% indirect stake in LVMH for #1.23 billion ($1.84 billion) and acquire a 34% interest in LVMH's Moet Hennessy SA wine and spirits unit for #902 million; this will lower its debt to 37% of equity from 47%.
LVMH will reduce its holding in Guinness to 20% from 24% by June 30, 1995, by selling the shares to unrelated investors.
Further, LVMH said Christian Dior, which has indirect control of the French company, will buy Guinness's stake and finance the purchase through a rights issue.
That news sent Christian Dior shares into a tailspin, ending at 360 francs, down 7.7% from 390 francs.
Analysts had criticized Guinness for holding a huge stake in LVMH but having little say in its business.
Now, under French law, Guinness's 34% stake in Moet Hennessy gives it "minority blockage" rights, or an effective veto on certain major strategic decisions.
Moreover, Guinness stays clear of any further diversification by Mr. Arnault.
"We will not be part of any new direction, media or other, that they pursue in the future," Anthony Greener, chairman of Guinness, said.
"A direct investment in the core brands of wines and spirits is clearly more appropriate for us."
Added NatWest's Mr. Eadie: "It takes the Arnault factor out of the equation, which is good because he's unpredictable."
Guinness will have an investment gain of #204 million on the disposal, but overall will end up taking a charge of #173 million against its 1993 earnings relating to goodwill write-offs.
Guinness said it expects to report pretax profit for the year of at least #875 million before that exceptional charge.
In 1992, Guinness had pretax profit of #795 million.
Mr. Greener said the ownership restructuring eventually should lead to more distribution joint ventures with Moet Hennessy.
These ventures give the two companies more marketing clout by combining their well-known brands: the British company's Guinness beer, Johnnie Walker and Dewar's Scotch whisky and Gordon's and Tanqueray gin, among others, and LVMH's Dom Perignon and Moet & Chandon champagne and Hennessy cognac.
Guinness's ties with LVMH go back to 1987, when they began establishing distribution joint ventures.
Guinness invested in LVMH to keep it from splitting apart and to protect those joint ventures when a battle for control of LVMH broke out between Mr. Arnault and rivals.
