For a tax collector, John Sharp sure has a lot on his plate.
In the three years since he became the Texas comptroller of public accounts -- primarily responsible for gathering taxes and making sure budget-writers don't exceed their revenue -- Mr. Sharp has emerged as the state's foremost policy wonk, churning out plans to streamline government, improve the criminal-justice system, and reform the administration of public schools, to name a few.
Even Al Gore, no slouch at wonking himself, was moved to borrow many of Mr. Sharp's ideas in his own recent stab at reformulating federal government.
Now, Mr. Sharp is broadening his scope, if such a thing is possible.
Within two weeks, his office plans to deliver the final, 300-page installment of "Forces of Change," a 1,300-page tome on the megatrends that will buffet Texas through the year 2025.
And even though the hefty study, which originated in an executive order from Gov. Ann Richards in 1992, is more than a year late, it's bound to make some waves when it finally hits.
At its center, Mr. Sharp calls for the adoption of a "Texas Business Plan," a wide-ranging set of legislative and administrative actions designed to grease the economy's entry into the 21st century by overhauling the state's economic-development policies, its management of natural resources, its infrastructure expansion and its schools, among other things.
It's also designed to kick up some controversy, as Mr. Sharp is quick to acknowledge.
"If no one proposes anything, nothing ever happens," he says.
"Sometimes you have to lead, sometimes you have to make controversy, in order for there to be a discussion."
One sure flash point will be Mr. Sharp's recommendations for education reform.
Concerned that the state's public schools are doing a woeful job of preparing young people to enter the work force, the comptroller counsels an all-out assault on the "Austin-based education bureaucracy" to limit the amount of central control over school districts.
He also takes up the hot-button issue of school choice, suggesting that parents be allowed to move their children out of poorly performing public schools into other ones nearby.
Also controversial is Mr. Sharp's suggestion that Texas consider consolidating more power in the executive branch by, for instance, giving the governor authority to name a cabinet.
(Some cynics might view that gambit as selfserving, since Mr. Sharp is widely expected to run for governor one day.
It's also ironic, because Texas' weak-governor system has helped Mr. Sharp amass tremendous power as comptroller.)
Finally, some in the private sector question whether Texas government should be in the business of formulating "business plans" in the first place.
"The notion that you need some grand master plan sounds more like ultranationalist Russian leader Vladimir Zhirinovsky than it does somebody in Texas," says James F. Smith, former head of the University of Texas' Bureau of Business Reseach.
To that, Mr. Sharp has a ready retort.
He says much of his plan concerns getting government to "streamline itself and move out of the way and let other factors take over."
He adds: "If we're here to let everything wash over us, we might as well go out of business and abolish the Legislature."
One thing is certain: Mr. Sharp's plan probably won't spend a lot of time gathering dust -- even though, as one staffer admits, it's so far-reaching that trying to grasp the whole thing "is like nailing Jello to the wall."
With a research and economic-forecasting staff numbering around 100, the comptroller has the most extensive think tank in the state, and his studies tend to find their way to policy makers and business leaders.
"The truth is, I think the governor and the lieutenant governor and the speaker have been waiting for this, and plan to use it as blueprint" for the next legislative session, says George Christian, an Austin political consultant.
Who's Feeling Better?
Consumer confidence may be on the mend in Texas, but business executives still feel a bit skittish.
According to a nationwide survey by Dun & Bradstreet Corp., executives in the West South Central region -- including Texas -- are less optimistic about their near-term prospects than they were three months ago, bucking a national trend of greater business confidence.
In particular, this region's respondents are less sure that the current quarter's sales will rise than they were when quizzed three months ago, or that their number of employees will increase.
There's some concern about inventory buildup, and they don't see much chance of raising their prices.
On the positive side, however, a greater number of executives now expect to see profits rise.
