The Senate vote this week to lift the embargo on Vietnam recognizes the tremendous potential for trade with our former enemy and the entire region.
Americans are just beginning to awaken to the fact that two-way trade with the Asian-Pacific Rim already exceeds our commerce with the European Union, or a combination of our North and South American neighbors.
This potential for increased trade and more U.S. jobs springs from the fact that capitalism is on the march in Asia.
If Adam Smith and Karl Marx could visit Beijing and Hanoi today, they would be shocked to see countries like China and Communist Vietnam sprinting toward capitalism.
Officially they call it a "socialist market economy," an oxymoron that may be the practical answer for countries not wanting to admit their wish to abandon the disadvantages of a planned economy for the rewards of individual initiative.
On the same day in early January when our delegation of seven U.S. senators heard China's Premier Li Peng in Beijing extol the theoretical virtues of socialism, the vice chairman of the National People's Congress announced plans to copy economic legislation from capitalist countries.
Our delegation heard a similar message on our visit to Hanoi.
A young official from the Vietnam Ministry of Trade was succinct in stating that the private sector was more effective than state ownership because "people work harder for their own pockets."
Looking to Western political ideology, Vietnam's most powerful political figure, Secretary General Moy of the Communist Party, claimed that his country sought to follow Abraham Lincoln's model of a government of the people, by the people and for the people.
Statistics show China's gross national product growing at about 10% a year.
Li Peng boasted of a trillion-dollar Chinese market in urging our delegation to renew most-favored-nation status for China.
Similarly in Thailand, Indonesia and Vietnam, we heard of multibillion-dollar U.S. opportunities in hydropower, telecommunications, air and rail transport, automobiles and environmental projects.
In all these countries, U.S. businessmen urged our delegation to delink trade interests from human rights and even the MIA issue.
Frank Hawke, representing Citibank's global finance operation in Asia, noted that about half of his company's $2 billion annual profits came from developing countries.
Members of the American Chamber of Commerce in Beijing chided our policy of lecturing China on human rights when 23,000 people were murdered annually in the U.S. and our cities were virtual war zones.
When we objected to China's missile sales, Li Peng chastised us for being the world's number one "big brother" in arms sales.
Indonesian officials expressed concern about the continuation of their trade privileges when our delegation raised the issue of human rights in East Timor and labor conditions generally.
Those protests suggest that our conditions for trade preferences are having an effect.
Access to our markets at reduced tariff rates is vital to Beijing's and Jakarta's trade, so we should continue our leverage on human rights and arms sales without breaking the lever.
It is obviously a judgment call as to how hard to press; but there is much room for improvement and we are having significant success, as evidenced by China's recent concession to allow greater inspection of manufacturing in their prisons.
Regrettably, a tough trade policy and sanctions also seem necessary to enforce U.S. property rights.
China has flooded our markets with illegal textile trans-shipments.
After cutting their import quotas, we have finally extracted commitments from China to stop the illegal trans-shipments of textiles, but that will have to be monitored closely to ensure compliance.
Responding to longstanding U.S. complaints, Thailand is finally enacting tough legislation and establishing a special court for enforcing intellectual property rights.
Similarly, Indonesia needs continuing pressure and monitoring to fulfill existing promises to respect U.S. copyrights.
Notwithstanding the problems, the big picture suggests enormous U.S. opportunities in the Pacific Rim.
China's Deputy Power Bureau Director Yu Fomin was outspoken in his preference for U.S. products over those of France and other competitors.
Within the next decade, Indonesia will provide a market for infrastructure development in excess of $100 billion.
The potential for U.S. business development in Indonesia is illustrated by a multibillion-dollar copper-gold mine being developed by Freeport-McMoRan Inc. in Timika in east Indonesia.
In the past five years, that talented and ambitious U.S. company has developed the world's third largest copper mine, creating thousands of new jobs there and in the U.S.
The problems of balancing competing interests in economic development were kept in perspective when we talked to Thailand's King Phumiphon, who told us that his favorite hydro-dam project was deferred because of community protests.
We understood constituent pressures on U.S. senators, but we asked why that would affect a monarch.
The king responded: "They'd demonstrate."
Mr. Specter, a Republican, is the senior senator from Pennsylvania.
