President Bill Clinton gave his fellow NATO summiteers good advice Monday night when he warned them not to threaten the Serbs unless they were willing to back up the threats with action.
Speaking as a man who knows a few things about credibility, he said that "failure to act on promises of action will have great ramifications in the future in other contexts."
Only events will show whether the other 15 national leaders took the warning to heart, or, for that matter whether the President was counseling action or inaction.
There was a certain ambiguity, suggesting that Mr. Clinton might not have been keen on issuing any threats at all.
The upshot, however, was a warning in yesterday's final communique of air strikes to "prevent the strangulation of Sarajevo, the safe areas and other threatened areas of Bosnia-Herzegovina."
The leaders ordered up plans to end Serbian interference with the rotation of U.N. troops in the besieged enclave of Srebrenica and to secure the opening of the Tuzla airport to renewed mercy flights.
But after sounding tough, the summiteers reminded everyone that any final decision will be in the hands of World Commander in Chief Boutros Boutros-Ghali at the U.N. Russia has been protective of the Serbs on the Security Council, so Bill Clinton will have to talk to Boris Yeltsin about that this week.
Canada's new Liberal premier, Jean Chretien, signed the communique without enthusiasm, in part because bombing might endanger Canadian peacekeeping troops.
The Serbs no doubt will make their own judgments about this latest of many threats.
But they will be more influenced in their actions by events on the ground, including the small signs of improving strength in the Bosnian Muslim forces.
Whatever happens next, we have some serious doubts about NATO's long-term shape.
The Alliance may be heading for greater fragmentation.
As the Journal's Peter Gumbel reported yesterday, the U.S. has yielded to France's ambitions for more independence of action for Europe within the Alliance.
France wants to fulfill the Maastricht treaty's goal of greater political unity by having the Western European Union (WEU) take greater responsibility for Europe's defense and seems to have won its point in yesterday's communique.
France's rather contradictory goal is to win more power for itself while keeping the Americans on hand to do any serious fighting.
Maybe it was historically inevitable that the U.S., 50 years after D-Day and three years after the end of the Cold War, would be turning over to Europe more responsibility for its own defense.
Yesterday's communique called for greater flexibility of command between NATO and the WEU progress.
But some might wonder at the wisdom of divided command.
Whether Mr. Clinton has given much serious thought to the future of the Western alliance is not entirely clear.
He and his foreign policy team wanted a "victory" to display at the summit, hence the heavy pressure to get Ukraine to relinquish its nuclear weapons.
But the President's announcement Monday of such an agreement may have been premature.
The Ukrainian parliament seems unwilling to agree to whatever President Leonid Kravchuk has promised, a reality Mr. Clinton had to acknowledge at his press conference yesterday.
There will be more pressure on Ukraine, from both the U.S. and Russia, later this week.
To be sure, there is not much order in the world where Mr. Clinton and his NATO allies are conducting foreign policies.
In the post Cold War world, there still remains much intellectual confusion over the more ambiguous challenges of a Bosnia.
Until these problems are sorted out, there undoubtedly will be many subtleties in their political moves.
We hope, however, that the NATO leaders do not become comfortable with such subtlety.
The world's most troubled corners are clearly crying out for a clearer vision than they have so far been offered.
