Rep. Dan Rostenkowski's clout overrode allegations of corruption, giving the Chicago Democrat a surprisingly large margin of victory in his race for nomination to a 19th term.
The chairman of House Ways and Means Committee garnered about half the vote in yesterday's Illinois Democratic primary.
His top rival, state Sen. John Cullerton, received about one-third of the vote.
Former Chicago Alderman Dick Simpson, Rep. Rostenkowski's 1992 foe, and two minor candidates split the remaining votes.
Polls before the election consistently showed a close race, with a large number of undecided voters.
"The critics said I'm not perfect, and they're right," said Rep. Rostenkowski, acknowledging that he had made mistakes in the past.
He added that he would return to Washington and "help President Clinton write a health bill that will take care of those who need the help."
Rep. Rostenkowski, 66 years old, still faces potential indictment by a federal grand jury after a nearly two-year probe of his office and campaign finances.
People familiar with the criminal investigation said prosecutors expect to seek an indictment, possibly within a month.
That outcome would be worse for Rep. Rostenkowski, in terms of his immediate Washington status, than an election defeat.
If indicted, he would have to forfeit his chairmanship until absolved.
Even in defeat, he would have remained chairman, though a lame duck one.
The Rostenkowski race was the hottest of the nation's primary season, given his larger-than-life stature in Congress and his importance to passing President Clinton's initiatives on health, welfare and the budget.
Mr. Clinton and a host of political figures trekked to Chicago to stump for the beleaguered lawmaker.
Last night, Rep. Rostenkowski called Mr. Clinton's Feb. 28 visit "a pivotal moment" for his campaign.
"I'm proud to be a soldier in the president's march for change," he added.
The Democratic nomination in Chicago typically is tantamount to victory, but Rep. Rostenkowski still could be vulnerable this fall against the winner of yesterday's GOP primary, especially if there is an indictment.
With about half of the vote counted, Michael Flanagan was leading the Republican race.
From the beginning of the campaign, the Rostenkowski camp acknowledged that their candidate would be most vulnerable to a one-on-one matchup.
In the primary, the ways and means chairman was helped by a splintered field that split the anti-Rostenkowski vote.
Rep. Rostenkowski also benefited from his million-dollar campaign chest, and the get-out-the-vote efforts of hundreds of workers from the city's Democratic machine.
