Here's a class that will sweep you off your feet.
Thrill seekers can now sign up for a crash course jointly offered by Interglobal Space Lines Inc. and the Weaver Aerospace Corp.
The topic: floating through space -- theory and practical application.
The cost: $2,000 for a one-day float and $3,000 for a two-day course.
Drifting around space shouldn't be limited to astronauts and space engineers, says Rand Simberg, president of Interglobal, a company formed last year.
As its first venture to prepare average citizens for space, Interglobal arranged with Weaver to give students the rides of their lives.
Weaver has been providing weightless flights for researchers since 1987.
The companies began offering classes to the general public this week.
So far, there are no takers.
Future participants would fly to Weaver's test-flight center in Boise where they undergo a four-hour lecture on such things as work stations and weightless operations.
After a break for lunch ("stay away from the greasy stuff," Mr. Simberg recommends), the fun begins.
Students board a North American Sabreliner executive jet, which first soars to about 20,000 feet before going into a gentle dive.
Then the pilot shoots up at a 45-degree angle for about 10 seconds.
Next, the pilot throttles the engines, causing the airplane to launch into a suborbital trajectory that provides 20 to 25 seconds of total weightlessness.
This maneuver is repeated about a dozen times.
At first, participants are encouraged not to move around too much, Mr. Simberg says.
But they do learn to perform such activities as moving along a handrail and pouring liquid without gravity.
"We want to give the feeling of what it would be like to walk on the moon or walk on Mars," Mr. Simberg says.
Jeffrey Smith, a seasoned paraglider and rock climber, agreed to participate in a flight after he was hired to design the lighting for a Weaver project.
"I don't do drugs, but for me it was like an endorphin rush," says Mr. Smith, 34 years old.
He calls the experience "incredible," though he got sick about 10 times during the flight.
As for greater hazards, the companies say they are covered by standard aircraft insurance.
But "there is really no rational reason to be concerned," Mr. Simberg says reassuringly.
