Continental Airlines hired Gordon M. Bethune as its new president and chief operating officer, snatching the senior Boeing Co. manager who oversees development of the manufacturer's new 737-700 small jetliner.
The Houston-based carrier gets an industry veteran focused intently on aircraft efficiency at a time when it is itself paring unprofitable operations and beefing up its low-fare, short-haul service, dubbed CALite.
Indeed, Continental will announce today that it's vastly increasing the number of daily CALite flights.
The move also reunites the 52-yearold Mr. Bethune with his former boss from now-defunct Braniff Airlines, Continental Chief Executive Officer Robert R. Ferguson III.
For Boeing, Mr. Bethune's sudden departure is a blessing and a curse.
It puts a Boeing backer at the helm of an important customer (the first of 92 Boeing jets Continental has ordered will be delivered Feb. 8), but it yanks the personable Mr. Bethune from his crucial role at the division that makes 737 and 757 airliners.
He has been overseeing the company's $1 billion investment in the new generation 737, an upgraded model that Boeing needs to develop and build inexpensively to compete with Airbus Industrie's A-320.
The 737-700's launch customer is Dallas-based Southwest Airlines, which CALite has emulated.
At Continental, Mr. Ferguson will relinquish the president's title and become vice chairman and chief executive officer, a title he held prior to April 1993, when Continental emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection.
Actually, Mr. Bethune will succeed Lewis Jordan, Continental's president and chief operating officer until last March, when he was asked to resign.
One reason for Mr. Ferguson's dissatisfaction with Mr. Jordan was a company study that concluded the airline paid about $200 million more a year on maintenance than its far-larger competitors.
Mr. Bethune is attuned to the industry's shift toward low-cost, highly efficient service, and has been known to launch into lengthy, spirited exhortations on the subject with little prompting.
In a recent interview, he professed an admiration for Southwest Chairman Herbert Kelleher, and noted that "you tend to emulate people you admire."
Until joining Boeing in 1988, Mr. Bethune spent most of his career in airline jobs, becoming a senior vice president at Piedmont Airlines.
It was during stints as engineering and maintenance chief of Western Airlines and Braniff that he earned the nickname "Oilcan," and worked for Mr. Ferguson, a former Braniff treasurer.
A certified commercial-jet pilot and licensed air-frame and engine mechanic, Mr. Bethune said he found Mr. Ferguson's offer irresistible.
"There are not that many big airlines," he said, noting that he agreed to take the job recently after declining the offer late last year.
With Mr. Bethune's departure, which caught many Boeing managers by surprise, the aircraft maker named as a successor William E. Selby, 60, general manager of aircraft-parts fabrication and a leader in companywide initiatives to ferret out cost savings.
