If you sold a home last year, getting ready for April 15 doesn't have to be a Nightmare on Tax Street -- if you pay careful attention to the complex rules governing sales of personal residences.
Unlike sales of other property, the sale of your main home doesn't automatically mean a big tax bill on any profits.
You can postpone the tax on the profit as long as you buy a replacement that costs at least as much as the one you sold.
Taxpayers generally can "roll over" their profits from a sale into a new home they bought either two years before or two years after the sale.
Homeowners keep track of their postponed profits on Form 2119, which they must file with the Internal Revenue Service.
But while seemingly straightforward, "this is a particularly confusing area of law for many people," says Julian Block, a tax lawyer in Larchmont, N.Y. Taxpayers who sold a home but haven't replaced it yet, who didn't make a profit on the sale, or who plan to buy a less expensive home have special considerations in order to keep their current or future tax bills to a minimum, tax professionals say.
Although people typically roll over such capital gains untaxed from house to house, chances are someday you will owe taxes on the deferred sum.
It's important to minimize the profit you report to the IRS for each sale.
To do this, you can add the cost of significant home improvements over the years, such as a new roof or remodeling, in figuring the "adjusted basis," which you will subtract from the sale price to determine your capital gain.
Also, you can subtract some selling costs, such as commissions, advertising and legal fees, in figuring the profit you report.
One tip: Many taxpayers who moved in 1993 will have a choice between deducting costs like legal fees or a real-estate agent's commissions as a moving expense or subtracting them from the rolled-over capital gains.
You should generally take the moving deduction, tax advisers say.
"If you deduct them as moving expenses, you can take the tax benefit right away," says Sylvia Pozarnsky, director of Ernst & Young's personal financial counseling group in Chicago.
(The 1993 Tax Act took away taxpayer's ability to claim home-selling costs as a moving deduction after 1993.)
Other taxpayers might have sold a home for less than they paid for it and think they have a deductible loss.
They are probably wrong for two reasons: Such losses are almost never deductible; and if a taxpayer has previously rolled over untaxed profit from a home into the one they sold in 1993, what feels like a loss might actually be a gain.
Say 10 years ago you sold a home for a $50,000 profit, deferring taxes on that amount by buying a new, $150,000 home.
In 1993 you sell the second home for $125,000 for a $25,000 "loss."
If you replace the last home within two years, you will roll over $25,000 of gain, rather than $50,000.
Those who "trade down" by buying a new home that costs less than the price of their old home face a tax on the price difference.
Some taxpayers may elect on Form 2119 to exclude up to $125,000 of home-sale profits.
You must be 55 or older to do so, and you should be aware that once you use it, it's gone.
"Be sure when you use the exclusion that that's going to be the biggest gain you are going to have in your lifetime," says Pat Mullin, a tax partner with Deloitte & Touche in Cleveland.
