Two black former managers of Tele-Communications Inc. have filed a lawsuit seeking class-action status that seeks to block TCI's acquisition by Bell Atlantic Corp., alleging a pattern of racial discrimination.
Calvin Smiley and Leonie Elizabeth Palumbo, who said they were among the highest-ranking blacks at TCI when they left the company last fall, filed the lawsuit in federal court in Washington, D.C.
They allege that TCI has engaged in a widespread "effort to terminate high-level black employees."
The suit also charges that TCI, a major cable company, no longer employs any black top managers in major urban markets and that it limits promotional opportunities for black candidates.
The case was one of three racial-discrimination lawsuits filed against TCI yesterday by lawyer Stephen L. Snyder.
He previously logged another case in which TCI ended up agreeing to a settlement with two black investors in Baltimore valued at an estimated $100 million in stock and cash.
The complaints yesterday follow similar criticisms leveled against TCI by the NAACP and the League of United Latin American Citizens, which have accused TCI of being "the worst discriminator in the telecommunications industry."
It isn't clear whether the class-action lawsuit will be at all successful in derailing or delaying the Bell Atlantic acquisition.
TCI's lawyer, Vincent Cohen of the Washington law firm of Hogan and Hartson, dismissed all of the allegations in the three suits as false.
He said any terminations or other matters raised in the complaints weren't race-related and that the suits "don't trouble us.
They'll be dismissed in 90 days."
The complaints were filed "clearly to get media attention," the TCI lawyer contended.
Mr. Snyder, the plaintiffs' attorney, leveled some unusual charges at TCI.
"They've done some bizarre things," the Baltimore lawyer said.
In addition to the class-action suit, he filed two lawsuits in Baltimore city court.
One alleges that, at TCI's Baltimore system, armed security personnel grilled 27 black employees in a makeshift "holding pen" for hours in investigating converter-box theft.
The suit also alleges that TCI hired private investigators to gather personal information on some employees and placed illegal wiretaps on their office phones.
The second city suit, filed on behalf of fired black manager Euan Fannell, accuses TCI's Baltimore office of planting cocaine in Mr. Fannell's office and car, then tipping off local police on when and where to nab him with the contraband.
Mr. Fannell, one of the highest-ranking blacks at TCI at the time, was fired by the company last October.
