One of my favorite cautionary tales is about the old sailing ship captain who was asked what you do when there's a typhoon blowing and a reef to leeward.
His answer: What you do is not get yourself in that position.
President Clinton would be doing the nation a big favor if he pondered that advice right now.
The North Korean tyrant, Kim Il Sung, is teaching him how you play hide-and-go-seek, no doubt smirking all the while at White House frustrations.
But this is nothing compared to what Mr. Clinton and the U.S. may face a few years down the road if the president persists in his present neglect of foreign policy and national security, which should be a president's most important concerns.
Essentially, the Clinton foreign policy is reactive and disorganized.
Troops are dispatched to Somalia and placed under United Nations command, except no real command exists.
Bosnia is turned over to the U.N. and festers until the Russians step in to take charge.
There's big hoopla about an Arafat-Rabin agreement, but Mideast politics only grow messier.
During the rapid drawdown of U.S. troops in Europe, GI comforts are getting priority over training and readiness.
The U.S. defense budget is being hacked to pieces by a president with big ideas about using the money to nationalize health care.
The U.S. ability to deal with threats to itself and its allies is getting weaker, not stronger.
Its allies are beginning to sense this, and that further lessens U.S. ability to exercise influence over events abroad.
Korea is a case in point.
There is no place where the U.S. has made a stronger commitment to an ally than in South Korea.
In the current flap over North Korea's refusal to allow U.N. inspection of its nuclear facilities, President Clinton reaffirmed that promise by saying an attack on South Korea would be regarded as an attack on the U.S.
But America's Asian allies, South Korea and Japan in particular, are finding it harder to believe these protestations of support.
The reason is simple.
North Korea and China are steadily improving their ability to deliver death with ballistic missiles.
The U.S., on the other hand, is dawdling about effective missile defense, even though in the 1980s it developed highly promising technologies for that purpose.
This is partly because of defense budget cuts and partly because of a psychology of denial that American liberals embraced in the 1980s when they told themselves that space must never be used for war.
But space will be used for war.
There's no avoiding it.
Space is the only place where a truly effective defense against missiles can be deployed.
North Korea is not only developing nuclear warheads -- it claims to have chemical and biological warheads as well -- but more powerful missiles to deliver them.
It also is willing to sell them to other rogue nations, such as Iran, for use in threatening their neighbors.
The No Dong 1 missile has a range of some 600 miles.
The Koreans now are trying to add a second stage to create a missile called Taepo Dong that might be able, with small payloads, to travel nearly 6,000 miles, according to Jane's Defense Weekly.
Mr. Clinton's response to North Korea's threat to turn Seoul into a "sea of fire" has been to promise South Korea a battalion of Patriot anti-missile systems.
But aside from the question of the effectiveness of such a defense against North Korean weapons positioned less than 50 miles from Seoul, there also seems to be no hurry about getting them there.
They will travel by boat and thus will not be operational for at least a month.
Japan also is worried about intimidation from North Korea, not to mention possible subversion in Japan itself from agents Kim may have inserted into the large Korean immigrant population in Japan.
North Korea has fired one of its test No Dongs some 500 miles into the Sea of Japan, no doubt with the idea of sending Japan a message: Stay friendly and do nothing to stop the flow of remittances to the homeland from North Koreans in Japan.
These are among North Korea's few sources of foreign exchange.
Japan insists that it does not want to go nuclear, and few doubt that wish.
But it does want a missile defense.
The U.S. has promised to provide it with its most effective system that is anywhere near being operational.
It is called THAAD (Theater High-Altitude Area Defense).
But the discussions have bogged down because of U.S. insistence on compensation in the form of Japanese commercial technology.
In short, building a strategic cordon around North Korea has run afoul of the Clinton administration's trade war mentality.
The U.S. hopes to deploy THAAD prototypes by 1996.
They presumably will be more effective than Patriots.
But the only truly effective missile defense system will be one that puts sensors and interceptors in space to kill offensive missiles on launch or shortly thereafter.
That would protect allies and would not need to be airlifted to trouble spots (an increasing problem as the administration cuts its airlift budget).
Most important, it would give the U.S. its first missile defense.
North Korea is getting perilously close to the point of building a missile with the range to reach the U.S. West Coast.
"Why don't we just attack them and wipe out their weapons grade nuclear reactor?" some have asked.
The answer is that the U.S. has 36,000 troops in South Korea who would be vulnerable to Scud missile retaliation in the absence of any effective defense.
The U.S. commander in South Korea, Gen. Gary Luck, asked for the Patriots three months ago, but won't have them for another month.
What President Clinton should be thinking about is the reef that may someday be on his leeward in a typhoon and how to avoid getting himself in that position.
He is doing no such thing.
The military's research and development budget is going down even faster than spending for operations and training.
Given the administration's policy of opening up defense-related technology for export, it may well be that some of the technology the U.S. developed in the 1980s -- for missile tracking systems, for example -- will find its first use not to defend the U.S. but to improve some other nation's military arsenal.
For the moment, the president is stewing about a troubling but not very immediate danger.
He is trying to repair bridges to Japan and China to try to mount a U.N. economic embargo against Kim Il Sung, for whatever good that might do.
But it is the future he should worry most about as he drifts toward the shoal that awaits any nation that doesn't keep up with the world's advances in military technology.
