Major railroads boosted fourth-quarter earnings an average of more than 10%, helped by tight cost controls and a pickup in some freight shipments.
Analysts said the improved earnings were achieved despite disappointing shipments of two important rail-hauled commodities.
Coal traffic was hampered by a miners strike in the East and weak export demand, while grain shipments were stymied by weak exports and severe Midwest flooding last summer.
However, the weakness in coal and grain traffic was more than offset by big traffic gains in metals, finished automobiles and intermodal traffic -- freight moved by a combination of road and rail.
According to the Association of American Railroads, intermodal shipments climbed 10% in the fourth quarter, reflecting the improving economy and increased use of the rails by motor carriers trying to cut costs and ease a shortage of long-haul truck drivers.
Although coal traffic declined 2.7% and grain traffic was off 10%, industrial shipments improved with metals increasing 17.6%, motor vehicles 14.3%, chemicals 6.5% and lumber 6.3%.
"If you exclude coal and grain, rail traffic would have been up 6% in October, 8% in November, and 11% in December," said Michael Lloyd, an analyst at NatWest Securities Corp.
"The rail traffic numbers tell us the economy was soaring as the fourth quarter ended."
Mr. Lloyd estimated the group boosted fourth-quarter earnings about 11%.
Thomas Galvin, an analyst at C.J. Lawrence/Deutsche Bank Securities Corp., estimated rail earnings rose as much as 17%, with cost-cutting discipline contributing as much to the gain as the surge in traffic.
"Railroads remain focused, almost obsessed, with streamlining their cost structure and driving service standards and asset utilization levels higher," Mr. Galvin said.
Analysts estimated higher fourth-quarter earnings at Conrail Inc., Norfolk Southern Corp., Union Pacific Corp., Burlington Northern Inc. and Santa Fe Pacific Corp.
But they forecast earnings declined at CSX Corp., whose rail unit was hurt by the coal miners strike that ended late in the fourth quarter.
A CSX spokeswoman didn't precisely estimate fourth-quarter earnings for the parent company, which had net income of $152 million, or $1.47 a share, in the year-earlier period.
But she said fourth-quarter net income exceeded the $1.37 a share mean of analysts' estimates and fell at the "top end" of estimates that range from $1.25 to $1.47 a share.
The spokeswoman said coal traffic declined close to 15% at the CSX's rail unit but that traffic gains in automobiles, metals and chemicals were "very reflective of the strength of the U.S. domestic economy."
She said operating profit at the company's ocean shipping unit rose "substantially" in the fourth quarter, while profit of the inland barge unit will "be relatively close to meeting a very strong performance in fourth quarter 1992."
A Burlington Northern spokesman said the company is "generally comfortable" with the consensus of analyst estimates that Burlington Northern earned $1.20 a share in the fourth quarter.
The company earned $1.04 a share in the year-earlier quarter, excluding a favorable tax adjustment of 19 cents a share.
The spokesman said Burlington Northern benefited from a reduction in personal injury costs and an agreement to extend smaller freight train crews to the northern third of its rail system.
Coal traffic soared 9% in the quarter, he said, reflecting the company's effort to help utilities rebuild stockpiles that were depleted when the Midwest floods disrupted rail service.
However, the move diverted rail capacity.
"We didn't have as many locomotives and crews to haul other freight," the Burlington Northern spokesman said.
Robert Krebs, chairman, president and chief executive of Santa Fe Pacific, said, "we will certainly meet analysts' expectations" for fourth-quarter profit of about 29 cents or 30 cents a share.
The company earned $43.9 million, or 24 cents a share, in the year-earlier quarter, excluding gains from transit line sales that boosted net income to $168.9 million, or 91 cents a share.
Mr. Krebs said Santa Fe has cut costs by centralizing some rail operations.
And fourth-quarter rail traffic increased sharply, with the strongest gains in intermodal, up 12%, and automobiles and auto parts, up 35%.
Andras Petery, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co., estimated Union Pacific earned $1.20 a share in the latest quarter compared with 94 cents in the year-earlier period.
Mr. Petery said the company's rail and trucking units performed well, but that Union Pacific's resources unit was hurt by lower oil prices.
Union Pacific declined to comment.
Among Eastern railroads, Conrail benefited from productivity and traffic gains.
"We have gotten our costs down and can price to attract shorter-haul freight and still make some money," said a Conrail spokesman.
But the spokesman declined to comment on analyst estimates that the company had earnings of about $1.11 a fully diluted share compared with 99 cents a share a year ago.
Burton Strauss Jr., an analyst at Lehman Brothers Inc., estimated Norfolk Southern's fourth-quarter earnings at $1.13 a share.
Scott Flower, an analyst at Kidder Peabody & Co., was slightly higher at $1.16 a share.
Norfolk Southern reported net income of $128 million, or 91 cents a share, for the 1992 fourth quarter.
Norfolk Southern declined to comment on the estimates other than to say that strong industrial freight and intermodal traffic offset a weakness in coal.
"We have more demand than we can handle," said Tom Finkbiner, Norfolk Southern's vice president, intermodal.
To handle the increasing demand for intermodal freight, Norfolk Southern is expanding some terminals and recently announced plans to build an intermodal terminal on 800 acres outside Atlanta.
