New York Life Insurance Co. said it sold the bulk of its Canadian insurance business to Canada Life Assurance Co. in what is seen as an early step in an expected wave of consolidation in Canada's overly crowded life-insurance industry.
Terms weren't disclosed.
New York Life, a U.S. mutual life insurer that has done business in Canada since 1858, is exiting from this market at a time when sales of new life-insurance policies are stagnating and companies' profit margins are being eroded by stiff competition.
The industry is expected to face additional pressures as the country's big banks build up their own insurance-underwriting operations following financial deregulation last year.
"Because of the lack of market growth in Canada there are too many insurance carriers going after business.
Our size is such that we really don't have the appropriate critical mass to compete," said Seymour Sternberg, executive vice president at New York Life's head office.
The company, which does 95% of its business in the U.S., will continue to operate in some faster-growing markets overseas, especially the Far East, he said.
New York Life has assets in Canada of 1.25 billion Canadian dollars (US$954.3 million) and writes about C$185 million of new business annually, mainly in the individual life sector.
The company will retain a small group life insurance policy business that will be run out of its New York office.
Canada Life in Toronto, is one of the country's largest life insurers with C$22 billion in assets.
The company said the acquisition reflects its drive to increase market share and improve its economies, especially in claims processing.
Slim profit margins have caused a few players to abandon Canada's property and casualty insurance market.
Analysts and industry officials predict that a similar shakeout in the life-insurance market will cause as many as half of Canada's 150 life insurers to disappear or be swallowed up.
Weighing heavily on the industry's future are the country's big banks, which are expected to build up low-cost distribution systems through their own insurance subsidiaries within a few years.
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, the country's second largest bank, already has launched its own insurance company in competition with the traditional industry players.
