Call it the Whitewater conundrum.
The so-called Whitewater scandal will embarrass President Clinton, cost him some extra taxes, and raise substantive ethical questions about the first lady's conduct as a private lawyer.
But the betting here is that there won't be any political smoking gun or certainly any findings of criminality involving the first family.
If the current performance continues, however, it's less than a longshot bet that one or two White House aides could end up in the slammer -- not for what happened in Arkansas in the 1980s, but for the way matters are being mishandled in Washington in the 1990s.
A Whitewater paranoia afflicts the Clinton White House team.
They've underreacted at the wrong times -- on supplying information and the need for an outside investigation.
They've overreacted at others -- elevating critics with intemperate attacks.
The presidential counsel, Bernard Nussbaum, supposedly the ethical gatekeeper in the White House, has caused more problems than he's prevented.
White House aides, acting in a careless, ad hoc campaign-type manner, seem oblivious to the risks they face if they're ever deposed on this issue.
The result is a textbook case of the common observation of defense lawyers: What's done after an alleged offense creates more culpability than the act itself.
One answer is that there has been no one in this White House with the independent judgment or standing to walk into the Oval Office on something this sensitive and tell the president how badly it's being botched.
The other, probably more important, answer is Hillary Clinton.
Previously, the first lady would take such bad news to her husband.
But Whitewater may pose even more danger to her than to the president, and the bunker mentality at the White House is a reflection of Hillary Clinton.
Ms. Clinton is a strong woman who drives her ideological foes crazy; they resort to cheap shots like labeling her an ineffective left-wing zealot, or engaging in personal innuendo.
In fact, she's a valuable public servant and perceptive political adviser.
But not on the matters that affect her.
Earlier this year, during the so-called Travelgate flap, White House aide John Podesta reportedly brought some bad news to the first lady and was slapped down.
That story has spread, and it's produced a chilling reign of fear on Whitewater.
In reality, the charge by some Nixon apologists that this is reminiscent of Watergate is preposterous.
Whitewater involves relatively small dealings a decade ago, when Bill Clinton was governor of Arkansas, in contrast to the wholesale criminal mugging of the Constitution that the Nixon White House committed.
A good example of Whitewater hyperbole is the 1985 Clinton fund-raiser hosted by Whitewater partner James McDougal that almost certainly involved some illicit funds.
But it's extremely doubtful that Mr. Clinton would have known about that.
An incumbent governor, especially in a state like Arkansas, has an easy time raising money legally, so there was no reason for him to countenance a shady fund-raiser.
The incentive for the influence-peddling Mr. McDougal was to tell his friend, the governor, what a successful event it was, not to confess that actually it was tainted.
Unlike some other politicians, money never has been a driving force for Bill Clinton.
This was probably best put by the Washington Post's David Broder, who, on "Meet the Press" recently, said bluntly: "If you told me Bill Clinton was very horny or very ambitious, I would have no trouble believing it.
If you told me he was money-hungry and was cutting corners for money, I'd say that doesn't sound like the Bill Clinton I know."
To be sure, when special counsel Robert Fiske is through, Whitewater will take a toll on the Clintons.
There seems little doubt they will owe more taxes, although tax experts say it's unlikely that any fraud case could be brought against them.
And Bill Clinton will be embarrassed by the highlighting of his terrible judgment in associating with the likes of James McDougal; Dan Lasater, an Arkansas investor and convicted cocaine distributor; and David Hale, a Clinton-appointed judge, now under indictment.
But the most lethal blows are likely to be directed against the first lady who, unwisely, was involved in a triangular conflict of interest: As the spouse of the governor and a Whitewater investor, she was representing Mr. McDougal before state regulators.
And she was the family decision-maker on investments.
Ms. Clinton and her friends are determined to resist this.
It won't work.
Earlier, White House sources say, she opposed a special counsel because there was no damage control plan but then clung to that view when it was no longer tenable.
Similarly, a good counsel today would advise her that a Whitewater hit is inevitable, but it's not the end of the world.
Other Clinton operatives need to understand their campaign-style tactics aren't working.
When Paul Begala goes on CNN's "Inside Politics" and attacks Rep. Jim Leach -- perhaps the most nonpartisan GOP member of the House -- as a politically inspired hatchet man on this issue, it backfires.
The same when other Clintonites go after New York Sen. Alfonse D'Amato.
(It's extraordinary that the Clinton tactics have provided even a semblance of credibility to this New York Republican on an ethics issue; given his sleazy past, Al D'Amato lecturing on ethics should be as credible as Louis Farrakhan preaching about tolerance.)
But the White House blunders on Whitewater are endless, the latest being Deputy Treasury Secretary and acting RTC head Roger Altman's meeting with three top White House aides to brief them on a Whitewater-related issue.
Mr. Altman now has recused himself from any Whitewater dealings.
But the briefing was attended by White House counsel Nussbaum -- who not only shouldn't have participated, but should have stopped it before it started.
-- Mr. Nussbaum, a nice man and an able Wall Street lawyer, must be replaced.
He's out of his political depth at the White House.
-- A small Whitewater team must be formed to deal with the intricacies of the scandal, as White House hopes that it would recede after the appointment of Mr. Fiske haven't materialized.
A leading outside political adviser has suggested this; it should be headed by someone with no previous connections to the issue.
-- Someone must tell Ms. Clinton that she's causing a lot of the problems, and a continuation threatens things far more important to her, such as her role in the health care deliberations.
In short, the first lady needs a Hillary Clinton.
