Cuba's cautious flirtation with economic reform has cooled, despite dire warnings from international experts that the island needs fast action.
A recent report by International Monetary Fund director Jacques de Groote says there is little time for the country to make "orderly" reforms to spark a turnaround for its devastated economy.
That report echoes a study made by former Spanish finance minister Carlos Solchaga, who is advising Cuba on its economic transition.
Mr. Solchaga calls on Havana to face the island's economic "chaos" with courage and boldness.
"The view is consistent from the outside that Cuba must make changes and must make them quickly," says Jorge Dominguez, a leading expert on Cuba at the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington think tank.
"But the Cuban government is pulling back from economic reforms, reforms which were timid to begin with."
Hesitation over proposed reforms is evidence that Fidel Castro and others in the country's hierarchy fear that changes they have been pushed to adopt will sooner or later cause them to lose control over Cuban society.
"The people who are Fidel's true believers are the ones who have the most to lose from the reforms," says Enrique Baloyra, a Cuba expert at the University of Miami.
"If he does what the people with the economic solutions want him to do, he has to act against his most loyal followers."
Mr. de Groote and his assistant, Frank Moss, made two private working visits to Havana last year at the invitation of the island's central bank.
In Cuba, Mr. de Groote -- an IMF director who oversees the fund's market-transition program for five countries, including Hungary and the Czech Republic -- organized a week-long series of seminars on the transition from central planning to a market economy.
His report says Cuba has turned into "largely . . . a subsistence economy" since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
"Time is running out for the orderly introduction of a critical mass of market oriented reforms," the report, issued in November, warns.
Cuban authorities feel that the time for "decisive action" is the next three to six months, the report goes on to say.
Top Cuban officials who met with Mr. de Groote, the report says, were very interested in strengthening relations with the IMF.
(Cuba has frequently excoriated the institution.
It isn't an IMF member, nor has it requested admission.)
A report submitted earlier last year to Mr. Castro by Mr. Solchaga, who was asked by Spanish Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez to advise the regime, says there is no incentive whatsoever in Cuba to generate production or efficiency.
Cuba's biggest conundrum, Mr. Solchaga writes, is how to soak up a huge excess in liquidity, which feeds inflation while killing any incentive to increase production.
The report says Cuba must implement a package of reform measures to increase production, turn the worthless peso into a convertible currency, privatize its industries and seek financing from international bodies such as the IMF.
Mr. Solchaga advises shutting down money-losing state enterprises, cutting personnel and slashing subsidies on products so as to make the remaining enterprises profitable.
Mr. Solchaga also calls for the creation of a tax system, which Cuba currently lacks.
Top members of the Cuban regime had said earlier that they expected a package of austerity measures along those lines to be approved by the rubber-stamp National Assembly at its year-end meeting.
But at the National Assembly meeting, Mr. Castro, who dominated the proceedings, vehemently attacked capitalism.
In the wake of Mr. Castro's displeasure, legislators leaned away from reforms and opted instead for opening a period of national discussion of the issues.
A second meeting of the National Assembly scheduled for the end of January, to vote on the measures, never took place.
Even before the National Assembly meeting the regime was sending signals that it was putting a brake on reforms.
The most striking: It banned Cubans from creating private restaurants and offering taxi rides, services that had been included among a list of more than 100 occupations that the regime last summer allowed some Cubans to practice legally for the first time.
The signals continue to be negative.
In late January, Carlos Lage, Cuba's youthful economic czar, railed against black marketeers and said that no more licenses should be given to people seeking self-employment.
Meanwhile, the proposed reform measures are being discussed in what some analysts say are thousands of highly orchestrated, tightly controlled debates in workplaces across Cuba.
The measures have also been attacked in the Cuban press as smelling of "Third World capitalism" and for being un-socialist shock measures.
Some analysts wonder whether Mr. Castro's deep fear and hatred of capitalism will end up strangling the reforms, as it did in 1986 when he closed down popular peasant markets because peasants were becoming rich.
Others feel that the economic situation is so dire that Mr. Castro has no choice but to go forward, hesitantly forward, but forward.
The IMF's Mr. de Groote, for one, predicts that Cuba's feeble first steps on the road to economic transition will "pick up momentum as the market forces set in motion will prove irreversible and much stronger than the current perception of the Cuban authorities seems to indicate."
Mr. Dominguez, of Inter-American Dialogue, is more pessimistic.
"It's clearly a pullback," he says.
"The optimistic reading is that it's a pause to build political support.
The less optimistic reading is that they are stalemated."
