I got a kick out of Jerry Bishop's Jan. 24 Leisure & Arts article about "Men With Hats vs. John F. Kennedy."
You might be interested in how it came about that our 35th president wore a hat.
Connecticut had an extensive and successful hat industry, especially in the towns of Norwalk and Danbury.
Then it became out of style to wear hats and many people were out of jobs in Connecticut.
The future president came to Connecticut to campaign in Norwalk.
I was to introduce him and spend that day riding in open cars with him.
I said to my friend: "Jack, you're coming into Connecticut to campaign and, as usual, you will not have a hat on your head.
This is a good opportunity to make points with the people of Norwalk and Danbury."
He said, "Abe, you are right."
I immediately talked to my friends who manufactured the Cavanaugh hats in Norwalk.
We took his size and there was made for him a complete set of hats of every type and style, from a snap brim to a "stove pipe," and they were turned over to me for presentation.
He took the hats but generally just carried them.
He found it very difficult to break an old habit, and generally rode in his open automobile with a hat in his hand, which he used to wave to the crowds.
Of course, he took Connecticut by a good margin.
After inauguration day, JFK never wore a hat again.
Mr. Bishop is right -- with weather as cold as it has been in the past few weeks, it would still be a good idea for men to wear hats.
Unfortunately, it is a little too late to save the hat industry of Danbury and Norwalk.
(Mr. Ribicoff was governor of Connecticut, a U.S. senator and served as secretary of health, education and welfare in the Kennedy administration.)
JFK regularly carried a hat when he traveled in repayment of a political debt.
The capmakers union in New York was a strong supporter in the 1960 election.
According to my grandfather, Harry Pomerantz, an early union member and a working capmaker well into his 80s, the union prevailed upon Kennedy to be seen at least carrying a hat in order to stave off a decline in demand created by a hatless president.
Daniel E. Karson
I was surprised to read in Mr. Bishop's piece that "not a single seat in any theater in these United States" retains a wire rack for holding a hat.
Perhaps Mr. Bishop would like to visit the Newsreel Theater in Cincinnati's Museum Center, where such racks exist and are thoughtfully explained for the visitor.
Roy A. Johnson
Pullman, Wash.
Mr. Bishop should visit the old Playmakers Theatre here on the University of North Carolina campus, where he would find that the seats still contain those under-the-seat racks that enable a man to avoid holding and/or crushing his headgear on his lap.
David M. Lieberman
Chapel Hill, N.C.
