Here comes another slap in the face for investors who like to "short-sell" stocks, betting that their price will fall.
This week, Morgan Stanley started offering institutional clients a chance to bet on a rise in the prices of 32 stocks that are perennial favorites of the bearish short-sellers.
This basket of stocks includes such speculative bets as U.S. Surgical (now at 17 1/2), Checkers Drive-In Restaurants (8 1/8) and President Riverboat Casinos (16 7/8).
What Morgan Stanley is peddling is a so-called derivative security, which is Wall Steet lingo for a financial instrument whose value zigzags in line with stocks, bonds, currencies or the like.
In this case, Morgan Stanley is selling a specially designed options contract that gives the investor the right to buy the group of stocks at some point in the future at the market price when the contract is written.
If the group of stocks has risen when the contract expires, the investor wins.
It may sound complicated, but the idea behind the newfangled options contract is relatively simple.
In the recent past, shortsellers have been dead wrong in many of their bets against the stock market.
So, the thinking goes, one way to make money is to make a wholesale bet against some of the stocks short-sellers hate the most.
It's a game that has worked in the past.
But will it work now, amid a stock-market setback?
Indeed, some market pros say the Morgan Stanley product may even be a sign that the stock market has peaked.
Often investors lose sight of fundamental investment principles as a market is topping, says Joseph McAlinden, chief investment officer of Dillon Read.
"They begin extrapolating" prior investment performance "into the hereafter," buying more and more speculative investments.
"The bottom line," says Mr. McAlinden, "is that people are running out of investment ideas.
So they're capitalizing instead on squeezing the shorts."
Not surprisingly, short-sellers, whose track records have been dismal in recent years, groaned at the news.
"This is a most cynical attempt to pick stocks with the biggest short interest and squeeze them," said Michael Harkins, manager of Gracy Fund, a New York hedge fund that formerly concentrated on short-selling.
A Morgan Stanley spokeswoman declined to comment except to say that the designer options contracts aren't meant for everyone.
The product is being marketed mainly to institutional investors by a team of Morgan Stanley salesmen, including new derivatives hotshot, Bill Levy, who left Kidder Peabody to join Morgan Stanley in recent weeks.
"He's a creative guy and a good salesman," says Gracy Fund's Mr. Harkins.
Limited though the offer may be, the new options contract could prove a big seller.
Even some short-sellers say they have become converts of designer options contracts.
"We've become accidental converts," says Mr. Harkins, who says his fund began buying "put" options on groups of stocks this summer.
"I can't see why anyone would be short stocks when they can do this instead."
(Put options confer on the holder the right to sell a stock at the agreed-upon price; the other major type of option is a "call," or a right to buy.)
Wall Street increasingly is dreaming up so-called designer options contracts so that big institutions can make a low-cost bet on a group of stocks.
Unlike traditional options contracts, these aren't listed on stock exchanges, nor must their sale be cleared by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Instead, the investor buys the options contract from the Wall Street firm, which agrees to sell or buy the group of stocks from the investor at a specified price at the expiration date.
In the case of the "short squeeze" option, investors are buying the right to buy the group of 32 stocks from Morgan Stanley three months from now at the market price when the contract was written.
If the basket -- an equal dollar amount of each stock -- rises, investors get a bargain.
If the stocks' prices fall, investors lose only what they paid for the options contract.
In an initial notice to clients, Morgan didn't set a price for the contract.
In the memo to clients, Morgan said it selected stocks that were "extremely difficult to borrow, have had the greatest decrease in price on a percentage basis since 1/1/94, and trade more than 50,000 shares per day."
Morgan is calling the contract the "Difficult Borrow/Price Decline Stock Index Trade."
The stocks included in the contract are: Wilshire Technologies, Copley Pharmaceuticals, Quality Products, Education Alternatives, Interactive Network, Pairgain Technologies, Media Vision Technologies, Sage Technologies, Mobile Telecommunications, Checkers Drive-In, Tokos Medical, S3 Inc., U.S. Surgical, President Riverboat Casinos, 50-Off Stores, PictureTel Corp., National Vision Associates, BroadBand Technologies, Epitope Inc., Borland International, Heart Technology Inc., Fastcomm Communications, Marvel Entertainment, Abbey Healthcare, Somatogen Inc., Advanta Corp., CML Group, Iwerks Entertainment, SciMed Life Systems, Phoenix Re, Sofamore/Danek Group and Barnes & Noble.
