THE COMPUTER industry is doing it to us again.
Just as the hardware makers have started selling fairly powerful personal computers at prices that put them in reach of many more families and small businesses, the software publishers have begun to require more memory for new programs than those popular computers typically offer.
Average consumers are being caught in the middle.
Many people buying heavily advertised, high-powered mass-market machines from leading companies -- like Compaq, IBM, Apple and Dell -- are going to wind up mighty frustrated.
When they try to use the latest versions of some popular business software from the likes of Microsoft, Borland and WordPerfect -- or even many elaborate games and multimedia offerings -- they'll find some of it runs slowly and poorly in the four megabytes of memory commonly installed on popular PCs that sell for under $2,000.
And the mismatch is likely to spread to more and more programs.
The hardware companies, caught in a price war, are reluctant to boost the cost of their machines by upping the standard memory capacity.
The software companies, racing to cram scores of often marginal features into their programs, conveniently overlook today's typical configuration.
What's more, people in both sides of the industry live in a sort of dream world.
They too often work on machines with two, three or four times the usual memory.
They rely too much on feedback from customers in big business who equip their own machines as lavishly.
And many falsely assume that average people will find it just as trivial as they do -- in money, time and skill -- to pop open their machines and add more memory.
As a result, small-business and individual owners soon will find themselves either settling for less capable software (like the basic all-in-one programs often bundled with their machines) or shelling out a couple of hundred dollars for memory chips and trying to install them.
It's happened before -- every few years, in fact.
But that's no excuse for selling customers products that work badly together.
HERE'S A BRIEF explanation of what's involved in this memory mess, and a little advice on what to do.
When I refer here to "memory," I'm not talking about the computer's long-term storage capacity, which is the size of the hard-disk drive inside -- though that aspect of the hardware also is under pressure from fatter and fatter software.
Instead, the real crisis for average buyers lies in the machine's short-term capacity, the total size of the programs and data files it can work on at any one moment.
This is what the industry means by "memory," or RAM (for random access memory), as opposed to disk storage.
The size of memory is governed by how many and what type of memory chips a computer holds.
Most mainstream machines being sold in large computer, electronics and office-products stores come with four megabytes of such memory, or enough to hold about four million characters of text at once.
The best way to cope with the memory squeeze is to buy more memory in the first place.
For a couple of years, I've advised readers to get four megabytes with new computers, and more if they can afford it.
I now must reluctantly boost that recommendation.
If you expect to use your computer with the most capable business and entertainment software, you should pick a computer with at least eight megabytes of memory.
This is especially crucial if you're buying a multimedia machine.
An extra four megabytes should add $200 or less to a machine's price.
As before, if you can afford even more, get it.
You can never have too much.
WHAT IF YOU own a four-megabyte machine?
First, you can just stick with the all-in-one packages that ship with many machines, such as Microsoft Works, or ClarisWorks.
These take far less memory than highly touted stand-alone word processors, spreadsheets and art programs, but they are probably good enough for most people.
Second, you can favor those major programs that run well on four-megabyte machines.
If you're running Windows with four megabytes, pass up the latest Windows version of WordPerfect in favor of Microsoft Word, or Lotus's Ami Pro word processor.
Avoid Borland's Quattro Pro for Windows spreadsheet and skip Microsoft's Excel as well, except for light-duty spreadsheet work.
For writing on a Macintosh, you can choose WriteNow from WordStar or Claris's MacWrite Pro.
Third, don't believe the memory requirements listed on boxes of software.
They often are understated, so assume it'll take a megabyte or two more to run the program optimally.
Finally, you can add memory chips, which come embedded on plastic sticks called SIMMS and pop into special little slots in your computer.
At about $50 a megabyte, they are pretty cheap.
But they can be tricky to install, because different computer models -- even from the same maker -- accept extra memory in different combinations and steps.
Some may not permit you to add small increments like one or two megabytes, or even force you to pull out and waste the memory chips you have before adding larger ones.
In my view, this is just another case of the computer industry overpromising and making things harder than necessary for nontechnical users.
It's time for either leaner software or a change in the standard under-$2,000 machine so it offers more memory.
Something's got to give.
