Many would have us believe that the key "women's issues" are abortion, parental leave and child care.
Only rarely are the budget, taxes, trade or deregulation listed as legislative priorities for women.
The irony is that the economy is probably the most fundamental women's issue of all.
Many groups supposedly addressing women's issues also generally support government solutions rather than a private-sector or free-market approach.
The Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues is a good example: Highlights for the 1993 legislative session touted many proposals expanding the role of government but didn't mention broader economic policies like the budget or taxes.
However, if an organization were really determined to advance the well-being of women, the economy would be a top priority.
Because a strong and growing economy is key to women's advancement in society.
Whether a woman is married or single, stays at home caring for children or works outside, the economy is more important to her welfare than a multitude of one-size-fits-all government programs.
Indeed, many government programs work against women by weakening the economy or creating employment barriers that are harmful.
Requiring certain benefits like maternity leave raises the cost of employing women and may cause marginal companies to close their doors and hire no one at all.
The higher costs may make some companies reluctant to hire women.
For women who work outside the home, a strong economy means expanding demand for workers.
As the experienced labor pool is exhausted, businesses must turn to those less experienced.
Women and teenagers often fall into this category.
Competition for scarce human resources requires businesses to offer higher wages and to adopt such nontraditional practices as job-sharing and flextime to make the work environment more attractive.
Competition also makes discrimination, glass ceilings and other inefficient work practices economically undesirable.
The availability of alternative jobs is the best protection a person has against unpleasant or unfair practices in the workplace.
Evidence of the importance of a strong economy for women is found in employment figures for the past decade.
Civilian employment increased by almost 20 million jobs during the 1980s.
More than 60% of those new jobs were filled by women.
The gap between women's and men's earnings also closed significantly, and is now less than 20%.
Furthermore, the advances made by women during a strong economy aren't lost quickly during a downturn.
In the past two recessions, for example, the number of jobs held by women declined, but far less than the number of jobs held by men.
Businesses also have responded to the increased numbers of women, especially those with children, by introducing family-friendly policies.
The publications Working Mother and Money report that substantial progress is being made to reduce the conflict between jobs and the family with flextime, job-sharing and telecommuting.
A 1993 survey of more than 1,000 companies found that 60% offer flexible work schedules, and about one-third allow job-sharing.
It is predicted that more than 80% of large companies will allow flexible work schedules by the year 2000.
All this is happening because businesses are responding to market signals rather than government mandates.
The advantage of these market responses is a greater variety of innovative practices and differing approaches that companies can use to meet their specialized needs.
Government's one-size-fits-all approach can stifle the development of new ideas and potentially reduce the availability of different options for workers.
This government-imposed regimentation is especially harmful to women.
Women fare better when the economy is strong, and not just because of the favorable employment outlook that goes with a growing economy.
The many women who own their own businesses are affected by general economic conditions.
When the economy is growing, the number of small businesses that start up and succeed -- many owned and operated by women -- is much larger.
During the economic expansion of the '80s, women-owned nonfarm businesses grew at a 12.6% annual rate, more than twice the rate for companies owned by men.
About one-third of all businesses, or about six and a half million companies, are owned by women.
That number may reach 40% by the turn of the century.
Women who do not work outside the home also benefit from a strong economy because their husbands have better jobs and more opportunities.
The beneficial effects of economic growth also apply to their teenage children looking for that first summer job.
Economic research indicates that married women spend less time working outside the home when their spouses earn more.
Some research also indicates that married women with children tend to substitute work in the home for work outside as their husbands' wages and incomes increase.
That is, some women are choosing to stay at home to produce high-quality, and more expensive, home and child care when their families can afford it.
The higher wages of the spouse during good economic times provides this opportunity.
By any objective measure, the well-being of women is more dependent on economic growth and a strong economy than on taxpayer-funded programs for child care or parental leave.
The best child-care program is a good family income that allows the family to choose the best nanny or child care, including the option for one of the parents to stay home.
Those who would truly advocate the concerns of women should begin by recognizing a simple truth: A growing economy raises the incomes and increases the opportunities of women in both the home and the workplace.
Translating this truth into policy means supporting programs that promote job creation and opposing programs that stifle growth.
Women's advocates should support free and competitive international markets, lower capital-gains taxes, lower income taxes and fewer burdensome government regulations.
And they should oppose government-imposed solutions like quotas, comparable worth or socialized medicine, because these measures promote economic inefficiency, increase employer costs and decrease the demand for labor.
Despite what "leading spokespersons" say about women's issues, there are some indications that many women recognize what is truly important.
Republican Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison's 1993 campaign stressed limited government, lower taxes, more individual freedom, free trade and a strong economy, prompting one feminist to label her a "female impersonator."
There are also new women's groups that make the economy a priority.
And many women seem to agree.
In 1992, a broad spectrum of women were asked what they worry most about.
Topping the list: jobs and the economy.
Not abortion, not parental leave.
These women were saying the economy is the women's issue.
Ms. Gramm, an economist, is a national adviser to the Independent Women's Forum.
