Canadian press baron Conrad Black has succeeded at last in acquiring a flagship newspaper in the U.S.
American Publishing Co., a unit of Hollinger Inc., a newspaper-publishing concern controlled by Mr. Black, agreed to acquire the Chicago Sun-Times and about 60 weekly and biweekly newspapers published in the Chicago area in a $180 million purchase of Sun-Times Co.
The purchase, which is set to close by the end of March, will be American Publishing's first high-profile acquisition.
The company already owns a string of nearly 140 small but lucrative dailies and weeklies in U.S. communities ranging from Tonawanda, N.Y., to Beatrice, Neb.
"This is a great newspaper franchise in the No. 3 newspaper market in the United States," said Larry Perrotto, president of American Publishing.
Analysts expect the acquisition to boost the profile of American Publishing, ahead of a long-awaited initial public offering of stock in the unit that is expected within the next few months.
"They've traditionally owned a hodgepodge of tiny newspapers in tiny towns," said Carla Larson, an analyst with Bunting Warburg Inc. in Toronto.
"What they've been wanting is a big name.
I think this will enhance the appeal of American Publishing stock to institutional investors when it comes to market."
American Publishing is acquiring the Chicago newspapers from Adler & Shaykin, a private investment partnership, and members of the Sun-Times management team.
Mr. Black has been looking for a large newspaper to acquire in the U.S. for several years.
In 1992, he came close to buying the bankrupt New York Daily News after the death of newspaper magnate Robert Maxwell but withdrew from the bidding after failing to reach an agreement with the tabloid's unions on staff cuts.
The Sun-Times acquisition is a departure from Hollinger's usual practice of investing in financially troubled newspapers, such as Britain's Daily Telegraph, and turning them around.
Sam McKeel, publisher of the Chicago tabloid and president and chief executive of Sun-Times Co., said the paper already is profitable.
American Publishing could find ways to enhance profitability, however.
Messrs. McKeel and Perrotto said there could be advantages to joint purchases of everything from newsprint to newspaper feature material.
"The Chicago market seems to be favoring the Sun-Times right now," said Andrew McCreath, an analyst with Gordon Capital Corp., pointing out that the tabloid has increased circulation in recent years while that of its rival, the Chicago Tribune, has fallen slightly.
The circulation of the Sun-Times stands at 535,793, while the total for the community papers published by Pioneer Press and Star Publications, units of Sun-Times Co., is 240,000.
The acquisition of Sun-Times will nearly double American Publishing's annual revenue, the company said, and bring total paid circulation to more than 1,600,000.
In 1993, the unit had total revenue of $185 million.
A spunky challenger to Tribune Co.'s Chicago Tribune, the city's major daily, the Sun-Times in recent years has appealed more to urban blue-collar readers and in the process given up much of the upscale suburban readership sought by many advertisers.
As a result, its future has at times been considered uncertain and its ownership has changed hands.
In 1984 the Field family, which made its money in department stores, sold the paper to Rupert Murdoch's News Corp., which little more than two years later sold it to the Adler & Shaykin/management group for $145 million.
The Sun-Times's circulation figures undoubtedly have been helped by its decision to keep its newsstand price at 35 cents when the Tribune went to 50 cents last year.
Despite a staff that is much thinner than that of the deep-pocketed Tribune, the Sun-Times is frequently considered the city's livelier read.
Hollinger is based in Vancouver, British Columbia.
In addition to its American Publishing and Daily Telegraph units, Hollinger has stakes in large Australian and Canadian publishing concerns and owns Israel's Jerusalem Post.
In Toronto Stock Exchange trading, Hollinger closed at 14.625 Canadian dollars (US$10.83), down 25 Canadian cents.
