Kendall Square Research Corp. agreed to settle shareholder litigation that threatened its survival, clearing the way for a $25 million capital infusion from its biggest holder.
The settlement terms and new investment from industrialist William Koch amount to a new lease on life for Kendall, a supercomputer maker which has been rocked by an accounting scandal that resulted in huge charges and the ouster of top management.
With only $4 million in cash reserves, huge potential liabilities in the litigation, and product development costs, Kendall was badly in need of new capital.
But Mr. Koch, one of the company's original bankrollers, had said he wouldn't add to his investment without a settlement.
His new investment will bring his stake to a fully diluted 47% from 25%.
The Waltham, Mass.-based company announced last fall that it had counted as sales numerous computers that customers didn't have any prospects of paying for.
It fired its founder and chief executive and said it would have to restate downward past results and report large losses instead of small profits for 1993.
Mr. Koch, also a yachtsmen who funded the last America's Cup winner, has taken over as chairman and chief executive and revamped management while trying to settle the suits.
In over-the-counter trading, Kendall Square stock gained 6.25 cents to close at $5.9375.
Kendall Square said plaintiffs in the suit will receive $5.35 million in cash, 3.5 million shares of Kendall common stock and warrants to buy an additional 1.5 million shares of common at $4.50 a share.
Of the cash, the company will pay $3.6 million.
Kendall said the rest will be paid by individuals including Henry Burkhardt, the fired founder, and the three firms that led the underwriting of a Kendall Square secondary offering in 1993, Alex. Brown & Sons, Bear Stearns & Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc.
Shareholder litigation against Kendall Square's auditor Price, Waterhouse & Co., continues.
Plaintiffs never publicly specified damage claims, but Mr. Koch said they were around $150 million.
Glen DeValerio, one of the plaintiffs' attorneys, valued the total settlement at "in excess of $20 million."
Mr. Koch will invest $25 million in a new convertible preferred stock, part of which would be used to repay a bridge loan of up to $15 million that he will make to Kendall Square until the settlement is approved by the courts.
The bridge note will include detachable warrants to buy up to four million shares of common at prices ranging from $4.50 to $7.50.
Besides Mr. Koch, three venture capital firms will buy an additional $3 million of the new convertible preferred and may buy some of the bridge notes and warrants as well.
Mr. Koch said that on a fully diluted basis, assuming conversion of warrants and preferred stock, his stake will expand to 16.1 of 34.2 million fully diluted shares outstanding after the new investment.
He currently holds 4.1 million of 16.1 million shares outstanding.
Although the settlement and investment reduce the threats to Kendall, "now they have the normal challenge of selling in an incredibly competitive environment," said Jeffry Canin, an analyst with Salomon Brothers.
A number of small supercomputer companies have been struggling to reach profitability, and in recent months big firms like International Business Machines Corp. and Hewlett-Packard Co. have entered the market.
Mr. Koch said the company will report results for 1993 and restated results for previous quarters on March 24.
He said "the sales we report will be significantly worse than the estimates," made in December that it had sold $10.4 million of computers in the first nine months of 1993.
That figure was down from the original claim that it had sold $24.7 million in the nine months.
