Short interest continued its steady ascent on the New York Stock Exchange, rising 2.8% to a record level of 1.28 billion shares in mid-January.
Big Board short interest totaled 1,275,614,471 shares, up from 1,240,720,928 a month earlier.
Short interest on the American Stock Exchange increased 849,284 shares, to 102,450,504 from an adjusted 101,601,220 reported in mid-December.
RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.'s short interest position soared 5.3 million shares, to 27.5 million shares, possibly reflecting high arbitrage levels in the company's stock, according to people familiar with the situation.
The food and tobacco company bumped Walt Disney Co. from the top of the list to second place, although the entertainment and movie concern's short position rose 1.3 million shares, to 24.1 million shares.
The short interest position of Columbia Healthcare Corp. showed a huge jump, increasing 8.3 million shares, to 22.3 million.
Guy Wyser-Pratt, president of New York-based Guy Wyser-Pratt & Co., which specializes in arbitrage, said Columbia's short position probably relates to the company's pending plan to acquire HCA-Hospital Corp. of America for $5.7 billion in stock.
Investors are probably shorting Columbia's shares in anticipation of covering their short positions by converting their HCA stock when the acquisition closes, he said.
Mr. Wyser-Pratt added that the record levels of short interest on the Big Board in recent months are closely tied to a wave of corporate takeovers, similar to the Columbia-HCA plan.
EMC Corp., a maker of computer products, registered the biggest increase in short interest, with the number of shares shorted more than doubling to 15.1 million from 6.8 million.
Mr. Wyser-Pratt said this may relate to the deterioration of prices for some computer products.
Traders who sell securities "short" borrow stock and sell it, betting that the stock's price will decline and that they can buy the shares back later at a lower price for return to the lender.
Short interest is the number of shares that haven't yet been purchased for return to lenders.
Rising short interest in the past has been considered bullish by some analysts because short-interest traders would be required to buy back large quantities of shares they have borrowed.
However, short program trading of large volumes of securities by institutional investors that involves hedging against other investment risks, rather than pure bets against individual stocks, may have reduced the effectiveness of this measure, others say.
The level of negative sentiment measured by the Big Board short interest ratio rose to 4.60 from 4.57.
The ratio is the number of trading days at the exchange's average daily trading volume that would be required to convert the total short interest position.
Average daily Big Board volume was 277.2 million shares.
Big Board and Amex short interest positions were calculated for the month including the 21 trading days through Jan. 7, with Jan. 14 as the settlement date.end.
The following tables show the Big Board and Amex issues in which a short interest position of at least 250,000 shares existed at mid-January or in which the short position had changed by at least 50,000 shares since mid-December.
