DON'T PANIC if you can't file your return on time or pay your entire tax bill.
To get an automatic four-month extension, just file Form 4868, which is only one page, by April 15.
That is what 5.5 million people did last year.
This won't give you any extra time to pay.
You still are supposed to estimate your tax bill and pay any projected balance due when filing for the extension.
The IRS charges interest on taxes not paid by April 15.
But even if you can't pay in full, you still get the extension.
Procrastinators also may be hit by a late-payment penalty if the amount they pay by April 15 is less than 90% of their actual 1993 tax.
Those who have done their returns but can't pay the full amount might consider proposing an installment plan.
Attach Form 9465 to the front of your tax return, telling the agency how much and when you propose to pay each month.
The IRS should accept or reject that offer within 30 days.
APRIL FOOL'S DAY is an important deadline for many public companies.
The new tax law signed by President Clinton last October generally bars publicly held companies from deducting pay above $1 million to the chief executive officer and certain other top executives.
This is effective for taxable years beginning on or after Jan. 1 of this year.
The change doesn't include "performance-based" pay -- as long as the compensation committee of a company's board of directors sets performance goals before Friday.
But many companies won't meet that deadline because they still are studying what the proper performance measures should be, says Samuel E. Berger of Price Waterhouse in New York.
Instead, some companies are considering deferring pay over $1 million to top executives until those people retire or leave, he says.
Setting the goals can be remarkably tricky.
For example, at the time the goals are set, the outcome must be "substantially uncertain," a rule that is "as clear as mud," Mr. Berger says.
Companies hope for more clarity when the IRS issues final regulations.
SUPPORT GROWS for a plan to let people use credit cards to pay the IRS.
Treasury officials are studying proposed legislation that would let taxpayers use plastic to pay the IRS.
The easier it is to pay, the more people will file, tax experts reason.
The idea is endorsed by Vice President Al Gore's National Performance Review report.
At least 11 states allow card use for state taxes, says a report by the General Accounting Office, a congressional agency.
But many questions remain, says Andre Fogarasi of Arthur Andersen in Washington.
For example, he asks, would those who pay by credit card have to pay a fee?
In some states, taxpayers now must pay a "transaction fee" to an intermediary company in addition to the taxes they owe that state, the GAO says.
Also, credit-card companies want Congress to protect them against people who charge taxes and later go bankrupt.
States give mixed reviews to creditcard tax payments as a tax-collection tool, the GAO report says.
RAISING REVENUE without raising taxes: IRS Commissioner Richardson says about 83% of taxes due are voluntarily reported and paid on time.
She vows improvement, saying that for each one percentage point increase in compliance, the U.S. can raise $7 billion to $10 billion a year.
CONFUSED TAXPAYERS bombard the IRS with telephone calls seeking assistance.
The IRS says calls from January through mid-March rose 6.5% from a year ago.
Once again, callers complain of great difficulty getting through.
MORE LAWMAKERS introduce bills to overturn a 1993 Supreme Court ruling making it tougher for many people to deduct the costs of a home office.
The decision "unfairly penalizes many small businesses," says Republican Sen. Hatch of Utah.
But tax experts say Congress probably won't act on the issue this year.
A MODEST PROPOSAL: James Boren, president of the International Association of Professional Bureaucrats (Motto: "When In Doubt, Mumble"), suggests a national "tax lottery," with winners receiving awards based on their tax payments that year.
Grand prize: "No Taxes For Life."
AN ARTFUL IDEA: The IRS may give art donors advance valuations of gifts.
Prodded by Congress, Treasury officials are studying a proposal that some tax experts say could reduce the number of battles between art donors and the IRS over the value of charitable donations.
Under the proposal, the IRS would provide donors with IRS valuations of major artworks before a gift is made.
Under the current system, the IRS will not give valuations ahead of time.
IRS Commissioner Richardson says the idea "would be very helpful" and "makes a lot more sense" than the system used now.
She also says the IRS can make the change without new legislation.
Treasury officials say they expect to issue a report later this year.
The sooner the better, art experts say.
Advance valuations "would be an excellent idea," says Andre Emmerich, a New York art dealer and a former member of the IRS's art-advisory panel.
BRIEFS: As of March 18, the IRS had received 52.2 million individual tax returns, or 350,000 fewer than a year ago.
It expects 117 million this year. . . .
Pizza tax slice: On April 15, Domino's Pizza customers won't have to pay any sales tax on their meal if they show a copy of their 1994 tax return.
