As expected, four of the world's largest record companies announced plans to launch a new music-video cable channel that could be formidable competition for Viacom Inc.'s MTV Networks.
The four companies plan to launch their 24-hour music channel in the fourth quarter of 1994 in the U.S. and Puerto Rico, the partners said.
The four music companies involved are Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Music Group; Sony Corp.'s Sony Music; EMI Music, a unit of Thorn EMI PLC; and PolyGram Holding Inc., 80%-owned by Philips Electronics NV.
A fifth partner in the proposed channel is Ticketmaster Corp.
Few details about the new cable venture were given in a brief press release.
The music companies said they plan to recruit additional partners, including cable television operators.
There had been speculation in the music industry that the music giants planned an exclusive service that would withhold their videos from competing services, such as MTV.
But yesterday's statement specifies that the record companies "will continue to license their music videos to other entities," and said that they will play videos from music companies that aren't partners.
None of the record companies involved would provide details about how the channel will look and sound and who will run the programming.
One executive close to the venture said the partnership deal was signed Friday and that nobody has been hired yet to begin creating the programming.
Although the record companies clearly have the deep pockets to launch a new music channel, there are many obstacles ahead.
MTV, while the biggest competitor, isn't the only one: Most cable services carry half a dozen music channels, but few are believed profitable.
Les Garland, president of Miami-based Video Jukebox Network says his company's video channel reaches 18.5 million homes after four years, but is still unprofitable.
At the same time, competition is escalating and other new music channels are in the works, including several from MTV.
Another major record company, Bertelsmann Music Group, has said it will launch a music channel this year with cable giant Tele-Communications Inc.
Even Ticketmaster, one of the partners with the record companies, is said to be close to announcing a music channel that will sell tickets and concert merchandise.
There is also a potential major credibility problem for the record companies.
How will the biggest purchasers of music, young people in their teens and twenties, react to a new channel that is owned by the major record companies?
Although insiders at the new venture say the partnership enacted strict rules that the programming be independent of pressure from owners, the perception of a captive service may be hard to shake.
