When Federal Reserve policy makers unanimously decided to raise short-term interest rates in early February, they were split between those who wanted a "slight" increase and those who wanted a "somewhat greater" increase, the Fed disclosed.
Each camp argued that the bond market, where long-term interest rates are determined, would respond more favorably to its preferred option, according to a summary of the Feb. 4 meeting, released Friday.
In the end, the Fed opted for the "slight" increase, voting to raise a key short-term interest rate by only 1/4 percentage point, the first upward move in rates in five years.
The bond market pushed up long-term rates a bit following the Fed action, but the major increase in long-term rates didn't come until more than a week later.
The Fed didn't disclose which members of its policy committee were in which camp, but Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan is said to have been among those who argued for a 1/4-point increase.
His allies said that "even a slight move . . . was likely to have a particularly strong impact on financial markets because it was the first policy change after a long hiatus" and that the impact was likely to be magnified by the committee's decision to alter long-standing policy and publicly announce the rate increase.
"A relatively small move would readily accomplish the purposes of signaling the committee's anti-inflation resolve and, together with expected further action, should help to temper or avert an increase in inflation expectations and speculative developments in financial markets," this side argued.
The other side made two arguments.
These officials said that "slow gradual tightening moves risked allowing inflation pressures to build."
They also argued that a "more decisive move . . . would, in fact, reduce uncertainty" in financial markets because it would suggest the Fed was likely to keep its hands off the interest-rate lever for a while.
The policy committee met again Tuesday and voted to raise short-term rates by another 1/4 percentage point, bringing the key federal funds rate, at which banks lend to each other, to 3.5%.
The Fed hasn't said whether all the members of the committee favored that move.
The committee met again by telephone Friday afternoon to approve a TreasuryFed plan to lend Mexico up to $6 billion to support the peso, a Fed spokesman said.
