Xerox Corp. selected Electronic Data Systems to manage its computer systems and data centers in a much-sought-after contract that may total as much as $3 billion over 10 years.
The selection dealt a blow to International Business Machines Corp., which has been pushing hard in the services business and had been viewed in some quarters as a front-runner along with bidding partner American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
IBM apparently lost out on pricing and a perceived weakness in its ability to run a cohesive world-wide operation, according to those who had been following the deal.
Xerox and EDS, a Dallas-based unit of General Motors Corp., hope to sign a final contract by the summer.
Analysts noted that the deal ranks as one of the largest ever for such "outsourcing" contracts and involves a client company long respected for its own internal technology operations.
Patricia M. Wallington, Xerox's chief information officer and the top negotiator in the outsourcing talks, is well-known in information-management circles as one the top executives in her field.
The fact that Xerox, based in Stamford, Conn., would move to essentially spin off its computer operations may clear the way for other blue-chip companies wary of taking such a step.
Other prominent outsourcing deals are in the works at DuPont Co. and Delta Air Lines.
In the Xerox pact, EDS may have simply been able to underbid IBM and partner AT&T while still being able to turn a profit.
EDS's consulting business has been growing at a strong rate, while IBM is in the midst of laying off 35,000 workers this year and AT&T is imposing cutbacks of its own.
As part of the deal, EDS is expected to pay Xerox about $100 million for the computer operations it will take over, and it has agreed to take on about 2,000 of the 2,700 Xerox employees who work in that area.
"This was such a large, attractive deal.
The pricing was very aggressive," said Julie Schwartz, an analyst at market researcher Dataquest, adding that the winner had another advantage.
"EDS is truly global.
That's why they were chosen."
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, GM's Class E stock, which represents a share in EDS's earnings, closed at $34.125 a share, up 62.5 cents.
Xerox closed at $99.125 a share, down 87.5 cents, while IBM closed at $58.625 a share, up $1.50.
Xerox expects significant cost savings by hiring a specialty company to perform day-to-day computer operations.
But some important details still must be worked out, including the total price and the exact length of the contract, which could run eight to 10 years, Xerox executives said.
Xerox declined to comment on the amount of the cost savings, but said the work-force reduction from employees who move to EDS will be in addition to the 10,000 already targeted for layoffs in a restructuring plan announced last year.
The EDS agreement is expected to cover four functions: data center operations, voice and data telecommunications, systems support for desktop computers, and some business-support applications.
Xerox will continue to handle strategic technology, such as designing the programs its salesmen or customer service centers use in the field.
The Xerox deal is clearly a coup for EDS.
The company, which was criticized by some analysts last year after running into a shortage of new contracts, has been on a roll in 1994.
Stephen T. McClellan, an analyst at Merrill Lynch & Co. in San Francisco, estimates that the company has booked $2.5 billion in new business this year, independent of the Xerox work.
In 1993, EDS generated about $7 billion in new business.
At IBM, by contrast, the rapidly growing services unit, Integrated Systems Solutions Corp., had revenue of $3.5 billion last year.
But the question remains whether Integrated Systems can compete against the likes of EDS, a leaner and more efficient organization that can offer lower prices.
The Xerox contract may show that IBM's massive restructuring problems have left it unable to afford low profit margins on such contracts, analysts said.
They say Big Blue's hopes for winning the Xerox business fell apart after IBM asked for further price concessions.
According to these reports, top IBM executives, including Chairman Louis V. Gerstner Jr., felt that the company had underbid on previous computer services deals and was particularly sensitive about a repeat performance.
Paul Allaire, chairman of Xerox, called Mr. Gerstner Sunday night to deliver the bad news.
