Companies challenging California's aggressive approach to taxing multinational firms got a mostly skeptical hearing at the Supreme Court.
The case, which was argued before the justices yesterday, could have major financial implications for corporations based in the U.S. and abroad.
California officials have warned that an unfavorable ruling could force the state to refund as much as $4 billion to corporations.
While most of the justices who participated in questioning the lawyers seemed dubious of the constitutional attack on California's tax method, such indications aren't definitive and sometimes even are misleading.
The justices now will discuss the case privately, and one or more opinions will be drafted -- a process that sometimes leads members of the court to change their views.
A decision is expected by late June.
Yesterday's arguments appeared from the outset to illustrate the high court's preference that unhappy multinational taxpayers take their complaints to Congress rather than to the courts.
And individual justices noted repeatedly that Congress has declined invitations over the years to ban California's approach.
"Congress can do a much better job of adjusting the balance" on questions affecting corporate taxation and international competition, Justice David Souter said at one point.
California taxes a portion of the worldwide income of multinational companies -- including that of parent companies and other affiliates -- based on a formula reflecting the amount of business the companies do in California.
By contrast, the federal government and most other states treat U.S. subsidiaries of multinationals as separate corporations, and tax only the income of the units.
Under pressure from the Clinton administration, California amended its tax law last September to allow multinationals to sidestep the controversial rules.
The change allows units of foreign multinationals to choose to be treated as separate companies.
But Barclays Bank PLC, the British multinational that had filed suit against California, persisted in asking the justices to intervene.
Barclays said the high court should strike down the underlying law so that multinationals can seek refunds of taxes paid before the recent amendment.
Barclays also argued that without a high court ruling, the amendment could be rescinded and other states could adopt the California approach.
At least six other states -- Idaho, Montana, North Dakota, Alaska, Tennessee and Utah -- use an approach that is similar, at least in part, to California's, according to Barclays.
The Supreme Court consolidated the Barclays case with a challenge to the California law filed by Colgate-Palmolive Co., a New York-based multinational that does business in California.
This action had prompted speculation that the justices were rethinking a 1983 ruling, in which the high court upheld application of California's so-called world-wide unitary method to U.S.-based multinationals.
But yesterday, most members of the high court seemed leery of arguments made by lawyers for both Barclays and Colgate-Palmolive.
Justice John Paul Stevens, for example, said he didn't understand Barclays's somewhat technical contention that California's approach causes some multinationals to get taxed twice on the same income.
In response, the bank's lawyer, Joanne Garvey, admitted, "I'm not sure I do either, Justice Stevens; it's a complex point."
She still insisted that the bank had been double-taxed.
In answer to contentions that California has interfered with U.S. relations with its trading partners, Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Souter and Ruth Bader Ginsburg stressed that the U.S. hasn't signed a treaty or otherwise committed itself formally to ban states from using the world-wide unitary method.
Multinationals noted that the executive branch under Ronald Reagan and George Bush backed them in opposing California's taxing approach.
But that argument was undercut by the Clinton administration, which supported California's position -- albeit with a tentative, narrowly worded defense.
(Barclays Bank PLC vs. Franchise Tax Board, Calif.; Colgate-Palmolive Co. vs. Franchise Tax Board)
