The latest round of bidding for U.S. Postal Service postage stamp printing contracts has shaken up the security printing industry, particularly North America's largest private security printing company, U.S. Banknote Corp.
The Postal Service bidding battle left U.S. Banknote, which has more than $200 million in annual revenue, in an unfamiliar position: left out.
After working with the Postal Service for the past several years, U.S. Banknote received no orders in the recent round of contracts, valued at as much as $330 million over five years.
Instead the Postal Service gave postage-stamp printing contracts to Banknote Corp. of America, New York, for $116.7 million; Stamp Ventures, Centreville, Va., $74.6 million; Ashton Potter, Amherst, N.Y., $125.7 million; and Avery Dennison Corp., Clinton, S.C., $14 million.
Ashton Potter is a unit of MDC Corp., Toronto and Banknote Corp. of America is a unit of Francois-Charles Oberthur Group, Paris.
All of the awards represent three-year contracts with two one-year options.
With more than 30% of the Postal Service's stamps now printed in the private sector, postage stamp contracts are considered an important source of revenue for domestic security printing firms.
And technological advances, such as self-adhesive stamps, coupled with the growing complexity of printing stamps in specific formats, are likely to force the Postal Service to rely even more heavily on the private sector in the future.
The bulk of U.S. stamps are still printed by the Bureau of Printing and Engraving.
U.S. Banknote, which had been doing about $24 million a year of work for the Postal Service before the recent round of awards, said the lost revenue would trim per-share earnings by about 15 cents in 1994.
The company, which bid for the Postal Service contract through its American Banknote unit, said it would focus on its growing international business.
Since the awards, U.S. Banknote stock has sunk.
The shares, which traded as high as $6.375 just before the Postal Service announcement, were quoted at $4.25 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday.
Representatives of the Postal Service defended the contract procurement process.
The agency took bids on eight product lines "and we had competition for all of those items," said David Page, contract officer for the Postal Service.
"And they U.S. Banknote just weren't a best value offerer in any of those items.
Their price was too high or they performed too poorly in technical evaluations.
It's really just that simple."
U.S. Banknote, saying it was "deeply disappointed" by the Postal Service's award, plans to file a formal appeal.
The company also expressed some skepticism about its smaller competitors.
"Small may be beautiful, but this is a real task ahead of them," said a U.S. Banknote spokesman.
"They have done very minimal amounts of security printing work compared to us, and now they are being asked to do things they haven't done before."
The Postal Service dismissed U.S. Banknote's complaints, saying that it fully analyzed all bidders and is confident that none of its contractors will have trouble fulfilling orders.
"It's not easy for me to see a company lose this kind of business," said Mr. Page.
"It would have been nice if they could have scored better technically or offered a lower price."
The omission of U.S. Banknote from the Postal Service's private-sector suppliers struck even some of the winners as odd.
"I was somewhat surprised myself of the results" of the bidding, said Martin Ferenczi, president of Banknote Corp. of America.
Mr. Ferenczi said his company has a intensive capital-expenditure program under way to meet the added demand.
The company, however, said it would not need to add to its 93,000-square-foot facility in Rockland County, N.Y., to meet the requirements of the new stamp contract.
"It's currently underutilized," he said.
To receive approval for its 1990 merger with International Banknote Co., U.S. Banknote sold one of its printing facilities to Banknote Corp. of America and guaranteed the company three years of business.
Banknote Corp. of America was subsequently bought by the French company.
