The phenomenon of fame before accomplishment is not rare in this impatient era, but by and large it has skirted sports.
The crowded calendar provides more than enough winners to satisfy the most voracious celebrity worshipers.
And then we have Dan Jansen, the speed skater.
He had failed and failed again in the Olympics-the one competition Americans notice in his obscure pursuit-yet that only served to enhance his stature.
Handsome, hardworking and bland, he is, apparently, the sort of man we yearn to admire, with or without much excuse.
Even in defeat, his picture was picked to grace boxes of Kellogg's Corn Flakes.
What could he expect in victory, Wheaties?
We might never find out.
The 28-year-old Milwaukeean came yesterday afternoon to the great-ceilinged Hamar Olympic Hall, the most impressive indoor venue of these Winter Games, as the strong favorite in his 500-meter specialty, as he was in the previous two Olympics.
And as he had in three other of these affairs, he finished off the medal stand, a distant eighth.
His downfall was a single step on the race's final turn.
His left skate slipped, knocking him out of kilter, and he had to extend a hand to right himself.
He did, and finished in a time of 36.68 seconds, only 0.35-second behind that of winner Aleksandr Golubev, an unheralded Russian.
But in a sport where a few hundredths of a second often separate winners from alsorans, the gap was gaping.
"I don't know why it happened," Mr. Jansen said later.
"I was fine to that point.
I felt good, had a good start and my first turn was solid.
It wasn't normal to slip at that part.
I tried to get it back, but I'd lost momentum.
Without the slip I think I would have won the race by quite a bit."
Anyone searching for historical comparisons for Mr. Jansen's plight could do worse than summon up Sam Snead.
No one struck more golf balls better than the man from West Virginia, but his sport's biggest prize, the U.S. Open, always eluded him, a few times in bizarre fashion, and he'll be remembered as much for his defeats there as for his many triumphs.
Mr. Jansen, too, has bagged many a prize, and they are important in places like Norway, where speed skating, and skaters, are revered.
That was evident from the ovation he received when he stepped to the starting line yesterday before the full-house crowd of 11,000 that has made this one of the Games' hottest tickets.
His credits include more than 50 medals on the World Cup circuit and 20-odd from various world championships, including the most recent.
More to the point, there have been three sub-36-second speed-skating 500s posted since the dawn of creation, and all three are his.
That makes him the fastest human ever on two feet over flat terrain.
He owns the world record of 35.76 seconds for the distance, set Jan. 30 at the World Sprint Championships in Calgary.
But Mr. Jansen's Olympic travails are better known, the stuff of both pathos and commoner woe.
He started out promisingly enough, finishing fourth in the 500 in 1984 as an 18-year-old outsider just glad to be there.
Four years later he came to Calgary as the favorite in the event, but the day of the race learned that his sister had died of leukemia.
He debated whether to compete, did, and fell, a rare occurrence.
A few days later he was back for the 1,000-meter race, another usually strong event for him.
He fell again.
At the 1992 Albertville Games, he had even stronger credentials and vowed to "show people the real me on ice."
He skated without mishap but placed a distant fourth in the 500 and a more-distant 26th in the 1,000.
The ice of the outdoor rink there, turned wet and soft by an unseasonable warm snap, didn't suit his long-striding style, he said.
His losses were cast in sharper relief by the victories of Bonnie Blair, his friend and training mate.
She won two gold medals at Albertville to go with the one she'd captured at Calgary.
She well may add a couple more in the women's 500, scheduled for Saturday, and the 1,000 on the following Wednesday.
According to both Mr. Jansen and his coach, Olympic ex-champ Peter Mueller, Lillehammer was to be different.
New training routines had honed the skater's body and marriage and a daughter, born in May, had set his priorities right.
This time, Mr. Jansen eschewed the usual athlete's promise to do his best, saying he expected to win the 500.
Coach Mueller went further, predicting victory by a half-second margin.
That's the speedskating equivalent of a race-track furlong.
"Dan's never been in better physical or mental shape.
He hasn't had a bad day on ice all winter," Mr. Mueller declared.
Negative thoughts were not to be entertained.
When a newsman began a press conference question Friday with the words "looking back . . . " the skater cut him off.
"I don't want to look back," said he.
But, inevitably, he was asked to do that after yesterday's race, and, no doubt, he will be again.
The query was a peculiar one: Did he ascribe his Olympic setbacks to a "force out of his power?"
Instead of shrugging it off, he answered.
"Maybe it wasn't meant to be for me," he said.
"Everybody knows I'm the best in that race, but it wasn't for me today."
Upstairs, in the medalists' press conference, the winners were saying much the same thing.
"Jansen is the fastest sprinter on Earth, so eighth place today was not proper," said the Russian Sergei Klevchenya, the runner-up.
"He should do better in the 1,000."
That race, probably Mr. Jansen's last as an Olympian, is scheduled for Friday.
And, indeed, he probably will do better.
But maybe he won't.
As I'd tell my kids when they were small, the reason they play all those games, and run all those races, is to find out who's best.
If we could figure that out in advance, who'd bother to watch?
