Japan's Big 5 steel companies yesterday released a set of miserable earnings estimates for the current fiscal year, and analysts say a return to profitability is at least a year away, even under the most optimistic of assumptions.
Each of the five companies -- Nippon Steel Corp., Kawasaki Steel Corp., NKK Corp., Kobe Steel Ltd., and Sumitomo Metal Industries Ltd. -- estimated a pretax loss in the fiscal year ending March 31, with the figures ranging from four billion yen ($37.8 million) for Kobe Steel to 34 billion yen for Sumitomo Metal Industries.
And for the first time in post-war history, four of the five eliminated their year-end dividends.
Only Nippon Steel offered shareholders a year-end payoutof 2.50 yen -- but analysts termed the move a symbolic one.
Newspaper reports in recent weeks have speculated that the companies would have trouble paying out any dividend this year, and the earnings estimates met expectations.
But in moves which analysts say could help in the long run, Kobe Steel and Sumitomo Metal Industries announced a broadening of previous restructuring and cost-cutting plans.
Kobe Steel said it will cut its work force by 19% by March 1996 and slash capital investment by 57% in the three-year period ending March 1996.
A Kobe Steel spokesman said the move may help the company reach a goal of turning a profit in the fiscal year beginning in April 1995.
Sumitomo Metal Industries announced a similar plan, under which it intends to cut its work force by 4,300 people over three years to 15,000 and reduce capital investment to 210 billion yen in the three years through March 1996.
Japan's big steel companies have been hampered by huge excess capacity, and analysts say sharp cuts in capital expenditures are essential if they are to have any chance to control their huge costs.
Despite cost cutting, analysts are doubtful about a return to profitability in the near term.
Basil Masters, an analyst with Kleinwort Benson International, says it will be "very difficult" for the companies to turn a profit in the coming fiscal year.
Under the best assumptions, companies could post "better results, which means better losses," he says.
