Numac Energy Inc., in a bid to accelerate its growth of oil and gas assets, said it plans to offer cash and new shares to acquire Co-enerco Resources Ltd. in a transaction valued at about 236.5 million Canadian dollars (US$175 million).
Co-enerco said its board appointed a special committee to review any takeover bids.
Unless the bid is approved by the Co-enerco board, it could trigger a poison pill that would complicate a takeover attempt, the company said.
Analysts said they believe the bid, which values each Co-enerco share at C$7.84 (US$5.80) based on the current market price, is too low, considering that the shares traded as high as C$14.50 last summer.
In American Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Numac closed at $6.125, down 37.5 cents, or 5.8%.
Co-enerco closed on the Toronto Stock Exchange at C$7.375, up C$1.50.
Under terms of the proposed bid, Numac would issue as many as 28.9 million common shares, representing 31% of its current share capital.
This would reduce the ownership stake of Numac's major shareholder, a group of Hong Kong investors, to as low as 54% from 69% now, Numac said.
Numac was formed this past summer from the merger of two Western Canadian energy companies.
The proposed acquisition of Co-enerco would increase Numac's oil and gas reserves by about a third.
It also would boost Numac's annual revenue, now C$200 million, about 50%.
"We have a fairly strong mandate from our shareholders to grow the company," said Irvine Koop, Numac president and chief executive officer.
He said the company aims to increase its cash flow to a level sufficient to fund its budding international operations.
Numac has ownership interests in energy deposits in Libya and Indonesia, which could begin production by 1997.
Under terms of the proposed bid, Numac would exchange either 0.95 new share, or C$2.50 in cash and 0.65 new share, for each of Co-enerco's 23.8 million shares outstanding.
Holders of Co-enerco's C$50 million of convertible debentures also could choose either cash or new Numac shares.
Numac also would assume about C$50 million of Co-enerco bank debt.
Both companies are based in Calgary.
Numac said the proposed bid would be conditional, among other things, on its not triggering Co-enerco's shareholder rights plan, a kind of poison pill that allows existing holders to buy new shares at a discount when an unwanted takeover is attempted.
