That's about how long it takes for the scofflaw posse of the New York City sheriff's department to find out that a car owner has exceeded the $231 maximum in unpaid fines, summon a tow truck, and tow the car away.
"If you went in to a store to get bread, milk and eggs, and there were three people in front of you in line, by the time you got back to your car it would be gone," crows Sheriff Phil Crimaldi.
His secret weapon?
A wireless data network called Ardis.
His deputies used Ardis to check out 1.9 million license plates on cars parked (and double-parked) on New York City streets last year.
That yielded more than $80 million in scofflaw payments, not to mention the towing of some 112,000 cars.
Before the Ardis network was installed in 1990, the department had never collected much more than $2 million in fines from artful ticket-dodgers.
Customers are just beginning to discover the advantages of wireless data networks.
The relatively small business -- last year it generated about $260 million in revenue serving 380,000 people -- could grow into a $2 billion market with 3.4 million customers by 1998.
"It will be the next major trend in the communications market," says Robert J. Rich, an analyst at Dataquest Inc., a San Jose, Calif., market-research concern.
Significant technological and competitive hurdles, however, will have to be cleared before wireless data networks can fulfill that bullish forecast.
Today, some 85% of customers use the most costly and least efficient network for sending data into the ether -- the regular cellular-phone system.
It is slow, and the cost per minute is high.
The data are often scrambled and lost in the hiss and crackle of transmission.
For consumers, though, the regular cellular-phone system is still a lot easier to use than the alternatives: You don't need special equipment or software, and you can reach a far greater number of people.
So, the question remains: Who will control the future?
Right now, two major players, Ardis and RAM Mobile Data, are scrapping for customers.
But add to the battle a third rival: the regular cellular providers themselves, which are putting together an all-digital data approach that may eliminate transmission glitches and cut costs by speeding up transmission.
The new method, known as CDPD for cellular digital packet data, could turn Ardis and RAM into also-rans -- if it can take hold quickly enough.
First, though, it must overcome the daunting obstacle of getting 250 hardware and software companies to support it in a uniform way.
Ardis, with 40,000 customers at about 40 companies, has a pair of deep pockets: it is a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp., New York, and Motorola Inc., Schaumburg, Ill.
But its networks are primarily separate, private systems that serve the individuals within a particular company.
Installing them requires expensive, customized software.
(Some companies, including American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and RadioMail Corp., San Mateo, Calif., offer services that use Ardis and RAM to carry wireless messages and aim to simplify the whole process.)
That drawback owes to Ardis's origins.
It was built by Motorola in the early 1980s to let IBM's service technicians keep in touch with home offices while tending to customers' mainframe computers.
It became a joint venture in 1990 to woo other companies with large field staffs.
Technically, Ardis, based in Lincolnshire, Ill., offers services in 400 metropolitan areas encompassing more than 10,000 cities, reaching 90% of the nation's "business markets" but only about 40% of the geographic U.S.
When users are in the rural patches that Ardis can't reach, they must use a regular phone to dial into the system.
This "dial-up patch" theoretically lets Ardis cover even remote points, including Death Valley -- providing, of course, you can find a pay phone.
Like all wireless networks, Ardis relies on good old-fashioned wirelines for much of its reach.
Its 1,300 "base stations" -- basically antennas atop buildings -- handle two-way, radio-frequency signals and link them with a nationwide, wired network run by AT&T.
For the New York City sheriff, the Ardis setup lets deputies use hand-held gadgets about the size of a VCR cassette to check license plates almost instantly.
In the old days -- before 1990 -- the deputies had to pore over reams of computerized printouts listing cars with unpaid parking tickets.
They were called "hot sheets," but the listings were at least 30 days old.
Before towing a car, deputies had to find a pay phone (no easy task in New York), and call headquarters to make sure the tickets were still outstanding.
About a third of the time, offending cars were gone by the time deputies got back to their cruisers, Sheriff Crimaldi says.
Now, when a deputy punches in a tag number, the message is broken down into an electronic packet to avoid fading and distortion.
It is beamed to the nearest Ardis radio antenna, which transmits it over a high-speed telephone line.
Next stop: the Ardis message switch, a computer in Chicago, which hands it off to a telephone line routed to a big mainframe database in Dallas.
There, the message is reassembled, the license plate is checked against the database of unpaid parking tickets, and a reply is zapped back along the same route to the deputy on the street.
The whole process takes a few seconds.
The bad news: Ardis is expensive.
Monthly costs per user can run into the $100 range depending on the number of users and the application.
Each wireless device costs several thousand dollars, and Ardis's customers shoulder the cost of developing customized software.
Ditto for encryption, or data security.
RAM Mobile is aiming at a broader and more generic market.
The New York-based joint venture of RAM Broadcasting Corp., Woodbridge, N.J., and BellSouth Corp., Atlanta, charges users less than Ardis to get on board.
Rather than serving primarily particular companies, RAM systems are set up to let virtually any user send and receive electronic mail and other data to another user.
The catch: Its customer base is puny, at only 3,000 users by the end of 1993, according to Dataquest.
RAM's underlying technology was developed about 20 years ago, but it didn't show much promise until the company got an injection of $300 million from BellSouth in 1991.
Designed to let people with portable computers zap e-mail back and forth, the RAM network uses radio-frequency waves and covers 6,300 cities in more than 200 metropolitan areas, or about 90% of the urban business population.
That translates, however, into only about 30% of the geographic U.S. RAM currently doesn't cover rural areas or, perhaps thankfully, vacation spots, save Waikiki Beach in Hawaii.
"But we're working on it," says Martin Levetin, a RAM executive vice president.
RAM base stations are clustered and linked into switching cabinets called "moxes," and each mox is an electronic traffic cop tied to dedicated phone lines.
As soon as the mox receives a message, it figures out where the message needs to go, then zaps it along the wired network to a waiting mox at the other end.
That mox feeds the message, which has been broken down into electronic packets, to the appropriate base station.
Seconds later, the message shows up on the recipient's computer, which automatically reassembles it into a readable format.
To use RAM, you must generally be on a company e-mail system that is tied to the network or use RAM-compatible software.
(Microsoft Corp., Lotus Development Corp., WordPerfect Corp., AT&T, CE Software Inc. and DaVinci Systems Corp. sell programs that can link up to the RAM system.)
Your portable computer must have a wireless data modem from Intel Corp., Ericsson GE Mobile Communications Inc., Raleigh, N.C., or Motorola.
Like Ardis's, RAM's pricing is volume-based; the more you use, the cheaper it gets.
A customer can receive 100 messages a month (for a total of 100,000 characters) for $25, 400 messages for $75 a month, and unlimited messaging for $135 a month.
Most of RAM's users, however, fall into the $75-a-month category.
RAM says Burger King, a unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC, is testing one point-of-sale application that allows people to pay for their purchases with credit cards.
A special device validates credit cards in less than seven seconds, about the time it takes to say, "One Whopper, hold the pickles, one chocolate shake, and an extra-large order of fries.
The cellular phone system, led by McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., Kirkland, Wash., could become a wireless-data powerhouse by almost any measure.
For starters, it reaches 96% of the geographic U.S. with a built-in customer base of more than three million people.
While data transmission over the current system can be a fractured and frustrating affair, McCaw is pushing CDPD to change that.
The digital technology, moreover, is expected to be cheap compared with other wireless options, with basic rates well within reach of even casual users.
Unlimited messaging will probably wind up costing around $45 a month, proponents say.
Experts say that CDPD's potential is enormous, and that it could become the Wal-Mart of wireless data networks, a category-killer that offers a little something for everyone -- except competitors.
"CDPD ends the argument," says Paul Callahan, a senior analyst at Forrester Research Inc., a consulting firm in Cambridge, Mass., who believes it has the best chance to become a de facto standard in the industry.
Others agree.
"Our feeling is that people tend to use what they're most familiar with, what they already have, and that's cellular," says Donald Blumberg, president of D.F. Blumberg Associates, a Fort Washington, Pa., consulting firm that tracks the market.
Sounds great.
But CDPD has barely moved beyond a few test beds, and it might never grow to the grand scale imagined by its principal backer, Craig O. McCaw, McCaw Cellular's chairman and chief executive.
He must get more than 250 players, from cellular service providers to hardware makers and software firms, to cooperate in building equipment and solutions that will work together.
That's a considerable effort for an industry filled with players not known for their team spirit.
In addition, the cellular strategy to simply overlay digital data atop phone-call traffic is tremendously complicated, and some observers aren't sure it will work as well as proponents promise.
The market for wireless data networks has languished, in part, because of a decided lack of user enthusiasm.
That could change under CDPD, which offers users the best of both worlds -- voice and data.
CDPD, developed by IBM with McCaw and a consortium of major cellular carriers, will ultimately use "dead" or unused air time in voice transmissions -- pauses between sentences, words or even syllables -- to squeeze in short bursts of data.
The existing cellular network works at only about 60% capacity, CDPD backers say, leaving plenty of room for data transmissions.
If voice channels are jammed, as they often are in busy markets like New York, CDPD will let data streams "hop" from one channel to another in search of an opening, and then fire off when they find one.
Five major cities were scheduled to be up and running with CDPD technology by last month: Miami, Dallas, Seattle, San Francisco and New York.
McCaw has announced plans to install CDPD across its entire network, which can reach 60 million potential customers, by the end of the year.
In addition, Bell Atlantic Corp., which is in the process of merging with cable giant Tele-Communications Inc., and a few other Baby Bells have said they hope to have their CDPD networks fully deployed within two years.
Even BellSouth, which wasn't included in the development phase because of its RAM connection, is considering offering CDPD across its wireless networks.
Some say that's a strong testament to the allure of the new technology.
Indeed, at a major trade show last fall, McCaw claims it got 4,000 leads from software developers for CDPD applications.
That isn't bad considering CDPD was operating in just one small market in the middle of the desert -- Las Vegas, not exactly a tough proving ground for tricky in-city transmissions.
Ms. Cauley is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
