In a surprisingly quick concession to furious investors, GE Capital Corp. announced a tender offer late yesterday for a $500 million issue of 30-year floating-rate bonds.
The decision by the firm, the financial-services arm of General Electric Corp. and one of the nation's largest issuers of corporate debt, is the latest development following a reversal that infuriated some investors in the company's debt.
The tender offer is a compromise that will allow those investors who were angered by the GE Capital moves to recover their investments with little chance of losses.
As was reported in late editions of yesterday's Wall Street Journal, the company told investors on Jan. 26 that it would redeem the notes at face value on March 15.
But on Feb. 15, just 11 days after the Federal Reserve started to boost short-term interest rates, the company announced that it wouldn't redeem the bonds after all.
The company's decision not to proceed with a previously announced redemption was highly unusual.
Some bondholders argued that GE Capital would be setting a dangerous precedent that would allow other firms to use redemption announcements as a type of option on future interest rates.
An issuer could announce a redemption, then sit back and watch bond-market trends.
If interest rates didn't go its way, a company could then decide not to redeem.
As with many bonds, the indenture for the GE Capital issue requires the company to announce at least 60 days in advance any decision not to redeem.
Every three years in March, GE Capital has the option of either buying the bonds back from investors or resetting their coupons at a rate equal to 108% of the rate on three-year U.S. Treasury notes.
This would mean that the coupon would drop from its current 8%, according to one investor, to something around 5.6%.
GE Capital went so far as to place an advertisement in yesterday's editions of The Wall Street Journal to formally give notice to bondholders of the decision to reset the coupon on the bonds.
In a statement released by the company late yesterday, Jeffrey S. Werner, senior vice president in GE Capital's corporate treasurys and global funding operations, said that "in recent discussions, some holders of the Reset Notes expressed dissatisfaction with our decision to rescind the original redemption.
This tender offer is designed to accommodate those holders, while allowing those investors who are long-term holders of the Reset Notes to maintain their investment positions."
Company officials weren't available for comment late yesterday.
Meanwhile the prices of U.S. Treasurys rose modestly yesterday, with the 30-year Treasury bond up more than 3/8 point, or more than $3.75 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 92 17/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of the price, dropped to 6.83% from 6.87% on Tuesday.
The prices of other Treasury securities posted smaller gains.
With all the weakness in world bond markets these days, investors are even more sensitive than usual about taking losses -- especially on securities issued by GE Capital, a corporation with more than $62 billion in debt oustanding.
As is common after a redemption announcement, some investors began to buy and sell the company's 30-year securities as if they were high-yielding 60-day notes.
Daniel Nagy, a bond dealer at Drake Capital Securities in Los Angeles who owns more than $50 million of the notes, said that a number of money-market funds purchased the GE Capital securities soon after the original redemption announcement in late January.
But when the redemption notice was rescinded on Feb. 15, some funds felt compelled to sell the bonds, since they would be treated as long-term debt again, something money-market funds aren't permitted to hold.
The result is a big hit to principle.
Since the redemption was rescinded, the price of the bonds has dropped two points to 98, according to Mr. Nagy and other investors, or $20 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
On Tuesday, an official at GE Capital described the original decision to redeem as an error.
However, Mr. Nagy at the time pointed out that the firm "did not announce that this was a mistake the same day or the next day or even that week.
They left it out there . . . and people bought and sold these notes" assuming they would be redeemed, he said.
Another large investor in the bonds said that the GE Capital decision not to go through with the redemption set "a bad precedent which . . . all fixed-income investors should be concerned about."
The GE Capital tender offer announced yesterday is a remedy to the dilemma of short-term investors.
It allows them to sell the bonds back to GE Capital at face value plus accrued interest, as if the original redemption hadn't been rescinded.
The tender offer also allows investors who bought the bonds after the redemption was rescinded or those who held the bonds throughout the confusion to continue holding those bonds under the original terms of the indenture, as if the redemption had been canceled.
"This looks good to me," said Mr. Nagy.
"This is the compromise we were looking for."
Soothed by news from the Fed suggesting that inflation pressures aren't as widespread as some had feared, prices of U.S. Treasury securities pushed moderately higher.
Market participants were quick to add, however, that even though signs of stability have begun to emerge in the battered bond market, sentiment remains bearish and buyers are extremely cautious.
The 10-year note rose more than 1/4 point to 96 13/32 to yield 6.35%, compared with 6.39% on Tuesday.
Yesterday's gains only partially erased losses posted Tuesday, but traders said it appeared that the market is trying to establish a bottom after weeks of big declines.
"The market has moved a good bit lower, and we're at levels where just a short time ago you would have viewed it as attractive," said Michael Moran, chief economist at Daiwa Securities Inc.
"So it's natural that the market would pause."
Paul McCormack, manager of government-securities trading at Chase Securities Inc., agreed: "People are willing to do a little bit of bottom fishing."
Buyers were encouraged by the Fed's Beige Book, which contains anecdotal reports of economic activity collected by the regional Fed banks.
The Beige Book reported only "limited price pressures" as the economy "expanded moderately" over the first two months of the year.
Traders had worried that the report would depict inflation pressures as spreading.
"The inflation aspect of the report was reassuring," said Doug Schindewolf, money-market economist at Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
But analysts noted that the report wasn't all good news for the bond market.
"It indicated that despite the weather disruptions in the opening months of the year, the underlying momentum of the economy is still pretty good," Mr. Schindewolf said.
That means the Fed is still likely to raise interest rates shortly, analysts said.
"They are on a path of persistent tightening, and we'll probably see another move in the not-too-distant future," said Mr. Moran of Daiwa.
Many in the market believe the Fed could tighten policy around the time of the next Federal Open Market Committee meeting, March 22.
In the meantime, "the tone in the market is clearly still negative," said Lawrence Leuzzi, head of fixed income at S.G. Warburg & Co.
"In order for the market to rally from these levels, it has to be convinced that inflation is not a problem now and that it is not going to be a problem down the road."
The corporate-bond market continued picking up steam yesterday as the Bank of China and MCI Communications Corp. both completed debt offerings that had been delayed by market conditions.
More than $2.7 billion of bonds were priced during the session.
Bank of China sold $500 million of Yankee bonds through lead manager Morgan Stanley & Co.
The two-part offering marks the first Yankee deal for the bank.
Yankee bonds are securities sold in the U.S. by foreign entities.
Meanwhile, MCI surprised the market with a $950 million, three-part debt offering.
Syndicate officials said they were happy to see the successful execution of the large transaction after a week of volatile trading.
Dealers also saw the deal as a signal that other issuers might follow.
"It's a great deal, a nice signal to market," a syndicate official said.
"Hopefully, this answers the concerns of the anxious."
MCI originally planned to sell about $600 million of debt, but improved market conditions prompted the telecommunications company to increase the sale.
Meanwhile, the Bank of China deal reportedly found interest mainly from U.S. investors and went "reasonably well," syndicate officials said, despite the poor performance of a recent bond offering from China.
Last month China sold $1 billion of 6.5% coupon 10-year global bonds, which have since dropped more than 6.5 points, or more than $65 for a bond with $1,000 face value, as their yield rose to 7.53% from 6.582%.
Yesterday the bank sold $400 million of noncallable 6 3/4% coupon notes maturing in 1995 at 99.71 to yield 6.819%.
The bank also sold $100 million of noncallable 8 1/4% coupon maturing 2014 at 99.7 to yield 8.281%.
A portfolio manager who buys international securities said he shunned the deal because the debt was priced at a yield spread that he considered too narrow to compensate for the credit of the issue, which isn't guaranteed by China.
Both parts of the Bank of China offering are rated single-A-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and triple-B by Standard & Poor's Corp., as was the global China offering.
Bank of China's five-year notes were sold at a spread of 0.98 percentage point above U.S. Treasurys, while the 20-year bonds were priced at a spread of 1.35 percentage points above Treasurys.
China's global bonds, on the other hand, were sold last month at a spread of 0.85 percentage point above the 10-year U.S. Treasury, but the yield gap between the securities has widened to about 1.12 percentage points in recent weeks.
Municipal bonds finished dealings narrowly mixed after drifting for the second consecutive day.
The market continues to consolidate after the plummet in the last few weeks that was triggered by the Federal Reserve's tightening Feb. 4.
In the cash market, prices were about 1/8 point lower to 1/4 higher in late trading.
In new-issue action, the highlight was the competitive sale of California's $700 million various-purpose general obligation bonds.
That offering was won by a Lehman Brothers group with a bid setting the true interest cost at 5.56218%.
Yields range from 3.25% in 1995 to 6.00% in 2023 and 2024.
Bonds due in 2002 and 2003 are insured by Ambac Indemnity Corp. while bonds due in 2020 are insured by Financial Security Assurance Inc.
Those bonds carry triple-A ratings from Moody's and Standard & Poor's.
The balance of the bonds, which are uninsured, have a double-A rating from Moody's and a single-A-plus rating from S&P.
In muni trading, the price for the Florida Board of Education's 5.125% of 2022 bonds barely budged after closing at 89 3/8 late Tuesday.
Those securities currently yield 5.90%.
Thomas D. Lauricella and Lauren Young contributed to this article.
