The climax of Japan's five-year battle to dismantle its corrupt, archaic political system is scheduled for today, with all sides projecting a tight contest.
A victory for the reformers in the parliamentary vote would alter the basic rules that have governed Japanese politics since World War II.
If the reforms pass, eventually "all parties will dissolve and we will build again new parties," says Kazuo Aichi, the defense minister in the pro-reform ruling coalition.
"The next phase of political turmoil will start," says Gerald L. Curtis, a Japanese-politics expert at Columbia University.
"Everything has been in a state of suspended animation, waiting to see what will happen with these bills."
Many analysts estimate the ruling seven-party coalition has the necessary strength to pass the bills in the vote slated in the upper house of parliament.
The four bills won committee approval by an 18-16 vote yesterday, breaking the logjam that has kept them on hold since passing the lower house two months ago.
The Japanese media last night predicted the vote will be close, with likely defections threatening the government's thin parliamentary majority.
Success will hinge on the coalition's ability to lure turncoats from the opposition.
"I'm confident," Trade Minister Hiroshi Kumagai said.
"But only the gods know for sure."
Japanese business leaders, as well as the Clinton administration, are rooting for a triumph as soon as possible, mainly so the Japanese government can finally move on to other matters, such as Japan's slumping economy and stalled U.S.-Japan trade talks.
Parliament's preoccupation with political reform has virtually frozen policy-making since November.
Plans for drafting the annual budget are a month behind schedule, and the timing for announcing a widely expected tax cut has slipped by several weeks.
"The government has been slow to deal with the economy," Kosaku Inaba, head of the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry griped, urging politicians to end their squabbling.
The U.S., meanwhile, will give the Japanese government little time to celebrate.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen has made a last-minute decision to stop in Tokyo Sunday on his way home from an Asian tour in order to press Japan's leaders to work harder on drafting a new "framework" for bilateral trade.
The two countries want an agreement by the time Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa visits President Clinton in Washington Feb. 11.
The impetus for Japan's reform movement was the endless string of financial scandals during more than three decades of Liberal Democratic Party rule.
To that end, the proposed laws would rewrite campaign-financing rules, curbing corporate donations to individual politicians and providing public funds to political parties.
But loopholes would remain, and skeptics doubt that the country's notorious money politics will disappear so easily.
The package's most significant change wipes out the old electoral system.
It replaces Japan's multiseat districts with a combination of single-seat districts and seats chosen through a national proportional representation vote.
It also would redraw the boundaries of all electoral districts.
"Our aim is to destroy the political ways of the past 40 years," says Yuriko Koike, a founding member of Mr. Hosokawa's Japan New Party, which was launched nearly two years ago with the goal of altering the political system.
"The aim of our reform is that politicians should be politicians," Ms. Koike adds.
"That sounds like a joke, but if you know the situation in Japan, you know that's not a joke."
Indeed, the way in which Mr. Hosokawa's coalition has promoted the reform bills reflects a new political style.
Even when the LDP had a strong parliamentary majority, it rarely put issues to an open vote, instead preferring to seek a consensus with the opposition through backroom negotiations.
Though Mr. Hosokawa has sought compromise with the LDP this week, he hasn't hesitated to force a vote, as he did in yesterday's committee contest.
The LDP has labeled such tactics "fascism."
