Venezuela decided to revise its new, unpopular value-added tax, which could have raised $2 billion this year and eliminated half the government deficit.
Shopkeepers now must get government permission to collect the VAT, effectively suspending it at the retail level, where it was introduced Jan. 1.
Critics said stores used the tax as an excuse for big price increases.
The government wants to ensure VAT revenue gets to the treasury.
Venezuela adopted the indirect sales tax, paid on products and services at each stage of output or distribution, to widen the tax base as oil revenue shrinks.
The VAT was applied Oct. 1 at the wholesale level, where it stays in force.
The revision move followed the Bolivar state governor's refusal to collect what he termed an unjust and badly implemented VAT and his plea to wait until President Rafael Caldera takes office Feb. 2.
Mr. Caldera favors replacing the VAT with higher taxes on the rich.
British Gas settled for $1.2 million a case filed by 16 women who claimed bias in being forced to retire in 1986 at age 60, while men were allowed to work until they were 65.
The women, who had held clerical or sales posts at the national gas supplier, had complained to the European Court of Justice, the European Union's highest court.
Unison, the health and public services union, said the out-of-court pact cleared the way for more than 400 other union members to make similar sex-discrimination claims.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in Australia between 1980 and 1991 fell 20% -- double the world-wide drop of 10%, according to the 31st World Drink Trends Survey.
The Distilled Spirits Industry Council of Australia said, "We are portrayed as a country of beer-swilling, heavy drinkers, yet the figures show that Australians are moderate consumers of alcohol."
Australia ranked 17th in world alcohol consumption.
The survey found Germans drank the most beer, 143 quarts a person in 1991, with Australians 11th at 108 quarts, down from their 136.5-quart peak in 1974-75.
Chinese state-owned enterprises' earnings and efficiency were poor last year, the official China Daily said.
In the first 11 months, 34% of the firms were unprofitable, compared with 25% of foreign-funded and privately owned industries and 15.5% of industrial collectives.
In November, for every 100 yuan ($11.50) spent on production, state factories generated only 4.67 yuan in profits.
Under market reforms, Beijing has reduced subsidies to state firms in a bid to make them profitable.
The European Union and seven East European nations agreed to align the eastern governments' statistics with norms of the EU, the former European Community.
The 12-member EU will help statistics agencies in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia develop their data-gathering systems and train personnel.
The EU considers accurate and politically impartial data essential to winning public confidence for reforms and building democracies.
Hong Kong's growing trade ties with China have caused a surge in corruption, the British colony's antigraft chief told the American Chamber of Commerce.
Last year, cases of alleged corruption in the private sector jumped 52% and, including those in the public sector, increased 44%.
This was attributed to more willingness to report corruption and eagerness to profit from booming trade before China assumes sovereignty in 1997.
An antigraft agency survey found that 70% of Hong Kong companies routinely gave gifts to officials in China, which is campaigning to eliminate bribery and other corrupt practices.
Turkmenistan's president vowed to speed up capitalist reforms, saying privatizations must become the basis for the former Soviet republic's economy.
Following his weekend referendum victory extending his term for five years until 2002, Saparmurat Niyazov also predicted Turkmenistan's gross national product would triple by 2000.
Since the U.S.S.R. collapsed, the economy of Turkmenistan, a desert country of 4.2 million people bordering Iran, has boomed, paced by natural-gas exports.
The reform plan calls for selling off all small trade and service firms by the end of next year; less than 10% of them are in private hands now.
A small stock exchange is to be set up in the capital of Ashgabat in February or March to help privatize large enterprises, and big manufacturers may switch to joint stock ownership this year.
Banks will be opened to foreign joint ventures, and by 1996, some banks are to be freed of state control.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Paris named a street in the 15th district along the Seine River after Ernest Hemingway, honoring the American who wrote his first novels in the French capital in the 1920s . . . .
Collective bargaining in Spain last year produced a 5.8% average wage increase, mostly offset by 4.9% annual inflation . . . .
Moscow will charge foreign tourists in the Russian capital a daily tariff of $1, payable in hard currency, the ItarTass news agency said.
It didn't say how the tax will be collected.
The levy won't apply to business visitors or citizens of most former Soviet republics.
