The buzz word on Wall Street these days is bewilderment.
Stocks and bonds last week played all sorts of strange games: When bond prices rose stocks fell and when bonds plummeted stocks rallied.
Witness the late 30-point surge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average Friday on huge volume even as the Treasury's 30-year bond plunged nearly 7/8 point.
Even more confusing, however, is the overall weakness of big stocks in the past seven weeks.
Small stocks are hitting new highs, but big ones are languishing even though the economy is still chugging along with subdued inflation and corporate earnings still look promising.
Of course, interest rates have risen, but by most measures they had declined too much and even after the recent surge are still relatively low.
"More and more people are saying they're puzzled by what's happening to the stock market," says Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer at First Albany.
"They just don't understand it."
Mr. Johnson worries that investors' confusion could lead to a bear market.
What's worse -- and so puzzling -- is that the bear market could occur for no apparent reason, he argues.
Though such a prospect seems strange to many analysts and investors, Mr. Johnson says he has found a precedent.
He sees disturbing parallels with 1962, when stock prices slumped 27.3%.
It was the second year of President John F. Kennedy's administration, just as it is now the second year of President Clinton's term.
Both Democrats challenged big business and presented wide-ranging, even utopian, agendas in their second State of the Union addresses.
Then, as now, the year began on an upbeat note, with the stock market hitting new highs, the economy expanding and consumer confidence growing.
But soon into the year the stock market hit the skids.
Mr. Johnson thinks hard economic data played less of a role in debilitating the stock market than did more elusive factors such as Corporate America's growing wariness of President Kennedy.
A similar scenario may be unfolding today, he says.
Among the examples of the battle between big business and the government, Mr. Johnson cites the Clinton administration's heavy hand in trying to reform and regulate the health-care industry and the recent Federal Communications Commission ruling requiring a 7% reduction in cable-television rates.
The stock market decline in 1962 was just as puzzling to investors then as the current woes are to today's participants.
As the 1962 price slide began, this newspaper carried reports by Abreast of the Market writer Oliver J. Gingold that could very easily describe today's conditions.
On March 24, 1962, Mr. Gingold wrote, "Most corporate news is optimistic. . . .
However, caution is apparent in the Street and among investors."
A week later, he reported, "There has been no business news to induce an important volume of selling, yet the market . . . sagged throughout last week.
Analysts are at a loss to explain this action."
The next week, Mr. Gingold wrote, "In the recent declining stock market, analysts have found it difficult to pinpoint the reasons for the spells of selling.
A number of analysts are expressing doubts about the business trend, but business itself is reporting a comfortable situation in most cases, with expectation of better things to come."
Indeed, business conditions continued to improve in 1962, though stock prices sustained a significant and puzzling decline.
Mr. Johnson says historians may look back on 1994 and conclude that, yes, the economic climate was just fine but stock prices fell for a variety of hard-to-pinpoint qualitative factors, among them, a clash between big business and the government and a loss of confidence among investors.
"If I didn't have 1962, I'd be sitting here scratching my head totally bewildered," Mr. Johnson concedes.
Investors also are puzzled by the performance of the major stock sectors.
Bull markets usually lift all stock groups, but this bull market has produced striking divergences among the groups.
Peter Canelo, chief investment strategist at NatWest Securities, notes that while the overall market climbed in the past two years, led by economically sensitive stocks, consumer growth stocks have suffered their own devastating bear market.
"It's very puzzling to growth-stock managers to see the Dow industrials and Nasdaq composite climb while growth stocks go to new lows," Mr. Canelo says.
He explains that anyone confused by the shakeout in consumer stocks has failed to recognize a fundamental long-term adjustment under way in the market.
He says that consumer stocks became grossly overvalued by the end of the 1980s and are experiencing a necessary correction.
"While that process happens, it looks very strange," Mr. Canelo says.
Also confounding market observers is that some economic trends aren't unfolding according to the usual patterns of a recovery.
Charles Clough, chief investment strategist at Merrill Lynch, points out that, for instance, growth of private credit in this cycle has been substantially below that of typical recoveries.
The slow pace of credit growth eases inflationary pressures but also leaves some analysts a little bewildered.
"There are a lot of different behavior patterns which may be adding to some of the puzzlement," Mr. Clough says.
Byron Wien, investment strategist at Morgan Stanley, contends the stock market isn't really all that puzzling.
But he concedes that investors are vexed by many uncertainties, chief among them the growing list of companies trying to go public even as the appetite for new stocks wanes.
Also worrisome are growing trade frictions and the expanding Whitewater investigation.
He expects long-term interest rates to exceed 7%, sparking further declines in stock prices.
The correction will take prices down 10% from their high by July, Mr. Wien predicts.
"To have people puzzled -- that's a perfect environment for a further correction," he says.
"People will say I better protect myself and the market will perform badly."
The Dow Jones Industrial Average surged in late trading amid very heavy volume tied to the quarterly expiration of futures and options.
The industrial average climbed 30.51 points to 3895.65.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index rose 0.16 to 471.06 and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index gained 0.24 to 261.35.
The Nasdaq Composite Index edged up 0.08 to 803.93 for a second consecutive record.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange soared to 446,362,000 shares from 303,883,000 Thursday.
It was the third-largest single day of trading in the exchange's history.
Traders said several waves of computer-guided buy programs kicked in near the close to drive prices higher.
Declining issues on the Big Board outnumbered advancers, 1,091 to 1,071.
For the week, the industrial average gained 32.95 points, or 0.85%; the S&P 500 rose 4.62 points, or 0.99%; and the Nasdaq composite climbed 14.73 points, or 1.87%.
World-wide, stock prices fell Friday in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 0.63 to 115.85.
Transportation stocks fell, with the Dow Jones Transportation Average sinking 14.79 to 1732.74.
AMR lost 1 1/4 to 61 3/4 and UAL fell 1 1/2 to 127 5/8.
Conrail lost 1 3/8 to 59 3/4.
The Wall Street Journal reported that surging freight shipments aggravated by the harsh winter weather have strained the company's capacity, leading to disruptions and higher costs for rail shippers.
Northwest Airlines' 20-million-share offering on the Nasdaq Stock Market was unchanged from its offer price of 13 in its first day of trading.
Some analysts said they believed the offering's underwriters may have been supporting the price.
Yellow Corp. slid 3 7/8 to 26 1/8 on Nasdaq.
The provider of freight transportation expects to report a first-quarter loss wider than the six cents a share posted a year ago.
Yellow cited severe winter weather at the beginning of the year and the Los Angeles earthquake in January.
Among technology stocks, Adobe Systems declined 1 3/8 to 29 1/2 on Nasdaq.
The software concern said Thursday its first-quarter earnings fell to 32 cents a share from 34 cents a year earlier.
Investors continued to show support for Compuware's planned merger with Uniface Holding, bidding the stock to a 52-week high for a second straight day.
Shares of the Farmington Hills, Mich.-based company jumped 4 to 46 3/4 as SoundView Financial Group analyst James C. Mendelson raised his fiscal 1995 earnings estimate.
Micron Technology rose 5 1/4 to 88 1/2.
The company said Thursday its fiscal second-quarter net income rose to $2.09 a share from 22 cents a year earlier.
Syndicator King World Productions jumped 2 1/8 to 39.
The Wall Street Journal reported that the company agreed with Oprah Winfrey to continue distributing her top-rated talk show through the 1999-2000 television season and to make her a major shareholder in return.
20th Century Industries sank 3 5/8 to 21 1/2.
Merrill Lynch lowered its near-term rating on the stock to "below average" from "above average" and its long-term recommendation to "above average" from "buy."
As reported Thursday, 20th Century said it expects total gross claims of $325 million from the California earthquake and a charge of $3.15 a share against first-quarter earnings.
Singer climbed 2 1/2 to 34 3/4.
The company said it acquired four more "excluded" operations from Semi-Tech (Global) for a total of $27.5 million.
