Here in this stronghold of militant Turkish Islam, religious fervor stops at the entrance to Refik Demirlak's cinema.
Hidden behind nondescript wooden doors, posters with half-nude starlets illustrate Mr. Demirlak's daily film menu.
"All my movies have been authorized by the Culture Ministry," insists Mr. Demirlak, who, like most of Konya's entrepreneurs in tourism and entertainment, relies on the central government in Ankara to guarantee the continued operation of his business.
"If the municipality had its way, there would be no movie houses, no theaters, no nothing in this town," he says, noting that seven of Konya's 10 cinemas have closed since the militant Islamic Refah Party won municipal elections here five years ago.
With opinion polls predicting significant gains for Refah in Sunday's municipal elections around Turkey, the situation in Konya -- famous for its whirling dervishes -- sends chills down the spines of Turkey's elite.
With its five-year-old Refah administration, this traditionally conservative Islamic stronghold in a country whose national ethos eyes Islam with suspicion, provides a window on what Islamic central government would entail.
Twice in recent months, municipal authorities forced Mr. Demirlak to close his movie house for two weeks, claiming that he had violated public health and safety standards.
A few shops down the street from the cinema is one of only six liquor stores left in this city of 600,000.
During the recently ended Ramadan, Hassan Yilmaz covered his shelves with cardboard so that shoppers couldn't see his merchandise.
"I respect those who fast during Ramadan," says Mr. Yilmaz, who has no doubt Refah would close him down if it could.
Business is booming despite the closure of most casinos and entertainment halls over the past five years, but Mr. Yilmaz's request for a municipal license to open a second store has repeatedly been rejected.
Instead, the city government has slapped a tax of 1.2 million Turkish liras ($55,300) on him for every Sunday that he opens his shop for business.
Mr. Yilmaz, a mustachioed blue-eyed devil in the eyes of Turkey's militant Islamicists, fears that the coming elections could serve as a stepping stone for Refah on its way to gaining control of Turkey's central government.
"This country will become another Iran if Refah takes over Turkey," he warns, echoing widespread anxiety among Turkey's secular political and economic elite.
At dinner tables in Istanbul, businessmen compare notes on contingency plans to increase their reliance on business outside Turkey and wonder whether the time may be nearing that they, like their colleagues a decade ago in neighboring Iran, may feel forced to go into exile in the West.
Some have already begun moving funds out of the country.
Leila Alaton, owner of a public-relations company, recently started her own campaign to persuade Turks to turn out at the polls in vast numbers in the hope that this will undercut Refah during polling.
Prominent Turkish leaders have publicly hinted that a Refah victory in the local elections could lead to a breakdown in Turkey's coup-punctuated democracy.
"If the country loses its democratic calm, the people will seek calm through the fist," warned President Suleyman Demirel.
"If we lose to Refah, we will never be able to return to the way things are now.
We in the secular elite have only 10% of the vote.
We'll never get power back," says Gazi Gazioglu, one of Turkey's major heating-equipment manufacturers.
Last year's defeat of reformist trends within Refah served to strengthen secularist fears.
Reformists had favored reaching out to secular women and ethnic and religious minorities to position Refah as a political movement with mass appeal.
Yet the inability of Turkey's mainstream parties to resolve serious economic problems or to reduce widespread corruption within their own ranks has worked in Refah's favor.
Inflation is galloping at 71%, and Prime Minister Tansu Ciller's economic policies have provoked a radical slide in the lira in the past three months.
More fundamentally, Mrs. Ciller has failed to give Turks a sense of direction at a time that they feel rejected in their quest to join the European Union.
Many also view the West's apathy toward the suffering of their Muslim brethren in Bosnia as adding insult to injury.
As a result, the masses may go to Refah this Sunday even if Refah doesn't go to the masses.
Besides preaching the establishment of a "just society" based on Islamic principles, Refah wants to take Turkey out of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and into an Islamic common market.
Refah, which has 40 seats in Turkey's 450-seat parliament, is likely to be seen as the only alternative to Kurdish separatism in wartorn southeastern Turkey.
But Refah is also gaining popularity in Turkey's steadily growing urban shantytowns.
Some 350,000 uneducated, religious migrants from Anatolia have poured into Istanbul each year in recent years.
Much of Refah's appeal lies in its diligent attempts to lessen the economic burden of lower-class Turks.
In Konya, where salaries average 3.5 million Turkish liras a month, the Refah-controlled municipality has opened two shops where foodstuffs and other basics are sold at subsidized prices.
Women line up in the lobby of the city hall to buy bread at a price that is a third below the market price.
One-third of all bread sold in Konya, or 150,000 loaves a day, is produced in a bakery opened by the municipality, says Tahir Erbil, a senior aide to Konya mayor Halik Urun.
Mr. Erbil, a bearded Islamic technocrat, denies allegations that the Refah administration opposes the sale of alcohol or the development of tourism.
Turkey's secular elite hopes that recent setbacks may nonetheless stop Refah in its tracks.
"The problem is that Refah is not creating the sense that it is reliable.
Things would have been much easier had Refah embarked on reformist changes," says Fehmi Koru, a Harvard University-educated columnist for the Islamicist Zaman newspaper.
Refah's seemingly unblemished record has taken a beating recently.
Turkish newspapers revealed last month that Tayipp Erdogan, Refah's mayoral candidate for Istanbul who is fighting a tight race with mainstream contenders, has twice been convicted on criminal charges: in 1989 for insulting a state official and three years earlier for building six houses on state land without permission.
Accusations that Refah had diverted billions of Turkish lira collected for Bosnia followed hot on the heels of the revelations about Mr. Erdogan.
Refah has denied the allegations.
Finally, Refah was forced to distance itself from Hasan Merzaci, a Refah deputy who charged that the mother of Kemal Ataturk had worked in a brothel.
Mr. Ataturk, who is still revered in Turkey as a demigod, carved modern Turkey out of the ruins of the Ottoman Empire and imposed the separation of state and church.
Mr. Merzaci's parliamentary immunity has since been lifted.
Opinion polls indicate nonetheless that these incidents have done little to dent Refah's popular appeal.
"Refah offers crisis-stricken Turkish society something new, something it hasn't tried yet.
Refah may gain power . . . if the other parties fail to put their own houses in order," warns prominent Turkish columnist Mehmet Ali Birand.
Yet at Konya's 1,500-member strong Chamber of Commerce, across the street from the Refah-controlled city hall, businessmen pray for a changing of the guard.
Their list of complaints is long: The municipality works only with businesses associated with Refah; it attempts to discredit other businesses by accusing them of being anti-Islamic; Mayor Urun has resisted the building of a badly needed cultural center as well as new hotels.
"In Konya, the last five years have been wasted," says Chamber of Commerce President Rahim Ozkaymak.
"Economic growth depends on the municipality. . . .
But the municipality says it can't bear the responsibility for allowing companies that operate in sin."
Back in Istanbul, Islamic columnist Fehmi Koru argues that Turkish democracy would benefit from a Refah victory by showing that it respects the will of the people under all circumstances.
Echoing opinions by Western liberals toward an Islamic victory in democratic elections, he adds that allowing Refah to take responsibility may be the party's ultimate defeat.
