Advertisements for apparel and beauty-care products are getting some cosmetic changes.
Instead of featuring models with chiseled features and high cheekbones in its new ads, Shiseido, the Japanese maker of cosmetics and facial-care products, is using a minimalist drawing of a woman's face.
Other fashion and beauty-product advertisers are also forgoing models in favor of illustrations or nonhuman images.
Levi Strauss & Co. used Matisse-like abstract drawings in ads for its women's clothing, and its illustrations didn't always depict rail-thin women, either.
Barneys New York, the New York-based clothing store, uses illustrations in its latest campaign in part, an executive says, to convey a sense of "whimsy."
And Coty's best-selling fragrance, Vanilla Fields, uses a hummingbird instead of a human.
Sadao Abe, chairman and chief executive of Shiseido Cosmetics America, a unit of Shiseido of Tokyo, says the new ads -- the first designed specifically for the U.S. market -- are based on research showing that American consumers don't want to "emulate the perfect `model' face."
The drawing "allows customers to project themselves," he says.
"If we used a model, the customer may think the product isn't for her."
The ad's design also leaves more room for copy.
The ad, which appears in March issues of Allure, Elle, Glamour and Mirabella, conveys more "straightforward information" about the product, Mr. Abe says.
Some marketing experts think such an approach is risky.
"This just shows Shiseido is still unable to understand what makes the American consumer tick," says Allan Mottus, a health-care and beauty marketing consultant.
"They have a super product and super packaging, but when it comes to marketing to the American woman, they haven't done well.
You see, many women want to emulate those models."
Indeed, Shiseido is still a small part of the U.S. cosmetic business.
According to Mr. Mottus, the company recorded retail sales of $96 million in 1992, the most recent available figures, capturing 1.4% of the department-store cosmetics market.
Mr. Abe reports that last year Shiseido's sales grew 11%.
Carol Moog, a psychologist and advertising consultant at Creative Focus in Bala Cynwyd, Pa., says Shiseido's simple drawing doesn't communicate much about the brand.
"It looks like they've tried hard not to be shown as perfectionists," she says.
"I don't fault them for trying to do something different."
Barneys New York, which still uses models in some ads, last year created whimsical print ads depicting situations ranging from a black-tie reception to city dwellers waiting for a subway in the winter.
"Models tend to be mercenaries and be perceived as guns for hire," says Ronnie Cooke, creative director and associate vice president, advertising, at Barneys.
"So they become less believable the more they're exposed."
Ms. Cooke says the Barneys ads reflect "mundane situations and scenes from everyday life."
Levi Strauss says it decided to look at an artist's portfolio instead of a model's photographs for its ads for women's apparel because "we are trying to speak to a large audience, from 15- to 40-year-olds," says Geoff Thompson, senior vice president and deputy executive creative director at Foote, Cone & Belding Communications' San Francisco office, which handles the account.
"It is very difficult to use actual models and have them relevant to each age group," says Mr. Thompson, who concedes there was "some resistance" to the ad agency's plan when it was first presented to Levi executives.
"They are merchants, and they want to show real product on real people as opposed to representative product on representative people."
But the campaign, which began in print three years ago, was considered such a hit that it was used in Levi's television commercials late last year.
Shiseido is confident it will have similar success.
"We don't think this carries any risk," says Mari Chihaya, Shiseido's executive director of advertising and public relations.
"We aren't targeting any one age group with this ad.
It expands our scope.
The line drawing is an appealing universal symbol of timelessness, gentleness."
Ad Notes. . . .
CLINIQUE: Estee Lauder Inc., the closely held cosmetics firm, said it has hired Hal Riney & Partners, San Francisco, to create a television advertising campaign for its Clinique brand.
Clinique said it will continue creating its own print ads, with Saatchi & Saatchi's AC&R Advertising retaining media duties for print ads.
Billings haven't been determined, a Clinique spokeswoman said.
ACCOUNT: Waterford Wedgwood PLC tapped Omnicom Group's Altschiller Reitzfeld for its U.S. Wedgewood account, consolidating its $5 million in advertising with the boutique.
The account was previously at Ammirati & Puris, New York.
