AMR Corp. posted a widened fourth-quarter loss, largely due to a five-day strike by flight attendants at its American Airlines unit that was more costly than initially forecast.
AMR said it had a loss of $253 million, or $3.55 a share, compared with a year-earlier $200 million, or $2.66 a share.
The strike cut after-tax earnings by about $190 million instead of the $160 million AMR forecast, wiping out AMR's profit for the year and resulting in its fourth consecutive annual loss.
But American's chief financial officer, Michael J. Durham, said AMR is "fairly optimistic about trends for airlines in 1994," citing a slight strengthening in the economy as well as capacity cutbacks by the nation's airlines.
Without losses from the strike and other special charges, American would have come close to breaking even in the fourth quarter, he said.
While the company doesn't consider that satisfactory, he said, "in a business as cyclical as ours, break-even is not a bad movement, it's a significant improvement in fourth-quarter earnings of recent years."
Fourth-quarter revenue was $3.59 billion, up only 0.4% from a year-earlier $3.58 billion.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, AMR closed at $71.25 a share, up $1.375.
The financial community also appears to be cautiously upbeat about the airline industry this year.
Chase Manhattan Bank said yesterday that it expects the industry to show significant improvement this year from cost-cutting, capacity reductions and route realignments.
In a private briefing to selected clients, portions of which were released yesterday, Chase said the industry should see operating earnings in the range of $4 billion to $5 billion.
However, some analysts were more cautious than optimistic.
"I don't think we'll see anything like losses of the past four years," said Vivian Lee, an analyst with Smith Barney Shearson.
"But I can't sit here in January, after an earthquake and the worst travel weather in years, and say we're having a profit in '94.
But I can't see what else can go wrong."
American has been cutting unprofitable routes and operations to save money, and this year for the first time since 1981 will have less capacity than in the preceding year.
American will cut capacity overall by 4.8%, with a 7% cut in domestic routes balanced by a slight increase in international flights.
The company also plans to lay off up to 5,000 employees this year and next.
However, because the workers who will remain will have greater seniority and thus higher pay, AMR's salary and benefit costs per worker this year will jump 7%.
AMR's efforts to cut costs may be aided somewhat by lower fuel prices.
American paid 8% to 9% less for jet fuel in the fourth quarter, which could translate into savings this year of up to $150 million if fuel prices remain low, Mr. Durham said.
AMR had some special charges in the fourth quarter, including $46 million in legal costs and for the settlement of litigation regarding the suspension last year of its Confirm hotel-computer reservation system.
Charges also stemmed from previously announced employee layoffs planned for this year.
Together, those charges amounted to $62 million after taxes, or 82 cents a share.
For the year, AMR had a net loss of $110 million, or $2.23 a share, on revenue of $15.82 billion.
In 1992, AMR's net loss was $935 million, or $12.49 a share, on revenue of $14.4 billion.
Last year's loss includes a $79 million after-tax charge for retirement of aircraft, and a positive adjustment for a change in an estimate related to passenger revenue.
The 1992 results include the effect of two accounting changes as well as a $109 million after-tax provision related to the suspension of the Confirm project.
