In January the company said it was restructuring to get out of its nonpharmaceutical businesses and focus on its drug store and new related businesses.
Since then, Rite Aid purchased a third-party administrator that manages prescription plans for health maintenance organizations, unions and other groups and a drug-utilization review company, which helps analyze prescription usage patterns for employers to control costs.
"We think we have to evolve from just being a retailer of prescription services to controlling our own destiny by having direct contracts with the payer," Martin L. Grass, president and chief operating offi cer, said in an interview.
More than half the drugstore chain's prescriptions are being paid by third parties and this percentage is growing at 3% a year.
Profit margins industrywide are being pressured by prescription drug in surance plans that use their clout to get discounts.
To jump into the managed-care end of the pharmacy business, Mr. Grass said last month the company created Eagle Managed Care.
Eagle would not only use Rite Aid's 2,700 stores in 23 states, but a nationwide network of stores to fill the prescriptions.
Into Eagle, Rite Aid folded two companies it recently purchased: PCI, a Toledo, Ohio, manager of prescription plans that covers about 2.5 million participants for prescription drugs through a nationwide network of more than 25,000 pharmacies, and Intell-Rx, a Pittsburgh-based drug-utilization review concern.
These companies will help form the basis of the managed care unit that Mr. Grass expects to expand mostly through internal growth.
The two purchases totaled less than $15 million, Mr. Grass said.
He expects the strategy to start paying off this year, and to really show results in the next two or three years.
Already, the company has signed up the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, with more than 30,000 participants, for a so-called capitated prescription drug payment plan, where a company pays a fixed price per member per month, rather than a certain amount of money for each prescription filled.
Rite Aid also hopes to use its influence as a benefits administrator to help it obtain better prices for drugs from drug makers in exchange for putting their products on official lists of drugs authorized for em ployees to take.
The move into managing prescription plans is part of an overall renewed emphasis on the core pharmacy business, as was the restructuring announced in January.
Then, Rite Aid said it would sell four noncore businesses, buy back 25% of its shares and close 200 underperforming drugstores.
Mr. Grass has said the core drugstore business accounts for more than 90% of the company's sales and profit.
Although the stock buyback last month fell far short of its target, (only 2.4%, or 2.1 million shares were tendered in a Dutch auction) Mr. Grass said Rite Aid recently began sending out offering books for the noncore businesses, and has received many inquiries.
"We are hoping by mid summer to have all the deals consummated," he said.
Mr. Grass said he doesn't expect any further write-offs related to the sales; in January Rite Aid said it was taking a reserve of more than $25 million to revalue those divisions.
The four noncore businesses are Adap, an auto-parts retailer with 95 stores; Encore Books, which operates 103 stores; Concord Custom Cleaners, with 170 outlets; and Sera Tec Biologicals, with 33 plasma collection centers.
