For the past few years, whenever the term "multimedia" came up in many media boardrooms around Europe it got a smug snicker.
It was, scoffed one French television executive a few months ago, "so much hype" from America.
Nobody's laughing now.
What once seemed unrealistic technobabble is getting a serious hearing around Europe.
British Telecommunications PLC was first in Europe to tune in, and will soon announce details of its planned multimedia trials.
France is scrambling to catch up and on Friday, three German heavyweights -- Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, Bertelsmann AG and Kirch Gruppe -- announced that country's first big interactive-multimedia venture.
"Our American friends were preaching about the electronic highways two years ago.
It took some time to think about it.
Now we are acting on it," says a spokesman for Kirch, a Munich-based media conglomerate that owns one of Europe's biggest film libraries.
That's sweet music to the U.S. companies that have been proselytizing in Europe for their interactive multimedia products.
The Europeans "are coming off the fence, in unison," says Paul Godfrey, a Briton who, as European business-development director for Redwood Shores, Calif., software house Oracle Corp., has logged many air miles around Europe trying to convert skeptics.
He expects six European countries by year end to be hosting trials of "video-on-demand," the most talked-about interactive multimedia service, letting people order TV movies over phone lines.
For these trials, the long list of wannabe suppliers from the U.S. includes Oracle, Bell Atlantic Corp., American Telephone & Telegraph Co., International Business Machines Corp. and Digital Equipment Corp.
What's happening is simply that the Europeans are cottoning onto the commercial possibilities of interactive multimedia services.
Multimedia -- the term, in the phone industry at least, refers to the union of telecommunications, computer and broadcasting technologies -- connotes a broad palette of services.
They include video-on-demand, which turns the phone or cable-TV company into an electronic video-rental shop; "timeshift TV," letting people watch a TV show whenever they want, rather than only when it's normally broadcast; multimedia home-shopping, so people can browse on-line video catalogs of merchandise; or business video-conferencing, turning personal computers into videophones to peer into other offices or commercial databases.
For a phone company, "this is a huge opportunity," says Paul Reynolds, a British Telecom executive in charge of that company's multimedia-development efforts.
Of course, European phone companies have spent billions of dollars on multimedia research over the past decade, partly subsidized by the European Union's so-called Race research program.
But most had concluded it was too expensive to commercialize today, as it appeared to require wiring much of a nation with costly optical fibers.
Though that's still true for the most-advanced interactive multimedia services, what the Europeans hadn't counted on was a few key technological developments, mainly from the U.S., to bring the cost down.
First was the ability to squeeze, down a standard copper telephone wire, the torrent of electronic signals needed to convey a decent video picture.
Second was the computer technology to manage such a complex nationwide service.
Though European phone companies knew of the developments, it took some time for their inveterately cautious top executives to study and act on them.
BT triggered the stampede.
Since its privatization in 1984, the former British state phone monopoly has become feared by its continental brethren for its aggressive forays into their home markets.
According to officials at two companies working with BT, more details of BT's video-on-demand plans will be announced soon.
A BT spokesman declined to comment Friday.
This April, BT plans to test its prototype multimedia system on 60 of its employees living near its main lab, at Martlesham Heath, England.
The aim is purely technical: checking how well the partly U.S.-designed system, using Oracle software, works when plugged into the British phone network.
Another goal: to confirm that its phone network is up to the job of delivering multimedia signals.
If all goes well, BT will progress this autumn to its first test-marketing on 2,500 paying subscribers.
Eager to test the multimedia waters, several British broadcasters and retailers have signed up to put their programs onto BT's computers.
They include the British Broadcasting Corp. and Carlton Communications PLC.
BT isn't the only U.K. phone company to climb aboard the interactive multimedia bandwagon.
A spokesman for Mercury Communications Ltd., owned by Cable & Wireless PLC, says his company is collaborating in the planned multimedia trials of TeleWest, a British joint venture of TeleCommunications Inc. and U S West Inc.
On the continent, for the past few months it looked as if only the Italians were interested in multimedia.
Italy's state telecommunications holding company, STET SpA, last year announced plans to experiment with Bell Atlantic on video-on-demand.
Then, just last week in Paris, apparently at government prodding, a French multimedia conglomerate was formed among publisher Havas SA, cable operator Cie. Generale des Eaux, Societe Generale bank, and France Telecom.
Then on Friday, the Germans weighed in with their own national multimedia champion.
The German venture, to begin operations in the middle of this year, is called Media Service GmbH.
It hopes to be the pivotal player in German multimedia -- the company with access to all the computers, software, cables, satellite links, TV decoders and customer-billing systems needed to deliver multimedia in Germany.
Other media companies would be its clients, using it to transmit their movies, home-shopping spots and other programming.
The partners are a formidable trio, possibly to be joined by at least one yet-unannounced partner; indeed, the venture could run afoul of Germany's tough Cartel Office.
Deutsche Telekom, the state telephone monopoly, has a hammerlock on the German cable-TV market with nearly 14 million subscribers.
Bertelsmann, the biggest German media company, helped start the country's first pay-TV service three years ago; called Premiere, it has 800,000 subscribers and is expected to start making a profit this year, ahead of schedule.
Kirch, a group of companies controlled by Bavarian media magnate Leo Kirch, is also a shareholder in Premiere and holds German broadcasting rights to 15,000 program titles comprising 50,000 hours of viewing.
The partners' initial investment will be between 150 million marks and 200 million marks, according to one source who declined to be identified.
Hans Stekle, Deutsche Telekom's cable-TV director, says the venture will focus initially on pay-TV and pay-per-view -- two variants of conventional cable technology in which viewers pay extra to receive special channels or programs.
But, he says, video-on-demand trials and home-shopping services will follow.
For now, he says, the venture is focusing on delivering services by cable and satellite.
In the future, he says, the venture will investigate using copper telephone wires.
