No one likes dealing with Russian mobsters, but Grigory Nersesyan, a literary agent turned entrepreneur, finds he is coping just fine.
"The Mafia is the only thing in this country that works," says Mr. Nersesyan, who recently opened a Tex-Mex restaurant in the shadow of the Kremlin.
"Protection money is a service.
You pay it, and the small-time hooligans stay away.
It's a fair deal, and it doesn't cost that much."
There is a new class of entrepreneur in Russia, made up of hardy souls like Mr. Nersesyan who aren't daunted by the rough fabric of the local business world.
Russia's headlines scream out that business is doomed: economic depression, runaway inflation, rackets, tanks in the streets, failed freemarket reforms.
But don't let that fool you.
There is big money being made here, and some of it is even legitimate.
For Russia's bravest entrepreneurs, the country's crises amount to new ways to make a fortune.
It isn't for the skittish; much of the fast money is in traditionally volatile markets like real estate, and some of these entrepreneurs could lose everything as quickly as they made it.
Longterm investment is rare.
And Russia's mobsters can be violent, even deadly.
Still, Russia's chaotic economy has created astonishing opportunities for instant wealth.
"I like a volatile market," says Roman Miagkikh, a self-styled Russian financier and Mel Gibson look-alike who favors expensive Italian fashions.
"It creates an environment for superprofits."
Mr. Nersesyan, casually stylish in Levis and a tweed jacket, raised a few eyebrows when he decided to plunge into the restaurant trade.
For years, he had been a typical intellectual.
Quietly dissatisfied with the Soviet system, he toiled in the literary world at a fixed state salary and did English translations on the side to earn pocket money.
When the system collapsed, Mr. Nersesyan watched as several friends launched primitive, but successful, business careers.
With $30,000 borrowed from friends and banks, he finally took the plunge himself last year.
Mr. Nersesyan quickly learned to profit from the sorry condition of Russia's former state-run sector.
He was able to pry prime space away from a grand turn-of-the-century theater that relied on subsidies and that now is in dire need of cash.
Besides paying rent and utilities, Mr. Nersesyan agreed to provide 50 free meals a day to the theater's cast -- in return for a storefront space on Tverskaya Street, the closest thing Moscow has to a Fifth Avenue.
He didn't need to spend much to fix up the restaurant, either.
He hired a construction crew -- former Soviet rocket designers desperate for extra cash -- to build a reasonably authentic swinging saloon door, and he had a Western piano-bar tableau painted on the wall.
He found some sombreros and put a big blowup Corona bottle in the window.
"Business is like theater," says Mr. Nersesyan, who also manages an international theatrical exchange program.
"You put in a few touches like the saloon door, and people think you must have spent a million dollars."
Business has taken off.
Mr. Nersesyan says he recouped his investment in full after just six weeks.
"Everything in this country is in short supply," he says, sitting in a booth as a Red Hot Chili Peppers tape blares in the background.
"Anything you do is doomed to success."
Russia's turmoil doesn't faze this crew of optimists.
Though free-market reformers Yegor Gaidar and Boris Fyodorov have quit the government and many fear that Premier Viktor Chernomyrdin will halt reforms and pursue inflationary policies, Russia's entrepreneurs are shrugging off the threat.
"The only serious risk would be a fascist government that nationalizes banks and stops market reform," says Sergei Ovsiannikov, a bank chairman, who views such a scenario as unlikely.
"But a cabinet reshuffle?
A shift in economic reform?
That won't affect business."
Only 32, Mr. Ovsiannikov four years ago helped co-found Mezhcombank, which has quickly become one of Russia's most respected financial institutions.
Banking is perhaps Russia's largest entrepreneurial activity; there are 2,000 banks, with 6,000 branches in all, up from next to none a few years ago.
Mezhcombank's latest shareholders' report sums up the Wild West spirit: "Despite persistent national recession, we confidently look forward to continued growth."
Much of that growth is fueled by speculative transactions.
The bank bought up thousands of privatization vouchers -- given to citizens to invest in former state companies -- at just over the face value of 10,000 rubles.
It sold out near the market's peak of 50,000.
The voucher price has since slipped to about 20,000 rubles.
In a market full of scoundrels, Mr. Ovsiannikov tries hard for an image of respectability.
He has a spacious office fitted with sleek black Scandinavian furniture.
On the walls hang works of Russian abstract artists.
His client list includes such top-name foreign companies as McDonald's Corp., Reuters Holdings PLC and AB Volvo.
As a beneficiary of reform, Mr. Ovsiannikov voted for Mr. Gaidar's party in December's parliamentary elections.
But as industrial output slips to 50% of its 1989 level, the bank is just as happy to see Russia do without reform programs such as strict monetary policy.
"I'd love to see Gaidar back in power," says Mikhail Alekseyev, who runs the bank's securities department.
"But only after Chernomyrdin saves Russia's industry."
For Andrei Barinsky, Russia's easy money is in property.
A soft-spoken 24-year-old who studied computers in college, he is director of the Center of International Exchanges and Development.
The private company, two years old, presides over a growing stable of prime Moscow office space that it rents out, at top dollar, to the expanding foreign-business community.
The potential seems nearly limitless, but so is the risk, given the murky legislation on property rights.
Though the government recognizes private property, it often isn't clear who owns former state property or whether it can be resold.
To Mr. Barinsky, these are minor annoyances.
"Investment should be pouring in," he says as he describes Moscow's undersupply of good-quality office space.
Conceding that he can't fully nail down ownership rights, he says his lawyers are able to build up what he feels is an air-tight legal paper trail clarifying ownership.
"Western businessmen spend millions on lawyers and on trips to Russia," says Mr. Barinsky, shaking his head in disbelief.
"But without 100% guarantees, they won't invest even $1,000.
It must be something about the Western psyche."
Recently, Mr. Barinsky stepped in to help rescue a state dental college that can't pay its bills, but that happens to own some attractive real estate.
The developers worked out a deal: They will renovate part of the college, buy it medical equipment and help it pay its salaries and student stipends.
In return, they get a 25-year lease, with the right to sublet, on a five-story building.
After renovating it at a cost of $500,000 -- mostly raised from Russian banks flush with money -- they plan to rent it out to foreign businesses, for a potential annual revenue of about $800,000.
"It's a good business," says Mr. Barinsky, flashing a smile.
Nikolai Lisai is another of Russia's cocky new businessmen.
His success selling computer-software systems to Russian banks attracted the attention of Russian mobsters, he says, who made him a remarkable proposal.
The mobsters, Mr. Lisai says, wanted equity, and offered to provide him whatever he needed in return: investment capital, a Mercedes, a huge salary.
After one year, they expected his company, Lieks Ltd., to be successfully working at world-class levels.
But there was a catch.
If the company didn't produce results, he says they told him flatly, they would kill him.
He declined -- but only after keeping discussions open for several weeks, he says.
"Ultimately," Mr. Lisai explains, "my wife wasn't crazy about it."
Mr. Lisai, 38, earned his stripes helping to develop the Soviet counterpart of America's Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars, weapons system.
He controlled the activity of six big military enterprises with 75,000 workers and a budget of about $12 million a year, he says.
In 1991 he left to try private business, rounding up several partners from among the state enterprises he had worked with.
He began producing software for computer-aided design and manufacturing.
For a year, business was slow.
Mr. Lisai even had to sell one of his prized computers to meet payroll.
A breakthrough came, however, when he decided to begin marketing software systems for Russia's surging banks.
"They have all the money, and they are just looking for ways to spend it," he says.
Third Wave Network Ltd., a British software consultant, apparently agrees.
It invested $300,000 in Lieks last year.
At the cutting edge of Russian business are people like Mr. Miagkikh, the self-proclaimed financier.
He takes advantage of the fact that so many of Russia's laws on business and finance are murky.
Mr. Miagkikh, 28, dropped out of Moscow State University in 1989 to get in on the ground floor of Russian capitalism.
He sold computers for two years before starting a trading company.
Working with emigres in the West, he imported everything from track suits and sneakers to car stereos and video equipment.
In an economy of shortages, it was like printing money.
As the trucks pulled into his shop, people lined up, ready to buy whatever he had, he says.
As business developed and Mr. Miagkikh's hard-currency holdings multiplied, he decided to move into finance.
Now he manages billions of rubles -- millions of dollars -- for clients, including a number of Russian trading companies, he says.
"A good banker never works with his own money," says Mr. Miagkikh.
"Mine is all in Switzerland."
He also facilitates clients' use of offshore accounts, which he has established in Switzerland, the Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands and the Bahamas.
As the ruble nose-dived earlier this year, Mr. Miagkikh made a quick profit swapping currencies.
He bought dollars at 1,300 rubles to the dollar and sold them at nearly 1,700, then bought rubles again when the market settled down.
"It's primitive," he says, "but it's big business."
Mr. Miagkikh insists that most of his business dealings are legal, though some of his methods clearly push the envelope.
When the dollar surges, he says, he can sometimes buy rubles at the previous day's rate from a friendly bank dealer.
"I give the guy 10%," he says.
"He's happy.
He's on a fixed salary."
He also boasts that, through contacts, he can get information from central-bank personnel on projected exchange-rate fluctuations.
Getting completely reliable information is hard, however.
"It would cost more than the profits I could make on it," Mr. Miagkikh says.
He freely admits he hides some of his income from the government, something many businesspeople here do because of corporate taxes, federal and local, that can reach 80%.
"I would never rob the people," he says.
"But I do prevent the state from robbing me."
Mr. Miagkikh claims he already has earned enough to emigrate with his family to the West and live comfortably for the rest of his life.
But his dreams are a bit grander.
"I'd like to create a financial empire," he says.
"Maybe even to be able one day to pull politicians' strings."
