Prices of wheat futures contracts fell as prospects for U.S. grain exports to Russia and China dimmed.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the wheat futures contract for March delivery sank 8.5 cents a bushel to settle at $3.7575.
The abrupt resignation of Yegor Gaidar, Russia's economic-reform czar, damped speculation that Moscow might be interested in importing as much as 73.5 million bushels of subsidized U.S. wheat by June.
Mr. Gaidar was widely seen in grain-trading circles as central to any credit agreement that would clear the way for a grain deal.
Wheat prices were also depressed by reports that the U.S. Agriculture Department is balking at terms of a Chinese bid to buy 10.5 million bushels of subsidized wheat.
China has already arranged the purchase of 29.9 million bushels of U.S. wheat.
Meanwhile, some U.S. traders expect to see more competition from major wheat exporters.
The Australian Wheat Board raised its estimate of that nation's impending wheat harvest to 668.7 million bushels from 635.7 million bushels.
The sub-zero temperatures across the U.S. Farm Belt in recent days normally would lift corn prices.
Livestock eat more grain in such cold conditions because they need more energy to stay warm.
But corn prices sank amid a wave of profit-taking.
According to traders, the managers of large commodity funds sold futures contracts representing 30 million bushels of corn.
The March corn futures contract at the Chicago Board of Trade fell six cents a bushel to settle at $3.0125 a bushel.
Corn prices have climbed since October because U.S. grain stockpiles are expected to shrink to unusually low levels this year in the wake of the 1993 crop disaster in the Midwest.
Soybean prices settled lower.
Richard Loewy, president of AgResource Co., Chicago, said traders are watching to see whether a dry spell develops over a soybean-growing region in Brazil, where the crop is in its critical growth stage.
Because of ideal weather earlier this growing season, analysts have been forecasting Brazil to generate record soybean yields during the April and May harvest.
Brazil is a major competitor of the U.S. in the world soybean market, so a smaller harvest there would tend to support U.S. prices.
ENERGY: The promise of warmer weather and an apparently widespread belief that heating oil futures were trading too high combined to push petroleum futures prices lower in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
February heating oil lost 3.19 cents to settle at 49.49 cents a gallon and pulled crude lower, as well.
Crude oil for February delivery fell 23 cents to settle at $14.87 a barrel.
Natural gas also lost ground on forecasts of a warming trend.
February natural gas fell 4.2 cents to $2.318 per million British thermal units, roughly equivalent to one thousand cubic feet.
PRECIOUS METALS: Gold and silver futures prices rose on healthy investor demand.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for February delivery was up $1.40 to $393.60 an ounce, while the actively traded March silver futures contract rose 1.5 cents to $5.347 an ounce.
Investor demand for precious metals remains strong because of perceptions that the U.S. economy is encountering a sustained recovery, analysts said.
