The U.S., reacting to North Korea's refusal last week to permit a full inspection of its nuclear program, is preparing to take a series of diplomatic and military steps to punish Pyongyang.
The moves, which follow a meeting of President Clinton's national security advisers at the White House Saturday, apparently represent the end of the "incentive" phase of the administration's carrot-and-stick approach to the North Korean nuclear problem.
"I think the North Koreans are going to force us to do the right thing, and go to the Security Council" for a resolution censuring North Korea, said Gary Milhollin, who is an advocate of a harder line and is director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, a private research group.
"In addition to offering carrots, we have to wave some sticks -- otherwise they'll just keep taking carrots."
North Korea also indicated it will be taking a tougher stance.
After storming out of talks with South Korea on Saturday, Park Young Su, North Korea's chief delegate to the talks, said: "This confrontation will eventually lead to a collision and further to war.
We are fully prepared to meet any challenge, a word with a word and a weapon with a weapon."
Having reached an impasse despite taking a conciliatory stance in recent months, the U.S. plans to seek a United Nations resolution calling on North Korea to permit a full inspection of its nuclear facilities to determine the extent of Pyongyang's pursuit of nuclear weapons, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said yesterday.
But, fearing a veto by China in the U.N. Security Council, the U.S. won't yet seek to impose economic sanctions on North Korea.
The U.S. plan apparently is to lay the groundwork for a future resolution on trade sanctions, and in the meantime persuade China to abstain on that resolution.
"If we work at it carefully and patiently in the United Nations, and bring the Chinese along, then they won't block the imposition of sanctions," Mr. Christopher said on CBS News' "Face the Nation."
"That may be a little different from the Chinese agreeing to them."
The U.N. moves hinge on a decision by the International Atomic Energy Agency, whose officials conducted the recent nuclear inspection, to censure North Korea for refusing to permit a full inspection and to refer the matter to the U.N.
That action is expected to come today.
Also remaining to be worked out is the nature of the contemplated trade sanctions.
It isn't clear that they necessarily would be enforced militarily.
In an interview at the Pentagon Thursday, retired Adm. David Jeremiah, who recently stepped down as vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said, "There are lots of sanctions that have been effective over time that don't involve military force."
A U.S. intelligence report that some North Korean army units are receiving only one meal a day gives analysts additional reason to believe that sanctions could work.
In the meantime, several other military steps are in the pipeline.
The U.S. and South Korea are expected to announce soon that the large-scale joint military exercise called "Team Spirit," which had been suspended as an incentive to the North Koreans to allow full inspections, will now be revived.
The U.S. also is preparing to ship Patriot anti-missile batteries to South Korea.
And it is discussing bolstering U.S. defenses in the area against chemical weapons, artillery fire, and mines.
The U.S. commander in South Korea, Army Gen. Gary Luck, has identified these areas as weaknesses, according to people who have been briefed by him.
Finally, the U.S. may send additional troops to augment the 37,000 American soldiers now in South Korea.
Mr. Christopher declined to rule out such a move.
"We're not seeking a confrontation with the North Koreans, but if they insist on one, I'm sure we'll prevail," he added.
President Clinton said yesterday that there was still "some hope" that North Korea would allow inspections of its nuclear sites, according to the Associated Press.
The president, in Miami for a health-care forum, said there appeared to be some sentiment in Pyongyang for ending its refusal to allow inspections of suspected weapons facilities.
"To some extent, the ball is still clearly in their court.
But we are proceeding to consider all our options," the president said.
Security officials also are bracing for actions short of war by North Korea, which has a history of violent, unpredictable behavior, such as the 1982 bombing of South Korea cabinet officials in Rangoon.
In Japan, security officials have sharply beefed up measures to protect South Korean President Kim Young Sam during his visit there next week.
"An attempt on president Kim's life or some terrorist act would be an adequate substitute for military action if North Korea wants to blow off some steam," said Bradley Martin, a Tokyo-based Fulbright scholar who is writing a book on North Korea.
