Even in Neverland, never say never.
Walt Disney Co., whose executives long have maintained that "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" would never be released on videocassette, yesterday changed its mind.
It announced plans for home-video sales of the movie, its first and most famous animated film, for a limited time world-wide this fall.
It predicted "Snow White" would become among the top video sellers of all time.
The unexpected announcement, made at its annual meeting at Walt Disney World here, brought cheers from Disney shareholders and helped shift the spotlight away from Euro Disney, the troubled theme park in France that is giving the company major headaches.
Disney Chairman Michael D. Eisner recently called Euro Disney's performance "dreadful."
But Mr. Eisner largely sidestepped Euro Disney at yesterday's meeting, telling shareholders that he and Disney President Frank Wells "have nothing new to report" on the subject.
Mr. Eisner quieted a couple of shareholder questions about the resort by saying "it would be inappropriate" to comment because of the company's current private talks aimed at a financial restructuring for Euro Disney.
While Disney in recent years has recorded huge profits from home-video sales, some executives had wanted "Snow White" held back from release because they feared that wide availability would hurt future theatrical runs.
The decision to release it, executives say, reflects a new view that the video market is now so big that it can co-exist with the theatrical market.
A restored version of "Snow White" played in theaters last year, and company executives say they were happy with its box-office gross of approximately $50 million.
But the issue is a tricky one for Disney, which has long worked to maximize the value of its film library's "crown jewels," as it calls its classic animated features.
"Pinocchio," released on videocassette in 1985, posted disappointing box-office returns when re-released in theaters in 1992.
The following year, however, the movie was released again on video, and went on to sell a very strong 12 million units.
Some executives at Disney believe "Snow White" has the potential to sell more than 20 million units.
"I definitely expect this to be one of the top sellers of all time," said Ann Daly, president of Disney's home-video unit.
Ms. Daly said Disney gets more requests for a home-video release of "Snow White" than for any other of its animated movies.
Disney's "Aladdin," which so far has sold about 24 million units, holds the title as biggest video seller.
The company hasn't yet set the price for "Snow White," or the date it will go on sale.
Separately, Disney promoted Richard D. Nanula, senior vice president and chief financial officer, to the post of executive vice president.
