J.P. Morgan & Co., the largest shareholder of Banco Espanol de Credito, the Madrid bank seized by Spanish regulators, will back a restructuring plan drafted by Banesto's new management, people familiar with the situation said.
Further, the banking company is weighing whether to make an additional investment in Banesto to maintain its 7.9% stake in Spain's fourth-largest bank, these people said.
Banesto's new management is planning to sell fresh equity in the bank to rebuild its tattered balance sheet.
Banesto's assets will be written down sharply, and new capital will be injected into the bank, which could ultimately be sold to another Spanish bank.
A Morgan spokesman declined comment on the bank's plans.
Last year, J.P. Morgan's Corsair Partnership, a $1 billion fund established to invest in ailing banks, invested $162 million in Banesto as part of a capital-raising plan.
But rumors of large withdrawals from the bank forced the Bank of Spain to seize Banesto and guarantee its deposits, fire its management and introduce new management to salvage the institution.
Until the seizure, Morgan had also been Banesto's financial adviser.
There was some concern in Spanish financial circles that J.P. Morgan would try to block the plan -- perhaps through legal means -- because the plan would dilute its current stake to about 2.5%.
Ultimately, though, Morgan was wary of such aggressive legal action, especially since the plan had the backing of federal authorities in Spain.
Morgan is concerned that blocking the deal could fray other corporate relationships in Spain, people close to the bank said.
Still, one of Morgan's clients, Northwest Mutual Life Insurance Co., could file a lawsuit in Madrid relating to its purchase of an equity stake in Banesto.
A spokesman for the Milwaukee insurer, which purchased 1.7 million shares of Banesto last summer, would say only, "We are considering a whole range of options and our rights as a shareholder."
That J.P. Morgan is even considering an additional investment is remarkable given that it has already lost 60% of its investment based on the market value of Banesto's stock.
However, Morgan officials are said by people close to the firm to believe that Banesto could still be a money-making venture.
Chairman Dennis Weatherstone told a congressional inquiry last month that Morgan "continues to view its stake in Banesto as a long-term investment."
Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve Board notified the House Banking Committee that Banesto's problems didn't have any impact on the U.S. financial system or institutions that held deposits in Banesto.
The Fed said 32 U.S. banks had claims totaling $1.5 billion in banks located in Spain.
The Fed also said that based on a preliminary review of Morgan's transactions with Banesto, it didn't appear that the U.S. bank was involved in any unsound transactions with the Spanish concern.
CORSAIR PARTNERSHIP, an affiliate of J.P. Morgan & Co., owns a 7.9% stake in Banco Espanol de Credito.
An article yesterday incorrectly reported that J.P. Morgan owned a 7.9% stake.
