The U.S. Export-Import Bank is creating a new project-financing arm to support the participation of American companies in the global infrastructure market.
Asia will be a "significant beneficiary" of the new service, because it is turning more and more to the private sector to build power stations, industrial plants, airports and other large projects, said Kenneth Brody, the bank's chairman.
"Asian governments are all looking to put less debt on their balance sheets, so they are looking to the private sector for help," Mr. Brody said in an interview.
The new project-finance group is intended to assist U.S. companies managing or equipping these projects.
Mr. Brody is leaving for China next week to discuss, among other things, the potential use of such financing with Chinese officials and representatives of U.S. exporters.
Financing this kind of project is riskier than the Ex-Im Bank's traditional lending, but such projects are a growing part of the Asian business of U.S. capital-goods suppliers.
The Asian Development Bank estimates Indonesia and Thailand alone will build more than $40 billion in power capacity -- mostly through private-sector initiatives -- by the year 2000.
The Ex-Im Bank so far has had only limited experience in this kind of financing.
Mr. Brody, however, pointed to its support of the Philippines' largest power project, the $933 million, 700-megawatt Pagbilao plant, as a "successful" example.
Three official lenders, the Asian Development Bank, the London-based Commonwealth Development Corp. and the World Bank's International Finance Corp., have a token 13% share in the project.
But the bulk of the equity is privately held by a Philippine affiliate of the Hong Kong developer, Hopewell Holdings Ltd.
Mr. Brody said the new financing unit is part of his plan to "reinvent" the Ex-Im Bank, a federal lending institution chartered to support U.S. exports with loans, loan guarantees and, in certain cases, direct grants.
"We want exporters looking for this kind of finance to come to the bank as their first stop, and not at the back end of the transaction," Mr. Brody said.
He said the new unit will be headed by a project-finance specialist to be recruited from the private sector or from one of the multilateral lending agencies.
There are limits to the bank's overall exposure, but Mr. Brody believes it can greatly expand this new activity by charging the appropriate interest rates for these higher-risk guarantees or by syndicating large portions of the risks involved to investors and commercial lenders.
The need for U.S. exporters to remain competitive in Asia is driving yet another aspect of the bank's current reorganization.
The bank is creating a separate group to support the overseas sales of U.S. aircraft and aircraft components, much of which now go to Asian airlines.
Mr. Brody acknowledged that recent U.S. aircraft sales to Asia were won in the face of stiff competition from Airbus Industrie, the European plane-making consortium, and that the interested European governments stand ready to back Airbus sales with attractive export financing.
Mr. Brody will be the first U.S. Ex-Im Bank head to visit China since then-Chairman John Bohm went there in 1986.
He said he expects to meet officials from the finance and trade ministries and from the People's Bank of China, as well as Beijing-based U.S. business representatives.
