Moody's Investors Service said it lowered its ratings on this telephone company's unsecured debt to single-A-1 from double-A-3 and reduced its ratings on the company's senior, secured debt to double-A-3 from double-A-2.
About $4.4 billion of debt is affected.
Moody's said it expects Bell Canada to continue to lose market share due to intensifying long-distance competition, placing further strain on the company's financial performance over the intermediate term.
The company's long-term ratings were placed under review in September, following a decision by Canadian regulators to deny Bell Canada's application for rate relief and to lower its rate of return.
Since its application was denied, Bell Canada has steadily lost market share to competitors offering lower prices, Moody's said.
Strategic initiatives by Bell Canada are likely to yield benefits, but they also involve potential risks, the ratings agency said.
A Bell Canada spokeswoman said the company isn't surprised by Moody's action, since other agencies lowered the company's ratings last year.
Bell Canada believes "the market already reflects the previous downgrades," she said.
The holding company for Bell Canada is BCE Inc., Montreal.
PNC BANK Corp. (Pittsburgh) -- Moody's Investors Service Inc. said it raised its ratings on $2.5 billion in long-term debt of this bank holding company and two subsidiaries.
The rating agency said the move reflects "PNC's strengthened core profitability and improved asset quality, as well as franchise enhancements over the last few years."
For PNC Bank, the rating on subordinated debt was raised to A-2 from A-3. Ratings on senior debt for PNC Bank's PNC Funding Corp. were raised to A-1 from A-2, while subordinated debt ratings were lifted to A-2 from A-3. Ratings for long-term deposits and other senior obligations at PNC Bank's Massachusetts Co. were raised to A-1 from A-2.
SHERRITT Inc. -- Moody's Investors Service Inc. said it lowered its rating on US$200 million of Sherritt senior notes to single-B-1 from Ba-3.
Moody's cited continued losses and the volatility of the fertilizer, oil and natural gas businesses in which Sherritt is involved.
Moody's also assigned a single-B-1 rating to Sherritt's recent issue of about $200 million of notes and debentures.
Sherritt, based in Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta, will use the funds to acquire fertilizer assets from Imperial Oil Ltd. of Calgary, Alberta.
