These are weird times.
In fact, the times are a full 3.5% weirder than they were just a year ago.
That, at least, is the conclusion of the Fortean Times, a London-based magazine dedicated to the study of all things bizarre.
The February/March issue of the small journal compares thousands of zany happenings in 1992 and 1993 and declares, somewhat arbitrarily, that the overall strangeness index had risen to 3,520 from 3,400.
Among the curiosities of 1993:
A trash bin belonging to the London borough of Lewisham was found beside the Sea of Galilee.
Sixty lambs in Germany were attacked and killed by hundreds of crows.
Swedish doctors cured a deaf man by removing a 47-year-old bus ticket from his ear.
The Fortean Times Index (not to be confused with the Financial Times Index, which has been heading the other way) has 34 components.
Leading the index upward was the Strange Behavior component, which includes people who throw birds into cars waiting at stoplights and the robber who taped two cucumbers together and pretended he had a sawed-off shotgun.
The Hoaxes & Panics category got a boost from the Chinese city where people were convinced that a giant deranged robot from America was killing and sucking the blood of people who wore red.
"People are more and more erratic," says Robert J.M. Rickard, the editor.
"There are just such stupid extremes of behavior."
The new FT Index hasn't exactly moved the market.
"I salute these guys . . . but it's probably worthless," says Nicholas Stevenson, an S.G. Warburg & Co.
European equity strategist.
"If people start using it for investment analysis, that would be even more weird."
Mr. Stevenson thinks the index needs a more reliable way to gather and measure weirdness, perhaps a "Unesco definition of weirdness."
There are early signs that 1994 may be even weirder than 1993.
Sightings of the Virgin Mary and highway ghosts are on the rise so far.
With signs this promising, Mr. Rickard thinks his FT Index could well outperform the other FT Index.
For the Fortean Times, at least, that's a bullish sign.
"I take comfort in the fact that the world is getting weirder," Mr. Rickard says.
"It shows that man hasn't explained away everything yet."
