A triple bonus of rising natural-gas prices, stable interest rates and recent deregulatory moves is spawning a flurry of insider buying among natural-gas utility executives and directors.
Insiders at nine major natural-gas utilities have been snapping up shares in their respective companies, Securities and Exchange Commission filings show.
Those companies are Southern Union Co., Pennsylvania Enterprises, Coastal Corp., National Gas & Oil Co., Western Gas Resources Inc., Arkla Inc., Enron Corp., Sonat Inc. and Southwest Gas Corp.
While the recent cold snap may continue to lift natural-gas prices and provide a short-term boost for several gas utilities, industry insiders had long detected grounds for optimism before the fierce weather set in.
Indeed, they saw a fourth-quarter market sell-off as an opportunity to buy, a move that now appears prescient.
In New York Mercantile Exchange trading, the futures price of natural gas for March delivery was $2.246 a million British thermal units, down 3.7 cents.
Prior to the cold weather, outside investors had been wary of several potentially daunting problems facing the gas utilities, none of which materialized.
One concern was the possibility that the Federal Reserve Board might raise interest rates, which would damage the rate-sensitive industry.
But a bigger threat loomed when Standard & Poor's Corp. changed its ratings guidelines for electric utilities, citing concerns about the potentially depressive effects on profit margins from accelerating deregulation.
Several equity analysts also expressed concern about increased competition among electric utilities, sending the group into a tailspin last fall.
Insiders, though, weren't put off by fears of rating changes.
They knew that their companies were much further along than the electric utilities in terms of deregulation.
"The natural-gas industry had been through a difficult period" of adjustment, said Foster Corwith, a gas analyst at Dean Witter.
"Now they're in a good position to stabilize profit and grow."
At Southern Union, in Austin, Texas, outside director Aaron Fleischman more than doubled his stake by snapping up 16,400 shares in the utility at roughly $26 a share during the final week of December.
The stock closed yesterday at $31.125, down 25 cents, in composite trading on the American Stock Exchange.
Mr. Fleischman's open-market purchases came after he and eight other directors at the company purchased roughly $13,450,000 in company stock in a rights offering.
That subscription rights-offering was meant to partially finance the company's earlier-announced acquisition of gas-distribution properties in western Missouri owned by Western Resources Inc.
That deal, which will expand Southern Union's client base by 460,000 customers, is expected to close on Monday.
"I'm a believer in the gas-utility business, but I'm especially confident in the management of Southern Union as it moves to double the size of its business through the Missouri acquisition," said Mr. Fleischman, senior partner in Fleischman & Walsh, a Washington-based law firm specializing in representing regulated businesses.
Says Alvin Silber, an energy-industry analyst with broker Herzog Heine Geduld in New York: "Southern Union, now one of the top five low-cost gas utilities, has a long-term strategy of acquiring depressed Sun Belt utilities at a discount."
What's more, he says, "They're not only being hard-nosed about operating efficiencies, but they see long-term opportunities in the gas-utility sector based on the increasing use of natural gas in such nonconventional areas as transportation and air-conditioning."
Mr. Silber notes, for example, that the 1990 Clean Air Act mandates that the federal government's auto fleet convert to natural-gas fuel use over time.
Such regulations, he says, will create "12-month-a-year areas of consumption for natural-gas providers like Southern."
Among the major gas utilities showing significant insider-buying activity in the fourth quarter, SEC data indicate that eight insiders at Pennsylvania Enterprises bought a combined 24,625 shares at an average of $28 each.
Yesterday the stock closed at $30.25, down 75 cents, on the Nasdaq stock market.
"A number of our directors and officers have been buying stock because they believe that it represents a good value," says Thomas Ward, company vice president and secretary.
"The gas business has always been a solid contributor to our bottom line, and we expect that business to continue to grow steadily."
He notes, as well, that insiders are buying company stock on improved water-utility operations at the Wilkes-Barre, Pa., company.
SEC data also indicate that two insiders at Arkla bought 2,500 shares at around $7.90; two at National Gas & Oil acquired 11,529 shares at $16; two at Western Gas Resources purchased 1,800 shares at $31.50; one at Enron bought 13,437 shares at $29; one at Sonat acquired 10,000 at $27; one at Coastal snapped up 4,000 shares at $26.38; and one at Southwest Gas grabbed 2,000 shares at $16.
