OFF THE BACK BURNER, appliance sales keep cooking.
But prices just simmer.
Increased home building and renovating helped lift January shipments over target and marked the eighth month of gains, says the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers.
But the mature market sees much of its new growth coming from optional replacements, says the group's Bob Holding.
What's more, new federal efficiency rules add to the cost of goods.
Retailers such as Joseph Hassid of Bay Cities Discount in California say shoppers scoff at pass-through price rises and demand to bargain.
In Massachusetts, Yale Electric Sales says refrigerators and laundry-appliance prices are "up a bit," but it spends more on promos due to bad weather.
"We can't afford to raise prices," says Fretter Inc. in Quincy, Mass.
In Texas, Walt's Appliance Supermarket says business is good but "prices are pretty much the same."
Ditto, says the Sears store in Irving, Texas, where demand has been "tremendous."
L.A. retailers say summertime energy rebates from local utilities are a "very big factor" in buying decisions.
MUSIC SOOTHES MRI patients and so do refinements in the costly machines.
Magnetic resonance imaging machines get roomier, quicker and quieter, depending on model.
Magnacoustics, an Atlantic Beach, N.Y., firm, says its latest musical sound system reduces MRI noise.
A scan, which can last 30 minutes to an hour or so, requires a patient to lie still in a cylindrical unit.
Conventional radios or tape players can't be used in a magnetic field.
Robbie Parry, chief technologist at an MRI center in Peabody, Mass., says the music system aids claustrophobic patients, saving test time and, therefore, cost.
He says music is offered to all, and "98% of people use it."
Meanwhile, Advanced NMR Systems Inc. in Wilmington, Mass., markets InstaScan, a device that retrofits existing MRI units for faster processing.
The demographic outlook for Mexico's beer market wins a toast.
The Mexican beer industry has grown at an annual rate of about 6% since 1983 and is expected to continue doing so-vs. a likely dip in U.S. volume, says Bear Stearns analyst Carlos Laboy.
Among other signs, he notes 80% of the population is under 40, beer imports are low and the economy is growing.
PaineWebber analyst Emanuel Goldman adds: "If you believe as I do, people are self-indulgent creatures.
When you can afford more, you buy more."
The Mexican market also is mainly split between two big producers, Grupo Modelo, maker of Corona Beer, and Fomento Economico Mexicano, or Femsa.
None of this has been lost on U.S. beer makers.
Philip Morris's Miller unit owns some 8% of Femsa and Anheuser-Busch owns 18% of Modelo -- which went public in Mexico last month -- and has options to buy up to 35% later.
"We couldn't be happier with the relationship," says Jack Purnell, chairman of Anheuser-Busch International.
Anheuser's stake in Modelo, bought for $477 million eight months ago, was worth over $1 billion as of this week.
THE TOP TUBES of 1993 included Avon Products' Under the Sea Surprise Soap Gel in a see-through plastic tube showing a toy diver inside.
The Tube Council of North America also says Pfizer Inc.'s bright DayTime Ben Gay won for metal tubes.
Best-of-laminates went to Dinopaste, a Perio Products toothpaste packaged with a toy.
SLIMMED AND SASSY, a huge organization says it is "embracing Information Age technology and the power of the computer to redesign itself."
It adds it has "total, world-wide asset visibility" and "the organizational structure needed in the next century."
Who is it?
The U.S. Army.
SOMETHING VENTURED; jobs are gained.
Venture-capital-backed firms created jobs at a 19% annual growth rate in the five years ended in 1992 while Fortune 500 firms trimmed staff, says a study by accountants Coopers & Lybrand and VentureOne, a San Francisco research firm.
EXECUTIVES PACK UP and head for lessons in foreign markets.
The lifting of the trade embargo with Vietnam fans interest in a trip there by executives traveling under a University of North Carolina Kenan-Flagler Business School program.
Stanford University's business school expects its joint program with the Monterrey Institute of Technology in Mexico to draw more managers this year, now that Nafta's a fact.
In New York, executives enrolled in Columbia's M.B.A. program make tracks for Germany.
The University of Michigan, a trailblazer in the executive-education field, says South Africa, Indonesia and South America are among future travel possibilities.
But such excursions aren't cheap.
The Vietnam trip costs some $13,500 -- without transportation to its Hong Kong starting point.
Stanford cuts its 1994 program to two weeks from three, saving participants' time and money.
Columbia gets 250 to 300 applicants a year for the 120 spots in its M.B.A. program for executives.
BRIEFS: Shaping things: Contenders in the national Rube Goldberg Machine Contest to be held at Purdue University, Lafayette, Ind., must build a gizmo that can brew a single cup of coffee in less than five minutes. . . .
And in New York, the Cooper-Hewitt, National Museum of Design of the Smithsonian Institution sponsors a program called "Design=The Bottom Line: Conversations on Business, Design and Culture."
