With words that might have been borrowed from Saddam Hussein's book of bombast, North Korea threatened over the weekend to turn Seoul into a "sea of fire."
After a slight remission, the confrontation over Pyongyang's nuclear program may now be reaching critical mass.
One might wish that the Clinton Administration had husbanded its leadership chips in Asia a little more carefully.
We don't know what secrets are contained in the "glove box" at the reprocessing plant in Yongbyon.
Either Kim Il Sung has diverted enough enriched plutonium to assemble the beginnings of a nuclear arsenal, or he kept the inspectors away to prevent them from discovering the emptiness of his nuclear threat.
In either case, the world is being held up for nuclear blackmail.
If Pyongyang is allowed to profit from these stunts, it will only encourage others.
The U.N.'s nuclear inspectorate is now taking up the question of economic sanctions.
Yet the only effective squeeze on Pyongyang would be a squeeze in which China and Japan are participants.
Kim Il Sung's philosophy of "Juche" has accustomed his subjects to poverty and isolation.
The regime depends only on China for oil and coal to keep its ramshackle industry going, and on an intravenous drip of hard currency from Koreans living in Japan for the cash to pay these fuel bills and fund a smattering of terrorism and technology theft abroad.
This cash infusion came to about $1 billion last year, according to the Japanese finance ministry.
The irony is that the two countries most crucial to economic sanctions against North Korea are themselves under immediate threat of U.S. trade sanctions.
Nobody questions the general desirability of Japan accepting more imports or of Beijing getting its foot off the necks of its pro-democracy dissidents.
We'd say that history is pushing steadily in the direction of both outcomes, and that the first priority of the U.S. superpower is to make sure nothing shunts history off this propitious track.
North Korea's nuclear gambit threatens to do that.
It's unlikely that Beijing cares a fig for fraternal solidarity with the regime of Kim Il Sung.
For China, the real question is whether the fear of a nuclear renegade on its border outweighs the fond prospect in Beijing's eyes of a U.S. embarrassment that could hasten its withdrawal from the region.
It may be that the chickens are coming home from the Clinton Administration's equivocation in Bosnia and elsewhere over what really constitutes a vital U.S. interest.
Even if the best move now were to outwait Kim Il Sung, the carrot-waving Mr. Clinton would have a hard time convincing anybody that he wasn't just turning tail.
If China vetoes sanctions in the U.N. Security Council, Washington can still try knocking the financial wind out of Pyongyang bilaterally with Tokyo.
This won't be easy.
The Korean community that sends money to Kim Il Sung also has its hooks deeply into Japan's political parties, especially the Socialists, who form a linchpin in Prime Minister Hosokawa's shaky coalition.
What's more, many Koreans still have family living in the north, often close relatives who were lured back by ideological delusions or the promise of an education.
These relatives are now held as virtual hostages to ensure that Pyongyang keeps getting a rake-off from Japan's pachinko gaming industry, which is dominated by ethnic Koreans.
Tokyo also suspects that among its 700,000 law-abiding Koreans are a few "sleeper" terrorists waiting for a signal from Pyongyang.
In short, Washington may soon be asking Mr. Hosokawa to take some sizable political risks.
But of course the Clintonites were last seen holding the Japanese prime minister in a headlock and extorting favors for a single U.S. company.
And the President's minions have been advertising their intention to repeat this performance on behalf of other domestic clients.
Mr. Clinton will have to work twice as hard now to persuade the Japanese to follow him in a politically risky strategy of confrontation with North Korea.
What, then, is to be done about a classic nuclear threat of the post Cold-War era?
It may be too late for dealing with Kim, but would all those people who mocked Ronald Reagan's Star Wars run by us one more time why building even modest systems to defend land masses against nuclear missiles was a bad idea?
In fact, scientists were moving steadily up the technology curve toward missile-defense systems, but the Clinton Administration, reflecting rote Democratic theology, eviscerated the SDI program.
Perhaps that decision will be reconsidered after the world spends enough time running along the nuclear brink with Kim Il Sung.
