Mesa Inc. agreed to pay Unocal Corp. $42.8 million to settle a securities lawsuit dating back to the hostile takeover days of the mid-1980s.
For Unocal, the settlement represents the final chapter in a tortuous saga in which the Los Angeles oil company thwarted a 1985 takeover effort by Mesa Chairman Boone Pickens by buying back shares and loading up with debt that took years to reduce and resulted in numerous asset sales and staff cuts.
For Mesa the settlement also closes the book but leaves the debt-ridden natural-gas exploration and production company in the position of needing to borrow more money at high interest rates to make the settlement payment.
"We wanted to get back in the game, and we couldn't until we got past Unocal," said a Mesa spokesman in Dallas.
"That's why we settled the case."
Many investors thought Mesa would have lost the case if it had gone to trial as scheduled next month.
Unocal was seeking $149 million, about $50 million of which was interest.
The settlement sparked a surge in Mesa stock, which jumped 17%, to $7, up $1, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mesa said it would take a charge in the fourth quarter of this year roughly equal to the size of the settlement.
In the 1992 fourth quarter, Mesa had a net loss of $17.5 million, or 45 cents a share, on revenue of $78.5 million.
The company's main goal this year is to reduce debt, which will rise to about $1.3 billion because of the settlement, the spokesman said.
Mesa last year completed a debt restructuring that delays some interest payments for several years.
The spokesman wouldn't elaborate on how Mesa plans to reduce debt but acknowledged that some kind of offering or swap involving common shares was among the options.
Mesa amassed its debt by making capital investments and payouts on the assumption that natural-gas prices would be much higher than they are today.
"We're entering a new era," the spokesman said.
Mesa will consider stepping up exploration activities, something at which the company has succeeded historically but has been too cash-constrained to undertake in recent years, he added.
The size of the settlement is less significant to Unocal, a much larger company, which said it will record a pretax gain of $33 million in the 1994 first quarter.
In the 1993 period, Unocal had net income of $11 million, or one cent a share, on revenue of $2.32 billion; the results included a one-time charge of $130 million.
Unocal shares fell 37.5 cents to $28.25 in composite trading on the Big Board.
Although the takeover battle and ensuing litigation was acrimonious, a Unocal spokesman said tempers have calmed.
"Most of the significant players involved with this are no longer with us," the spokesman said.
"The company has changed a lot in the intervening time," he said, adding that "this was just one more thing on the law department's docket."
The suit stemmed from the accumulation of more than 13% of Unocal stock in 1985 by Mesa and its subsequent tender offer.
Unocal fended off the bid with a recapitalization plan, and Mesa ultimately agreed to exchange some Unocal stock for Unocal bonds; Mesa later sold the bonds.
Unocal's debt swelled to more than $6 billion that year, about $4.6 billion of which came from fighting off Mesa.
Unocal's debt stood at $3.4 billion at the end of last September.
Unocal sued Mesa in 1986, alleging that it violated a federal law designed to prevent company insiders and shareholders of more than 10% of a company's stock from seeking "short-swing" trading profits.
The law provides that a company may sue to recover any such profits that investors gain from the purchase and sale of its stock within a six-month period.
The rule is aimed at curbing speculative abuse of inside information.
Mesa has argued all along that it didn't commit any violations and that the situation was so hostile that it couldn't be considered an "insider."
The suit advanced to the Supreme Court, which in 1992 declined to review a lower court's ruling that the case should be tried.
Unocal also said that various partnerships controlled by Texas oil men Cyril Wagner Jr. and Jack E. Brown agreed to settle the same suit for $4.7 million.
They had joined Mr. Pickens in his Unocal efforts.
