WASTE FIRMS aren't cleaning up from Clinton policy initiatives.
The hazardous-waste-handling industry had expected a surge of business, as the pro-environment administration promised tougher enforcement and speedier cleanup of toxic dump sites.
But the proposed new Superfund legislation would let much contaminated dirt sit.
"We expected their positions to be more beneficial to us," says a spokesman for Union Pacific Corp.'s hazardous waste incineration and dump unit.
Manufacturers haven't grown wary enough of the Clinton EPA to start a cleanup binge on their own.
With cleanups largely stalled, 1993 was a disaster for the hazardous waste industry.
Stock prices of Chemical Waste Management and Rollins Environmental plunged by more than half from their highs to the lows last year.
And, for an industry fueled by regulation, 1994 isn't looking like a turnaround.
One bright spot: such promising, yet unproven, technologies as breaking down wastes in a bath of molten metal.
GARBAGE GROWS as a problem, at least in some people's minds.
A recent poll of U.S. women finds 23% believe consumer trash is the most important environmental issue today, followed by air quality (20%), water quality (16%) and the ozone layer (8%).
Five years ago, only 12% named garbage as most important, the marketing firm Gerstman+Meyers says.
Its poll, aimed at helping packaging concerns make products more appealing to women, reveals a gap in consumer awareness.
The "garbage crisis," a shortage of dump space that sent disposal prices upward in the late 1980s, existed in only a few places such as New York and New Jersey.
Today, a glut of disposal capacity in many areas has dump prices plunging.
Not fooled are the middle-aged and seniors, who rank trash, at most, a second-rate threat.
But women under 35 overwhelmingly choose garbage.
EARTHQUAKE brings out the rubble recyclers.
Los Angeles had barely ceased shaking when city officials, ever environmentally conscious, began to beat the drum for recycling.
Within days, letters went out to 2,700 demolition contractors asking that debris from the quake not be simply hauled off to dumps.
A quick pilot program to separate and analyze debris suggests that 81% of the estimated 500,000-to-800,000 tons of rubble in the city of Los Angeles alone can be recycled as cheaply as dumped.
Concrete, asphalt and dirt can be mixed, crushed and used as base for new roads.
Old brick can be salvaged for new buildings.
"Let's turn this tragedy into an opportunity to push forward with recycling," says Joan Edwards, a city waste official.
A 3,000-ton sample cost $14.50 a ton to recycle, she says, vs. as much as $33.80 a ton to dump.
That could save the hard-pressed city millions.
Dump owners may get a lot less rubble than initially expected.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency would consider financing recycling if it's economical, the agency says.
TWO DANGEROUS PRISONERS have escaped in trash trucks so far in 1994.
Both were compacted; one survives, found badly bruised at the dump.
Prisons tighten security against the unusual escapes.
The state prison in Lancaster, Calif., puts locks on dumpsters and counts inmates before trash trucks leave.
A Florida prison uses a "security procedure" of compacting trash in the truck while on the grounds.
A CHILL GOES through WMX Technologies as two big dumps the company owns near Philadelphia are hit with a combined fourfold increase in property taxes, to more than $4 million a year.
The tax rise was the idea of an enterprising school district seeking new funding.
WMX, which operates 130 dumps in the U.S., calls the hefty hike "unusual" and appeals.
FIRES AT OLD TIRE PILES prompt safety measures.
Two billion discarded automobile tires sit in piles around the U.S. Fires burn hot, threaten groundwater with oily runoff and can cost millions of dollars to extinguish.
The Scrap Tire Management Council advises: Fence them in; pile them low; keep a road clear for firetrucks.
BACKYARD BURNING of trash makes a smelly comeback.
As environmental laws force old rural dumps to close and towns increase trash-collection fees, more residents turn to burning waste in a 55-gallon drum.
Even if it's just paper, a backyard fire can be a smoky nuisance for neighbors.
Add in plastics and, officials say, it's potentially toxic.
Still, trash burning isn't an enforcement priority.
In Spooner, Wis., state environmental officer Jim Ross lacks ticketing authority so he tries to convince burners they are being rude to neighbors.
In tiny Milford, N.Y., population 460, antiburn activist Michael Whaling counted 68 burn barrels.
Most fire up on Saturday mornings, avoiding a long drive to a disposal outlet, he says.
Placing drop-off dumpsters closer to such towns would help curb burning, says a New York state official.
LITTER: Workers at a Preston, Conn., trash incinerator take time to inspect loads from a nearby casino, where chips and cash sometimes fall into the trash. . . .
Still going strong, states passed 110 new recycling laws in 1993, reports State Recycling Laws Update, a newsletter.
