After weeks of grappling with balky computers and a new surveying system, the Texas Employment Commission yesterday released its much-anticipated unemployment statistics for the state's metropolitan areas.
So, what do the numbers show?
Quite a bit, but you have to know how to read them.
Although the press and public tend to focus on the unemployment rate as a way of gauging the economy's health, economists generally take it with a grain of salt.
Not only are local unemployment figures extremely volatile on a month-to-month basis, but sometimes they can lead to false conclusions about what's really happening.
For instance, looking at unemployment numbers alone would suggest that the McAllen area is the sickest in the state.
Roughly 18% of the work force didn't have a job in February; that's twice the unemployment rate of Texas City-Galveston.
But as any close watcher of the Texas economy knows, McAllen -- buoyed by twin-plant growth, construction and trade with neighboring Mexico -- is actually more dynamic than the Texas City region, which has been hurt by sluggishness in the petrochemical industry.
And in fact, a separate set of statistics maintained by the Texas Employment Commission bears this out.
A survey of area companies indicates that the total number of payroll jobs in McAllen-Edinburg-Mission grew an explosive 7.2% between February 1992 and February 1993, compared with an anemic 0.1% gain for Texas City-Galveston.
One reason for the dissonance: McAllen's businesses are growing so fast that they're acting like magnets for jobseekers from Mexico, who come and swell the unemployment ranks before landing work or moving on.
There are also some other shortcomings to the unemployment data that bear watching.
For starters, the federal government this year implemented major changes in its household survey, a sampling method it has used since 1940 to come up with an estimate of the U.S. work force and the unemployment rate.
Among other things, the Bureau of Labor Statistics determined that the questions posed to respondents didn't do a very good job of eliciting the employment status of women, teenagers and elderly people.
Economists say that although the revisions eventually will prove helpful, they first make the data harder to interpret, because they don't allow for any historical comparison.
For instance, it's impossible to say with certainty whether Texas' February unemployment rate of 7.6% represented an improvement over the year-earlier figure of 8.1%.
"They've made changes that are going to greatly improve the series, so that's a positive," says Fiona Sigalla, an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
"But the changes also break the series, so in the short run that's bad."
At the local level, there's another reason for skepticism about the household-survey data: Researchers don't actually call a representative sample of households in each metropolitan area.
This means that local estimates must be extrapolated from the statewide data.
This is done via a 43-step process that attempts to account for regional differences by, for instance, taking into account local unemployment claims -- at best an inexact science.
On the other hand, the household survey does provide some information that can't be obtained from other employment measurements.
Because it contacts people at home -- as opposed to the so-called current employment survey, which takes data on wage earners from established companies -- it's more likely to get a fix on people who operate their own businesses, or who work for companies that recently started up.
It also captures the small portion of the population that works on farms and ranches.
Thus, according to the household survey, there were 8.5 million people employed in Texas in February, up 4% from the same month a year ago.
The current employment survey, on the other hand, showed 7.6 million Texans employed in nonagricultural wage and salary jobs, up 3.3% from a year earlier.
These differences can become acute, especially in times of economic turmoil, when lots of laid-off people are starting their own companies, or when business is really booming.
Indeed, one reason Austin's job-growth figures for 1993 were revised upward to 6.3% from about half that was that the current employment survey failed to catch the explosion in new small-business jobs.
A similar phenomenon occurred at the state level, where Texas wage and salary job growth was revised upward to 3% from about 2%.
Explains James Smith, a finance professor at the University of North Carolina: "Scratch a Texan and you'll find an entrepreneur."
