For months, the pressure grew on James Dickerson Jr., Bell Atlantic Corp.'s chief negotiator in the dicey and divisive talks to acquire Tele-Communications Inc.
But he knew he was in trouble when he couldn't sleep and no longer enjoyed eating.
Now Mr. Dickerson, a 47-year-old Bell Atlantic vice president, has decided to leave the company to join U.S. Healthcare Inc. as a senior vice president.
He quietly notified his bosses of the move about three weeks ago, shortly before the collapse of the would-be $16 billion-plus deal.
A few days after informing his employer, Mr. Dickerson, still leading the Bell Atlantic team in the ill-fated talks with the cable concern, awoke one morning in his New York hotel and felt dizzy.
Alarmed, he packed his bags, checked out and returned home to Philadelphia.
Normally a low-key executive with low blood pressure, Mr. Dickerson was diagnosed with a case of hypertension.
His doctor prescribed medication and instructed him to take a break.
"The stress of eight months of negotiations had built up on me," Mr. Dickerson says.
Bell Atlantic switched the lead role in the TCI talks to Lawrence Babbio Jr., chairman of the Bell Atlantic Enterprises International subsidiary.
Mr. Dickerson cut back on his days in the office, offering counsel on the deal to his successor.
Mr. Dickerson's stepping aside didn't cause the deal's collapse.
But his experience underscores the intensity of the negotiations and the impact of the deal on the people who had devoted themselves to bring together TCI and the regional Bell telephone company.
He had been spending six days a week in a New York hotel, away from his wife of 22 years and his two children and subsisting on room-service fare.
He was trying to crunch numbers that refused to add up and find answers to questions that, in the end, couldn't be answered.
The two sides took a break over the Christmas holiday, except for the flow of paper from lawyers.
That gave Mr. Dickerson time to talk about his own possible merger -- with U.S. Healthcare, a health maintenance organization provider based in Blue Bell, Pa., near Philadelphia.
He says the company had initiated the first contact in the fall, about the same time his blood pressure was rising.
By mid-January, Mr. Dickerson's health began to show signs of wear.
He was having trouble sleeping through the night, sometimes getting in no more than three hours at a time.
"I'd wake up thinking about numbers, issues and elements of the negotiations," he says.
About the same time, his appetite began to diminish -- dulled, he believes, from too many nights eating hotel food.
Then came the dizzy spell.
By then, he says, he had already decided to leave Bell Atlantic and try his hand in a new industry.
And although he says the decision to leave after 15 years wasn't a direct result of the bruising deal process, he concedes it might have made him more receptive to making the jump.
Mr. Dickerson, who is also controller at Bell Atlantic, plans to join U.S. Healthcare in a few weeks.
He will be a member of the senior management team, reporting to the chief financial officer.
In his home stands a treadmill that he didn't get to use much over the past year.
But "now that I'm moving into the healthcare field, I plan to become healthier," he says, vowing to stick to a regular exercise regime.
His blood pressure has since returned to normal.
