Back from the shadows of the Cold War for one more adventure is Blackford Oakes, the Central Intelligence Agency covert-activities chief featured in a bestselling series of novels by William F. Buckley Jr.
"A Very Private Plot" (Morrow, 272 pages, $20), the 10th and (so says its author) last of the Oakes chronicles, shifts between past and future tensions.
The book's "present" is 1995, when a liberal U.S. senator, bent on passing legislation that would ban secret CIA activities, tries to force Oakes to testify about something called "Cyclops."
The senator doesn't know for sure what Cyclops was, but he claims it brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Oakes risks being held in contempt of Congress by refusing to talk.
Through flashbacks, the reader learns what all the fuss is about.
In 1986, a handful of disaffected young Russians (some of them veterans of the disastrous Afghan campaign) planned the assassination of Premier Mikhail Gorbachev, whom they held responsible for their nation's ills.
When the plotters came to the attention of a KGB double agent, he alerted his longtime U.S. contact, Oakes, who in turn warned President Reagan.
The plot, of course, was a failure -- novelist Buckley does not attempt to rewrite history -- but some suspense is generated regarding the fate of the players.
The other appeal of this smoothly written entertainment is in its seemingly knowledgeable peeks inside the corridors of power: at make-believe meetings with the likes of CIA chief William Casey, and inside the Oval Office with President Reagan.
The Reagan episodes ring truest -- and funniest -- as the chief executive looks to old movies for historical precedents: "I remember in Man Hunt when Walter Pidgeon had Hitler at his mountain hideout right in the crosshairs of his rifle -- my heavens, how we all wish he had squeezed that trigger!
Turn in Walter Pidgeon because he intended to shoot Hitler?
That's crazy!"
Craziness of a different sort informs "Mirror Maze" (Villard, 358 pages, $21), the latest in William Bayer's books featuring New York Police Department Lt. Frank Janek.
A young woman raised above an elaborate mirrored fun house, and abused there by her carnival-worker father, acts out her ritual-revenge obsessions by drugging and robbing men.
When one victim is found killed, Janek hunts the young woman through the city's maze.
At the same time, the lieutenant is forced to re-enter another labyrinth: the notorious nine-year-old Mendoza case, which saw a well-to-do New Yorker convicted of arranging the murder of the wife who engaged with him in violent sexual scenarios.
Did an official coverup result in other killings?
Janek's chief sends him to Cuba in search of a vanished witness.
Mr. Bayer's fictional maze is well-constructed, filled with surprising turns and intentionally frustrating dead ends.
Discovered within it are straight and crooked cops, devious and aboveboard attorneys, caring psychiatrists, coldblooded predators and a surprisingly sympathetic victimizer.
Janek himself proves to be good company: a likable and believable hero, more than a match for the monsters he eventually finds.
There's nothing monstrous to worry about in the latest ultracozy mystery of Lilian Jackson Braun.
What violence there is takes place offstage in "The Cat Who Came to Breakfast" (Putnam, 254 pages, $19.95), the 16th book involving small-town columnist-millionaire Jim Qwilleran and his two Siamese cats, one of whom may have useful psychic abilities.
This time out, the columnist and his felines investigate the curious doings on Breakfast Island, a historic offshore settlement recently developed as a vacation spot.
The old-timers resent the newcomers, but is there enough bad blood to lead to murder?
Readers hungry for mild detection and lots of cat grooming will find "Breakfast" just their cup of kibble.
The more hard-boiled, though, may prove allergic to these Siamese.
In a league apart from any of the books just discussed is "Bomber's Law" (Henry Holt, 296 pages, $22.50), by George V. Higgins, one of the most accomplished novelists ever to write in the crime-fiction field.
This 25th Higgins book has a Boston police detective, Harry Dell'Appa, preparing to assume the caseload of retiring veteran Bob Brennan.
The glaring omission of Brennan's career is his failure to find grounds to arrest Short Joey Mossi, who is almost certainly a hit man for the mob.
Brennan has been stalking Mossi for years without turning up any evidence.
Dell'Appa finds this peculiar, and he begins poking into Brennan's secrets as well as Mossi's.
Mr. Higgins's forte is dialogue.
"Bomber's Law" is told almost completely through conversations.
Its characters are champion talkers; their speeches, filled with engrossing digressions and self-revealing asides, artfully resemble real-life monologues without duplicating real talk's false starts and dull repetitions.
The author is on record as being an admirer of the work of the late John O'Hara, a writer who was an expert at showing by telling.
With "Bomber's Law," Mr. Higgins earns another place on the same shelf as that past master.
