R.H. Macy & Co. reported strong operating earnings and net income for its fiscal second quarter despite blankets of snow in key regions and store damage from the Los Angeles earthquake.
The company also reported a modest increase of 1.4% in same-store sales -- a key retailing indicator -- for the quarter, which ended Jan. 29.
In February that measure, which charts sales at stores open a year or more, grew at an even stronger pace, up close to 6% from a year earlier.
Macy said increases in merchandise gross margins and reductions in expenses resulted in a nearly sevenfold increase in net income, to $60.5 million, compared with a year-earlier $8.9 million.
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for the quarter exceeded the company's business plan, rising 61% to $227.2 million from a year-earlier $141.1 million.
Macy said that based on the quarterly results and on February's preliminary results, the company has met or exceeded its plan for 13 of the past 14 months.
Total sales for the quarter fell 2%, to $1.99 billion from $2.04 billion, showing some effect from damage to four stores in the Los Angeles earthquake.
Isaac Lagnado of Tactical Retail Solutions Inc., an industry consultant, said he was "pleasantly surprised" at Macy's same-store gains.
"Macy did better than several other department stores," he said.
The February gain, he said, "tells us the first deliveries of spring are showing good sales."
It is vital for Macy to meet business-plan projections for earnings growth and to post healthy increases in same-store sales as it prepares to file a reorganization plan in federal bankruptcy court in New York.
The company has been operating under federal bankruptcy protection for more than two years.
Macy hopes that stronger operating results will, in part, help fend off Federated Department Stores Inc., a Macy rival and senior creditor that has said it wants to merge the two department-store chains.
Myron E. Ullman III, Macy's chairman and chief executive officer, said considering disruptions by snowstorms and the earthquake, same-store sales gains in the months of January and February were "very encouraging."
He said "improvements in merchandising" and ongoing programs to reduce expenses have improved Macy's bottom line.
He also said Macy was working "vigorously" with creditors and a court-appointed mediator, Cyrus Vance, to develop a consensual plan of reorganization.
