The Clinton administration is seeking to kill the targeted jobs tax credit, a roughly $273 million annual tax break used largely by the retailing and hotel industries.
The White House also is considering replacing the federal emergency unemployment-benefits program, which expires Feb. 5, with a plan that would require a substantial state role.
The changes will be proposed in President Clinton's budget early next month.
"Certain kinds of answers may not work" for getting the unemployed back to work, Labor Secretary Robert Reich told the Center for National Policy, a Washington think tank.
"We need to turn our resources elsewhere."
Mr. Reich laid out his vision for programs that do work.
He lauded the Job Corps, which provides long-term training in a boot-camp environment for inner-city youth.
He also said extra schooling beyond high school and allowing entrepreneurial-minded unemployed workers to use benefits to start businesses are beneficial.
The White House is likely to seek new emphasis for those types of programs in the budget.
One program that doesn't work, Mr. Reich argued, is the jobs-tax credit, which in the past decade has given employers $4.5 billion in tax breaks for hiring certain groups of disadvantaged workers.
Under the program, companies that hire workers -- mostly inner-city youth -- for 90 calendar days or 120 work hours can get a break of as much as $2,400 a worker.
Several government and private studies have concluded that the program doesn't help anyone except the employers who garner the tax credits.
The General Accounting Office, the research arm of Congress, concluded two years ago that there were no substantial differences between the earnings of people hired by companies claiming the tax break and other, similar workers.
And the Labor Department's inspector general last year concluded that most of the workers would have been hired even without the tax credit.
But Mark Gorman, senior director for government affairs at the National Restaurant Association in Washington, countered that the program does what it was set up to do.
"Nobody is making the case it creates a lot of new jobs," he said.
"But there's no doubt it encourages companies to give preferences to economically disadvantaged people that they might not otherwise."
Many of the association's members, from McDonald's franchises to Red Lobster, use the program, Mr. Gorman said.
The administration is still trying to decide what to do about federal unemployment benefits.
There appears to be minimal appetite on Capitol Hill to resurrect the emergency program, which started in November 1991 and has paid out about $25 billion in aid.
The program provides as many as 26 weeks of additional benefits for workers who have exhausted regular state benefits.
But the national unemployment rate declined to 6.4% last month.
It was 6.9% when the federal unemployment-benefits program began in 1991, and subsequently rose to 7.7% before coming back down.
Mr. Reich said he is considering seeking an extended unemployment insurance program in which costs would be split equally by the federal government and the states.
A similar 50-50 program is in place now, but has been virtually unused by the states.
Robert McGlotten, AFL-CIO legislative director, said it would be a mistake to ask states to kick in more money.
He urged the administration to see unemployed workers as a crisis.
"It is expensive, no doubt," he said.
"But so is supplemental earthquake assistance.
It's also a natural disaster for people who have lost their jobs."
