Standard & Poor's Corp., citing increased competition that USAir Group Inc. faces from low-cost rivals, cut its ratings on $2.9 billion of the carrier's long-term debt.
S&P lowered its rating of USAir's preferred stock to triple-C-plus from single-B-minus, pushing the airline's preferred stock further into speculative-investment status.
S&P also lowered ratings of USAir Group's subsidiary, USAir Inc., as follows: senior unsecured debt to single-B from single-B-plus; airport revenue bonds to single-B-plus from double-B-minus; and equipment trust certificates to double-B from double-B-plus.
The rating concern said USAir's decision last month to lower fares sharply has put added pressure on the airline to gain "substantial pay and productivity concessions" from its unions.
The airline "doesn't face an immediate liquidity problem, but must address its high costs this year in order to stabilize its finances," said Philip Baggaley, vice president of S&P's transportation-ratings group.
USAir approached its unions for concessions this month, but because of the uncertainty of those negotiations, S&P said it would keep the airline's debt on CreditWatch for further possible downgrades.
(Typically a company is removed from CreditWatch following a downgrade.)
"The result of those talks will be crucial in avoiding lower ratings," Mr. Baggaley said.
Still, S&P remained somewhat optimistic, given that the company has relatively stable labor relations, therefore may more easily negotiate concessions given the threat of new, low-cost competition.
A USAir spokesman said the union discussions are progressing, but he didn't offer specifics.
USAir, based in Arlington, Va., slashed fares last month as much as 70% on many of its routes to fend off low-cost rivals Continental Airlines and Southwest Airlines.
"The fare cuts were meant to minimize the damage," Mr. Baggaley said, "but it was clear they were going to lose a fair amount of money either way."
A USAir spokesman said the lower ratings from S&P were "not unexpected."
He added, "S&P pointed out things we are already doing.
We agree on what has to be done."
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, USAir's Class B preferred stock closed at $37 a share, down $1.875 cents.
USAir's common stock closed at $8.50 a share, down 12.5 cents.
