Crude oil rose in nondescript trading as market players awaited the release of inventory statistics that wound up showing a sharp downturn in refinery output of petroleum products.
After the close of trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the American Petroleum Institute reported that U.S. refineries operated at 87.5% of capacity in the week ended Feb. 25, down from 90% the prior week.
The level matches the lowest utilization rate during the past year and reflects what refining engineers call "turnaround season," the time of year when many plants or portions of plants are shut down for maintenance and overhauls.
The refinery decline coupled with strong cold-weather-induced demand for heating oil caused a drop of 3.9 million barrels in inventories of that product.
At the same time demand was 7.1% higher than it was last year, calculated Robert Boslego, president of Boslego Corp., a Winchester, Mass., energy-consulting and information firm.
That could be bullish for petroleum prices, he said.
The latest statistics "will be viewed favorably by the market," Mr. Boslego predicted.
Both the decline in refinery utilization and the inventory drawdown were steeper than many analysts had expected.
On the New York Merc yesterday, light sweet crude for April delivery rose 19 cents a barrel to settle at $14.67.
April heating oil jumped 0.66 cent to 45.55 cents a gallon and April gasoline advanced 0.6 cent to 45.75 cents a gallon.
Crude-oil inventories in the latest week dropped a steep 7.8 million barrels to about 325.7 million barrels, the API reported.
That's significantly lower than they were at this time last year and fall into the lower end of the range tracked by statistic-oriented industry analysts.
Meanwhile, gasoline stocks bucked the trend by rising slightly.
But Mr. Boslego noted that gasoline demand over the mostrecent four-week period was actually 3.2% higher than last year.
"You would think the harsher weather conditions would damp gasoline demand," he said.
"The fact that it remains as strong as it has, despite the weather, to me means that when weather conditions clear up you could see quite robust demand," he added.
Industry analysts generally explain the hearty gasoline demand by citing the strong economy and low retail prices.
PRECIOUS METALS: Gold-futures prices fell in a day of retrenchment after strong gains on Monday.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was down $3.10 to $379.40 an ounce.
Generally, the gold market is jittery about the prospect of a return of inflation, but traders aren't convinced that such a return will actually occur, analysts said.
Until it becomes clear whether inflation is actually picking up, they said, gold is likely to continue to fluctuate within the $375-to-$385-an-ounce trading range in which it has remained for the past few weeks.
Any meaningful increase in inflation, however, would be expected to push gold's price higher.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of corn and soybean futures contracts settled mixed.
A record soybean harvest is shaping up in South America.
Richard Loewy, president of AgResource Co., Chicago, is predicting record harvests in Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay for combined production of about 40 million metric tons, or roughly 1.46 billion bushels.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the soybean contract for May delivery rose 0.75 cent a bushel to settle at $6.8450 a bushel.
Grain prices have drifted for several sessions.
But traders said they detected some firmness yesterday, which they mostly attribute to farmers resisting selling at these levels.
Some Midwest grain elevators raised their bids yesterday in an attempt to lure corn from farm bins.
