Prudential Insurance Co. of America and Harvard Medical School said they agreed to collaborate on a project aimed at evaluating and improving the quality of managed health care.
The agreement is the first significant project for Prudential's recently established Center for Health Care Research.
In the face of mounting pressure from government and private-sector health reform efforts, it reflects the growing effort of health-care companies to measure and improve their performance in delivering medical care.
Prudential formed the research center last August as part of its strategic shift from a company that provides health insurance to one that delivers care.
William L. Roper, president of the center, described it as the research and development arm of Prudential's health-care operation.
He added that such a facility is important to the company's success in the healthcare market.
Other companies and health plans have mounted similar efforts.
For instance, United HealthCare Corp.'s Center for Health Care Policy and Evaluation, Minneapolis, is developing report cards intended to aid consumers in choosing health plans.
U.S. Quality Algorithms, a unit of U.S. Healthcare, Blue Bell, Pa., focuses on methods to evaluate hospitals and doctors.
Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, Calif., Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, Seattle, and Health Partners, Minneapolis, all health maintenance organizations, also run research centers aimed at finding cost-effective ways to monitor quality and provide care.
The Prudential-Harvard agreement is part of Prudential's plan to "use our member population as an ongoing laboratory for studies" of the outcomes of health services, Dr. Roper said.
Under the arrangement, Prudential will pay Harvard a $100,000 annual retainer for the next three years as a step toward "a long-term collaboration," he said.
Among other things, the effort is expected to lead to more reliable methods of measuring the effectiveness of care and to provide doctors with information to help "change the way health care is delivered," Dr. Roper said.
For Harvard, whose Department of Health Care Policy is one of the nation's leading academic programs in health services research, the agreement provides researchers access to Prudential's five million covered lives, a particularly large source of patients on which to study outcomes and develop ways to measure performance.
"The health-care system is going to be driven by things people want to measure," said Barbara J. McNeil, chairman of the department.
But few reliable tools exist to account for differences in how sick patients are and other variables that can lead to bias in measuring and comparing treatment results, she said.
Initial projects under the agreement will focus on how to reduce bias and on factors that contribute to patient satisfaction with care, she said.
