The New York Stock Exchange, as part of an effort to maintain its prestige in the global marketplace, is considering trading foreign stocks in different currencies.
Though such a step, if taken, is several years away, industry executives said the Big Board is mulling the idea as part of its long-term business plan and has discussed the concept with regulators in connection with broader talks on its future.
The Securities and Exchange Commission said that so far the Big Board hasn't made any formal proposal to the agency about trading nondollar-denominated securities.
But the idea of trading foreign stocks in different currencies was unveiled publicly by Richard Grasso, president of the Big Board, at a luncheon for the Cooley's Anemia Foundation on Monday.
Saying that the Big Board's opportunities to expand its domestic business are limited, he told the group the exchange can boost its business "by adding foreign product and by changing the currencies under which that product is traded."
In an interview after the lunch, Mr. Grasso said the Big Board needs to list more foreign companies before it can gauge whether there is demand for trading foreign stocks in different currencies.
"My guess is that when you get upwards of 400 companies listed on the exchange, there will be demand," Mr. Grasso said.
Currently, there are about 160 foreign companies whose stock or American depositary receipts are listed on the New York exchange.
ADRs, as they're known, represent a share, or specified number of shares, of a foreign stock.
By looking at listing foreign stocks in different currencies, the Big Board is hoping to lure more foreign investors to trade in New York.
Under the plan envisioned by the Big Board, for example, a Japanese investor who wants to buy shares of Daimler-Benz AG, the German car company whose ADRs are listed on the New York exchange, would be able to do so in Japanese yen, thus reducing the currency-transaction costs involved in the stock purchase.
Similarly, many big U.S. institutional investors would be able to buy the ordinary shares of Daimler-Benz, circumventing the need to pay the albeit-modest ADR fees and perhaps enabling them to buy stock at a better price than offered in the ADR market.
"Mr. Grasso is serious about the idea," said one securities industry executive.
"But you have no sense of the timing of it."
The Big Board has held for years that offering investors the ability to trade foreign stocks is the key to preventing it from slipping even further in importance among major exchanges around the world.
But so far, the New York exchange has made scant progress.
Two years ago, William Donaldson, chairman of the Big Board, went head to head with then-SEC Chairman Richard Breeden to get the agency to soften strict U.S. disclosure rules so foreign companies with looser listing requirements could offer their shares in the U.S.
The SEC has refused to make any substantial concessions on those issues.
Nevertheless, the Big Board succeeded last year in persuading Daimler-Benz to list its shares as ADRs on the exchange.
At the time, Mr. Donaldson argued that if the exchange doesn't lure more foreign companies "the danger is that we'll become a regional exchange in a global marketplace."
Exchange officials have said the Big Board already has lost considerable business to foreign stock exchanges, particularly London, and has been making efforts to "repatriate" that business.
"Just as the regional exchanges take business away from New York, New York can take business away from the international markets," said Peter DaPuzzo, senior managing director at Cantor Fitzgerald, a securities firm, in New York.
But others aren't so sure the Big Board will be able to surmount all the hurdles that stand between it and listing foreign stocks in foreign currencies.
Richard Ketchum, chief operating officer at the National Association of Securities Dealers, which runs the Nasdaq Stock Market, said the NASD, like the Big Board, is interested in trading foreign stocks in different currencies.
But at least for the time being, he added, the Depositary Trust Corp., the repository for stock certificates, doesn't have the capability of settling stock transactions in different currencies.
Although Mr. Ketchum said trading stocks in different currencies would probably attract more business to the U.S. markets, he doesn't think it will happen at least for another few years.
Meanwhile, some money managers question whether there is enough demand among investors for buying foreign stocks on the Big Board in different currencies.
Nick Carn, who manages $200 million at London-based Draycott Partners, said most money managers are already geared up to trade foreign stocks in different currencies.
So, without a compelling reason, they are unlikely to move their business to the Big Board.
"I suspect it's something people probably don't want," says Mr. Carn.
"If you are going to buy a foreign security in foreign currency, you might as well go to the exchange on which it's listed."
Still, Mr. Carn conceded that if the New York exchange were to become a place of one-stop stock shopping, he may change his mind.
"I suppose if I could buy every German security on the New York Stock Exchange and it was cheaper and more liquid, I would," he said.
"But it's difficult to persuade someone to do part of their foreign business there."
Other money managers agree that the Big Board will have to offer a vast repertoire of stocks if it is to lure foreign money managers to trade in New York.
"If it were five stocks out of Hong Kong and two stocks out of Singapore, then forget about it," said Fermin Da Costa Gomez, a portfolio manager at Pacific Asset Management NV in Amsterdam.
But Mr. Da Costa Gomez said it would make his life much easier if the New York exchange started listing a broad array of stocks in different currencies.
"As a fund manager, we often get a redemption or a lot of money in and I can't do zip because the Asian markets are closed," he said.
"If you can trade Asian stocks at 3 or 4 o'clock in our afternoon, that would be bloody convenient."
Christi Harlan in Washington contributed to this article.
