Evanston, Ill. -- Racquetball is a wonderful game, and I pride myself on being one of its earliest participants.
I've been playing for 23 or 24 years, long enough to have been asked, by handball players when headed courtward, why I was carrying that racquet.
I recall the mid-1970s, when the sport was the rage and large, spiffy clubs were springing up everywhere.
"You say you'd like to join?" the young man in sweat clothes behind the counter would say.
"Well, I think we may have an opening."
"What do you charge for court time?"
I would ask.
"You mean by the season, of course," the guy would answer.
But after a few years you didn't have to reserve court time by the season -- a phone call a week in advance would do.
After a couple years more you could call the day before and arrange to play.
Then all you had to do was show up.
One day, around 1985, I showed up and the place was closed.
It's a warehouse now, I think.
Along with racquetballers displaced by that and other club closings (there used to be several in my vicinity), I joined the local YMCA.
It had a fair amount of traffic on its four courts for a while, but that has petered out, too.
Jon Laing, who writes for Barron's, and I play a couple weekday mornings starting at 7:45, and I can think of only one day this winter in which another court was occupied while we were there.
This week, out of curiosity, I asked the "Y" deskman what the weekend situation was like.
He showed me the advance sign-up sheets for tomorrow and Sunday.
They were blank.
"We get some early evening play on weekdays, but not much at other times," said he.
I'd long suspected that racquetball wouldn't hold its early popularity -- the first tip-off was the fact that professional athletes were among the most visible court-club investors -- but its recent decline has seemed precipitous.
For documentation, I phoned the American Amateur Racquetball Association, the sport's U.S. governing body.
I was told that while it had no current figures, its latest estimate was that U.S. participation was holding steady at about 9.5 million players.
Given the ingrained boosterism of such organizations, I expected about as much.
The National Sporting Goods Association, which annually surveys sports participation, says there were about 6.6 million American racquetballers at its last published check, in 1992, down from 9.9 million in 1984.
In a land of 250 million, there probably are 6.6 million people with lower-lip cold sores at any given time, but even that number seems high.
Racquetball's professional side reflects the harsher realities.
A pro tour flourished in the early '80s and had a star in young Marty Hogan, but by the late '80s it dwindled to only four stops before it died.
There's a new one now, called the TransCoastal International Tour (it also visits Canada and Mexico), but it's sans Hogan (he's retired) and the total prize money available at each of its 20 stops is in the $15,000-to-$20,000 range, against as much as $50,000 in the good old days.
"Our venues never had the seating capacity to produce much of a live gate, and the ball moves too fast for television," says Hank Marcus, the 32-year-old former playing pro who's commissioner of the TransCoastal tour.
"We've had to scale down our expectations."
The pros have reduced their game's number of serves to one from two to promote rallies, and have changed the color of their ball to green from blue in the name of greater visibility.
The service change came because of all the aces produced by the 170-mph deliveries of the top players, but Marcus thinks the recreational game also would benefit from such a switch.
Another fellow who believes a one-serve rule might help bring players back to racquetball is Joe Sobek.
He's worth listening to because he invented the game, in 1949.
He was a tennis pro in Greenwich, Conn., who wanted a winter outlet for his energies.
Rejecting handball because it requires ambidexterity and squash because courts were too few, he developed a short-handled racquet with strings and found a light, seamless dime-store ball to whack around with it inside a handball court.
The game took no time to learn, and soon he and his friends were hot at it.
The rub was in finding a mass-produced rubber ball that was both reliable and playable.
"The ones that were lively enough broke, and the ones that were sturdy didn't play well," Sobek says.
The quest took nearly 20 years, but once it was successful the game soared.
Sobek, now 75 years old, says he's disappointed but not terribly surprised that racquetball has fallen into eclipse.
He agrees with the proposition that easy-to-do exercise pushes out activities that require some talent and application, and notes that as simple as racquetball is to learn it still falls short of the instant mastery offered by such currently in-vogue workout gadgets as the treadmill, Lifecycle or StairMaster.
I offered him my theory that racquetball has faltered in part because, unlike some other sports, very small differences in skill between players translate into very large differences in game scores.
This means that, to keep interested, players must find opponents who perform at almost exactly their level, no small feat.
I attribute my continued allegiance to the game to the availability of the above-mentioned Laing.
He and I share a "B" level of expertise and pretty much take turns winning, although I must admit that his wimpy "kill" shots are becoming more effective as my legs age.
Sobek said he thought I had a point, but he had a further one.
"Racquetball's decline was probably inevitable because the sport grew so fast," he opines.
"It caught right on, the court clubs mushroomed, and all the operators had to do to get business was open their doors.
But most of them didn't do much promotion, or offer instruction, and when people reached their limits they got bored and quit.
"It's been a case of easy come, easy go, and I'm afraid that coming back won't be easy."
