The arrest of the highest-ranking U.S. government official ever accused of spying sent shudders through the capital and brought cries in the Senate for a halt to Russian aid.
Meanwhile, the Central Intelligence Agency continued to assess the damage allegedly caused by Aldrich H. Ames, the CIA official who is accused of giving the KGB details of some of the nation's most-secret spy operations.
Among other things, the officials tried to determine the extent to which Mr. Ames's disclosures over the past eight years had risked the lives of intelligence operatives.
Mr. Ames, for his part, remained in jail and said, through his court-appointed lawyer, well-known trial attorney Plato Cacheris, that he would plead not guilty and wasn't bargaining with the government.
Sen. Dennis DeConcini, the Arizona Democrat who heads the Senate's Select Committee on Intelligence, called for a 60-day freeze on the delivery of further aid to Moscow until Russian leaders agree to help the U.S. assess the damage.
Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole (R., Kansas), who said the Ames case challenges the "foundation of our relationship" with Russia, said that if President Clinton didn't use his executive powers to freeze the aid, Congress might do it for him.
He also called for the Russians to halt spy operations in the U.S. and to withdraw from the U.S. any Russian diplomats who dealt with Mr. Ames.
Asked about the Senate pressure, President Clinton said, "I think we should be careful before we make specific determinations about aid flows.
A lot of aid flows, for example, are directly to individuals who are trying to privatize their businesses, having nothing to do with government or government policies."
Mr. Clinton, who repeated an earlier assessment that the spy case is serious, added, "Most of our government aid is in the form of aid to take down the nuclear weapons, and I don't think anyone thinks we should slow that up."
The State Department said that if Russian aid were frozen, it would hold up about $1.7 billion of disbursements promised or in the pipeline.
"The extent of the effect of this incident on our relationship with Russia will depend upon Russian actions in the days ahead," Secretary of State Warren Christopher told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee yesterday.
"Events in Russia over the past few weeks have revived our fears about the future."
But the administration, which until recently had viewed Russia as a comparative success in a muddled foreign-policy portfolio, clearly was rattled.
"There's a feeling of acute annoyance, bordering on outrage," one high-ranking official said.
"This sort of stuff wasn't supposed to happen."
For its part, the Russian government urged the U.S. not to allow the Ames affair to cause a major political rift between the two countries.
"It would be inappropriate to hype this case into a political scandal," the official news agency Itar-Tass commented yesterday.
Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman Grigory Karasin told Itar-Tass that "a balanced and quiet approach, devoid of excessive political emotions" is necessary and that many questions remained to be clarified.
Officials at the Foreign Intelligence Service, the external branch of the former KGB, declined to comment on the case.
But repeatedly in recent months, intelligence officials have charged that foreign countries are engaged in spying on Russia.
Meanwhile, the U.S. is waiting for Moscow to respond to its request to send home those individuals in the Russian Embassy who aided or supported Mr. Ames's spying.
Senior U.S. officials said yesterday that the administration hasn't set a deadline by which it wants the Russians to leave.
However, the administration clearly is looking for action within the next couple of days.
"We've asked them to do the right thing before we do it for them," a senior U.S. offical said.
Unlike U.S. aid to Israel, which also has been caught spying on the U.S., aid to Russia has a very fragile domestic constituency.
Sen. Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.), ranking minority member of the foreign operations subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee, said bipartisan support for aid to Russia is dwindling.
"It the Ames case is just one of a series of movements in the wrong direction.
It just leads me to question whether we ought to supply anything to Russia next year."
Sen. DeConcini and the CIA added details to the saga of Mr. Ames, who was born in River Falls, Wis., in 1941.
He joined the CIA in 1962 as a trainee.
After attending the University of Chicago, he graduated from George Washington University here in 1967 with an undergraduate degree in history.
Mr. Cacheris, saying his client would plead not guilty, added that "we have not discussed any deals" with the government.
Mr. Cacheris was appointed by the court to represent Mr. Ames, because the CIA agent's funds have been frozen by the government.
A combined preliminary and bond hearing for Mr. Ames, originally scheduled for tomorrow, now is planned for Tuesday in Alexandria, Va.
Mr. Cacheris is one of Washington's most celebrated white-collar defense lawyers, whose clients have included former National Security Council staffer Fawn Hall, Sheik Kamal Adham, who was indicted in the BCCI case, and the late Attorney General John Mitchell.
Mr. Ames, the son of a CIA employee, spent his entire career in the agency, coming to specialize in counterintelligence operations against the Russians in the mid- to late 1980s, a critical period at the end of the Cold War.
According to the FBI, his spy activities began in 1985 and continued until earlier this week, when he was arrested near his home.
In an odd coincidence, Mr. Ames's father was a subordinate of James Jesus Angleton, the legendary CIA counterintelligence chief.
Mr. Angleton, who was forced into retirement in the 1970s, was relentless in his pursuit of a CIA "mole" -- an agency official who was secretly working for the Soviets.
Mr. Angleton never found one -- but a decade after his retirement, Aldrich Ames was recruited by the KGB, according to the FBI's court filing.
Mr. Ames is now the highest-ranking CIA official ever accused of being "turned" by the Russians.
Since the mid-1980s, according to current and former CIA officials, the agency suspected that it had a "mole" who had compromised the identities of Soviet agents and revealed other highly sensitive intelligence information.
After noticing a number of operations going sour, the CIA did an "analytical review" to determine "how come all these things are going crazy on us," one Justice Department official said.
Suspicions were raised by the Ameses' sudden wealth, manifested in the cash purchase of a $540,000 house and a string of unexplained bank deposits.
The sudden appearance of a red Jaguar in the parking lot at Langley sparked curiosity, although a number of other CIA employees also drive luxury foreign automobiles.
Mr. Ames's explanation -- that his wife came from a wealthy Colombian family -- seemed to satisfy his colleagues, until federal authorities began further investigations into Mr. Ames's financial dealings and activities about two years ago.
In 1986 and again in 1991, according to Sen. DeConcini, Mr. Ames passed CIA-administered lie-detector tests, which are routine for all employees.
Sen. DeConcini said his briefings from CIA Director James Woolsey and other officials have led him to suspect the worst: that the leakage compromised major U.S. codes and operatives in Russia and might have caused the executions of some of the people involved.
Robert Gates who headed the CIA from 1991 through 1993, warned that Sen. DeConcini's move to suspend aid might be a mistake because it would put "the entire U.S.-Russian relationship at risk over this."
He also worried that to demand Russian cooperation could do some additional damage, because it might be asking "more than Yeltsin can extract from the bureaucracy at this point."
Joe Davidson and Elisabeth Rubenfien contributed to this article.
