Amoco Chemical Corp. and Imperial Chemical Industries PLC will each take slim stakes in Yizheng Chemical Fibre Ltd. when the Chinese polyester manufacturer makes an initial public offering of shares in Hong Kong later this month.
Yizheng, China's largest polyester producer, is the seventh mainland Chinese company to list shares abroad, among nine companies authorized last year to do so.
Amoco Chemical, a unit of U.S.-based Amoco Corp., and Britain's ICI are Yizheng's two largest foreign suppliers.
Their share purchases will mark the second time a mainland Chinese company has sold a slice of its international offering to strategic investors.
Last year, Tsingtao Brewery sold a 5% stake to Anheuser-Busch Cos. of the U.S.
Both Amoco Chemical and ICI are to acquire 0.625% stakes in Yizheng, at a cost of about US$7 million each.
Yizheng's underwriters said the stakes are the maximum allowed by the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, which requires that around 25% of a listed company's shares be free-floating.
Yizheng's offering represents 25% of its total shares.
Amoco and ICI will be barred from selling their shares for 12 months after the offering.
Yizheng, controlled by China's Textile Council, was built up during the 1980s, after the mainland's cotton-clad society discovered the wash-and-wear joys of synthetic fabrics.
The company's factory complex, on the banks of the Yangtze River in Jiangsu Province, has the capacity to pump out 500,000 metric tons of polyester a year, most of which is sold in China.
Domestic demand for polyester far outstrips domestic supply.
While the company's sales and operating profit have grown steadily, its net profit hasn't done so, because debt denominated in foreign currency has left Yizheng exposed to a drop in the value of China's yuan.
While sales climbed 5.3% in 1992, net profit dropped 38%.
Money raised through Yizheng's offering should temper the impact of any further devaluation in the yuan, according to S.G. Warburg Securities (Far East) Ltd., Yizheng's lead underwriter.
An unstable yuan isn't the only risk facing Yizheng investors.
China more than doubled the corporate tax rate this year to 33% -- a move that Yizheng and other companies are fighting.
Moreover, China's goal of re-entering the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade would reduce duties that keep foreign polyester suppliers out of Yizheng's market.
Meanwhile, the company is offering its shares as stock markets weaken world-wide and the appetite wanes for new Hong Kong issues.
"People are more sensitive now," said a spokesman for Warburg.
But he says that falling raw-material prices in 1995 will widen Yizheng's profit margin, adding that production capacity will provide further profit growth later.
Proceeds from the offering will help finance construction of a plant to produce pure terephthalic acid, or PTA, which is used in making polyester.
Both Amoco and ICI supply PTA to Yizheng.
Yizheng also plans to add to its polyester chip capacity and build a polyester filament plant.
Hoping to raise the equivalent of more than $250 million, Yizheng is selling one billion so-called H shares, which are shares of mainland Chinese concerns listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange; 70% of the shares are to be sold to institutional investors overseas, including 25 million shares each to Amoco and ICI; and the remaining 30% will be sold to investors in Hong Kong.
An additional 15% stake in the company is to be sold in the form of A shares, which will be listed in China and available only to Chinese nationals.
After the offerings, the Textile Council will own 42% of the company, and state-owned China International Trust & Investment Corp. will hold 18%.
