Staring into a sea of business suits, Hillary Rodham Clinton made a pitch last September to a roomful of chief executives to support the far-reaching health-care bill that the White House was preparing to send to Capitol Hill.
"I want to begin by reading you what we believe in," she told the meeting of the Business Roundtable's policy committee.
She spoke of giving every American access to health care and of reining in spiraling medical costs.
She called for building on and enhancing the private system.
"If these sound familiar to you," the First Lady added, "it's because they're your principles."
Many of the corporate chieftains were impressed.
"She did a wonderful job," says John Ong, chairman of B.F. Goodrich Co. and head of the Roundtable.
But five months later, the administration's appeals to big business have blown up in its face.
Just last week, the same Roundtable policy committee voted 60 to 20 to support a rival health-care plan by Rep. Jim Cooper, a Tennessee Democrat.
Within three days, two other major groups, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers, publicly denounced the Clinton plan.
The Clinton camp's failure to win over the corporate community, despite its concerted effort, is due both to its own political missteps and to early posturing by businesses eager to get changes in the Clinton plan.
But above all, it boils down to a visceral feeling among many executives that, despite the Clintons' claims to the contrary, the administration is proposing a big-government solution to a problem better left to the market.
At a White House meeting last week with President and Mrs. Clinton, Paul O'Neill, chairman of Aluminum Co. of America, bluntly called the administration plan a "vertical dive into federalization."
On its face, the Clinton bill would seem a boon for big business.
But many of the features that the White House thought large corporations would love are instead leaving them grumbling.
For example:
-- By guaranteeing all Americans comprehensive health coverage, the Clinton plan would alleviate the burden of "cost shifting," in which large companies that insure their workers wind up bearing the cost of care for the uninsured.
A new Brookings Institution study found that manufacturers' health-insurance bills would drop by $1,349 a worker.
But PepsiCo Inc. and General Mills Inc., both of which have restaurant-chain subsidiaries with lots of part-time workers, have been opposing the plan's regulations, including the mandate that all businesses must help pay for their employees' health insurance.
In early December, General Mills Chairman H. Brewster Atwater wrote to fellow CEOs to urge them to support the Cooper bill as the best "viable alternative to the Clinton plan."
White House officials contend that this campaign -- along with vigorous opposition by insurance and pharmaceutical companies -- has stoked general business sentiment against their bill.
-- By capping the rate of growth in health-insurance premiums, the Clinton proposal would save the companies more than $90 billion a year by 2004, the Congressional Budget Office concluded in an analysis this week.
But besides disagreeing with the means of achieving this cost reduction -- price controls -- many executives "are just not confident the caps will hold and that the promise of long-term savings will play out," says Rich Ostuw, the chief actuary for health plans at the Towers Perrin consulting firm and a White House adviser on its proposal.
-- By allowing companies with more than 5,000 workers to opt out of the new regional insurance-purchasing system that the plan would establish, the White House thought it was leaving big companies free to manage their own health plans.
But "not one of my Fortune 500 company members" says it will take advantage of the provision, says James Klein, executive director of the Association of Private Pension and Welfare Plans.
One reason: Even corporate giants fear being muscled out of the market by the big regional alliances.
"We'd be small fish in the sea," says Kenneth Porter, chief actuary at DuPont Co.
Companies are also annoyed that they would be subject to a 1%-of-payroll surcharge if they opted out of the regional arrangement.
-- By having the government take over 80% of the health-insurance costs for early retirees, the administration plan would relieve large companies of an enormous financial burden.
But this sweetener has helped to entice only the Big Three auto makers, several large steel companies and a few others with mostly older work forces.
Many CEOs doubt their companies would benefit very much, and, anyway, they suspect -- with good reason -- that this provision can't get by Congress.
The administration's wooing of the Business Roundtable began long before Mrs. Clinton's well-received speech in September.
A year ago, Goodrich's Mr. Ong and other executives met with the newly inaugurated president and Vice President Gore.
They asked to be allowed to offer their health-care ideas to the administration's policy drafters.
Mr. Clinton agreed.
That led to an early meeting in Williamsburg, Va., with Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Ong and Robert Winters, chairman of Prudential Insurance Co. of America and the head of the Roundtable's health-policy task force.
Then came another session with the First Lady in June and numerous consultations with Ira Magaziner, chief architect of the administration's plan.
Some of the corporations' concerns were narrow, centering on such technical issues as the White House desire to give the states great flexibility in running the new health system; companies operating throughout the U.S. fear dealing with 50 different sets of requirements.
Other worries were more fundamental, including that companies would end up ceding control of their health-benefits programs to the regional alliances, reducing their role to simply writing checks.
But after all the discussion, Mr. Ong says, "certainly the structure of their plan doesn't reflect the view we put forward."
In December, following Mrs. Clinton's talk to the Roundtable, the group's health task force held a conference call to discuss its position in the intensifying debate.
The panel had three options: Support the Clinton plan, support the Cooper bill or stay neutral.
Within just 45 minutes, it voted 14-1 to favor the Cooper bill.
Many executives on the phone -- including five consecutive speakers from the insurance or pharmaceutical industries, according to one listener -- expressed dismay that the Clinton plan would force too many regulations down their throats.
"Have you ever tried to swallow a watermelon?" asks David Jones, the chairman of Humana Inc., the hospital chain.
Others preferred the Cooper bill because it, unlike Mr. Clinton's or other reform proposals, had bipartisan sponsorship on Capitol Hill.
The recommendation then went to the 85-member policy committee, which sets official Roundtable positions.
Some in the White House were worried.
They knew that practically their only solid corporate support so far was from the auto companies and steelmakers.
The only dissenter in the 14-1 vote had been Chrysler Corp.
Soon, the administration began to forge a working relationship with leaders at six other companies presumed to be sympathetic to its efforts.
In late December, Mrs. Clinton invited the six to the White House.
They were Paul Allaire of Xerox Corp., a Democrat considered a Friend of Bill; Edgar Woolard of DuPont, thought to be very concerned about cost-shifting; George Fisher of Eastman Kodak Co.; Joseph Gorman of TRW Inc.; Harold Poling of Ford Motor Co.; and Edwin Artzt of Procter & Gamble Co.
During the session, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Magaziner said the administration wanted to begin consulting seriously with big business to address its concerns about the health bill.
They suggested setting up a process by which staffers of the six companies would meet regularly with Mr. Magaziner's staff and the two administration officials with the closest ties to business: Robert Rubin, the head of the National Economic Council, and Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman, both once successful investment bankers.
The meetings began.
But on Jan. 13 and 14, the policy committee took up the issue of the Cooper endorsement in conference calls -- just as the White House was really turning up the heat.
Voice after voice said over the phone lines: "I got a call from Rubin."
"I got a call from Altman."
"I did, too."
"Rubin called me."
Above all, the administration officials pleaded with the executives to delay taking public action until after the president's State of the Union speech on Jan. 25.
The vote was 45-14 to endorse a resolution supporting the Cooper bill "as a starting point."
A second vote was 32-25 to ignore the White House appeals and announce the tally immediately.
Why, some thought, should we subject ourselves to more pressure?
But Roundtable leaders, considering the majority too small, decided to wait until their regularly scheduled Feb. 2 meeting, take another vote and then announce a position.
By then, the White House wasn't about to turn back, despite some officials' reservations about all the lobbying.
Harold Ickes, the New York attorney brought in last month to oversee the selling of the health-care plan, was one with serious concerns.
If the aggressive arm-twisting failed, it would only underscore the defeat, he and some others feared.
But some thought that the administration would be criticized for folding too soon if it didn't go all-out.
"I think it would have been just as bad, if not worse, to have people like Ong say they weren't talking to us," says Jeff Eller, a top Clinton health aide.
Knowing it stood virtually no chance of getting the Roundtable to back the Clinton plan, the White House sought only to prevent the group from publicly backing the Cooper bill.
The day before the vote, Mrs. Clinton called about 10 CEOs to the White House.
The president came in and chatted with the group for half an hour.
Then, three of the friendlier CEOs -- Xerox's Mr. Allaire, TRW's Mr. Gorman and P&G's Mr. Artzt -- went to Capitol Hill, where House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski was trying to persuade Mr. Ong, Prudential's Mr. Winters and Union Pacific Corp.
Chairman Drew Lewis to stay neutral.
An array of administration officials, including Mr. Ickes, Mr. Magaziner and senior policy adviser George Stephanopoulos, lined the room.
Talking to colleagues back in the White House, Mr. Ickes later called Mr. Winters a "19th-century coal baron."
Sensing defeat, a group of officials decided to single out Mr. Winters publicly and suggest that the insurance interests were the driving force.
Robert Boorstin, a White House communications official, lit into Mr. Winters at a televised forum with White House counselor David Gergen.
But after they returned to the White House, Mr. Rubin and Mr. Altman told them to stop, saying it wasn't wise for the White House to attack people by name.
That afternoon, the CEOs took a final vote.
Roy Vagelos, chairman of Merck & Co., warned against trusting the administration's statements.
He said he was still dismayed by the administration's handling of the issue of childhood immunizations -- it charged that high vaccine prices were leaving children unprotected -- and accused it of reneging on a compromise he thought drug companies had reached last year.
What happened after the Roundtable vote was precisely what the White House feared most: a domino effect.
The following morning, the Chamber of Commerce, which had been generally favorable toward the Clinton health-care plan, bowed to pressure from House Republicans and delivered blistering testimony against it.
Then the National Association of Manufacturers labeled the plan "deficient in numerous significant areas."
Says Jerry Jasinowski, NAM's president: "The Roundtable vote certainly caused a number of our people to feel we ought to take an even harder line."
Administration officials express confidence that, in the end, they will be able to resolve many of their differences with big business as health-care legislation moves through Congress.
They note that business support for the president's economic plan -- or at least the ranks of those willing to hold their fire -- gradually grew.
And even in backing the Cooper bill, Roundtable officials disagreed with some of its major provisions, especially a limitation on employers' ability to deduct employee health-benefit costs.
"I think the differences between the administration and the large business groups are exaggerated," Mr. Altman says, adding, "We think there will be meaningful business support."
One source of that may be the broadbased National Leadership Coalition for Health Care Reform, which has endorsed an employer mandate and universal coverage.
Among its big corporate members are Caterpillar Inc., Georgia-Pacific Corp. and H.J. Heinz Co.
Another group of 17 big companies, called the Corporate Health Care Coalition and including McDonnell Douglas Corp., AlliedSignal Inc. and Atlantic Richfield Co., recently said it is "prepared to accept an employer mandate" in the right context.
"Most of the CEOs I talk to are in favor of universal coverage and cost containment," Mr. Rubin says.
But opponents of Mr. Clinton's bill don't agree.
The small-business lobby, which has long fought his plan, is hoping to forge formal ties with big business.
Says John Motley, of the National Federation of Independent Business, which represents more than 600,000 mom-and-pop firms: "They bring the money, and we bring the grass roots."
HUMANA Inc. is a large managed-care company.
In Friday's page-one article about how the Clintons lost big-business support for their health-care plan, Humana was incorrectly identified as a hospital company.
(WSJ Feb. 14, 1994)
