Warnaco Group Inc. snared one of the best-known names in retailing, agreeing to acquire the profitable underwear business of Calvin Klein Inc. and the rights to produce other merchandise under the designer's name.
It is the first time the designer has sold his trademark outright.
Even so, the deal gives Mr. Klein global reach through Warnaco, the fast-growing company that makes apparel under such brand names as Hathaway, Christian Dior, and Chaps by Ralph Lauren.
Warnaco said it will pay the closely held company $64 million for the Calvin Klein Inc. world-wide trademarks and businesses in men's underwear.
After the initial payment, Mr. Klein will receive an "on-going fee" starting in the third year, based on a percentage of total sales.
The transaction, several months in the making, was guided partly by David Geffen, the Hollywood record and movie mogul who is a long-time friend of Mr. Klein.
Calvin Klein Inc. executives said cash from the sale would allow it to pay off outstanding debt, including a $58 million loan the company received from Citibank N.A. last year.
Mr. Klein used the loan to buy back junk-bond debt from Mr. Geffen, who had purchased it to help the designer through financial difficulties.
While retail sales of Calvin Klein men's underwear, at about $130 million annually, are a sliver of the estimated $1.6 billion in men's underwear sales in the U.S., the brand, made popular by sexy ads, is said to have unusually strong profit margins.
Linda J. Wachner, Warnaco's chairman and chief executive, said the deal calls for her company to license the trademarks for Calvin Klein's men's accessories world-wide.
Warnaco will also acquire world-wide trademarks for Calvin Klein's women's underwear and intimate apparel when the U.S. license expires at the end of this year.
The Warnaco deal is the latest step in the goal of Mr. Klein and partner-chairman Barry Schwartz of turning Calvin Klein Inc. from a manufacturer into a pure licensing business -- with the exception of Mr. Klein's high-fashion collections.
"Warnaco has ability to market and manufacture the product globally, and this is the time for me to do that," said Mr. Klein yesterday in an interview.
Some analysts questioned whether Warnaco paid too much.
But Ms. Wachner said, "This is going to be more than additive to our earnings . . ."
