Can Fidel Ramos stay on course?
In his first 21 months as president of the Philippines, Mr. Ramos has shown a willingness to adopt needed reforms even if they hurt some groups of voters.
He has gone a long way toward dispelling foreign investors' qualms about the Philippines and brought political stability to a country that only a few years ago faced coup attempts with frightening regularity.
But in recent weeks Mr. Ramos has seemed to waver, withdrawing an increase in oil prices in the face of popular opposition.
Now he must convince the International Monetary Fund that he can keep the Philippines on a sound track.
"We have to pass that test," Mr. Ramos said in an interview.
"That's the toughest one of all."
A team of IMF negotiators arrived in Manila last week for talks that will decide whether the Philippines receives what Mr. Ramos calls the IMF's seal of approval.
The decision will not only determine whether the Philippines can borrow from the IMF.
An IMF blessing also would enable the country to reschedule up to $1 billion in debt from a group of its biggest foreign creditors.
Most important, it would provide additional comfort to potential foreign investors, who bypassed the Philippines for other Southeast Asian countries in the late 1980s because of Manila's political instability and on-again, off-again economic policies.
Both the IMF and the Philippines agree on the goal: increasing the country's longterm growth rate.
This year, for the first time in four years, gross national product, or the nation's total output of goods and services, is expected to grow faster than population -- an expected 3.5%, compared with a birth rate of 2.4%.
But even that is far slower than needed to raise living standards significantly, and it is dismally slow compared with many neighboring countries.
The IMF and the Philippines also agree on the means needed to reach that end: more savings and more investment.
They agree on the need to raise tax revenues, dismantle tariff walls and make the government smaller and more productive.
Despite all these points of agreement, convincing the six-member IMF team won't be easy, as Mr. Ramos concedes.
IMF officials aren't willing to take Mr. Ramos's word that the needed economic reforms will be put in place over the next few years.
They want to see at least some concrete measures right away, especially the passage of tax measures currently pending in the Senate.
Two months ago, the Philippines seemed on the verge of winning the IMF over.
An IMF team had come and gone, and oil prices had been raised to bridge the country's chronic revenue shortfall.
Public protests over the increases didn't seem to budge Mr. Ramos, who said he would stand firm on the issue.
Then, suddenly, he backed down.
The increases were suspended, a committee of government officials and protest leaders was formed to find ways to raise the 10 billion pesos ($369 million) the oil levy was to have generated, and finally the levy was scrapped.
Mr. Ramos suggests that the chain of events is actually a victory for the government because he gained the support of Congress for new long-term revenue measures.
Nonetheless, he doesn't like dwelling on the subject.
"I don't know why this is such an important part of this interview," he demands at one point.
"We're not seeing any reduction of foreign interest in investing in the Philippines just because there was an oil levy that was lifted."
Mr. Ramos will need all his confidence to bring the IMF around.
If the team can't take home any tangible evidence that Manila is ready to take immediate action to carry out its own economic prescriptions, the IMF isn't likely to agree to make new loans available now.
If that happens, talks will probably be put on hold for several months, leaving questions hanging over the Ramos administration's commitment to reform.
Those concrete steps, however, aren't all within Mr. Ramos's control.
He needs the cooperation of Congress to pass several key measures.
While the House of Representatives has been amenable to following his lead, the Senate hasn't.
Senators have sat on some bills that Mr. Ramos considers vital to his program, such as one to broaden the scope of the value-added tax and another to open the banking industry to foreign competition.
Other steps needed to keep Mr. Ramos's program on track, such as tariff reductions and more vigorous tax collection, will antagonize powerful interests that benefit from the current system.
Still, some observers are surprised that the president, who was elected with only 23.5% of the popular vote, has gotten as far as he has -- especially given the difficulty of taking unpopular actions in a country with the Philippines' rambunctious legislators and litigious culture.
One foreign economist in Manila says the rollback of the oil price increase is simply a case of "two steps forward, one step back."
No one is writing Mr. Ramos off, least of all Mr. Ramos himself.
"I can assure you, the alternate sources of revenue are there, and that's precisely what the IMF is asking about," the president says.
"I can assure you that we will stay on course."
