Treasury securities posted moderate losses as the bond market was unable to extend a two-day rally despite more seemingly favorable economic news.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped 3/8 point, or $3.75 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 92 20/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, rose to 6.82% from 6.79% Wednesday.
Bond prices had been higher at midmorning after release of the Philadelphia Federal Reserve's business outlook survey for March.
The report offered more evidence of moderate price pressures and economic activity.
The prices-paid index, a regional inflation gauge whose last release prompted a bond price slump, plunged to a reading of 16 in March from 30.4 in February.
The overall business activity index also fell, to 24.1 in March from February's 26.7.
Bond investors often welcome news of a slowing economy because they fear rapid growth will lead to higher inflation, which reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
Kevin Flanagan, money market economist at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., noted that "overall, the favorable inflation reports this week helped the market stabilize -- its worst fears appeared to be unfounded."
But while February consumer price and producer price data and the Philadelphia Fed report may have soothed fears, analysts and traders say chances of a significant rally are dim.
"Perhaps we will have a little reprieve for the time being, but I would stress for the time being," said Mr. Flanagan.
Robert Dederick, chief economist at Northern Trust Co., said "all the market is going to do is have technical rallies until a time that it's convinced that the Fed is finished with its job" of raising rates to attack inflation.
"I haven't seen anything that would tell me the market would be convinced of that anytime in the near future," added Mr. Dederick.
Bond market players are focusing on next Tuesday when the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed's policy-making arm, is scheduled to meet.
There is much speculation that FOMC members will vote to again tighten credit conditions by raising the federal funds rate to 3.5%.
The Fed last raised rates on Feb. 4 when it nudged the funds rate, at which banks lend each other money, to 3.25%.
"With the FOMC meeting in the back of your mind, it's really hard to be aggressive" in trading U.S. Treasurys, said Mr. Dederick.
Bond market "rallies are really out of the question as long as the economy remains in what some would describe as a satisfactory expansion."
There are no major economic indicators scheduled for release today.
The durable goods report due next Wednesday will be closely watched, but some analysts are already talking about the April 1 report on March employment as being the next big market mover.
Meanwhile, a spokesman for the Federal Reserve Board said that Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan is to meet with President Clinton at the White House this morning.
The spokesman described the meeting as "routine" and said there wasn't any set agenda.
Such sessions aren't uncommon, but they aren't usually disclosed.
Word of this one seeped out because the Fed chairman canceled plans to speak at a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Although bond prices appear to have stabilized, the market is still vulnerable to quick shifts and erratic trading.
Bond market participants would be particularly unnerved by any surge in commodities prices, said Mr. Flanagan of Dean Witter.
Commodities prices, which Fed Chairman Greenspan recently called a closely watched policy-making monitor, continue to play a role dictating Treasury market direction.
Still, despite a 1.65 point drop yesterday in the Commodity Research Bureau's index of 21 commodities, "there really doesn't seem to be much interest in buying the Treasury 30-year bond below the 6.80% level," said Mr. Flanagan.
"But is there potential to deteriorate?
Yes, there's still uncertainty."
The FOMC may provide some reassurance, some market players said.
Mr. Dederick of Northern Trust doesn't believe the Fed will "do an instant tightening."
He believes instead that the Fed is "more likely to wait until the market has settled down.
Otherwise, it's running the risk of aggravating the market's ill humor."
Richmond, Va., Fed President Alfred Broaddus, an FOMC voting member, said yesterday that the FOMC must strengthen confidence if the U.S. economy is going to perform as well as economists have predicted.
In comments to lawyers in Richmond, Mr. Broaddus attributed the recent longterm rate rise to concern that the Fed won't be able to control inflation.
"We need to get ahead and stay ahead of the inflation curve," Mr. Broaddus said.
The commitment "to controlling inflation is stronger than it has been in the past.
I would argue that it's a much stronger foundation than the one we had back in the 1960s or the 1970s," he added.
For the second time since its creation in February, Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. entered the corporate debt market, which otherwise saw only moderate activity.
The company was created when Columbia Healthcare Corp. merged with HCA-Hospital Corp. of America.
About $1.25 billion of debt was sold yesterday, including a $205 million global private placement from Freeport Terminal (Malta) Ltd.
In the junk bond market, trading was light to moderate with prices up 1/8 to 1/4 point during the day.
Columbia/HCA Healthcare sold 10-year noncallable notes priced at 99.744 to yield 7.186%, 0.80 percentage point above Treasurys.
The company was in the market just last week with $175 million of five-year notes.
Proceeds from the deal will be used to reduce the company's bank debt, said John McCarty, director of finance at the company.
Columbia/HCA presently has about $200 million of bank debt outstanding and $1.6 billion of commercial paper outstanding.
The company would like to pay off its bank debt and reduce its commercial paper debt to about $1 billion, Mr. McCarty said.
Rated single-A3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and triple-B-plus by Standard & Poor's Corp., the issue was sold through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
Freeport Terminal (Malta) Ltd.'s 15-year bonds marked the first foreign debt ever sold by a borrower from Malta, said Jacques de St. Phalle, head of investment-graded fixed-income syndicate at BT Securities Corp.
The container transshipment terminal operator will use the proceeds to develop a second transshipment terminal in Malta, making the deal similar to a project financing, he noted.
There was widespread distribution, with more than half of the deal sold in the U.S., said Mr. de St. Phalle.
Insurance companies were the largest buyers among investors who are expected to hold the amortizing debt to maturity, he said.
"Malta's economy is growing rapidly and its inflation levels are very low," Mr. de St. Phalle said.
The offering didn't excite much interest among European investors, but U.S. investors liked its 10-year yield pickup of 1.15 percentage points over the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury.
The 7.5% bonds were priced at 99.861 to yield 7.52% and are guaranteed by the Republic of Malta.
The bonds have a sinking fund and a 10-year average life.
Municipal bonds were generally unchanged in late trading, having run out of steam after gaining as much as 1/4 point early in the session.
Although munis did manage to hold on to much of what they gained during Wednesday's rally, the limited buying yesterday concerned some market participants.
"There's still a little skepticism out there" about municipal bonds, said a New York-based trader.
Issues totaling more than $300 million were priced yesterday, including Michigan's $150 million Series 1994A State Trunk Line Fund bonds.
They were won by a Goldman, Sachs & Co. group and reoffered to yield from 3% in 1995 to 5.85% in 2024.
The bonds are secured by motor vehicle-related taxes.
The modest price gains seen in mortgage securities late yesterday understate the market's performance yesterday, traders said.
"The mortgages definitely are outperforming," said Don Segalas, head of mortgage trading at Tucker Anthony.
One new real estate mortgage investment conduit, or Remic, backed by $1.6 billion in Government National Mortgage Association's 7 1/2 % securities was announced yesterday by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., and underwriters added more than another $800 million to existing deals.
In late trading, Fannie Mae's 7% securities were yielding 7.28%, which is 89 basis points above the yield on the Treasury 10-year note.
In the previous session, that yield relationship was at 93 basis points, and Monday it stood at 100 basis points.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.
The Fannie Mae coupon yesterday was up 1/32 at 98 20/32.
