Matt Seto is putting some of Wall Street's savviest players to shame.
Since his Matt Seto Fund was launched in April, it has soared 38%.
"I don't want to sound too cocky," he says, "but I can predict the range of a stock price during a six-month period."
Not bad for a 16-year-old.
While Matt looks as if he should be hanging out at the mall rather than managing his own mutual fund, the high-school sophomore has all the trappings of a big-time money manager.
His office is littered with lists of top-performing stocks and investment tomes.
Business cards sit in a dispenser on his desk.
There also are stuffed animals, a Batman doll and a collection of squirt guns.
Matt's office doubles as his bedroom in his parent's modest house in a subdivision here.
To be sure, Matt's portfolio isn't very big by Wall Street standards; his fund has about $30,000 in assets, a far cry from the $34 billion in Fidelity Investments' Magellan Fund.
The teenager also advises clients -- actually, friends and relatives -- on investments totaling another $100,000.
Says Harry Yee, a cousin who sank $500 into the fund: "I figure if he loses my money he can cut my grass for the rest of his life."
So far, Matt can keep the mower in the shed.
But his success hasn't come without struggle.
His biggest battles involve his father, Chick Michael Seto, a 1950s refugee from China.
"Confucius teaches us that money is not important -- ideas and philosophy are important," says the elder Mr. Seto, who runs a one-man structural engineering firm.
"We tried to brainwash Matt against the stock market but it's no use."
To tame his son's money-crazed ambitions, Mr. Seto has laid down some rules: no financial software for Matt's computer, no options trading, no hand-held stockquote devices and no distribution of business cards.
Cable television also is forbidden because Mr. Seto fears its array of programming will distract Matt from his schoolwork.
Despite his father's restrictions, the young investment maven finds ways to get essential information.
He spends hours at the library poring over Standard & Poor's Corp. stock reports.
Or he heads off to the Charles Schwab & Co. offices here after school to use one of the discount-brokerage firm's public computers.
His research has paid off.
His top stock pick, electronics retailer Best Buy Co., has climbed 52% for a current profit of $3,100 since Matt bought 150 shares in September.
His reason for owning the company: its strong earnings, competitive market position and stock-price momentum.
Something else played into his analysis, though.
"It's the appliance store for teenagers," Matt explains.
"The salesmen allow you to test out their stuff and play around with it."
But not all of his picks are golden.
Like many older and wiser investors, Matt got burned by International Business Machines Corp.
He bought Big Blue at $52 a share but, after a brief climb, it plunged to $40.
Matt finally bailed out at $43.50, losing $850.
Now he kicks himself because shortly after he sold, IBM shot up to $58.
"I knew what the stock was supposed to do and it did it," he says.
"I just didn't hold on long enough."
But such setbacks leave him undaunted.
Matt aspires to the ranks of his heroes, Warren Buffett, one of the richest people in America, and Peter Lynch, the renowned stock picker.
His favorite TV show is "Wall Street Week."
The teenager recognized his calling early in life.
In fourth grade, he announced his intention to work on Wall Street.
By the fifth grade, friends signing his yearbook were urging him on to fabulous wealth -- all except a girl named Jeni who wrote, "You're a scuz."
What he is is competitive, a characteristic that landed him a spot on the tennis squad at Troy Athens High School.
The team, however, isn't exactly Davis Cup material, which caused Matt much frustration last year.
"Everyone had a losing attitude," he says.
"I don't like to be around that."
From age nine, Matt hounded his father to let him trade stocks.
But he had to wait until he was 14 before the elder Mr. Seto allowed him to make his first investment.
Matt bought shares in Cybertek Corp., a Dallas insurance-software concern, with $700 saved from Chinese New Year gifts from his grandparents.
In three months, he netted an $800 profit.
Matt's easy triumph dismayed the elder Mr. Seto.
"My wife and I were very nervous because he was successful in his first try," Mr. Seto says.
"There's a saying in Chinese philosophy that a gambler is born with the first winnings."
But after Matt proved cautious and diligent in his research, the elder Mr. Seto agreed to his son's plan for a mutual fund.
Matt studied the literature of other funds, then drew up his own prospectus outlining the risks and potential gains.
He pumped in his savings of $1,200 and persuaded nine friends and family members to join him.
He has sent letters to the heads of Ford Motor Co. and IBM soliciting investments in his mutual fund.
And he also unsuccessfully pitched Fidelity Investments Chairman Edward C. Johnson 3rd on the idea of folding the Matt Seto Fund into Fidelity's mutual-fund family.
His letters include one caveat: no phone calls before 3 p.m. on school days.
An adolescent fund manager faces fundamental obstacles.
Since Matt is too young to trade, his father has to authorize all buy and sell orders.
Once Matt became overzealous and impersonated his father over the phone.
Brokers at Schwab quickly caught on and threatened to suspend his account.
But Anita Burgess, branch manager, now says she is delighted to have Matt as a customer.
"He is definitely one of our most frequent visitors of his age," she says.
Besides running the fund, Matt gives free investment advice to several clients.
If he took a fee, Matt would have to register with the Securities and Exchange Commission as an investment adviser.
His fund isn't registered with the SEC because it has never had a public offering and has fewer than 100 investors.
One of Matt's latest successes is the elder Mr. Seto, who has agreed to place his $80,000 retirement nest egg in Matt's care.
Mr. Seto, who admits ignorance in financial matters, says he trusts Matt's judgment.
Even if his son stumbles occasionally, Mr. Seto is confident he won't end his days in the poorhouse.
"I think Matt has a certain touch in the stock market."
Others aren't so sure.
At the Schwab office, Matt chats up a potential client, Jules Tabak.
They stare at the ticker tape and debate the future of the stock market.
But Matt's pitch fails.
Mr. Tabak declines an offer to invest in Matt's fund.
"Let me give you a little business advice," the 67-year-old home remodeler tells Matt.
"Grow a beard."
