MALAYSIA BLACKLISTS U.K. FIRMS
Britain tried to placate Malaysia after the Kuala Lumpur government, enraged by British press allegations, barred British firms from new government contracts.
But the conflict escalated over the weekend and could spread to the private sector.
The news reports have alleged for several months that Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad and other politicians had been offered bribes by a British construction company to win a contract for an aluminum smelter.
Some press reports also have criticized the link between a $348 million grant for a hydroelectric dam and a $1.93 billion arms deal.
The ban signals the loss of huge deals for British firms, including contracts for building a $3.2 billion international airport near Kuala Lumpur.
Malaysia, a former British colony, is the U.K.'s second-biggest Asian-Pacific market, after Hong Kong.
Chief ministers from Malaysia's 13 states backed the federal ban, and several Malaysian companies have endorsed it.
British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said that his government was trying to resolve the dispute but that it wouldn't apologize for Britain's free press.
AUSTRALIA BACKS ASIAN TONGUES. . .
Citing its close economic links with Asian and Pacific countries, Australia opened a campaign to have 60% of school students learn Asian languages.
National and state governments agreed to emphasize initially the Japanese, Mandarin, Indonesian and Korean languages, which are expected to be the most economically important to Australia in coming decades.
Just 12% of Australian students take foreign-language classes
Australia's federal, state and territorial governments agreed to pursue opening key areas of the economy to more competition.
The plan would allow business rivalries in areas reserved for state enterprises, such as ports.
Governments rely on revenue from such operations, but opening some of them to competition could produce higher tax receipts.
The various governments will draft legislation on the issue to consider when the representatives meet in August.
China's Labor Ministry will open a national telephone hotline for workers, aimed at protecting their rights.
It singled out foreign-funded enterprises, saying they often abuse Chinese employees.
The official China Daily said 250,000 strikes and labor disputes since 1988 "were usually caused by ambiguous contracts, long hours, low pay and unsafe working conditions."
The official press has increasingly reported on harsh conditions in China's booming coastal export-processing areas.
The Hong Kong government, ignoring China's wrath, published plans to widen democracy in the British colony.
The reform bill would allow Hong Kong to elect all 60 members of the Legislative Council in 1995.
Legislators now are elected and appointed.
The bill, to go to lawmakers March 9, would create nine special-interest constituencies to enfranchise all of Hong Kong's 2.7 million workers.
It contains the more radical elements of the reform package proposed last year by Gov. Chris Patten.
After legislators last week passed a first-phase bill of minor reforms, China vowed to disband all elected bodies in 1997, when it takes over sovereignty.
German legislators voted to allow Berlin's Reichstag, the once and future seat of the parliament, to be swathed in silver fabric by Christo Javacheff.
The 58-year old Bulgarian-born packaging artist, now an American known by his first name, had been rebuffed repeatedly in his 23-year campaign for permission to wrap the neoclassical building in cloth.
The Reichstag, which will be covered for two weeks in 1995, housed the parliament from 1894 to 1933 and will do so again in 1998 as the government returns to Berlin from Bonn.
Intensifying its control over population growth, China said it would take legal action to separate couples who live together before the official marriageable age -- 22 for men and 20 for women.
Under the new marriage rules also designed to curb births, the government may block unions of couples deemed unsuitable, such as in arranged, mercenary or bigamous marriages or those between close relatives, which the Xinhua news agency said are common in some areas.
Of the 10 million marriages each year in China, Xinhua said, 1.6 million involved people below the legal age.
China, the world's most populous country with 1.2 billion people, has an extensive family-planning system, which tries to limit most families to one child each.
With religious belief spreading in China, where foreign missionaries encourage underground church meetings, the government said it would maintain strict control over religion and quash any activities by foreigners that could hurt social order.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Norway lifted its oil embargo and economic sanctions against South Africa, which has moved to end apartheid and hold democratic elections. . . .
A Russian newspaper reported that when former Soviet leaders reviewed Red Square parades, the fur hats they wore were fitted with hidden metal plates to protect against assassination.
The same helmet factory now offers similar hats to entrepreneurs who fear attacks by gangsters.
