A new commercial for BMW, scheduled to begin airing this evening, shows the luxury car maneuvering effortlessly on a rural lake of solid ice.
The car easily handles curves while virtually carving a figure-eight into the ice.
The BMW can "help you slip away without slipping," the announcer declares.
The planned for this year in a continuing effort to reposition BMW as a safe, affordable vehicle for the entire family and steer it further away from its image as the Love Bug for yuppies.
The advertising also marks the second effort by BMW's new agency, Mullen Advertising, which replaced Ammirati & Puris last February after their 18-year relationship soured.
Mullen's first ads came in for criticism, and auto analysts don't give them much credit for BMW's sales resurgence in 1993.
BMW of North America, the U.S. unit of Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, sold 78,010 units last year, a 19% increase from 1992 sales.
In comparison, Infiniti had sales of 50,547, up 14%; Lexus sold 94,677 units, up 2%; and Mercedes-Benz dipped 2% to sell 61,899 units.
Infiniti, Lexus and Mercedes-Benz are BMW's direct competitors.
For its part, BMW says Mullen advertising "has had a very positive effect" on sales.
But auto analysts cite other reasons for BMW's boom.
"The value-price positioning and the product changes are the reasons," says Susan Jacobs, an analyst with Jacobs Automotive, an auto forecasting and consulting firm.
"Its marketing and advertising efforts aren't the core reasons for the success."
"I don't think advertising is responsible for BMW's increase," says Chris Cedergren, an analyst with AutoPacific Group in Santa Ana, Calif.
He says BMW's Japanese competitors raised prices to be closer to BMW's sticker price.
"The Lexus used to be under $37,500.
Now it's $51,000.
A BMW could be $55,000 for its seven series.
That adds up to basically no price difference."
BMW is hoping for another year of growth, especially with its new 318 convertible priced at $35,800 and the M3 model, priced under $30,000.
Mullen's first television commercials for BMW, which premiered in May, were panned by many on Madison Avenue.
They showed peculiar footage of cows and daisies in slow motion while a BMW zoomed by.
The ads also poked fun at the competition: "The wine glass test has been a little overdone.
So has the ball bearing test."
The references targeted ads for Toyota Motor's Lexus and Nissan Motor's Altima.
The BMW ad continued, "But in real life, what counts is the corkscrew test, hairpin and stop-on-a-dime tests."
What followed were the usual shots of a car handling curves along a winding mountain road.
"I didn't much like the ads," says Bob Garfield, the critic for Advertising Age.
"I found them awkward and confusing."
Indeed, the ad world has been buzzing with rumors about displeasure among BMW executives over Mullen's creative work.
There was talk that Mullen reached outside its agency, which is based in suburban Boston, to hire additional creative talent to quell the unhappiness and ensure that the $80 million BMW account would stay parked at the agency.
In December, Jack Fund, formerly with Rubin Postaer & Associates in Santa Monica, Calif., and Keith Weinman from Foote Cone & Belding in San Francisco joined Mullen as a creative team for BMW.
Both had worked on Honda ads.
"It was always our intention to hire a third creative team to work on BMW," says James X. Mullen, the agency's president and chief executive officer.
BMW and Mullen deny any dissatisfaction.
"The relationship was never in jeopardy," says Mr. Mullen.
"Instead, you had a bunch of people from Mullen and BMW getting to know one another."
Mr. Mullen concedes there was "some roughness with what was put out originally.
Conceptually, we weren't as tight as we could have been."
Despite the self-criticism, Mr. Mullen says consumer research showed "people got the right message.
BMW is dynamic, comfortable and affordable."
This year, BMW ads will concentrate on features, such as traction control and "superior engineering," says Mr. Mullen, as well as new models.
Also in the works is a video sales tape on BMW's traction control that Mr. Mullen says "could potentially" also be used as an infomercial to hit the airwaves in February.
"We're looking at alternative ways to get across our message.
It could run on cable, in nontraditional programming," he says, "but nothing is decided."
If BMW indeed produces an infomercial, it will join other major auto makers, including Volvo, Ford and General Motors' Saturn unit in using the medium, according to the National Infomercial Marketing Association in Washington, D.C.
BMW says Mullen Advertising will be instrumental in these marketing plans.
And Mr. Mullen hopes to hear better things about subsequent campaigns.
So far, he admits, "From an advertising peer point of view, the ads were considered disappointing."
Philip Morris's Kraft General Foods and Miller Brewing Co. consolidated some of their media buying with D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles's TeleVest media unit.
Exact billings involved in the consolidation couldn't be determined, but executives estimate them at more than $60 million.
The new account includes Miller Brewing's national nonsports advertising time, previously purchased by Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates, and KGF's time in adult-syndication programming, previously split between DMB&B and Leo Burnett, Chicago.
The new arrangement makes strange bedfellows out of DMB&B and Miller: DMB&B's St. Louis office creates ads for Miller rival Anheuser-Busch.
But DMB&B officials said the arrangement wasn't a conflict.
"This is a KGF assignment, given to us by a longstanding client," said Michael Moore, DMB&B executive vice president.
"If they choose to use their time for Miller, we're not going to know it until very late in the day."
An Anheuser spokesman declined to comment.
Miller Brewing also said it has assigned creative duties on the Sharp's and Miller Reserve brands to Backer.
The accounts, previously at Laughlin/Constable, Milwaukee, bill about $17 million, executives estimated.
In addition, D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles won new creative duties from KGF, for the Friehofer cookie account.
Billings couldn't be determined.
Albany, N.Y., shop Partners Meany previously handled the account.
Ad Notes. . . .
LABATT: Labatt Breweries, a unit of John Labatt Ltd. of Toronto, changed agencies for several beer accounts in Canada.
The brewer moved advertising for its Canadian beers, including Labatt Blue and Blue Light, to the Toronto office of Ammirati & Puris.
Bozell Palmer Bonner, a Bozell Jacobs Kenyon & Eckhardt unit, won new assignments for Budweiser and Carlsberg, both of which Labatt distributes in Canada.
The business was previously split among agencies including WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson, Young & Rubicam, and D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles.
Labatt bills about 40 million Canadian dollars (US$30.3 million) a year in Canada.
ACCOUNT: Russell Corp., Alexander City, Ala., tapped Omnicom Group's BBDO for sportswear and team-uniform advertising, an estimated $10 million account previously at Gillis Advertising, Birmingham, Ala.
