The most important man in Olympic ice hockey isn't in Lillehammer but in New York.
He's Gary Bettman, commissioner of the National Hockey League, and what he and his NHL owner-employers decide over the next year or so will determine whether the sport in future Games will be represented by its best or, as at present, the rest.
Mr. Bettman was here for a few days last week to discuss that subject with Olympic honchos.
He jetted home Saturday encouraged that his league's stars could wear their national colors come 1998 in Nagano, Japan.
"We've begun a dialogue," said he.
"I think we're on the right track."
Mr. Bettman knows from Olympic tracks because, as a former aide to National Basketball Association Commissioner David Stern, he was in on the plans to loose the U.S. "Dream Team" upon the world via the Barcelona Summer Olympics.
The T-shirt sales that move generated haven't stopped yet.
The dream in hockey would be broader, encompassing all the globe's red-cheeked lands.
That's because, with a player pool that's, roughly, 60% Canadian, 20% American and 20% European, the NHL is hockey's international big league, and its enlistees could help stock a half-dozen national units.
We are talkin' Jeremy Roenick, Sergei Federov and Teemu Selanne in the Games.
Maybe even Wayne Gretzky, if his legs hold out.
The development wouldn't be universally cheered.
"I think that something's lost if Olympic participation becomes an afterthought for professionals," says Tim Taylor, the U.S. coach.
Defenseman Peter Laviolette, a longtime minor leaguer who, at age 29, is the U.S. team's skating graybeard, agrees: "It would take away a kid's chance to be an Olympian unless he's an NHL all-star first.
I'd rather wait 20 more years for another `Miracle on Ice' {the stunning triumph of an unheralded American team over the favored Soviets in the 1980 Games}."
But such reasoning does not obtain in other Olympic sports (nor should it, I think), and its days appear to be ending in hockey.
There could be a slip twixt puck and tip-off, and maybe several.
One large potential hang-up is scheduling: Unlike the NBA-Summer Games tie, the Winter Olympics hit the NHL in midseason, meaning that league participation would require it to suspend its regular schedule.
Mr. Bettman says that a 16-day halt -- the length of the current Olympic tournament -- is "out of the question," and that NHL owners probably wouldn't OK even a 12- or 13-day break.
That'd raise the possibility of a two-tier tourney, with hockey nonpowers such as France, Italy and Norway having it out first for a berth or two in a weeklong championship round involving the sport's big boys.
Another snag could be the style of play allowed should the NHL step into the five-ringed rink.
The league has long taken a boys-will-be-boys, let's-give-the-fans-what- they-want position on rough stuff, while the stance of the Olympics is that boxing and wrestling belong in the Summer Games.
Mr. Bettman contends that his league's punchy style "is that of the world's best players," indicating that negotiations will be needed on this matter.
Meantime, a hockey tournament is going on here, and it's making up in competitiveness what it lacks in quality.
There have been two major surprises, one positive and one negative.
The plus one is the performance of the Finnish team, the only one to complete its first-round schedule unbeaten.
The downer is the showing of the Russians, who've been relegated to the pack after leading it since, as the U.S.S.R., they first came to play in 1956.
To watch the Finns is to watch fine hockey at any level.
The guys from old Suomi, veterans most, have been all but impenetrable defensively, surrendering just four goals -- and but 62 shots -- in five games.
The Finns defeated the Russians 5-0 last week and, on Sunday, whacked the Germans, who had previously beaten the Russians, 7-1.
"We can't play better than we did the first two periods tonight," when they led Germany 5-0 while allowing only eight shots, the Finnish coach, Curt Lindstrom, said later.
His foes better hope so.
The Russians were favored by many coming in, but, it seems, solely on the historical ground of their eight firsts in the past 10 Games.
With 19 of the 22 players from the 1992 gold-medal "Unified Team" wooed to the NHL, this gang is young, raw and loose on defense.
Russia's in the playoffs, but it's probably too late for Viktor Tikhonov, its coach from better days, to firm things up.
Behind the Finns are three teams that played on about even terms in the other bracket.
Canada, which yesterday beat highly rated Sweden 3-2, has a lot of flash, especially in Paul Kariya and Peter Nedved, but a penchant for penalties.
Methodical Sweden has Peter Forsberg, an excellent young stickhandler, and good ballast in Hakan Loob and Mats Naslund.
Slovakia has ex-NHL great Peter Stastny and a patriotic push from new nationhood.
The U.S. is still in the fray, but just barely; three come-from-behind ties and a loss (to Sweden) in its first four games left it needing a 7-1 win over Italy yesterday to advance.
As advertised, the young Yanks (average age, 22) are speedy, but lack size and have the unfortunate habit of giving up the puck in their own end.
"We made a big step as a team," in winning, said Mr. Taylor after the triumph.
Against Finland in the first playoff round tomorrow, it'll need a giant leap.
