First the Japanese auto makers lost their price advantage to Detroit's Big Three, and now they're losing their styling panache.
"Take a good look at the new Toyota Avalon, then turn your head away," writes Robert Cumberford in Automobile magazine.
"You'll discover that you can't remember what the car looks like."
He goes on to berate the Avalon's styling as "mind-numbingly banal."
The Avalon isn't the only problem.
Styling by Japanese auto makers -- once the industry's design leaders -- has gotten dull.
And people are starting to notice.
"Is it me, or does the Celica look painfully similar to Acura's new Integra?"
Kimara Mitchell writes in a letter to the editor of Car and Driver magazine.
"Shame on Toyota for trying to pass off its Celica as an Integra wanna-be."
Indeed, the Toyota Celica and Acura Integra sports coupes are nearly identical, right down to their circular headlights and low snouts.
It's also difficult to distinguish between the jellybean-shaped Nissan Altima and the jellybean-shaped Mazda 626.
"A sameness has crept into Japanese car designs," says Carl Olsen, chairman of transportation design at the Center for Creative Studies.
"The companies have an anonymous corporate style that makes it hard to tell a Mazda from a Nissan from a Honda."
This is a remarkable reversal of positions.
A decade ago, Detroit was taking heat for bland styling.
In August 1983, Fortune lined up four indistinguishable Chevy, Pontiac, Oldsmobile and Buick models and put them on the cover as a biting commentary on GM's look-alike designs.
Look-alike styling sent millions of Americans to Japanese showrooms to buy cars like the 1983 Honda Prelude, the 1983 Mazda 626, the 1989 Nissan Maxima and the 1990 Previa minivan.
"Japanese styling was leading edge in the 1980s," says Christopher Cedergren, an automotive consultant with AutoPacific Group Inc.
"They took more risks because they were going after more market share."
Today, however, "the styling race is being won by the Big Three, and the Japanese are beginning to realize it," Mr. Cedergren says.
Styling critics say Detroit has pulled ahead with such cheeky new models as the Ford Mustang, Chevrolet Camaro, Chrysler Neon and Cirrus and Dodge Stratus.
Of course, some Japanese vehicles have been bona fide styling hits, including the Nissan Altima and the Toyota Camry.
And the sporty Honda Civic del Sol created quite a splash when it was unveiled last year.
Analysts say that even some models that resemble each other -- such as the Altima and the Mazda 626 -- are nicely styled.
Japanese auto makers, meanwhile, maintain that their vehicles are more distinctive than ever.
"Six or seven years ago most Japanese cars were boxy and had no emotion," says Tom Matano, Mazda's executive vice president of design and special projects.
"They don't look alike as much as they used to."
He concedes, though, that many Japanese models have a rounded jellybean design that gives them a similar look.
So how did Japan's styling become dull?
Industry watchers say the auto makers have favored mainstream, conservative designs as a way of protecting their market share.
In addition, "when there is a good styling idea, other companies are influenced by that," says David Hackett, studio director of Calty Design Studio in California.
When Japanese companies make a bold styling statement, it's usually with vehicles that wind up having limited appeal.
For instance, Mazda sold just 5,026 of its curvy RX7 sports cars last year, down 15.7% from the previous year, while Nissan sold 9,516 300ZX sports cars, down 3%.
The trouble with niche vehicles is that they typically lose their appeal quickly.
Meanwhile, the Japanese makers have a dearth of strong contenders in the hottest segment of the U.S. auto market -- trucks.
After years of dithering, Honda finally began selling a sport utility vehicle this month.
The auto maker won't offer a minivan until next year.
The Toyota T100 pickup is a flop.
The auto maker expected to sell 50,000 annually, but last year sold just 22,000.
And what about future styling?
Japanese auto makers won't comment.
But industry watchers speculate that their cars are likely to adopt bolder, more linear designs in the next few years.
