International Business Machines Corp. has won the first phase of what could be one of the largest contracts so far to build an information-highway system, in a deal to wire homes in Quebec.
The pact with a Canadian consortium is an important first win for the computer maker and could prove to be worth hundreds of millions of dollars over five years.
It also could boost IBM's chances as it bids for other contracts for two-way video and information systems.
IBM will provide computers, TV set-top boxes, software and integration services to add new features to the Videotron system, a pioneer in interactive television.
The Videotron system, for example, currently lets viewers choose their own camera angles and call up player statistics while watching a baseball game.
The new project will start with 34,000 homes and is the first phase of a 750 million Canadian dollar (US$557.4 million) plan to provide movies on demand, home shopping, home banking and other services to almost 1.5 million homes over three to five years.
The consortium, Universality Bidirectionality Interactivity or UBI, includes Hearst Corp., Le Groupe Videotron and National Bank of Canada.
IBM will design custom set-top boxes using its new PowerPC microprocessor chip and software created by Kaleida Labs, a joint venture of IBM and Apple Computer Inc.
IBM plans to begin supplying the first 34,000 boxes, costing several hundred dollars each, by September 1995.
The company also will supply video "servers," computers that store and transmit digitized movies, TV shows and other programming, and custom software and billing systems.
But rather than employ IBM's mainframe computers, the servers will be based on cheaper RS/6000 workstations and may also rely on IBM's new Power Parallel high-end computers, said Paul M. Loftus, general manager of IBM's Multimedia Systems group.
That amounts to somewhat of a setback for a faction within IBM that has been promoting costly mainframes as video servers.
But the UBI contract specified industry-standard software, rather than the proprietary software used by IBM mainframes, Mr. Loftus said.
While a number of prototype interactive systems have been announced, the technology hasn't been perfected.
Time Warner Inc., for instance, recently delayed the start of its Orlando, Fla., system because it wasn't ready.
International Data Corp. analyst Peter Burris said the Canadian agreement shows some customers are confident enough in IBM to be "willing to pay them even as they're gaining experience."
