Multimedia fever has spread to France, hastening a consolidation of the nation's television industry and spurring the government to take action that some say is long overdue.
Notwithstanding the collapse of Bell Atlantic Corp.'s plans to acquire Tele-Communications Inc., French officials have been both fascinated and bemused by U.S. efforts to create "information superhighways" and a plethora of consumer services to go with them.
While France started developing its own crude interactive technology more than a decade ago, in the form of the successful Minitel videotex service, many now fear the nation is lagging behind its European neighbors, let alone the U.S. Cable television, for example, has so far been an expensive flop and the state telecommunications monopoly has been slow to exploit its potential as an operator of both telephone and cable networks.
But a series of corporate and government moves over the past few days has injected a new urgency into France's catch-up efforts -- and unleashed a torrent of publicity about the brave new interactive world that may lie ahead.
The most spectacular development has been the decision this month by key shareholders of the Canal Plus pay-TV station, France's biggest audiovisual success story of the 1980s, to combine their stakes into a joint holding.
The move sparked a furious controversy because it led to the resignation of Canal Plus's founder and chairman, Andre Rousselet, who charged that the government engineered the whole affair against his will.
The government denies the charge.
Aside from its political repercussions, the move is significant because it cements the links between the Canal Plus TV franchise, Havas SA, a large and diversified publisher which owns 24% of the station, the cable operator Cie. Generale des Eaux, which holds 20%, and the retail bank Societe Generale, which owns 5%.
Meanwhile, the French telecommunications monopoly, France Telecom, agreed to hand over its part of a telephone-directory publishing operation to Havas in exchange for a 5% stake in that company.
Government officials say the result is the emergence of a potential multimedia conglomerate that they hope could become a sort of national champion.
Before the political fuss had died down, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur announced on Tuesday that he is commissioning an official report on electronic superhighways prior to introducing new legislation in parliament this year.
Over the next three years, Mr. Balladur said he expects a big mobilization of investment, particularly in cable.
And the government is hinting that it would like the European Union to play an important role in motivating and financing more sophisticated pan-European interactive networks.
The Canal Plus maneuvering was made possible by a new French law on audiovisual services that increases the limits on investment in TV companies from a maximum of 25% to 49%.
Two other big companies, Bouygues SA and Lyonnaise des Eaux-Dumez said this week they also plan to increase their stakes in their respective private TV stations, TF1 and M6.
Such rapid-fire maneuvering has stirred big public interest.
Paris Match, a fashion and gossip magazine that writes a lot about models and very little about modems, even ran a gushing 12-page color feature in its latest edition about the opportunities presented by multimedia.
But government officials and independent analysts caution that there is still a very long way to go before state-of-the-art multimedia becomes a reality in France.
For one thing, given the paucity of cable, it's still far from certain how consumers will get access to it.
Despite a huge investment of more than 20 billion francs ($3.41 billion) over the past decade, only five million homes in France currently are wired, and of those, only 1.2 million have actually subscribed to the various cable TV services currently being offered.
As a result, French cable operators are all making hefty losses.
"In the U.S., the idea of multimedia makes sense because there are consumers for it.
In France, there aren't," says Christophe Cherblanc, an analyst at Cholet-Dupont in Paris.
France also lags behind on the hardware needed to establish information superhighways.
A study of the European market by the PA Consulting Group in London, this week concluded that France is far behind Germany and the United Kingdom in its development and deployment of the crucial broadband telecommunications infrastructure that can reach consumers.
Moreover, French executives complain that the U.S. is well ahead when it comes to providing services for a big expansion of the audiovisual sector.
Jerome Seydoux, the chief executive of Chargeurs SA, which recently started investing in cable systems, has said the lack of TV programming in Europe "is our real inferiority."
Cable operators have griped that the franchise given to Canal Plus is a key part of the problem.
The pay-station, which shows many of the latest films and key sports events, is beamed in scrambled form to most homes in France, and has attracted about 3.5 million subscribers.
Cable operators say its success has made cable less attractive to consumers, and the government seems to agree.
During negotiations to renew its franchise, which expires next year, government officials say they have been urging Canal Plus to play a bigger role in the development of cable TV and use some of its revenues to finance cable systems.
France Telecom is also held by some as the scapegoat for France's tardiness.
But a France Telecom spokesman says the company has been investing heavily in cable, satellite and other hardware, and is now increasingly involved in multimedia services.
Among other things, France Telecom recently announced it is working with television companies on a pay-per-view television service.
