The Queen of DIP financing is stepping down.
Darla D. Moore, the Chemical Banking Corp. managing director who turned the arcane world of debtor-in-possession lending into a booming business, resigned yesterday after a 13-year banking career.
"I'm a firm believer in people needing to repot themselves periodically," says Ms. Moore, 39 years old, who is unsure what her next career move will be.
"I'm not resigning to `pursue personal interests' or whatever they say."
The sharp-tongued Ms. Moore helped develop the market for DIP financing, which are loans used by companies that enter into bankruptcy protection.
With Ms. Moore's help, Chemical won the lion's share of the business when bankruptcies were soaring a few years ago.
Oddly enough, lending to companies in bankruptcy is one of the most attractive types of financing for banks.
Because the loans carry fat fees, high interest rates, and are the first to be paid off when the borrower emerges from bankruptcy, the market became a hugely profitable niche business.
In many cases, the loans are not even fully drawn down, but used as an insurance policy for vendors and suppliers.
"The bank never lost a penny.
Not one red cent," boasts Arthur Newman, a partner at The Blackstone Group and Ms. Moore's former boss at Chemical.
"I think that Darla did an outstanding job as the DIP Queen of America."
While some banks loaned money to companies under bankruptcy protection as part of their existing relationships, Chemical was among the first to set up a unit devoted solely to companies that enter into bankruptcy.
Ms. Moore's first big transaction was Texaco Inc.'s bankruptcy in 1987, when the company needed a $750 million loan.
She became very close with the community of bankruptcy lawyers and advisers who often recommended that clients choose Chemical.
"When a company is heading into bankruptcy, the first call you make is to Darla," said Robert Miller, a bankruptcy attorney.
"She became the standard in the industry."
Her clients read like the Who's Who of Bankruptcy, including Allegheny International, Revco D.S. Inc., Public Service of New Hampshire, Allied Stores Corp., Federated Department Stores, among others.
In 1990 the bank made $1.6 billion in DIP loans; her group was said to earn close to $30 million that year.
"She was at the forefront of selling a new product for a commercial bank that exploded," said Mr. Newman.
"She developed a reputation of turning around on a dime, and being able to follow through with actual commitments."
Of course, she had plenty of help, including the commitment by senior management.
Ms. Moore also attributes her success to the bank's ability to commit funds and syndicate them to other banks.
Without Chemical's syndication department, Ms. Moore wouldn't have been able to write such big checks.
In April 1991, Ms. Moore stunned Chemical by resigning to work for Manufacturers Hanover Corp. for what people close to the bank said was over $1 million; three months later the two banks announced a merger, and she became head of the combined unit's group.
But amid a decline in bankruptcies last year, Ms. Moore gave up the DIP business and began building a retailing industry specialty group.
Her last big DIP loan was a $600 million financing for R.H. Macy & Co.
People who know her say she was probably getting bored with the humdrum nature of her new position.
Ms. Moore says she's unsure what she will do after a couple of months, but "I need to do something of an entrepreneurial nature."
That could include the purchase of a company to build or doing advisory work, she said.
Ms. Moore and her husband are something of a power couple in New York circles.
She is married to Richard Rainwater, a successful Texas investor formerly associated with the Bass Brothers.
