With breathtaking speed, the House telecommunications subcommittee unanimously approved two bills designed to give the regional Bell telephone companies greater freedom while encouraging competition in local phone service.
The rapid approval -- the bills were sent to the full Energy and Commerce Committee after only an afternoon of debate -- suggests the bills may strike the necessary balance between the powerful interests involved, and are now on a fast track through Congress.
The bills would influence how local phone companies, long-distance carriers, cable operators and others spend billions of dollars to build important stretches of the information superhighway.
One measure, introduced by Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) and Judiciary Committee Chairman Jack Brooks (D., Texas), would eventually allow the seven regional Bell companies to provide long-distance services and manufacture telecommunications equipment.
The companies currently are banned from those markets under the 1982 consent decree that broke up the Bell System.
The economic and commercial law panel of the Judiciary Committee, which shares jurisdiction on the bill, is expected to vote on the measure today.
The other bill was introduced by Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.), chairman of the telecommunications subcommittee, along with Rep. Jack Fields of Texas, the panel's ranking Republican.
That measure is designed to open the local telephone networks to competition from cable television companies and others, while permitting phone companies to provide cable TV service.
"This is the most significant change in communications policy in 60 years," Mr. Markey said.
"This legislation will pave the way for the much-anticipated information superhighway."
The full House could vote on the package by summer.
No amendments were offered to the Brooks-Dingell bill.
The long-distance companies apparently failed to persuade lawmakers to drop a provision that would let the regional Bell companies buy long-distance service in bulk from such carriers as American Telephone & Telegraph Co. or MCI Communications Corp., and resell it to businesses and residential customers.
The long-distance companies also have been fighting a provision that would allow the regional Bells to offer in-state long-distance service, but that, too, remained in the bill.
While the Bell companies were delighted that the Brooks-Dingell compromise sailed through the subcommittee, some expressed deep concerns about the Markey-Fields bill, particularly a provision that would generally freeze rates for basic residential phone service.
"We believe the freeze is unconstitutional" and eventually will be removed from the bill, a spokesman for Atlanta-based BellSouth Corp. said.
Much of the debate on the Markey-Fields bill centered on an amendment offered by Rep. Billy Tauzin (D., La.) on behalf of television and radio broadcasters.
The amendment, which Rep. Tauzin ultimately withdrew, would have given broadcasters wide latitude to use their assigned spectrum for a variety of nontraditional uses.
For instance, it would let them use digital compression technology to split their spectrum into several new channels.
For some time, broadcasters have been pushing for more flexible use of their spectrum; they see strong possibilities in transmitting data and perhaps even mobile phone calls.
Support for the amendment withered after Rep. Dingell attacked it in a series of pointed questions that suggested broadcasters were being greedy.
Mr. Dingell, however, left the door open for broadcasters to modify their proposal.
They are certain to do so when the bill reaches the full Energy and Commerce Committee.
