New York -- It's opening night at Rainbow & Stars, and Rosemary Clooney is visibly nervous.
"I wish you could start with the second night," she tells the packed house at the tony cabaret atop Rockefeller Center.
But now the first number is behind her, sung in the distinctive alto that rapturous critics have often compared to a cello.
And now the audience is comfortably nestled in the palm of her hand.
"I was performing here last year when Tony Bennett won the Grammy," says Ms. Clooney, 65 years old, who was in contention with Mr. Bennett in the "traditional pop vocal performance" category for her album "Girl Singer" -- her first nomination in 33 years.
This year, Ms. Clooney is duking it out with Mr. Bennett again, and with Michael Crawford, Diane Schuur and Barbra Streisand.
"I wish there were a category for people over 65 who live in the Ohio Valley," says Ms. Clooney, making no secret of her belief that Ms. Streisand would go home with the gold.
"Maybe next year," calls out an audience member encouragingly.
Grammy or not, THIS year is pretty fine with Rosemary Clooney, even considering the recent earthquake that toppled one of the chimneys at her Beverly Hills home.
Here in New York on the windowsill of her vaporizer-misted hotel bedroom is an azalea plant sent by a couple of fans named Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward.
There on the sofa table is her new record, "Still on the Road."
And here she is back singing in Manhattan for the sixth year in a row.
"Of course it's special in New York," says Ms. Clooney.
"I think the place you have your first success is the place you always want to come back to."
Born in Maysville, Ky. -- the town now has a street named after her -- Ms. Clooney was shuttled between her alcoholic father and distant mother, and, just as often, her grandparents.
The constants in her life were her brother, Nick, and her sister and singing partner, Betty.
The duo got a ticket out of town when they won a contest sponsored by a Cincinnati radio station, subsequently joining Tony Pastor's band.
Betty decamped to be with a boy back home and Rosemary decamped for Columbia Records, where Mitch Miller, then head of artists and repertory, sensed that audiences would go big for a song written by Armenians (William Saroyan and Ross Bagdasarian) sung in an Italian accent by an Irish-German girl.
Ms. Clooney, finding the lyrics of "Come on-a My House" a tad tawdry, says she protested vigorously, but Mr. Miller made it clear that Rosie had better swing along with Mitch.
"I would probably have done `Come on-a My House' willingly," says Ms. Clooney of the 1951 novelty number that sold more than a million copies and ushered her down the road to pop stardom.
Her hesitation had less to do with suggestive lyrics about pomegranates and other enticements than with the level of control exerted by Mr. Miller.
Now "Come on-a My House" is a fixture in Ms. Clooney's act, introduced with great good humor and delivered con brio.
"There comes a time when you realize it's not YOUR memory anymore," she says.
"It's someone else's.
It's what THEY were doing that summer of '51 that they want to remember."
Unlike many performers of her era, Ms. Clooney does not have the slightest whiff of theatricality about her, no camp; she makes no attempt to evoke the glamour of a bygone time.
She is, as she has always been, a study in economy, honoring first the intent of composer and lyricist, then adding the fillip of her experience and taste and sensibilities.
Microphone held easily in her right hand, glasses perched halfway down her nose, Ms. Clooney is a grandmotherly figure who swings, whose delivery is as close to conversation as Frank Sinatra's or Billie Holliday's.
If the notes she once stretched to a filament are shorter, if the vibrato a bit trimmer, the voice still has an ample measure of sun and seduction.
"She has a quality that only a few singers have," says another Rainbow & Stars singer, Mary Cleere Haran.
"There's a deepness and a warmth, and yet a little ping.
You know immediately that it's Rosemary."
Well, not everyone knows immediately.
"A lot of guys who were in the Second World War come up to me and say, `I danced with you in the Philippines,' " says Ms. Clooney, who during the time in question hadn't yet set foot out of Kentucky.
Perhaps the former soldiers are thinking of Frances Langford.
A lot of people come up to Ms. Clooney and tell her how much they love "How Much Is That Doggie in the Window."
That, folks, was Patti Page.
"I recorded so much crap they probably figure if it's a bad song I must have done it," says Ms. Clooney, who's as direct in conversation as she is in song.
"I'm going to sing a song from the '50s so you'll know which one I was," she tells the audience as she leads into "Hey There."
Her original interpretation of the song as a self-help guide for the lovelorn mirrored that of John Raitt, who introduced the song in "The Pajama Game."
"But now," she says, "I've taken myself out of it.
Now I view it as talking to a child."
When Ms. Clooney first sang "We'll Be Together Again," she was imagining the end of a love affair; she now sings it thinking of the friends who've died too young.
"It's easier to take chances now," she says.
"I've become more comfortable with myself.
You start to realize it all really isn't that important, that you're OK."
Twenty-five years ago, Ms. Clooney wasn't OK.
A collapsed marriage to Oscar-winning actor Jose Ferrer, a collapsing affair with a younger man and the rigors of raising five children became too much to bear.
Ms. Clooney began abusing drugs (Seconal, Librium and Miltown) and audiences (she called them stupid when they asked for "Come on-a My House"), and made some recordings she finds painful to hear.
The full-court crackup came shortly after her friend Bobby Kennedy was assassinated and Ms. Clooney drove up a winding two-lane mountain road on the wrong side.
An ambulance and stretcher, and several years of intensive therapy, were waiting for her at the end of the ride.
"I knew I'd work again," she says.
"I never ever doubted the fact that I could make a living.
But I didn't have any idea that I would work in nice places -- and I didn't for a while," adds Ms. Clooney, whose gigs at the time took her to various Holiday Inn lounges around Southern California.
"But I always enjoyed it and I was singing better than before.
I'd been on so many prescription drugs that I had lost sight of the talent that was there.
I couldn't feel intonation.
I was just kind of apart from it.
I was under water and I have the records to prove it.
Off drugs, I could begin to get back in touch with the vocal part and the music part."
She's back in touch, and now, rather to her discomfort, is regarded as a pop icon and spoken of in the same breath as Sinatra and Ella Fitzgerald.
"I find that hard even to get close to," she says.
"Truly, I think if you survive long enough and keep liking it -- and do more than sing the top 20 tunes from the 1950s -- it will happen.
"But I also think I have a better handle on my career than I ever did and a better handle on my life."
Whatever tentativeness Ms. Clooney may have once displayed is gone.
She has no problem publicly scolding her pianist/musical director for failing to put her music back in correct order after the first set, no embarrassment about keeping the lyrics within easy reach.
"Otherwise, I get nervous," she says.
She chooses her songs, her arrangements and her club dates, taking care to leave ample time in the schedule for her seven grandchildren, visits to her Kentucky vacation home, and her new passion, Court TV.
Is she at peace?
Ms. Clooney ponders the question for a minute.
"Most of the time, most of the time.
It's pretty good, it's pretty good."
Ms. Kaufman is a writer in New York.
