The House Ways and Means health subcommittee rejected a series of tax and premium increases designed to subsidize small businesses and enrich the health benefits that would be promised in health-care overhaul legislation.
On a 6-5 roll call that divided both parties, the subcommittee tabled a bid to raise cigarette taxes to $2 a pack to finance subsidies for small employers.
Meanwhile, liberal efforts to provide long-term care for the disabled and chronically ill floundered amid Democratic divisions over a proposed payroll-tax boost to finance the benefit.
Rep. John Lewis (D., Ga.), who cast the pivotal vote tabling the tobacco-tax provision, said last night that he may move to reconsider the issue today.
Conflicts among Democrats on the issue underscore the fiscal pressure on lawmakers as they try to devise a plan costing less than the Clinton administration's ambitious health proposal.
Like President Clinton's plan, the Democratic-backed alternative before the panel would require all employers to help pay for their employees' health insurance.
But it would give firms of 100 or fewer employees the option of covering their workers through a new arm of the federal Medicare program.
The subcommittee bill also would designate a standard package of benefits for Americans, as would the Clinton proposal.
But the subcommittee's benefits would be less generous -- and consequently less costly -- than the package in the Clinton bill.
Yesterday, the second day of voting on the health-overhaul legislation, Rep. Jim McDermott (D., Wash.) proposed increasing annual premiums for the expanded Medicare program by about 20% to bring the benefits more in line with the administration's proposal.
But that was too much for the Republicans and many of Rep. McDermott's fellow Democrats.
"You can't give everybody very much for nothing," said Dr. McDermott, who is a psychiatrist.
He argued that the bill would sanction a two-tiered system of health-care for the nation -- one tier for private patients and another for those who obtain government coverage.
"We are going to put people into a very skimpy house with a lot of shaky aspects to it if we aren't willing to raise revenues," he said.
In other action, Democrats on the panel upheld a series of measures designed to give the federal government greater control over the cost and use of prescription drugs.
Specifically, the panel voted in favor of provisions authorizing the Secretary of Health and Human Services to negotiate rebates on new drugs, and to monitor the prescribing and drug-dispensing practices of physicians, under the expanded Medicare program.
Rep. William Thomas (R., Calif.) had proposed dropping the provisions from the Democratic alternative, which was written by Rep. Pete Stark (D., Calif.), the panel's chairman.
Panel members did approve one Thomas amendment, striking a provision that would have given the secretary power to establish the minimum and maximum dosage on prescriptions and to limit refills.
By a unanimous voice vote, the committee approved an amendment that would add a number of mental-health and substance-abuse benefits to the benefits package, including 90 days of outpatient psychotherapy for people under 18, and up to 135 days a year of "intensive residential services" for detoxification and treatment of mental illness.
Some members complained however that the expanded mental-health benefits weren't enough.
"I recognize that this is just a first step toward reducing the stigma and creating parity in health care for persons with mental illness," said Mr. Stark, who introduced the amendment.
Yesterday's debate over revenues underscored divisions among Democrats over the cost of the measure and the relative importance of enhancing benefits and enriching small-business subsidies.
Rep. Lewis said last night he supported the tax increase but wanted some of the revenue reserved for long-term care.
By contrast, Democrats such as Rep. Sander Levin of Michigan embraced the increase as the best way to raise money to help small businesses pay for their employees' health insurance.
Currently, federal tobacco taxes are about 24 cents on each pack of cigarettes.
The administration proposes increasing them to $1, while the amendment considered by the committee yesterday would have boosted the total levy to about $2.
The proposed increase, drafted by Rep. Mike Andrews (D., Texas), would have raised an additional $12 billion in annual revenue.
Two-thirds of this would have gone to small business, and the remaining $4 billion would have been divided among a variety of public-health initiatives.
The subcommittee, one of numerous House and Senate panels that must review health-care provisions before final legislation is passed, hopes to approve a bill and send it to the full Ways and Means Committee next week.
After a relatively congenial -- albeit partisan -- day of voting Tuesday, the panel of seven Democrats and four Republicans sank into testy bickering yesterday.
The most tense moment came when Rep. Stark quipped that Rep. Nancy Johnson (R., Conn.), who is married to a physician, obtained her medical knowledge from "pillow talk."
Mrs. Johnson immediately shot back: "I dissent from that comment.
My husband is a physician. . . .
I respect the fact that he keeps his business entirely to himself. . . .
I get my knowledge of the medical system from endless hours of work as a representative in this Congress, in hospitals and physicians' offices talking with patients."
Mr. Stark later apologized to Mrs. Johnson.
