Tokyo stocks fell Thursday, as investors were nervous about the stability of Japan's governing coalition, which is divided about tax proposals.
The London and Frankfurt markets each tumbled on disappointment that Germany didn't lower interest rates and that the German money supply surged, news that also pressured prices on other European bourses.
But Sydney stocks advanced 1.1% to a record.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 118.27, down 0.75, reflecting lower markets in all regions.
Coal stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 108.79, up 2.15, or 2%, with Cyprus Amax Minerals of the U.S. posting a 4% gain in its local currency.
Communications with AT&T stocks trailed at 145.85, down 3.57, or 2.4%, with Oki Electric Industry of Japan sliding 3.2% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which dropped 166.31 points Wednesday, fell 75.21 to 20174.82.
In trading on Friday, the Nikkei index rose 25.70 points to close the morning session at 20200.52.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 550 million shares, down from 669.5 million shares a day earlier.
Decliners outnumbered advancers, 808-257.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which fell 15.44 points Wednesday, dropped 14.93 to 1612.73.
Some enthusiasm about the Japanese government's unveiling of long-awaited stimulative tax policies waned when the Social Democratic Party indicated its opposition to the proposals might result in the party's withdrawal from the coalition.
The tax measures were largely in line with market expectations, leaving investors with little reason to push shares higher following sharp gains earlier this week.
The Social Democrats' intransigence caused many Japanese to be leery about the government's future, and they sold stocks.
The Nikkei jumped at the opening, because of the tax proposals, but drifted lower until midafternoon, when buyers moved in; a late burst of futures-driven buying pushed the benchmark index back up in the final minutes.
Foreign investors continued to buy shares but at a slower pace.
Also contributing to the market's jitters were the Japanese yen's continued strength against the U.S. dollar and an apparent lack of progress in U.S.-Japan trade talks ahead of next Friday's meeting between Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and U.S. President Bill Clinton.
In London, after setting a new high Wednesday, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index lost 28.8 points to 3491.5.
The FT 30-stock index dropped 19.6 points to 2694.0.
Volume was 1.09 billion shares, compared with 1.08 billion shares a day earlier.
After an opening surge that took the FT 100 up 19 points, sentiment was battered on news that Germany's money supply rose last year much more than expected, fanning inflation fears and indicating the German Bundesbank, the central bank, will be slow to lower interest rates, which could fan pressure on consumer prices further.
Then at midday, the Bundesbank said it wasn't changing its key rates, dealing another blow to the London bourse, which hopes for a tandem British lending-rate cut to boost economic recovery.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index, which had gained for five consecutive sessions, sank 32.29 points, or 1.5%, to 2151.72, also the intraday low, after trading as high as 2187.88.
Prices, already under pressure from some profit-taking and dissatisfaction with the unexpectedly high expansion of Germany's money supply, dived on the Bundesbank's inaction on interest rates.
Though most investors hadn't expected the central bank to cut its rates, some had bet otherwise.
In Paris, after scoring a record high the day before, shares fell across the board in heavy trading, on disappointment that German monetary policy wasn't eased.
A pall also fell over the market because of a plunge in French bond prices and fishermen's violent protests against inexpensive imports.
In Milan, shares ended lower after profit-taking chipped away at early gains aided by more buying by foreign investors.
In Madrid, equities slipped, damped by the lack of a rate reduction in Germany.
In Stockholm, profit-taking also was touched off by weakness in other major markets and higher bond and money-market yields, and stocks ended at the day's lows.
In Zurich, share prices fell after the German money-supply figures came in higher than anticipated.
In Mexico City, equities rose 1.4% to a record on confidence about strong earnings in the telecommunications sector, which would indicate an economic turnaround had begun in the fourth quarter.
In Sydney, stocks were propelled to new highs by stronger commodity prices including oil, solid corporate earnings, and strong buying by foreign investors.
In Hong Kong, despite relatively uneventful trading, shares rebounded, more than recouping the previous session's losses, as participants continued to hope for a Chinese New Year rally; the holiday is next Thursday.
In Singapore, prices climbed almost 1% in subdued activity, as dealings continued to be technically driven.
In Taipei, shares jumped 1.6% in heavy trading, even after profit-takers clipped huge earlier gains in the final half-hour; financial issues dominated dealings, surging 4.3%, while other sectors ended mixed.
Bullishness in the Taipei market, which has posted gains in six of the past seven sessions, was sustained by more reports that the Taiwan government will raise the limit on foreign investment in stocks.
In Manila, shares gained on news that the Philippine gross national product grew 2.3% last year.
In Wellington, stocks rose strongly in heavy trading led by forestry issues.
But in Seoul, prices tumbled 2%, hurt by the third set of measures announced Wednesday night by the South Korean government to curb speculative demand for stocks.
With cash abundant, the market attempted an upturn at midday but this fizzled under the weight of the measures to prevent overheating.
High-priced blue chips and construction shares were hit hardest, though medium-priced blue chips and some small issues ended higher.
Among corporate developments, in Amsterdam, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines finished at 48.20 guilders ($24.82), off 80 cents, pulled down by the weaker market, though the carrier posted third-quarter profit of 15 million guilders ($7.7 million), compared with a year-earlier loss of 437 million guilders, and unveiled an issue of 20 million common shares for March.
In Sydney, News Corp. soared 52 cents, or 5.2%, to 10.56 Australian dollars (US$7.56), on higher-than-expected earnings.
For the first half ended Dec. 31, profit jumped 70% to A$768.9 million (US$550.1 million) from a year earlier.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
