By veering from obstinacy to conciliation to belligerence over its nuclear weapons program, North Korea may have finally overplayed its hand.
In sabotaging inter-Korean talks Saturday with fiery threats of doomsday attacks on Seoul, Pyongyang has galvanized South Korean citizens and handed President Kim Young Sam an opportunity to assume a tough posture counseled by several cabinet members and U.S. military officials.
Diplomats and policy makers say they expect Mr. Kim, upon his return from summit meetings in Tokyo and Beijing, to approve the revival of joint U.S.-South Korean military exercises, known as Team Spirit, and to endorse the deployment of Patriot missiles.
He has yet to comment conclusively on either issue, analysts say, for fear of being criticized as a lackey of the U.S.
Some groups here have assailed the proposed Patriot mobilization and Team Spirit as a provocation against North Korea.
But such dissent has been drowned out by North Korea's recent vitriol.
"Clearly, the pendulum has shifted to a harder line," says a U.S. diplomat.
"There comes a time when the Koreans decide it's best to match firmness with firmness."
So resolute is South Korea's administration that on Monday it quashed an international peace mission to Pyongyang that would have had unprecedented scope.
The move comes at a time when many diplomats fear economically strapped North Korea is on the verge of retreating into an isolation that could eventually mutate into a last-ditch military strike.
But government officials stress their objective is to squeeze North Korea back to the negotiating table.
"Only when we take a firm hand do we help the moderates in North Korea," who favor talking over saber-rattling, says Lee Hong Koo, senior vice chairman of the government's Advisory Council on Unification.
North Korea has been locked in negotiations with Seoul and Washington since it announced it would bolt from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty last March.
The surprise move stoked suspicion Pyongyang was developing nuclear weapons, which the Stalinist regime denies.
Several times North Korea has agreed to on-site checks, only to renege at the last minute; the last time came just a week ago when North Korean officials interfered with an international inspection team.
A few days later, a delegation of North Korean officials abruptly halted inter-Korean talks, amid threats that Seoul would become "a sea of fire" if South Korea did not back off from what the North Koreans said were unreasonable demands.
Dialogue between the two governments is a precondition for a resumption of talks between Pyongyang and Washington.
It was the first time such threats have been made at formal talks between the two governments, and the threats gave hard-liners in Mr. Kim's cabinet an opening they were quick to seize.
Almost immediately after the breakdown, the tape of North Korea's outburst was broadcast on all four Korean networks, followed by file footage of last year's Team Spirit maneuvers.
(The government maintains considerable influence over Korea's electronic media, which was once state-run.)
South Koreans, who have regarded the standoff with North Korea with a mix of complacency and resignation, were angered by the footage.
"North Korea is engaging in a common communist tactic," says Kang Chan, a 46-year-old comic-strip creator.
"They are strong when we show weakness, so it is time to strengthen."
Cabinet officials huddled throughout the weekend to plot a proper response to the north.
At one point, Mr. Kim's national security adviser, Chung Chong Wook, a hawk, took aside Foreign Minister Han Sung Joo, a moderate, and suggested he keep a low profile.
Mr. Han, recently condemned by the local media as too soft on North Korea, has obliged.
"Mr. Han is in an awkward position," says an official at the Ministry of National Unification.
"But he is smart enough not to be outspoken right now."
On Monday, Deputy Prime Minister Lee Yung Duk, another hard-liner, canceled an international peace mission to North Korea sponsored by the Washington-based Federation for World Peace.
A spokesman for the federation said it had recently received an open invitation from North Korea for an unlimited number of visitors to Pyongyang.
The mission would have included about 60 former heads of state, scholars, and policy makers, and was to begin with the delegation walking north across the heavily fortified border along the Korean peninsula's 38th parallel.
North and South Korea have yet to negotiate a peace treaty from their 1950-1953 civil war.
"At first, the South Korean government was quite excited" about the mission, said Antonio Betancourt, the federation's deputy secretary general.
"But after the talks collapsed, the deputy prime minister told us there would be no exchanges for the time being."
Says a North Korea watcher who would have been among the delegates: "Apparently, the government has decided it won't be fazed by North Korea's bark."
