Copper-futures prices rose despite price weakness among other industrial metals, gaining strength as the stock market staged a late-day rally.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, copper for May delivery was up 1.35 cents to settle at 87.25 cents a pound.
Analysts said copper's surge at the Comex as the prices of metals such as nickel, zinc and aluminum plunged on the London Metal Exchange reflects the fact that the U.S. economy is still far more vibrant than economies overseas.
"Physical demand for copper is quite buoyant in the U.S.," said Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man .
"But the rest of the world isn't as strong."
Copper prices remain substantially higher than they were late last year despite plunging last week.
A basic raw material of the U.S. housing and auto industries, copper has benefited from surges in both these businesses.
Copper's price was down slightly early yesterday on weakness in the stock market, but rallied as stocks rebounded.
"In theory, the stock market is a barometer of future business conditions, and to that end might signify potential demand or lack of it," said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
"Its effect on copper prices is largely psychological."
Commodity funds, or managed pools of investor money, were big buyers of copper-futures contracts yesterday, mainly to liquidate their "short" positions, or wagers that prices would fall, analysts said.
Buying by these big investors typically helps to support prices.
In recent weeks copper prices have been locked in a narrow range between 85.5 cents and 88 cents a pound, Mr. Savaiko said.
At the upper end of the range, copper producers and dealers have tended to exert downward pressure on prices by selling futures contracts.
At the lower end, liquidation of short positions by commodity funds and others tends to support prices.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of wheat-futures contracts rebounded after skidding earlier this week to their lowest levels in about three months.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the wheat contract for March delivery rose 1.25 cents a bushel to settle at $3.42 a bushel.
The modest rally was triggered in part by reports the U.S. had agreed to subsidize the sale of a relatively small amount of hard red winter wheat-39,500 metric tons-to the former Soviet Union.
Corn and soybean prices settled lower.
ENERGY: Yet another winter storm in the Northeastern U.S. gave a slight boost to heating-oil futures prices yesterday in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
However, natural-gas futures were slightly lower, despite the weather forecasts, as an industry conference in Houston thinned the ranks of traders.
Most crude-oil market participants already seem to be holding back ahead of the March 25 meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
The weekly report on U.S. oil inventories from the American Petroleum Institute was, for the most part, ignored, although it contained bullish data.
April crude oil rose nine cents a barrel to finish at $14.76.
