The sex-scandal stories just keep coming and coming.
There is a bimbo eruption one day, a lurid revelation the next, a tabloid rumor after that.
It all adds up to a series of remorseless blows to the integrity of the government.
Needless to say, we're talking about the British government.
Prime Minister John Major's regime is offering any other governments that might want to notice a pretty good example of how to become undone in the information age.
For starters, there is the credibility threshold.
At some point, the government crosses it.
Then, all of a sudden, it seems that everyone in the media is treating the government with less respect, even the corners of the media that should be its policy allies.
Minor stories, which otherwise would bump along the bottom, are brought to the top of the newscasts as further evidence of the trouble at the top.
The government tries to govern and restore its credibility, but it can't get any traction.
Every week or so comes another revelation to send it deeper into the mire.
The scandals don't have to be particularly important.
Take this week's U.K. scandal involving a very junior minister, Hartley Booth, who is a Member of Parliament from Margaret Thatcher's old district, Finchley.
Mr. Booth met a 22-year-old art student, Emily Barr, over tea last January.
She asked about how to apply for grants and mentioned that she posed nude for art classes for five pounds an hour (about $7.50 an hour).
Mr. Booth offered to hire her for slightly more as a researcher for a book he was writing on unemployment.
Ms. Barr attended meetings of the Socialist Worker's Party, but defended her decision to work for a Conservative, saying, "I really like Tory MPs.
Some of my friends are horrified to hear me say that, but they're very charming.
They're also extremely easy to manipulate."
Last week, Mr. Booth admitted that he had cuddled with Ms. Barr and written poetry to her.
He's resigned from the government.
This normally trivial but now-splashy story comes on the heels of revelations about Tory love children, bed-sharing, adultery and the previous week's scandal, the bizarre death of Stephen Milligan.
Mr. Milligan, a promising young government minister, was found dead in his home wearing nothing but women's stockings.
Analysts speculate he suffocated during auto-erotic sex.
Somehow, Britain has worked itself into a sour and masochistic mood throughout Mr. Major's term in office.
Mrs. Thatcher was loved or hated but nonetheless commanded the world stage.
Now, there is a growing sense that the British establishment is doddering.
It has reasserted itself in the years since Mrs. Thatcher's fall, but it still suffers from the same tired maladies she tried to combat.
A large part of the current government's problem is that it often seems too clever by half, or is habituated to what in the U.S. might be called an excess of spin control.
Very early on, for instance, the Major government broke ranks with the principled right -- during its support of the Maastricht treaty.
Backing the treaty wasn't the problem; that was intellectually defensible.
But it was the shifting, spinning, slippery way it maneuvered the treaty through Parliament that damaged its credibility.
Similarly, Britain's fall from the European currency grid was not in itself the fault of the government.
Britain was caught between the diverging monetary policies of Germany and the U.S.
But then Mr. Major fired his loyal and long-suffering chancellor of the exchequer, Norman Lamont, an act that earned little respect.
Since then the story has been spin and more spin.
Mr. Major has some sound instincts, and he is everywhere regarded as an honorable man, but where is the storyline?
A Thatcher or Reagan thrived with a sharply defined storyline, but the more common strategy in politics today is to sand off the edges.
Mr. Major tried to launch a campaign based on principle called "Back to Basics."
It was an effort to halt family breakdown, but it was conveyed into the public mind as an initiative with no convincing intellectual heft.
An analogy here might be the White House's all-of-a-sudden rekindled enthusiasm for welfare reform.
In Britain, the government's most potent critics now are the journalists on its own side, the right.
In the media age, or perhaps any age, it is probably better to be despised by your foes for reasons of your own choosing than to be pummeled or abandoned by your allies for loss of purpose.
