Mercedes-Benz AG's chairman mapped out a plan for a radical reorganization of the company's production structure, after a year in which its passenger-car and commercial-vehicle divisions had operating losses.
Helmut Werner's strategy would increase the percentage of cars produced outside of Germany as well as save money by buying more parts from outside sources.
Mr. Werner, meanwhile, envisions catapulting the company's passenger-car production to as many as 900,000 units by 1998 from 482,000 last year through aggressive moves into new geographical markets and new market niches, such as sport-utility vehicles, minivans, and a subcompact city car.
"Until now we have been too passive dealing with structural changes," Mr. Werner said at a news conference.
Mercedes is the auto unit of German industrial giant Daimler-Benz AG.
Industry analysts expressed moderate enthusiasm for Mr. Werner's strategy, but said they'll wait to see how well management implements the program.
"They're saying many of the right things, and they're probably doing most of the right things, but they've fallen short on implementation before," said Edmond Chew, European auto-industry analyst at Nomura Research Institute.
Other analysts worried that Mr. Werner might be aiming at too big an expansion too quickly while neglecting the heart of the company's franchise -- traditional luxury cars -- in favor of new market niches.
Mercedes-Benz's commercial-vehicles division will remain solidly in the red in 1994, Mr. Werner said.
The car division, however, "may" make it back into the black this year, he said.
A recovery on the car side of the business would be primarily driven by sales of the lower-priced C-Class, the "Baby-Benz," which has sold 120,000 units since being introduced in the second half of last year.
In 1994, Mr. Werner predicted that the C-Class as well as the retooled E-Class would help push car sales up to 570,000 units from 508,000 units last year and that sales for the company would total 68 billion marks ($38.85 billion).
Mr. Werner refused to give any indication of the magnitude of operating losses for 1993 but said Mercedes would have a profit for 1993, without giving details.
In 1993, sales dropped 2.9% to 64.6 billion marks from 66.5 billion marks in 1992.
By 1998, Mercedes aims to raise the ratio of foreign-produced or assembled cars to 10% from the current 2%.
Only partly motivated by high costs of production in Germany, this move is primarily one to win Mercedes a better position in global markets, Mr. Werner said.
Mr. Werner cited the need to balance out the risks of market downturns, currency swings and the need to have a presence in each of the world's major trading blocs.
Analysts wonder if Mercedes will run into problems with its plan to "outsource" more of its car parts.
A quick increase in outsourcing would mean a lot of surplus Mercedes workers, and the company is already under political pressure to stem layoffs.
The decision to keep production of the new A-Class in Germany for instance, represented a concession to labor pressure and was a key factor in limiting the number of job losses to 8,000 rather than 13,300 as originally slated for 1994.
Still, the upturn in the U.S. market, where Mercedes hopes to boost sales to 70,000 in 1994 from 61,000 in 1993 is a good harbinger.
And the appreciation of the yen gives Mercedes a further competitive advantage by making its chief competition in that market, the Lexus division of Toyota Motor Corp., relatively more expensive.
