U.S. Shoe Corp.'s board rejected a shareholder proposal to break up the company, saying the plan would "pose potential solvency risks to the resulting three businesses."
The Cincinnati company said a proposal by money manager Greenway Partners L.P., which is run by Alfred Kingsley, would "derail" existing plans to fix its sagging footware and women's apparel businesses, increase financing and operating expenses, and wipe out its leasing leverage with mall developers.
U.S. Shoe said late yesterday afternoon that it will recommend that shareholders vote against the proposal, which was filed by two individual shareholders, Alfred and Sondra Markim, along with Greenway, which owns 4.3% of common stock outstanding.
The advisory proposal will be included in the proxy statement for its May 26 annual meeting.
Bannus B. Hudson, president and chief executive officer, said he expects the proposal to be closely scrutinized by holders, and he intends to "make sure they understand why we do not think this proposal is a good idea."
He said he plans to meet with Sasco Capital Inc., its biggest institutional shareholder, and the California Public Employees Retirement System, among others.
Sasco declined to comment.
Calpers couldn't be reached.
Mr. Kingsley said he was "disappointed but not surprised" by the board's decision, and added that he will keep pushing his proposal.
"They say they don't like it, but we haven't seen any alternatives, so we intend to take our plan to the shareholders."
He rejected the company's claim that keeping the diverse retail operations under one roof would enhance shareholder value.
"We've seen a lot of restructuring at U.S. Shoe in the past, in dribs and drabs," he said.
U.S. Shoe's Mr. Hudson said the proposal would divert executives' attention in the middle of a turnaround and thus "adversely affect" their financial performance.
He noted that the company has already brought in new top managers to run the footwear and apparel businesses, sold some "nonproductive" assets, and announced plans to eliminate 700 jobs.
Mr. Hudson also said the company's concentration in shopping malls gives it clout with developers that would be lost in a spinoff.
Moreover, the company would have difficulty renegotiating its mall leases, potentially saddling it with more than $500 million of lease liabilities and "posing a major risk should one of the new companies fail to perform."
Also, Mr. Hudson said the three separate businesses would not be able to assume U.S. Shoe's approximately $180 million in debt.
He said the footwear and apparel units generate so little cash that the healthier spinoff, Lenscrafters, would have to absorb most of the debt, jeopardizing its financial performance.
Moreover, without U.S. Shoe's big balance sheet, suppliers to the apparel spinoff would exact more severe terms, "significantly increasing its risk of insolvency."
