Nicotine patches used to help smokers quit are helpful in treating ulcerative colitis, a major disease of the digestive system, a new study found.
British researchers reported that about half of patients who used a nicotine patch for six weeks had complete relief of symptoms of the disease, compared with onefourth of patients who used a patch without nicotine.
Partial relief of symptoms was also higher among those using a nicotine patch.
But side effects, including nausea, lightheadedness and headaches, were higher in the nicotine group, especially among patients who had never smoked.
"Our results suggest that nicotine may be a suitable treatment in patients able to tolerate the drug," said the researchers, who were led by Rupert D. Pullan and John Rhodes at the University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff.
Their report, based on a study of 72 patients, appears in this week's New England Journal of Medicine.
The study was funded in part by Kabi Pharmacia Therapeutics of Sweden, one of several companies that makes both nicotine patches and the drugs used for ulcerative colitis.
Patients in the study also received anti-inflammatory medication, the standard treatment for the illness.
Ulcerative colitis, characterized by chronic and painful bouts of severe diarrhea, afflicts an estimated 750,000 to one million Americans, according to the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of America, New York.
Crohn's disease is similar to ulcerative colitis but the two illnesses are distinguished by the fact Crohn's disease isn't relieved by nicotine.
Doctors long have suspected a beneficial effect of nicotine on ulcerative colitis since most people who have it don't smoke, and people with the illness who have smoked usually get it within a few years after they have quit.
The British study is the first major controlled trial that demonstrates the effects of nicotine patches on ulcerative colitis.
Why nicotine would ameliorate symptoms isn't clear, though researchers say that among other things, it affects production of mucus in the colon.
None of the patients reported an urge to smoke after the trial, researchers said.
But Stephen B. Hanauer of the University of Chicago Medical Center said that the study lasted only six weeks.
"Nicotine does have addictive potential and ulcerative colitis patients need long-term treatment," he said.
He also said patients in the trial hadn't responded well to standard treatment and thus they weren't representative of most patients with the condition.
In an editorial accompanying the report, Dr. Hanauer cited what he considered other limitations and said it didn't provide "convincing evidence of a true biologic effect of nicotine" on the disease.
