Landmark legislation to overhaul the nation's health-care system won approval from a House Ways and Means subcommittee, after Democrats cobbled together a fragile financing package that includes a 1% payroll tax on large, self-insured companies.
The 6-5 vote underscores the partisan differences still facing health-care reform, but the subcommittee's action restores precious momentum to the Clinton administration's efforts to achieve health coverage for all Americans.
"It isn't a perfect bill by anyone's estimation," said Rep. Pete Stark (D., Calif.), chairman of the health panel.
"But we have given the American people reason to believe that Congress will and can act."
Major elements of the administration's own plan were streamlined or abandoned in the Democratic-backed alternative approved by the subcommittee.
Concessions made last night would further delay requirements that all employers help pay for their employees' insurance.
Companies with more than 100 employees would have until January 1996 before having to meet the requirement; employers with 100 or fewer workers won't be subject to the so-called employer mandate until two years after that.
The most fractious debate involved financing, including provisions that go significantly beyond the president's plan.
Democrats finally dropped a 0.8% general payroll tax in favor of a 1% levy that would be limited to self-insuring companies with 1,000 or more workers.
But reducing the payroll levy left a budget gap.
So the lawmakers agreed to require a 20% co-payment on Medicare home health services for the elderly and to force states to maintain their full current payments under the Medicaid program for the poor.
The Clinton plan proposed a 10% co-payment on Medicare, and would have allowed states to reduce their Medicaid effort to 95% of the current payment level.
All of the revenue provisions, including a $1.25-a-pack increase in cigarette taxes, are subject to review by the full Ways and Means Committee.
"When we come to financing, we'll begin at the beginning," said Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.).
But the idea of focusing on large, self-insured companies has won acceptance elsewhere in the House as part of a trade-off between big and small business.
John Dingell, (D., Mich.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, has proposed a similar 1% payroll levy even as he has made concessions to agricultural and small-business interests important to Democratic lawmakers from rural districts.
While changes will be made in the formula adopted last night, Democrats argue that many of the large companies that would have to pay the new payroll tax stand to benefit from reforms designed to limit the current shifting of health costs to larger businesses from small ones.
Such trade-offs are an inherent part of the legislative process.
The true significance of the current maneuvering in the House is that it defines a new starting point -- beyond the Clinton plan -- for debate this spring.
Mandatory insurance-buying pools -- a central element in the administration's proposal -- have been dropped by both the Ways and Means and the Energy and Commerce leadership.
And there is general agreement that the basic benefits package that would be guaranteed to all Americans should be scaled back to reduce costs and the burden on small business.
"People have to be realistic, but I'm going to get him {Mr. Clinton} a bill," said Mr. Rostenkowski last night.
The administration has deliberately stepped back as lawmakers have begun to invest more of themselves in the reform effort.
All four Republicans on the Ways and Means subcommittee opposed the bill last night; it was finally approved following a day in which a range of alternative measures all failed for lack of a majority.
Most of the competing plans espoused a more market-oriented approach to health reform.
But the GOP also forced a roll call on the initial Clinton plan, which also failed, 4-0, with all of the seven Democrats merely voting "present".
"If the president's plan is the beginning, the vote today is to certify the end of the beginning," said Rep. William Thomas, the subcommittee's ranking Republican.
Hours later, the conservative Californian returned to the same theme as the Democratic-backed alternative narrowly won approval.
"It isn't the end but the beginning," said Mr. Thomas.
"We may not have won this particular battle, but we have not lost the war."
Rep. Michael Andrews of Texas, the sole Democrat to oppose the subcommittee bill, appealed for more cooperation between the parties.
But the House clearly will be a more partisan battleground than the Senate.
This partisanship can result in some distortions, as chairmen, unable to win Republican votes, are forced to try to win over different Democratic camps.
The Ways and Means subcommittee bill includes an expanded Medicare-like program to appeal to liberals who favor a government-run alternative to private health insurance.
By the same token, the Energy and Commerce Committee leadership is focusing on swing Democratic lawmakers, many from rural districts, who are sensitive to small employers and agricultural interests.
"Dingell is trying to build legislation the old-fashioned way, bottom up," said Rep. Richard Lehman (D., Calif.), a member of that committee.
"He's actually saying: `What do you want?"'
Such maneuvering often means moving costs from one group to another.
It was a member of Mr. Dingell's own Michigan delegation, Rep. Sander Levin, who was the final pivotal vote for Democrats in the Ways and Means subcommittee last night.
Mr. Levin had opposed the more general payroll tax first proposed by Mr. Stark.
But the Medicaid savings in the final compromise infuriated some of his colleagues because of the impact it would have on their states.
