The state insurance commissioners' group approved Florida's proposal to fine Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. $20 million to settle charges of questionable sales practices, but the insurance company has yet to accept the plan.
If Met Life rejects it, each state would be forced to take separate action against the company, which could delay repayment to the 60,000 policyholders who were allegedly misled by Met Life agents into buying life insurance under the pretense that they were buying a retirement account.
The proposal also orders New York-based Met Life to pay back any policyholder who may have been victimized by the alleged misrepresentation.
Met Life, which has already volunteered to pay back any defrauded policyholder, could pay as much as $76 million in that action.
At the quarterly meeting of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners yesterday, Florida insurance commissioner Tom Gallagher released a scathing report about Met Life's activities, in which he blasts the company's "ostrich approach" to the problem.
Senior Met Life officials knew more than a year before Florida began an investigation that the company's Tampa office violated state rules that govern sales practices.
Met Life officials said yesterday the company has not yet decided whether to agree to the settlement offer.
"We're weighing our options," said Met Life spokesman Charles Sahner, who criticized the size of the fine, which is unusually large by the standards of state insurance regulators.
But he added the company remains committed to a multistate solution.
Met Life officials are to meet here today with regulators.
The questionable practices were first detected -- and were most pervasive -- in Florida, where Met Life's Tampa office developed a massive, national sales program aimed at registered nurses.
But evidence of illegal activities showed up in nearly every state.
State laws require that agents disclose that they are selling insurance, and that life insurance can't be marketed as solely a savings vehicle.
Mr. Gallagher's report singles out Met Life Executive Vice President Robert Crimmins, who is in charge of insurance sales to individuals, as having known about the problems as early as March 1991.
Met Life defended Mr. Crimmins yesterday by saying that having a general knowledge of a problem isn't the same as knowing the extent of a situation and the details.
Commissioners were divided on the size of the fine, but compromised by agreeing to $12.5 million in penalties to be divided among the states and another $7.5 million for unspecified purposes.
