Digital will produce its powerful Alpha chip in the $425 million plant, the tiny silicon engine that is supposed to carry the computer maker into the next century.
From the Guinness Book of Records to the respected industry journal Microprocessor Report, Digital's Alpha has been hailed the world's fastest computer chip.
Unfortunately, the first versions of the chip aren't selling as fast as they can crunch numbers.
Alpha system sales rose to $500 million in 1993, the first full year of shipments, but sales of the company's mainstay VAX line plunged by almost $1 billion in the same period, estimates Barry F. Willman, an analyst at Goldman Sachs & Co.
While soaring personal computer sales have helped, they aren't yet large enough to pick up the slack.
Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., hoped to be a step ahead with Alpha -- but it may have left its market behind.
As one Digital salesmen says, "My customers are asking, `Tell me again why I need a car that goes 500 miles an hour.'"
Alpha, he says, is great for high-powered tasks like weather forecasting or seismic modeling, ("and I've already called on every seismic modeler in my territory -- it took all of Tuesday morning").
The Alpha design is indeed a generation ahead of most chips, a 64-bit device offering supercomputer-class performance.
The standard today is a 32-bit design; and even that computing capacity isn't yet fully utilized.
"Digital made an expensive bet that the world needs a 64-bit processor -- and it will, but not for another three years," says Steven Milunovich, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co.
Robert B. Palmer, who has been Digital's chief executive for only 15 months, is digging in for a long siege.
He's slashed expenses by 22% in the past 12 months, and is expected to cut an additional 7,300 jobs, or 9.2% of the work force, by June 30.
However, he's been unable to ignite enough new growth as Digital's conventional businesses contract.
In the fiscal second quarter ended Jan. 1, revenue fell a dizzying 12%, to $3.25 billion, yielding a net loss of $72 million, or 53 cents a share.
Though it still has $1 billion of cash on hand, an internal review of Digital's finances obtained by The Wall Street Journal says that the company will soon need an additional $500 million to $1 billion of new financing, probably as preferred stock.
Digital has burned through $2 billion in the past 18 months, and now has $1 billion of debt.
Analysts say new financing suggests that another charge for more restructuring -- and new layoffs -- might be on the way.
A reorganization Mr. Palmer put into effect shortly after taking the reins was supposed to divide Digital into units tightly focused on specific industries, such as banking or health care.
But the reorganization was scrapped after a year because the units fell far short of product-sales goals, bringing even more upheaval to an already-shaken sales force.
At the same time, poor forecasting and supply problems prevented orders of some hot products from shipping in time.
"We failed to execute well; we ran out of popular products and had orders that didn't ship," Mr. Palmer says.
He also says a shift toward low-end products such as workstations wasn't accurately forecast.
The linchpin of Digital's Alpha strategy is to offer the chip to other computer makers -- in addition to selling systems itself -- to get popular software written for Alpha.
But after more than a year, Alpha hasn't yet won over mainstream computer makers.
It's been hurt by delays in both software operating systems that customers needed to use the chip: Digital's version of Unix for Alpha, which was six months late, and Windows NT from Microsoft Corp., which was about nine months behind schedule and hasn't really taken off yet.
The slow rollout of Windows NT is especially worrisome.
The NT operating system is critical to Digital because it runs on Alpha chips as well as those of the market leader, Intel Corp.
This ensures a bridge between Alpha and the vast library of software written for Intel-based machines, a key selling point for Alpha.
Moreover, some analysts say that ties between Digital and Microsoft have been frayed in recent months.
Willy Shih, who runs Digital's Alpha PC effort, rejects such talk.
"Every relationship has its ups and downs.
But we view it as a long-term strategic alliance."
Mr. Shih, a young engineer who played a key role for IBM in the PowerPC alliance with Apple, defected last year to Digital.
He says that Alpha "is extraordinarily well-positioned in raw technology" and that the chip's ability to run multiple software operating systems, including NT and Unix, will be a key competitive advantage.
In a shifting world, "We don't force people to choose one or the other."
Still, Digital has lost precious time against rivals' pressing their own new chips: Sun Microsystems Inc., Hewlett-Packard Co., Silicon Graphics Inc. and the Apple-IBM-Motorola Inc. triumvirate.
To date, Digital has signed a handful of backers, including Cray Research Inc., the big supercomputer maker, and Italy's Olivetti, which is part-owned by Digital.
Dell Computer Corp., the PC maker, is testing Alpha and other new chips for a line of plug-in boards to supercharge future products; the company hasn't yet decided what to do.
Eric Harslem, a Dell senior vice president, says that Digital's Alpha "has the best technology, but also a real challenge" because of rising competition from better-known rivals Apple and IBM, which are pumping huge marketing resources into their new PowerPC chip.
This leads to sky-high frustration at Digital.
"The slowest Alpha chip is faster than the fastest PowerPC you can buy today," Mr. Palmer says.
However, Digital, he says, "doesn't market itself as well as its competitors."
At the same time, Digital's huge base of existing VAX customers are under renewed attack by Hewlett-Packard and Sun.
Sun's approach is particularly merciless: Prospective buyers are offered discounts when they agree to trade in a VAX; the VAX is then dumped as scrap.
The decline of the VAX is hurting Digital's service business, which is about half of total revenue, the internal finance review says.
At the same time, Digital's computer-systems manufacturing unit is "having problems with transition from VAX to Alpha," and "a contingency plan is being developed" to reposition the unit with lower sales and costs.
"Very little margin for error," it notes.
The review says that further work force reductions are likely but that specific goals haven't been set beyond June 30, pending third- and fourth-quarter results.
"We're running very close to break-even," the review says, though "revenue is uncertain for next two-plus quarters."
The review concludes that Digital "will still be in turnaround for the next two or three quarters" and that managers should "focus heavily on cash conservation."
There is a chance, it adds, "if we keep at Q2 spending levels, that we can make a profit this fiscal year."
While Mr. Palmer confirmed many of these points in an interview, he wouldn't make any forecast.
"This is a large organization that was in deep trouble when I started, and we still have a way to go," he says.
He concedes that the transition to Alpha is behind "where I wanted it to be by now," but calls it "a multi-year process."
Buyers of Alpha systems seem pleased.
Robert Stodola, research computing manager at Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, is using Alpha machines to help build a map of the human genome, under contract from the National Institutes of Health.
He says the Alpha "really flies" and is faster than any workstation he's ever used.
But Fox Chase, once a committed VAX customer, now looks at every vendor before it buys new equipment.
The cancer center has switched to standard software to "avoid getting locked in to one company," Mr. Stodola says.
Now when he buys from Digital, "It's solely on price and performance."
Mr. Palmer, the Digital chief executive, says he will need to sell five million chips a year by 1996 -- counting Alpha and others -- to make his huge investments pay off.
He says a recent contract with Advanced Micro Devices Inc., under which Digital will make two million 486-class chips a year, ensures that he'll have enough business to fill the chip plants -- even if Alpha isn't the success Digital hopes.
Nevertheless, Alpha's slow start puts enormous pressure on Mr. Palmer, a semiconductor engineer who championed the chip.
He insists he has the full support of Digital's board, which ousted his predecessor, Digital co-founder Kenneth H. Olsen, in 1992.
But he adds that when he was appointed, "The board maybe didn't understand the magnitude of the challenge -- and I didn't either, frankly."
