In TV commercials in the 1950s, pert actresses in frilly aprons extolled the virtues of a Frigidaire or an Amana range.
The concept was simple, the impact obvious.
"It will change your life," the message went.
"It will make things easier."
If only this year's model were that easy to explain.
Instead, overwhelmed by hype and cliche, many people have thrown up their hands.
Call it the broadband-cyberspace-interactive-multimedia-full-service- network-500-channel-digital-information-superhighway- revolution blues.
And the truth is harder to get at than the tangled cables at the dusty back end of a VCR.
Seldom, in fact, has so much been said about something that everybody knows is coming, but about which no one really knows much.
Says Walt Disney Co.'s studio chief, Jeffrey Katzenberg: "It will be the first time a roadway, a railway, an airway or a phoneway has ever been built to a place for which we don't know the destination."
But don't let all the blather fool you, because this much is clear: A sea change is coming in communications, information and entertainment.
And in some measure, it's already here.
The simplest way to understand the revolution is to first think of the personal computer and television set converging into one box.
Now, imagine the machine is interactive: Not only can you send text, sound and video, as well as receive it, but -- because it's in digital form -- you can manipulate and navigate through it pretty much instantaneously.
Nobody yet knows how this will all play out; that's the unknown destination.
But even the most obvious possibilities are mind-boggling.
Consumers, for instance, could have instant access to every movie and TV show and piece of music ever produced.
They could get access to everything in the Library of Congress.
They could go shopping with a sister in San Francisco, examining products in a "virtual mall" from all angles.
They could order a driver's license.
They could compare hotel rooms for a vacation.
And they could exchange information with people anywhere in the world, about narrow topics they thought only they were interested in.
And that's just the beginning.
The groundwork for much of the revolution already is being laid.
Giant telephone companies are forming partnerships with cable operators, and pouring billions into wiring homes for two-way multimedia.
Technological advances involving the compression of data, as well as its delivery, mean that changes once thought to cost hundreds of billions of dollars will cost perhaps only a tenth as much, and will achieve critical mass much sooner.
Even though one highly publicized acquisition was aborted -- the agreement of Bell Atlantic Corp. of Philadelphia to acquire the biggest cable company, TeleCommunications Inc. -- a number of cable and phone companies have linked up in the past 12 months.
And a recent survey of industry leaders by the Washington, D.C., office of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International found a majority predicting that 40% of American homes -- their definition of a "mass market" -- will be wired to take full advantage of new multimedia services from 1998 to 2000.
Consumers also seem poised to accept the new world.
Personal computers gain customers every day, and an increasing number of users are plugged into on-line services, through which they retrieve information and talk to others.
Video-game makers -- already running a $6 billion business in the home market, with an additional $7.5 billion in arcades -- are increasingly attracting grown-ups and younger girls to join the adolescent boys for whom zapping aliens already is second nature.
The number of computers in the U.S. equipped to play CD-ROM titles -- powerful interactive computer software on compact disks -- is approaching six million.
And that market has only begun to take off.
Computer, entertainment and electronics giants are spending billions of dollars to serve this new market, but even more important, thousands of small entrepreneurs are busy developing interactive software to traverse the information superhighway.
This is where future Microsofts lurk.
Much of the corporate effort is devoted to making the whole process simpler for the consumer.
Barry Diller, the QVC Inc. chief who is as responsible as anyone for stirring up excitement about the infotainment future, likes to talk about everyone having one control.
"You point it," he says, "and say, `yes.'"
That's his retort not only to jargon-happy computer hackers, but to the legions of doubters who say they can't even program their VCRs.
For the American entertainment industry, the technological revolution is viewed with a mixture of hope and panic.
Consumers already spend much of their leisure time watching Hollywood's products.
Just as cable TV and home video provided new ways to watch movies and generated extra profits, so should the ability to instantly call up movies and other programming on demand.
In the language of the digital future, the studios are the "content providers," the "intellectual-property holders," the "software makers."
The grand new distribution networks will only make their products more valuable.
That's what the battle for Paramount Communications Inc. was all about.
Still, Hollywood's conversion is relatively recent.
Two years ago, much of the town viewed the future with benign neglect.
For years, an advance guard of technologists and futurists had flown in from Northern California to talk about digital destiny.
A group of hard-core locals would pop open their laptop computers and take notes.
But the talk was confined mainly to a group of "early adopters" and digital fanatics.
These are the same folks who have long used the Internet, the government-subsidized communications network that probably is the most important existing model for what is to come -- and just about impossible for many people to understand and use.
Then, about 18 months ago, everything changed.
The Hollywood buzz switched from Lamborghinis to PowerBook computers.
While technological advances had something to do with it, personalities were even more critical.
Probably the two most important were the well-known Mr. Diller, a creature of the old Hollywood, and techno-evangelist W.M. "Trip" Hawkins from Silicon Valley.
Both men understood how to work their colleagues and the media, and they got the word to Hollywood and to Wall Street: Think digital; think interactive; think multimedia.
Mr. Hawkins may not be a household name.
But among the Hollywood hordes attending what seemed to be almost weekly high-tech seminars, he became a key symbol of the possibilities of an interactive future.
The charismatic businessman had been one of the first employees at Apple Computer Inc.
He had founded a $1 billion entertainment-software company, Electronic Arts Inc.
And when he started another new firm, 3DO Co., of Redwood City, Calif., to create a new video-game system that would be a springboard for other interactive pursuits, he attracted such investors as Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. and its MCA Inc. unit, American Telephone & Telegraph Co., New York, and Time Warner Inc., New York.
Whether one believes that Mr. Hawkins is a brilliant entrepreneur or a slick salesman -- and there are plenty of people in both camps -- he galvanized the business community.
When 3DO went public a year ago, it was one of the hottest stock offerings of the year.
Whatever happens to his company -- and some cynics already are writing its obituary -- Mr. Hawkins will be a reminder that there won't be much opportunity in the digital future without large-scale risk-taking.
The other poster boy of the digital revolution, Mr. Diller, has gone even further than Mr. Hawkins.
As the studio chief at Paramount and News Corp.'s Twentieth Century Fox who made many successful movies and started a fourth TV network, his stature in Hollywood is unparalleled.
Fellow moguls trust him because he has made hit films, still Hollywood's primary order of business.
When he threw his lot in with the digital future by investing in West Chester, Pa.-based QVC and its home-shopping channel, people took notice.
The ultimately unsuccessful battle for Paramount that he waged against Viacom Inc. kept the topic center stage.
The topic has stayed so center stage that many, particularly in Hollywood, already are burned out on the subject.
This is a malady that can be caused by hearing too many information-superhighway metaphors such as "on ramp" and "road kill."
Or by going to too many seminars with the word "digital" in their title.
Or by seeing too many "demos" that consist of primitive cartoon characters grunting and kick-boxing.
Or by picking up just about any publication and reading lofty, eloquent tomes about what turns out to be a new way to order pizza or watch "Beavis and Butt-head."
"It used to be just a merry band of visionaries, mostly computer hardware and software people," says Christopher Murray, an entertainment attorney in Los Angeles.
"Now, everybody's selling something."
Mr. Katzenberg of Disney recently dug out and waved a Time magazine cover story headlined, "Man of the Year: The Computer."
The year was 1983, and the message was clear: The media like to hype things well before they affect the vast majority of people.
And there's no doubt that hucksters, hypesters and instant experts abound.
A TV network touts a new "interactive" experience.
It turns out to be a 900 number encouraging viewers to pay to vote to name the baby of a sitcom character.
Wall Street has to have a multimedia angle for any new entertainment start-up; stick the word "interactive" into a prospectus, and it has a better chance of making it, dealmakers say.
Hollywood certainly has plenty of reason to succumb to the hype.
After all, the industry's traditional revenue sources have been flattening, and its growth now comes mainly from expanding international markets.
So there's much reason to fervently wish for -- and overstate the promise of -- an interactive future.
Indeed, all of the studios have set up new media divisions, as have the major talent agencies.
"Everyone wants an interactive clause in their contract," says one agent.
"It doesn't matter if it's `Sleepless in Seattle.'"
Adds Jeff Berg, chairman of International Creative Management, a talent agency in New York and Los Angeles: "There are deals being made now in real terms and for real dollars, but there are other deals that are speculative."
But, he and others say, no one wants to wind up like Peggy Lee, who had to sue to get some additional return from the music and voice work she did for Disney's animated "Lady and the Tramp."
The film brought in millions from its home-video release decades after it was made.
Hollywood's biggest concern, though, is that it's all real -- and that the traditional entertainment industry won't be the one to cash in.
Mark Stahlman, a former securities analyst who consults on new media in New York, long has argued that producers of new interactive entertainment will come from outside Hollywood, which he believes isn't entrepreneurial enough.
The video-game business provides an instructive precedent, Mr. Stahlman and others say.
Certain video games based on films such as "Aladdin" and "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" have done well recently.
"Jurassic Park" captured about $2 million for the rights to translate the blockbuster film into a video game.
But those were the exceptions.
MCA President Sidney Sheinberg recalls that more than a decade ago, the then-reigning box office champ, "E.T., the Extra-terrestrial," was licensed to Atari Games for $24 million.
The film was great, the video game was lousy, and stores couldn't give it away.
More recently "Bram Stoker's Dracula" -- even with enormous help from the filmmakers -- wasn't a major game hit; nor was "Cliffhanger."
Actually, Hollywood has pretty much missed out on the video-game boom.
Instead, game makers tap other sources for ideas -- particularly sports figures or video arcades, the birthplace of superselling, supergory Mortal Kombat.
Another ominous sign: the swiftly changing control over entertainment distribution.
Entertainment moguls have had an up-and-down relationship with the cable industry, but at least they knew the players.
The game seemed to change, however, when Bell Atlantic announced its plans to acquire TCI.
Even though that deal fell through, other alliances continue to be made: Nynex Corp. of White Plains, N.Y., put a major investment into Viacom, Southwestern Bell Corp. of St. Louis formed a cable venture with Cox Enterprises Inc., Atlanta, and Time Warner got a $2.5 billion investment in its cable and entertainment businesses from U S West Inc. of Denver.
Some observers wonder whether there will be many major independent cable operators left by year's end.
No one is sure what it will be like doing business with the no-longer-so-Baby Bells.
In the current relatively low-tech world, local phone-company revenue is more than $100 billion; movie box-office revenue is a comparatively paltry $5 billion, with home video adding another $13 billion.
In fact, many people think the current flattering of Hollywood -- all this talk about "content is king" -- is just short-term stroking.
Distribution will be king.
Once the interactive future is truly under way, these people say, Hollywood may be one of many providers -- and not the most important.
Instead, even more than the cable companies, the phone companies appear to be in the driver's seat.
Though they may be perceived as unhip in Hollywood, their culture of "universal service" and "common carriage" sees entertainment as a footnote.
They want people to talk or interact with each other, and collect a few dimes every time they do.
"The entertainment paradigm is just a hook, how people get into it," says Alan Schwartz, co-chairman of investment banking at Bear, Stearns & Co. in New York.
"But the network will be a communications network, an information network, not just a new way to deliver TV."
Even the entertainment portion of the interactive future may be up for grabs.
With digital production bringing costs down, a filmmaker might be able to make a movie and put it on the network, bypassing the Hollywood fat cats.
The logical extension of video-on-demand is an "a la carte" universe -- where a viewer could have customized television, picking and choosing from among the most narrow kinds of programming.
Through the use of "intelligent agents" controlling a TV set, a consumer will be able to come home at night, and the TV will say, "We know you're interested in opera and `The Magic Flute' was on Bravo tonight.
So we taped it."
Such agents, says Mr. Diller, give consumers the "ability to follow up their curiosity," and to have information that interests them "synthesized" and brought to them "instantaneously."
In this world, he says, creative artists will have "the ability to program for a narrow audience, the ability to have an audience gathered together that is small in mass-communications terms but huge for something like ballet or performance art.
You will have a critical mass that will allow people to produce for that.
That's never happened before."
Perhaps, but don't count the traditional players out just yet.
Narrowcasting, many believe, has its limits.
When cable television was in its infancy, many fantasized about an abundance of choice.
It didn't happen.
Adults got CNN, teens got MTV, children got Nickelodeon, and the public limited its actual range of TV choices to perhaps seven or eight channels instead of the old three or four.
There still is lots of "shelf space" on many existing cable systems, and little to fill them.
"Public-access" cable didn't generate a huge burst of creativity from the citizenry: It just put a lot of kooks on the air.
Moreover, the big three networks, though a bit battered, still command around a 60% share of all TV viewing -- just as home-video customers spend 70% of their money on the top 20 titles, according to Video Business magazine.
The lesson: Even with lots of choices out there, American audiences have been conditioned for a certain kind of entertainment.
And only the networks and major studios spend the kind of money to produce shows that have that kind of mass appeal.
"Consumer tastes in entertainment are broadly similar," says Strauss Zelnick, former Fox studio president who now runs game producer Crystal Dynamics Inc.
"There's no other explanation for hits."
Sociologists have noted the importance of the "water-cooler" syndrome: People want to talk the next day about what they watched on TV the night before.
"You can't make . . . us all these little individual sovereign states," says Disney's Mr. Katzenberg.
Just as important: How will people know what's available to watch?
A software navigator can help find information, but it isn't going to differentiate between junk and gems.
A vital role of the Hollywood studios in the digital future therefore could lie in the area of marketing.
In the movie business today, the actual amount of money made in the domestic movie theater is only about 20% of the total expected revenue from any film.
But the big-screen run is still the most important link in the revenue chain, because that's when the movie is imprinted in people's brains.
It's when most of the marketing dollars are allocated (80% of it spent on TV commercials), when the title is stretched across thousands of marquees, and what the award hoopla is all about.
Even if production costs somehow drop because of digital tricks, marketing -- which already costs almost as much as production does -- will continue to be pricey.
A kid with a video camera won't be "empowered" by new technology unless he can get somebody to watch him.
"We'll become marketing partners with the technology companies," says Scott Sassa, executive vice president of Turner Broadcasting Systems Inc., which has started its own movie company through recent acquisitions.
"In a sense, we're promoters."
Moviemakers and distribution companies also are convinced that if the viewing universe becomes too fragmented to make much money off the programs themselves, they will be able to sell products along with their shows.
As Bear Stearns's Mr. Schwartz says: "The trick of the full-service network is, you watch `Jurassic Park,' then you buy a `Jurassic Park' T-shirt."
Another scenario, promoted by Oracle Corp. of Redwood City, Calif., has the studios profiting, because they wouldn't have to pay the 50% cut they traditionally have given to theater owners, cable operators and video retailers.
Under this plan, studios would buy their own electronic storage and delivery device, known as a server.
If everybody in the future is wired, studios will be able to zap their wares directly to consumers.
Oracle has a vested interest in the theory: It hopes to sell huge video servers to the studios for $15 million to $25 million each.
"If a studio has its own server," says Terence J. Garnett, senior vice president of new media, "the only cost to them is the telephone line charge."
No middleman.
Moreover, he adds, they'll have private access to all sorts of demographic information about consumers who plug in.
But can this video-on-demand, an update of the decade-old pay-per-view, be priced competitively?
Movies already rent for $2 or less and often sell discounted for as little as $7, less for older titles.
Further, says MCA's Mr. Sheinberg, "I seem to remember that you can pay a pretty hefty fee for 2 1/2 hours of using the phone."
So, it comes back to the original unknown: Where are we heading?
Companies have plenty of reasons to be excited -- and just as many reasons to be worried.
And every move forward just brings more questions.
Will, for instance, the digital future create an intellectual elite, separating people into information haves and have-nots?
Will privacy be protected, as it is by and large on phone lines?
Will direct-broadcast satellites further muddy the picture?
Hollywood has major concerns about copyrights.
If consumers can send video to each other and instantly record it, how do copyright holders protect their films and TV shows?
"This has never happened before," says Mr. Murray, the entertainment lawyer.
"It's impractical to photocopy a bestselling novel."
One thing is sure: The twists and turns that the path to the digital future takes will be entertaining in themselves.
"It's going to take a while to turn a raw, untamed technology into a compelling medium," says Paul Saffo, a director of the Institute for the Future in Menlo Park, Calif.
"But as this evolves, it's going to be full of surprises that will delight the consumer and confound a lot of business executives."
Mr. Turner is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau.
