Equitable Cos. promoted James Benson to president of its largest unit, increasing his chances of becoming chairman of the financial services company.
Mr. Benson, 47 years old, will become president of Equitable Life Assurance Co. of the U.S.
He joined Equitable less than a year ago as senior executive vice president, after having been president of the New York office of a consulting firm.
Richard Jenrette, current chairman and chief executive officer of Equitable, turns 65 this year.
Yesterday he said that he has "no near-term plans to retire."
However, analysts don't expect him to remain at the helm for more than a few years.
They add that whether Mr. Benson or his boss, Joseph Melone, succeeds Mr. Jenrette will depend on when Mr. Jenrette retires.
Mr. Melone is now 62.
Even if Mr. Melone serves as chairman for a brief period, it now appears more likely that Mr. Benson will eventually assume the title.
"This makes the line of succession clear," said CS First Boston analyst Vanessa Wilson.
In announcing Mr. Benson's promotion, Equitable also named Mr. Melone to succeed Mr. Jenrette as chairman and chief executive officer of the life insurance operation, effective immediately.
Mr. Melone had been president of that unit.
Before Equitable went public in the summer of 1992, the company had brought in Mr. Melone, then a high-ranking official with Prudential Insurance Co. of America, to bring stability to its sales force.
Equitable's sales force has always been one of its major strengths, and the company was worried about losing insurance agents because of the financial troubles it experienced at the time.
Now that Equitable has cured its financial woes, the company seeks to expand.
Mr. Benson, whose expertise lies in marketing, will be responsible for developing and selling products needed to make Equitable grow.
"We got the balance sheet in good shape," Mr. Melone said.
"Now, the name of the game is how to improve the profit and loss statement."
Mr. Benson spent 15 years with Pacific Mutual Life Insurance Co. before joining the New York office of Management Compensation Group, a consulting firm.
He said he has no plans to change the marketing strategy Equitable already has in place.
The company, Mr. Benson said, will continue to focus on selling to the "baby boom" generation, which is a group many insurers have targeted because of its favorable demographics.
Equitable will also continue to promote variable insurance products, in which the buyer determines how to invest the premiums and takes the risk for the investment results.
Mr. Melone, who in addition to running the life insurance company retains his job as president of the parent company, played down the idea that Mr. Benson is being groomed to become chairman.
Mr. Melone said other executives within Equitable, including John Chalsty and David Williams, both 60, will also be considered.
Mr. Chalsty heads Equitable's brokerage unit, Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.
Mr. Williams heads Equitable's money management arm, Alliance Capital Management.
Neither holds executive positions at the parent company, although Mr. Williams sits on Equitable's board of directors.
CS First Boston's Ms. Wilson noted that because both men already head their own empires within Equitable, they might find running the parent company less enjoyable than their current positions.
Both DLJ and Alliance are also more independent than the life insurance unit.
Alliance already has public stockholders, and DLJ is likely to be taken public.
