H.J. Heinz Co., faced with disappointing results at its Weight Watchers business in the U.S., said it plans further major expansion moves and acquisitions in international food service and baby food businesses.
Appearing before food industry analysts here, Anthony J.F. O'Reilly, chairman, president, and chief executive of the Pittsburgh food giant, said that with Heinz's emphasis on food service and baby food, and contributions from established and newer brands, the company expects double-digit annual earnings growth in the next three years.
A Heinz spokesman said the company "didn't disagree" with analysts' operating earnings estimates of $2.10 a share for the year ending April 30, compared with $2.49 a share the year earlier.
Mr. O'Reilly also used the luncheon meeting to talk about his future and answer speculation he may leave Heinz in the next few years.
"I am going to stay with Heinz until we get back our premier rating," he said.
"I am totally committed to Heinz."
The 57-year-old executive said he will stay at Heinz another five years "if necessary."
In recent months, Mr. O'Reilly has expanded his private newspaper empire with major acquisitions in England and South Africa.
Mr. O'Reilly told analysts that Heinz is the final stages of acquiring three different baby food companies in Europe, India, and Latin America.
He said Heinz, whose world-wide baby food sales are $631 million -- with operating profit of more than $170 million -- plans to spend $250 million in acquisitions and investments in the baby food business this year.
In the food service area, Mr. O'Reilly said Heinz, through acquisitions and expansion, has created an "unsuspected" -- that is, unnoticed -- Heinz, with annual sales of more than $1.4 billion and operating profit of more than $200 million.
Analysts said Mr. O'Reilly appeared humbled by the company's problems with its Weight Watchers unit, but said Heinz's earnings projections seems realistic.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading, Heinz shares rose 87.5 cents to $32.
"He is trying to show they have some new growth vehicles besides Weight Watchers," said John M. McMillin, an analyst with Prudential Securities.
"Management's new goals are more realistic than the ones given a few years ago, partly because they come off of a low base."
Mr. O'Reilly noted the company's cashflow position should be improving, having spent $1.1 billion in capital investments to upgrade facilities world-wide in the past three years.
He said this year and next capital spending would be substantially less, at about $250 million.
Heinz will spend $130 million on a stock buyback program in fiscal 1994, a figure that could double to $260 million in fiscal 1995.
