As the Clinton administration presses for access to Japanese markets, Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa faces the task of repairing the Japanese economy.
If he repeats the policy errors of recent economic "stimulus" packages, he will botch the job.
His will become the second government in two years to be destroyed in part by bad advice from the Japanese Ministry of Finance and the U.S. Treasury.
If instead he is revolutionary in his economic policy thinking, and follows not-so-recent policy precedents, the Japanese economic miracle could be reborn.
Imports could rise too -- without the numerical targets that the Clinton team is demanding.
During Mr. Hosokawa's recent visit to Washington, Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman accused Japan of "draining demand from the rest of the world" by running a big trade surplus.
The U.S. Treasury wants permanent tax cuts in Japan to boost its consumption, stimulate its economy and reduce its trade surplus.
President Clinton is threatening trade sanctions.
The Treasury's demand analysis of Japan's tax cut and its current-account surplus is ridiculous.
The current account measures the net balance of trade in goods, services and some transfers.
Japan's current-account surplus is matched dollar for dollar by a capital-account deficit.
(The capital account measures net capital outflow.)
Japan's net purchases of foreign stocks and bonds and direct investment in plant, equipment and real estate abroad add as much, directly or indirectly, to rest-of-world demand as its current-account surplus removes.
There are two ways for a country to reduce its current-account surplus: cut saving or raise domestic investment.
Cutting saving slows the country's income growth and that of the rest of the world, which has less capital to work with.
Raising domestic investment speeds the country's growth and, as production, income and imports rise, speeds growth of the rest of the world.
Clearly, the latter course is preferable.
Neither Washington nor Japan seems to understand the distinction.
The world needs more saving and investment, not less.
The last thing the U.S. should do is to bash Japan for its saving rate or start a "current-account" trade war.
Japan needs to return to the roots of its economic miracle.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Japan enacted a series of incentive-creating tax cuts, widening tax brackets so that workers faced lower marginal tax rates.
In most countries, income is taxed when earned and, if saved, the earnings of the savings are taxed again.
In Japan, however, savers were protected from double taxation in postal savings, savings bank and government bond accounts, where large amounts of interest earnings were not taxed.
Saving for a home was sheltered.
Dividends were partly sheltered from double taxation with a special reduced tax rate.
There was no capital-gains tax.
Japan saved, invested and boomed.
In recent years, Japan has forgone net tax cuts in favor of higher government spending and "infrastructure investment."
The disastrous Miyazawa tax reforms of 1988-89 curbed tax-exempt saving, and instituted a capital-gains tax, with little in the way of marginal income-tax rate relief to show for it.
Furthermore, at the insistence of the Finance Ministry, a consumption tax was instituted to avoid any increase in the deficit from the income tax cut and expenditure hikes.
Japan's program to reduce private saving and increase public spending has been a financial and economic disaster.
The capital-gains tax and higher taxes on saving helped to collapse the stock market, real-estate values, the balance sheets of the banks and capital formation.
Income gains have been slashed.
Unemployment has risen.
Job security has been shattered.
Slower growth of production and income has slowed imports, making a mockery of the advice from abroad that higher taxes on saving and investment would reduce the trade surplus.
The debate in Japan now centers on an income-tax reduction to stimulate consumption (egged on this time by the Clinton Treasury).
The prime minister, at the insistence of the Finance Ministry, initially proposed to raise the consumption tax to 7% from 3% to pay for the income-tax cut.
After a tug of war between the Socialists and the Finance Ministry, an absurd compromise was reached, under which there would be no consumption-tax hike but the income-tax cut -- a 20% across-the-board reduction -- would be for one year only.
Many observers fear that the temporary tax cut will be saved instead of consumed, negating the supposed demand stimulus.
These arguments about consumption, saving and demand stimulus are Keynesian nonsense.
Tax cuts don't work by giving people money to spend.
A tax cut (permanent or temporary), unmatched by a spending cut, pumps no money into the economy.
The tax cut is matched yen for yen by higher government borrowing.
There is no "demand stimulus."
An income-tax cut offset by a consumption tax hike would likewise produce no demand increase.
What Japan needs to do now is to design a permanent incentive-oriented income-tax reduction, and pay for the bulk of it with spending restraint to free up real resources for private-sector use.
The form and duration of the tax cuts are critical.
First, the cut must be of a form that increases incentives.
Fortunately, the proposed individual income-tax cut is already an across-the-board reduction, akin to a cut in marginal income-tax rates, which, if made permanent, would be an incentive to increase work, saving and investment in Japan.
But the cut must be permanent.
A one-year tax cut will not induce businesses to undergo the cost of hiring and training permanent new workers or to purchase plant and equipment that lasts for years.
Other needed steps include: restoring the protection from double taxation for saving and repealing the capital-gains tax.
The consumption tax should not be raised.
The recommended changes would raise the after-tax reward to additional labor, saving and investment.
Supply and demand would rise together.
Lower production costs and higher returns on capital in Japan would reduce the capital outflow, which, along with growth, would reduce the trade surplus.
How do we know that these policies would work as advertised?
One answer lies with the success of America's 1981 tax cuts.
Perhaps a more compelling one comes from Japan's own history: In the 1960s and 1970s Japan showed the world what incentive economics could do for growth.
Mr. Entin is resident scholar at the Institute for Research on the Economics of Taxation in Washington.
