In promoting his plan to provide every citizen with comprehensive health benefits that can never be taken away, President Clinton has set out to convince the 150 million Americans covered by employer-sponsored health plans that his proposal will improve their coverage.
He has focused almost entirely on the big picture: what benefits would be offered, what they would cost, and the mix of taxes and spending cuts required to finance them.
Very little has been said about the day-to-day reality of how most Americans will choose and use their plans.
From the consumer's perspective, however, the value of the plan depends on its ease of use when it is needed most.
People see doctors when they are sick or hurt.
At this stressful time they must understand not only what is covered and what isn't but how to use the plan.
Difficulty in getting questions answered right away can turn minor frustrations into major grievances.
Will the president's plan make it easier or harder for people to get access to health care and use their benefits?
At present, health insurance is an employee benefit, with employees receiving administrative support from their employer in choosing, managing and resolving problems with their health coverage.
The company human-resources department evaluates available health plans and selects the plan or plans (many employers offer a choice) that provide the best coverage for the most reasonable cost.
Companies do this because they are contributing to, or paying entirely for, the cost of coverage and want to spend the money wisely.
They also want to offer a competitive benefit that will attract and retain good employees.
To help employees use their health plans effectively, most companies explain the plans through detailed communication campaigns.
Companies also make sure employees get assistance with questions and problems as they arise -- such as what treatments are covered, how to pre-certify a hospital stay and how to resolve incorrectly paid claims.
Under the Clinton plan, the scenario will be vastly different.
Every company with fewer than 5,000 full-time employees will have to join a state-chartered regional health alliance, the sole health insurance purchasing agent for its members.
Over 90% of the work force will be members of such alliances, which will have virtual monopoly buying power in their regions.
The employer-employee health insurance link will be severed since companies will be paying premiums only to an alliance.
To establish "sufficient" buying power, most states will charter one or a few (noncompeting) alliances, each covering several hundred thousand, perhaps millions, of people.
In addition, states will have the option of adopting a "single-payer" approach, buying coverage for all residents and giving them no alternative to the state plan.
Thus, almost everyone will obtain coverage through a large state and federally regulated bureaucracy.
Choosing a plan will be a challenge.
A typical regional health alliance will offer numerous plans (perhaps dozens) from three general types: fee-for-service, HMO and a hybrid that pays HMO-style benefits inside the provider network but permits out-of-network use.
You will pick your health plans during the regional health alliance's annual open enrollment period.
Each alliance will publish a giant rate sheet displaying the cost of the various plans.
If your employer offers any benefits beyond the standard package stipulated by the alliance (many employers, particularly those with collective bargaining agreements, undoubtedly will), the rate information will be supplemented by a separate communication from your company.
To help you choose, the alliance will publish standard data on the quality of each health plan.
But because measuring the quality of each plan isn't yet a well-developed skill, it is likely that only some basic statistics on consumer satisfaction will be reported.
If it turns out that the plan you want is "oversubscribed," you will be forced to select a different plan that may not be to your liking.
Sound confusing?
It is sure to be.
Most people will have to choose from dozens of plans, at different prices, with very little guidance about what criteria to use in making their choice.
But don't worry.
If you have a question, you can call the alliance "ombudsman's office" for help.
Problems and disputes will be resolved through an elaborate bureaucratic process beginning in a complaint review office, which each state must set up.
If your claim is paid incorrectly or you are denied coverage for treatment you believe you are entitled to, you must call the complaint review office to lodge a grievance.
If you don't receive satisfaction from the three levels of hearings mandated at the alliance level, you may appeal to a new federal agency, the Federal Health Plan Review Board.
If this sounds like dealing with the Department of Motor Vehicles, it should.
The alarming fact is that the majority of Americans who now get their employer's help in purchasing and managing health insurance will become, under the Clinton plan, supplicants of a large government bureaucracy that is much less likely to be responsive to their concerns.
Many people believe universal health care coverage is a worthy goal, and they would even agree to pay more in taxes or premiums to achieve it.
But they will evaluate the Clinton plan at least in part on whether it eases or complicates their access to and use of benefits.
If they sense they are exchanging an imperfect but essentially workable benefit for a hopelessly tangled bureaucratic process, they will judge the Clinton plan harshly.
This potential administrative nightmare can be avoided.
Alternative proposals would allow all but the smallest companies to opt out of a regional alliance, and they would establish competing alliances in each region.
This would give the smallest businesses the group buying power they need and a choice of alliances, while preserving what most Americans now enjoy -- good benefits that are easy to use.
Mr. Billet is a principal at A. Foster Higgins & Co., an employee benefits consulting firm in Stamford, Conn.
