General Motors Corp. said it will build a compact pickup truck for Isuzu Motors Ltd. at its assembly plant in Shreveport, La.
Isuzu expects to sell 25,000 of the new trucks a year; production is to begin with the 1996 model year.
The new truck is Isuzu's U.S. replacement for its TF-series pickup, which Isuzu builds at a plant in Japan and at one in the U.S.
An Isuzu spokesman said the Subaru-Isuzu Automotive assembly plant in Lafayette, Ind., a joint venture between Fuji Heavy Industries' Subaru and Isuzu, will switch its truck production to all sport utility vehicles when production of the TF-series is discontinued there.
A GM spokeswoman said it plans to utilize existing capacity at the Louisiana facility.
GM said it doesn't plan to increase employment at the plant or reduce production of its GMC and Chevrolet compact pickup trucks currently being built there.
This is the second truck project between GM and Isuzu.
GM, which owns 37.5% of Isuzu, began building a medium-duty truck at its assembly plant in Janesville, Wis. for Isuzu in January.
Separately, Subaru-Isuzu said it started this week the model changeover for the 1995 Subaru Legacy sedan.
GM, Ford Motor Co., Chrysler Corp. and Toyota Motor Corp. have all scheduled overtime this week at U.S. car and truck assembly plants.
Altogether, the U.S. auto makers said they plan to build 245,374 cars and trucks this week, an increase of 14.4% from the 214,447 vehicles built in the same week last year.
Russia moved a giant step closer toward dismantling its inefficient, collectivized system of farming.
Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin announced at a conference of regional leaders that he will promote on a national scale a pilot project in Nizhny Novgorod aimed at breaking up Russia's largely unreformed state farming sector.
"This program should become a national program for Russia," Mr. Chernomyrdin said during his first visit to Nizhny Novgorod, Russia's leading laboratory for radical economic reform.
Mr. Chernomyrdin again confounded critics who view him as an obstacle to reform.
While often the cautious technocrat, he said Russia's goal in agriculture is "to give land a true owner."
"It is a historic moment," said Tony Doran of the International Finance Corporation, an arm of the World Bank that is helping to administer the pilot program.
Despite several years of reform, Russia's agricultural sector, forcibly collectivized by Joseph Stalin, has barely been changed.
State farms have re-registered as cooperatives, but they remain heavily centralized and dependent on state subsidies.
Small-scale privately owned farms, meanwhile, have begun to appear, but lacking capital and equipment have fared poorly.
In Nizhny Novgorod, the reform-minded regional government headed by Boris Nemtsov has experimented with a novel approach.
In five pilot farms, it has helped to obliterate the old system.
Collective farms are being dismantled acre by acre, tractor by tractor.
Farmers living on the collectives are given entitlement certificates enabling them to "buy" land and equipment at auction.
Mr. Chernomyrdin was on hand as leaders of eight new private farming associations bid on equipment from the now-defunct "Sixty Years of October" collective farm in the rural part of Nizhny Novgorod province.
During the spirited auction, they snapped up the farm's extensive fleet of Zil trucks and tractors.
Also pledging support to the program was Alexander Zaveryukha, vice prime minister in charge of agriculture.
Mr. Zaveryukha, a former collective-farm boss, had been critical of earlier rural privatization efforts.
His endorsement gives the program an important boost.
It isn't clear how Mr. Chernomyrdin plans to push the program on a national scale.
All told, there are about 27,000 collective farms in Russia.
The prime minister suggested that he may ask President Boris Yeltsin to issue a decree calling for farms that wish to go private to follow this model.
The biggest problem is financing.
Privatizing the five pilot farms in Nizhny Novgorod has cost about $1 million, largely raised from Western sources.
