The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, scrapping friendlier testimony released only hours before, delivered a broadside on the Clinton health plan, and warned Congress against even using the bill as a "starting point" for future legislation.
The statement came on the heels of a Business Roundtable vote Wednesday also rebuffing the administration plan.
A senior Chamber official described the twin actions as a "wake-up call" to the president of eroding business support for his health-care plan.
Democrats and labor leaders reacted with anger.
AFL-CIO President Lane Kirkland accused business of "cracking the whip . . . and invoking class solidarity."
Perhaps the most emotional reaction came from Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.), who introduced himself at a news conference as "John D. Rockefeller IV," and proceeded to castigate the big corporate interests so associated with his wealthy family.
"I stand before you to say `Shame on big business,'" said Mr. Rockefeller, who saved his sharpest rebukes for the Roundtable, an organization of chief executive officers of some of the nation's largest corporations.
"They have walked away from their workers," said Mr. Rockefeller, adding that there is "special place in hell" for Robert Winters, chairman of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, who heads the Roundtable's health-policy task force.
That brought a stern rebuke from Prudential.
"I am disappointed a senator of his stature would level such a harsh, personal attack on our chairman -- a person of outstanding integrity -- simply because they disagree over difficult public-policy issues," said Joseph Vecchione, vice president for public relations at Prudential.
Much of the debate comes down to who will pay for changes in the health-care system.
Business interests are clearly aligning themselves with more conservative alternatives that, unlike the Clinton proposal, wouldn't require employers to help pay their workers' health premiums.
The tone set by the Chamber, the nation's largest business lobby group, was striking, since the organization had sent the House Ways and Means Committee advance testimony indicating that it was open to "employer mandates" if the employer share could be pared back to about 50% of the cost of coverage.
The administration proposes an 80% employer contribution.
"We accept the proposition that employers should provide and help pay for insurance on a phased-in basis over time," said the text, which was delivered in anticipation of a hearing yesterday morning.
"We suggest that the required level of contribution be no more than 50%, and applied with reference to lower-cost plan premiums."
When Robert Patricelli, chairman of the Chamber's health committee, appeared before the Ways and Means Committee, this language was gone, and the message and tone were very different.
"We specifically cannot support the president's Health Security Act," he told the panel.
After reciting a list of perceived flaws in the Clinton proposal, the executive warned the committee against even using the bill as its base text in drafting legislation this spring.
"The Clinton bill, for one, certainly gives mandates a bad name," said Mr. Patricelli.
"If employer mandates become the vehicle for those who favor the trappings of a government-dominated system, we will not accept those mandates."
While the Chamber remains open to some cost-sharing formula, the administration must pare back on other elements of the plan if it is to restore business support for a common financing scheme, Mr. Patricelli said.
He said the initial testimony was a mistake of "well-meaning" Chamber staff who hadn't cleared the text with top officials.
But this explanation is at odds with the Chamber's reputation as a tightly controlled organization, and many observers saw the new tougher statement as designed to build on the Roundtable vote Wednesday evening.
Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark (D., Calif.), chairman of the Ways and Means health subcommittee, likened the Chamber to a "Republican apologist society," and Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) is expected to use a speech today in Washington to attack Republicans for a long history of opposing health reform.
President Clinton, for his part, yesterday played down the Roundtable and Chamber statements.
"I don't want to make too much of it because the people who came in here to see me said it was a negotiating strategy," he said.
"This is the beginning of what will be a protracted legislative discussion."
Some business people said they weren't hopeful about negotiating with the White House.
In an interview, P. Roy Vagelos, chairman and chief executive of Merck & Co., the giant pharmaceutical concern, said, "We would love to work with them.
We've tried repeatedly to get with them.
Unfortunately, we're always left with the feeling if we're not supportive of what they want, we'll be excluded.
So you're either a supporter or an enemy."
"We're sorry they feel that way," replied Jeff Eller, a White House spokesman.
"We think that we have tried to be as open as possible, while at the same time being consistent with the president's goals, which include coverage for all Americans.
We want to continue.
We want a constructive dialogue."
Amid the rhetoric, two new studies were added to the health-care debate.
Republicans said the first, a report by the joint Committee on Taxation, supports their concerns that the Clinton plan's proposed employer mandate would bring job and wage losses.
But the other, a preliminary analysis by George Washington University's Center for Health Policy Research, suggests that low-income people would be left stranded without the required employer contributions.
Under the proposal favored by the Roundtable, it said, a mother who has two children and earns $23,780 a year would have to budget more than 15% of her income for health insurance premiums alone.
