Rep. Dan Rostenkowski reimbursed the government $82,000 for possibly improper purchases over a six-year period from the House Office Supply Service.
Mr. Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, said his payment last week covers some items that were used for congressional functions, but whose purpose couldn't be documented.
Separately, a former aide to the Chicago Democrat has been cited for contempt for refusing to testify before a grand jury investigating allegations of financial irregularities by the congressman.
The former aide, Celeste Gabinski, was given 10 days to appeal the contempt citation given to her this week by federal district Chief Judge John Garrett Penn in Washington, according to people familiar with the case.
Concerning the supply service, Mr. Rostenkowski said: "While this means that I am paying for purchases which were in many cases part of my official activities, I am willing to do so since my integrity is a lot more important than the money."
The supply service sells goods for congressional use at discounted prices.
Prosecutors have subpoenaed information from the supply service regarding the reimbursement.
Robert Bennett, Mr. Rostenkowski's lawyer, said, "This is evidence that he wants to do the right thing and that dollars and cents is not an issue to him.
He erred on the side of giving money back rather than trying to argue the point."
Federal prosecutors have been conducting a lengthy investigation into several allegations, including charges that Mr. Rostenkowski improperly received thousands of dollars from the House Post Office by converting stamps to cash and that he fraudulently had ghost employees -- people on his congressional office payroll who didn't work.
Mr. Rostenkowski, who has denied any wrongdoing, faces a tough primary election vote next month.
He is a key player in President Clinton's efforts to restructure the nation's health-care system.
If indicted, he would lose his chairmanship until cleared of the charges.
Mrs. Gabinski, who reportedly remained on the Democrat's Chicago payroll after she had stopped working for him, was given immunity from prosecution in exchange for her testimony.
She testified once, but when called to testify again, she refused.
Lawyers working with Mrs. Gabinski's attorney said some facts in this article were inaccurate, but wouldn't say what they were.
A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office said he had no comment.
Through her lawyer, Mrs. Gabinski argued that she should be granted immunity from prosecution for perjury before testifying again.
A judge may order someone with immunity, who nonetheless refuses to testify, to remain in jail until he or she testifies.
In December, the Chicago Sun-Times reported that Mrs. Gabinski remained on the Rostenkowski payroll for five years, receiving $79,000, after ostensibly quitting her job.
The wife of a Rostenkowski protege, Chicago Alderman Terry Gabinski, Mrs. Gabinski worked in the Rostenkowski office from 1981 to 1987, but reportedly was on the payroll until May 1992, when it was reported that a grand jury was investigating the congressman's finances.
A Rostenkowski employee said Mrs. Gabinski did work at home.
Mr. Gabinski succeeded Mr. Rostenkowski as Chicago's 32nd Ward Democratic committeeman.
A grand jury has subpoenaed the ward's financial records.
According to the Chicago Tribune, Mr. Rostenkowski has used more than $56,000 from his huge campaign war chest to pay legal expenses for Mrs. and Mr. Gabinski.
James Cole, the Gabinskis' lawyer, said he had no comment on matters involving them.
Mr. Rostenkowski once had a Chicago office in the same building where Mr. Gabinski's and the ward organization's offices are located, a building the SunTimes said was owned by the congressman's family.
