Insiders at a number of regional banks have been loading up on shares in their respective companies, betting that good times lie ahead.
Despite an uncertain interest-rate environment, these insiders seem to believe that earnings will stay on track, that balance sheets have been cleaned up and that a trend toward consolidation will add some takeover sizzle to the sector.
Stoking that takeover fever is a bill moving through Congress that will allow full interstate banking.
Analysts say that even if bids for the companies don't materialize, many bank stocks seem cheap compared with price levels for much of 1993, before interest-rate jitters derailed a two-year rally.
Yesterday's Federal Reserve announcement that it will raise short-term interest rates, combined with a rate boost by the Fed on Feb. 4, could pressure bank earnings by squeezing profit margins, or the spread between what banks receive for loans and what they have to pay to borrow, analysts say.
Yet, longer term, consolidation seems inevitable for many smaller banks that recognize a simple fact: They aren't going to be extremely effective competitors as independent operators.
"There's no way they can all achieve an acceptable level of profitability," says Elizabeth Summers, a banking analyst at Ryan, Beck & Co. in West Orange, N.J.
And, after a couple of years when bank stocks only went one way -- straight up -- the market is becoming more discriminating.
Ms. Summers says that for many senior managers who own stock, now is the time to take advantage of the heated market for acquisitions and explore takeover possibilities.
So far this year, there have been $3.9 billion of bank mergers and acquisitions, according to SNL Securities in Charlottesville, Va.
The pace now is nearly a deal a day, albeit not all are hundred million dollar deals.
Yesterday, Premier Bancorp Inc., of Baton Rouge, La., said it reached agreements to buy two banks in Louisiana for about $100 million in Premier stock.
"If you're going to get out as an independent bank, now is the time," says Ms. Summers.
Little surprise then that insiders were buying late last year at Baltimore Bancorp. and at Citizens First Bancorp of Glen Rock, N.J., both of which received takeover bids Monday.
Both companies had been rumored takeover targets.
First Fidelity Bancorp. of Lawrenceville, N.J., said Monday it will purchase Baltimore Bancorp. for $346 million, or $20.75 a share, for the target company's common shares.
Analysts said the purchase price, at 2.1 times the target bank's book value, reflected a hefty premium.
Baltimore Bancorp. was unchanged yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading at $19.25 a share.
Baltimore Bancorp. executives and directors, who purchased a combined 61,000 shares in August and September at an average $12 a share, had said for years that they would consider an eventual sale of the company.
The bank, with assets of $2.2 billion, had been actively marketing itself for several months.
Most of the purchases last fall were the largest on record for the nine bank officers and directors who made them.
Notably, insiders at First Fidelity were also active buyers of their company's stock.
Eight insiders snapped up 37,700 First Fidelity shares at an average $42 each from Oct. 15 to Nov. 19, Securities and Exchange Commission filings show.
At Citizens First, company executives had been telling analysts that they wanted to keep the bank independent.
But rumors kept swirling about a takeover of the $2.6 billion-asset banking company.
"We were getting one signal from management, and the other signal from the marketplace," says Ms. Summers, the Ryan analyst.
National Westminster Bank PLC, one of Britain's largest commercial banks, said Monday it plans to pay $500 million to acquire the New Jersey bank.
NatWest said it will pay Citizens shareholders $9.75 a share or exchange 0.22034 NatWest American depositary receipt for each Citizens First share.
Late last summer, four executives at Citizens acquired a combined 88,053 shares at an average cost of $6.50 a share.
Yesterday, Citizens shares closed at $8.75 a share, down 25 cents, on the American Stock Exchange.
Market pros who track insider activity think the buying action will continue to percolate -- especially among small to midsize banks -- and may portend a slew of other mergers.
"We like the bank insider activity these days," says Bob Gabele, president of CDA/Investnet, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., company that analyzes insider data.
"We recognize that there were a lot of wrong bets placed in 1989-90, as some banks which had heavy insider buying, like the Bank of New England, never recovered," Mr. Gabele adds.
What Mr. Gabele is looking for these days -- as a pointer to a potentially hot bank stock -- is a large number of insiders buying at a particular bank, especially "when they're buying more stock at higher prices."
It's also important to see middle managers getting involved, not just the company chairman and CEO, he notes.
Mr. Gabele likes the insider buying action at First American Corp., TCF Financial Corp., Trustmark Corp., Mark Twain Bancshares, City National Corp. and Collective Bancorp.
A group of banks considered by industry analysts to be eventual takeover targets are also showing up strongly on Mr. Gabele's screen for insider buying.
They include: North Fork Bancorp; Firstar Corp., Sovereign Bancorp; and Barnett Banks Inc.
Recent SEC filings show, for example, that North Fork Chairman John A. Kanas bought 5,400 shares at $13.675 each in late February.
The move follows purchases by five insiders at the Mineola, N.Y., bank in November and December.
The group paid $11.50 a share on average for their stock purchases in the open market.
In January, two other insiders picked up shares at prices as high as $12.875 a piece.
"North Fork is a recovery story," says Mr. Kanas, noting that the stock has recovered from a low of about $3.60 a share in September 1991.
"The fundamentals of the company have been improving since early 1992," he adds.
Yesterday, North Fork said its board voted to reinstate the bank's cash dividend of 7.5 cents a share for the first quarter.
The company last paid a dividend at the end of 1991.
And at Firstar, insiders are making some large dollar-volume purchases.
Director William Wirtz, for instance, snapped up 111,000 shares between December and January for around $3.4 million, SEC data indicate.
Among strong super-regional banks -- which are likely to be on the buying side of future takeover deals -- insiders have also been active buyers.
Insiders have been stepping up to the plate at Banc One Corp. and KeyCorp, SEC filings show.
Those purchases, analysts say, are more likely to reflect insider bullishness about fundamentals and a sense that the stock is simply cheap.
With interstate banking getting more legislative support than in the past, insiders may also be looking for new opportunities to increase market share through acquisitions, analysts add.
By improving efficiencies at some of the smaller, less-well-managed banks they seek to acquire, some of these super-regionals can achieve important cost-savings, while avoiding the problems of being too highly concentrated in a given market, they add.
