After 23 years as Harold S. Hook's friend and ally at American General Corp., Michael J. Poulos has suddenly become an adversary of sorts.
Mr. Poulos, 62 years old, resigned as vice chairman of the big Houston life insurance company in September, and, in a move that surprised even his closest friends, announced he was taking a job as chairman and chief executive officer of Western National Corp., the annuity and life insurance unit Conseco plans to spin off in an initial public offering next month.
The company also will be based in Houston, and will compete with much-larger American General in the annuity business.
By taking the Western National job, Mr. Poulos steps out of the shadow as second-in-command at American General, and fulfills a long-sought goal to run a company -- which he knew would be unlikely at American General.
But it remains to be seen whether Mr. Poulos's move into the limelight will be successful.
Although he's highly regarded in insurance circles, he hasn't ever been at the helm of a company.
For his part, Mr. Hook says he hasn't any doubt Mr. Poulos has what it takes to lead a company.
At one point, many observers speculated Mr. Poulos might be named interim chairman after Mr. Hook, also 62, announced his plans to step down at the end of this year.
But Mr. Poulos lobbied against that idea, noting to directors that with the company's mandatory retirement at 65, it would be disruptive to appoint him for such a short term.
Thus, it looked as if the two friends -- who met in the 1960s when both worked at United States Life Insurance in New York -- would finish their careers together at the same company.
"I always figured I'd be the first one out, and that Mike would follow soon after," says Mr. Hook.
But a breakfast meeting last fall between Mr. Poulos and another insurance industry friend, Conseco Chairman Stephen C. Hilbert, changed that.
Mr. Hilbert offered the Western National job to Mr. Poulos, who initially hesitated.
But the chance to run his own show eventually swayed him, he says.
"The chance to spend even five years as a CEO is a chance I'll never have again," he says.
Mr. Poulos will be well compensated.
Under a five-year employment agreement, he will earn $750,000 a year, plus a $500,000 bonus for 1993; from 1994 to 1996, he'll earn bonuses of at least $750,000 a year.
In addition, he was awarded 10-year options to purchase as many as 1.25 million Western National shares at the initial offering price.
In his new role, Mr. Poulos will compete to some degree against his former employer: Both companies are respected players in the annuities market.
Neither company, however, makes much of the rivalry because of their sizes.
Western National receives about $100 million a year in annuity deposits.
American General receives about $2 billion, mostly from tax-sheltered annuity products marketed through 403 (b) retirement plans for employees of nonprofit agencies.
Western National, though it has $1.8 billion of its assets tied to 403 (b)-related products, hasn't played up that side of the business in recent years, opting instead to focus on fast-growing individual annuity products sold through banks.
But Mr. Poulos is keen on expanding the 403 (b) business by "picking up what American General leaves behind."
Mr. Poulos also plans to aggressively pursue so-called structured settlement annuities, alternatives to lump-sum personal-injury settlements that property and casualty companies purchase to provide a stream of income to injured persons.
As for his relationship with Mr. Hook, Mr. Poulos says his departure hasn't soured their friendship.
At American General they met for lunch nearly every Saturday; now that Mr. Poulos has left, they still meet about every other week.
