Terry S. Prindiville gazed at the women jammed cheek-to-jowl in a bustling shop in Shanghai and saw opportunity.
All this tumult, the J.C. Penney Co. executive thought, to buy lingerie at higher prices and lower quality than his company could offer.
Penney isn't selling goods in China yet, but Mr. Prindiville and his staff hope to change that.
They are masterminding an ambitious expansion that is transforming stodgy old J.C. Penney into a major international retailer.
Already, Penney stores are under construction in Mexico.
The company will add nearly one million square feet of retail space in Japan next fall by offering its private-label apparel in 300 department stores owned by Aoyama Trading Co., Japan's largest retailer of men's suits.
It has been scouting sites in Chile after surveys showed that many Chileans are so eager to buy American goods that they regularly fly to the U.S. to shop.
Licensed Penney shops are racking up impressive sales in the United Arab Emirates and Singapore.
It is talking with potential licensees, including one in Portugal that is already selling Penney private-label goods, and another in Greece.
It is considering anchoring a new regional mall in Taiwan.
It is looking into Thailand and Indonesia.
It offers catalogs in Iceland, Brazil and Russia and is translating a trimmed-down catalog into Spanish to tap the Latin American market.
Penney isn't alone in looking beyond the overbuilt U.S. market.
The North American Free Trade Agreement is spurring many U.S. retailers to enter Canada and Mexico.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. recently spent an estimated $300 million to buy 120 stores from Woolworth Corp. and gain a foothold in Canada, for example.
And, led by specialty retailers such as Toys "R" Us Inc., even traditionally cautious department-store operators are overcoming their phobia about going overseas.
Nordstrom Inc. is investigating joint-venture prospects in China; Dillard Department Stores Inc. is entering Mexico; and Saks Fifth Avenue and Federated Department Stores Inc.'s Bloomingdale's division are studying Europe.
But few have gone after foreign markets in as many ways as Penney.
And what happens to the Plano, Texas, company abroad may help shape its -- and the industry's -- future.
Penney's recent foreign thrust began less than three years ago, when a group of managers urged the company to create an international division.
Given Penney's traditional caution and history of foreign blunders, they faced some opposition.
But the group -- including Mr. Prindiville, an executive vice president of the company, and Alfred F. Lynch, now the division's chief executive -- argued persuasively that with U.S. opportunities dwindling, the company had to take the foreign gamble to stay competitive and keep growing.
And they saw abundant opportunities in other countries, where many merchants were less sophisticated and Penney could capitalize on its strong private brands.
Problems cropped up, of course: The collapse of the Soviet Union after the abortive coup against Mikhail Gorbachev scuttled one joint venture; a year of negotiations to buy a retail chain in Hungary failed after the government raised the price repeatedly.
Chinese tariffs remain a barrier.
To develop malls its way in Mexico, Penney had to persuade Mexican developers to work with U.S. developers.
And potential pitfalls abound: Foreign-exchange fluctuations can devour profits, and social, cultural and legal differences can cause problems.
In the case of department-store operators such as Penney, "where by definition you're offering a broad assortment," Peter Monash, a retail consultant, says, "you have to take cultural differences into account" more than specialty retailers do.
For decades, U.S. retailers expanded overseas sparingly.
Many still saw opportunities in the vast American market and cited such foreign flops as those of Sears, Roebuck & Co. in South America and Federated in Spain.
A failed acquisition of retail chains in Italy and Belgium in the late 1970s didn't inspire confidence at Penney, either.
In Belgium, Penney's plan to build giant hypermarts was thwarted by the local equivalent of zoning boards -- stacked with competing merchants.
That left Penney with small, outdated stores in congested downtown areas, while competitors built spacious suburban stores.
"There was no way we could grow the business," says Narina Vaira, a vice president of Penney's international division.
Penney also had assumed it could turn around the chains by slashing bloated payrolls and raising productivity, only to find that labor laws in both countries made layoffs prohibitively expensive and timeconsuming.
By 1980, Penney had bailed out of Italy; in 1987, the company sold its 52-store Belgian chain and took a $16 million charge.
The experience scarred the company.
William R. Howell, Penney's chairman and chief executive, said he didn't see any reason to invest overseas.
Most managers directly involved in the ventures retired or left, says M. Allen Hale, now a vice president of the international division.
A small export-sales operation became an unwanted stepchild.
"You couldn't get any interest in it" from upstairs, recalls Mr. Hale, who then worked in it.
But Mr. Lynch says he and some others "kept raising the issue of the world out there."
Company studies showed that Mexicans traveling north to shop accounted for as much as 60% of sales at the 22 Penney stores near the border; the stores were among the company's top sellers.
Another powerful argument for looking abroad was that the U.S. was "really overstored," Mr. Prindiville says, and Penney was already in most big markets.
But the groundwork for the company's change in attitude was laid with a snub from Liz Claiborne Inc.
Squeezed between discounters and fashionable specialty stores in the early 1980s, Mr. Howell was trying to move Penney upscale.
But the women's apparel maker turned up its nose at Penney's middle-brow image, as did Estee Lauder, Elizabeth Arden and many others.
So Penney focused on turning its own private labels -- Hunt Club, Worthington, Stafford, St. John's Bay, Arizona jeans and Jacqueline Ferrar -- into brand names.
It designed exclusive lines to its own specifications, pursued quality by rejecting substandard goods and advertised the lines.
The effort paid off at home and abroad.
Even as the company was dumping its failed European ventures, its private brands were starting to appeal to foreign retailers.
Unlike most mass merchandisers, Penney executives have "created such a strong brand franchise here . . . .
It's a big competitive advantage," says L. Wayne Hood, a retail analyst at Prudential Securities.
Penney's house brands now form the backbone of its overseas business.
In the spring of 1990, the company formed a small group -- initially just Messrs. Prindiville, Lynch and Hale -- to study foreign prospects one more time.
Mr. Howell sent the three men on an eye-opening, 21-day tour of seven countries.
In East Berlin, shortly after the wall fell, "you'd look in a store window and see one shirt sitting there with dust on it," Mr. Lynch says.
At an enclosed mall near Istanbul, the three men saw just how poorly local retailers arranged related products, such as lingerie and women's clothing.
"They had lingerie next to plumbing equipment," Mr. Lynch recalls.
All over Europe, they noted the lack of coordinated home furnishings.
Back in Texas, they reported that Penney was leagues ahead in marketing sophistication, in how to display products, how to locate aisles to direct and take advantage of customer traffic, how to group products -- how, in short, "to develop an environment that invites the customer to shop," Mr. Lynch says.
Mr. Howell and senior managers decided to try again.
But this time, Penney wouldn't just go in and buy existing retail chains; in fact, it avoids buying property at all.
It would link up with local partners who would know, for example, that Chilean men consider short pants suitable only for boys and that Abu Dhabi women, despite wearing full-length robes outdoors, like party dresses.
And it would tailor its retailing to each country, while banking on what it considered its strong suits: private labels and merchandise presentation.
So, Penney insisted that Liwa Trading, a licensee that opened its first Penney Collection store in Dubai 15 months ago and plans 10 more stores in the Mideast by 1998, send people to Dallas to learn Penney's merchandising, training and accounting methods.
Liwa not only had to use Penney's store fixtures but also had to hire its contractor to install them, Mr. Hale says.
Several times a year, he adds, Penney inspects foreign stores to make sure that their displays stay within its guidelines.
The licensees, Mr. Prindiville says, must "agree to replicate the way the merchandise is presented in the U.S."
Penney's initial list of 30 promising countries was whittled to 20 after its executives gauged their political and economic stability (which eliminated much of the East bloc), ability to repatriate profits, economic growth and demographics.
Eventually, the company settled on four fundamental strategies:
In "understored" countries where real estate was affordable, laws allowed foreign ownership, and labor and construction regulations wouldn't hamstring expansion, Penney would open and operate stores itself.
In more-saturated markets or where regulations or other problems make it too tough to run its own stores, Penney would license local retailers to operate J.C. Penney Collection stores, which sell its branded apparel and other soft goods.
In still-tougher markets such as Singapore and Japan, where high property costs and regulations make it almost impossible to build large stores, Penney would license other retailers to operate in-store shops selling specific branded lines, such as the Hunt Club shop in Robinson's Department Store in Singapore.
And in places with strong consumer demand but insurmountable barriers, Penney would sell through catalogs, usually distributing goods through a third party that would take orders, buy the goods from Penney in the U.S. and ship them.
Mexico represents easily the biggest effort -- and biggest gamble.
By late 1996, Penney plans to operate four stores in Mexico City and one each in Guadalajara, Monterrey and Leon.
The stores will average 165,000 square feet, comparable to Penney's largest U.S. stores.
And unlike competitors such as Kmart Corp., Price/Costco Inc. and Wal-Mart, Penney decided that it doesn't need a local partner in Mexico.
"Based on our experience on the border," Mr. Prindiville says, "we felt like we'd be able to go in and run stores just like we run them in California or any other place."
Such talk reeks of hubris to some analysts.
"I think you're making a mistake in Mexico when you don't joint-venture with local partners," says David M.M. Rosen, who directs emerging-markets research at Kidder, Peabody & Co., "particularly with someone who has knowledge of credit and the extension of credit in Mexico."
Sales on credit are expected to boom from the current 5% of Mexican retail volume as the high interest rates on credit cards continue to drop.
Penney plans to issue credit cards in Mexico, and Mr. Rosen notes that Mexico's credit and disclosure laws differ significantly from those in the U.S. and that the country lacks any established agencies that can instantly check credit records.
Kenneth Russo, Penney's vice president of sourcing, says the company has compiled marketing studies, focus-group reports and surveys that "indicate the Mexican consumer is very familiar with our U.S. product and will demand it."
He says 75% of the merchandise Penney sells in the U.S. will be stocked in its Mexican stores; the rest will be purchased in Mexico.
The company says it will gain any local expertise it needs through the dozens of prospective Mexican managers it is training at its headquarters, dubbed the "Penneytentiary" by some wags.
Penney expects sales at its Mexican stores to far surpass its U.S. average of $137 a square foot.
Some analysts also predict higher profit margins in Mexico, and Penney won't have to split profits with a joint-venture partner.
Penney adds that it has minimized the risk by leasing instead of owning its buildings.
Kidder's Mr. Rosen, however, believes Mexico already has too many stores for the 11 million upper-income customers Penney wants.
Preparing for the post-Nafta onslaught, Mexican department stores have increased their square footage 30% in the past three years and are still expanding, he adds.
Penney, he says, is "walking into what I consider the most competitive segment of the market right now."
Overall, Penney's overseas efforts are still but a blip on the radar screen for a company with annual sales of about $18 billion.
The company doesn't even report international sales figures and won't project future foreign sales.
But based on sales at stores along the U.S.-Mexico border, some analysts predict that Penney's seven planned Mexican units will each generate more than $33 million in annual sales.
Mr. Lynch won't project how far all this expansion will go, citing the uncertainties of overseas operations.
He notes the abandonment of a planned Abu Dhabi store because the site lacks parking space and a six-month delay in opening a Monterrey store because of construction problems.
"Things keep changing.
You have to be adaptable, patient -- and we're being extremely cautious," Mr. Lynch says.
"We're taking the long-term view."
