Figgie International Inc., deep in a cash crunch, today is expected to ask its bankers to throw it a financial lifeline.
The Willoughby, Ohio, operator of some two dozen businesses, ranging from insurance to fire trucks to sporting goods, is seeking to borrow an additional $60 million above the $150 million credit line it has already exhausted, according to a person familiar with the situation.
Alternatively, the company will present bankers with a plan to "factor" -- or sell off -- its accounts receivable at a discount.
The meeting with the syndicate of banks, led by Bank of Boston, comes on the heels of a Figgie board meeting yesterday.
The company said that, among other things, directors reviewed the quarterly dividend of six cents a share, which some analysts say could be cut.
A spokesman declined to comment about the meeting with bankers, but added that Figgie would make an announcement today.
Figgie International Chairman Harry Figgie Jr., in his bestselling book "Bankruptcy 1995: The Coming Collapse of America and How to Stop It," sounds the alarm about America's penchant for living on a "champagne appetite and a beer income."
But that's precisely the kind of diet on which Mr. Figgie's own company has indulged itself in recent years, according to allegations in a shareholder lawsuit filed by a former executive.
Staggering under a $450 million debt load, Figgie International itself came perilously close to filing for Chapter 11 protection last month, according to people familiar with the situation.
The company went so far as to prepare Chapter 11 schedules, fearing that asset sales wouldn't be fast enough to supplant the company's depleted cash.
Figgie managed to pull through the peril with aggressive cash management but now needs cash to finance a long-term solution.
A Figgie spokesman yesterday said that, while the company wouldn't comment on how close it came to filing for Chapter 11, "we've acknowledged we had a temporary liquidity squeeze.
We think the worst is behind us."
Figgie reported its first loss in 25 years in its 1993 third quarter amid a sluggish economy, $15 million in operating losses from flooding at three Midwest plants, and operational difficulties.
In November, it more than halved its quarterly dividend, to six cents from 12.5 cents a share.
Then, Figgie said in early January that it incurred a "significant loss" for the fourth quarter as well as the year.
Those figures haven't yet been released.
In 1992, Figgie had net income of $28.3 million on sales of $1.2 billion from its mix of consumer, technical, industrial and service businesses.
Figgie had $1.16 billion in assets, $775 million in liabilities and net worth of $383 million, according to its Sept. 30, 1993, balance sheet.
The company is considering shrinking assets to about $800 million to $900 million and liabilities to $500 million, thus raising equity to $400 million, according to one of the individuals.
It has put its Rawlings Sporting Goods division on the block and plans to spin off other businesses as well, in order to focus on its "core businesses."
A handful of other businesses, including its fire-truck and Safety Supply America protective-clothing businesses are likely targets for divestiture.
The spokesman said yesterday that the company hadn't confirmed any divestiture candidates besides Rawlings, but might have "more information today."
Figgie has said it wants to focus on industrial and manufacturing operations that share a technological base.
In trading yesterday on the Nasdaq Stock Market, Figgie's Class A shares closed at $12.75 apiece, up 50 cents.
Figgie's problems came to a head in December, when a cash shortage combined with a routine seasonal downturn to create a crisis.
Figgie had been humming along, making profits year after year, until founder and chairman, Harry Figgie Jr., now 70, fell ill in the summer of 1992.
The autocratic Mr. Figgie, who prides himself on being a tough boss, never disclosed his illness to the public, rankling Wall Street investors and analysts.
"I wish I'd known he was absent: I would have been absent also," says Sidney Heller, analyst at Lehman Bros.
The company maintains, however, that Mr. Figgie was in day-to-day contact with his son, Harry E. "Doc" Figgie III, who was vice chairman.
"He never relinquished control," a Figgie spokesman said yesterday, noting that both internal and external legal counsel felt there was no need for disclosure.
But during his father's nearly 18-month recovery from pneumonia-related ailments, the younger Dr. Figgie, 40 and a former orthopedic surgeon, launched a costly modernization plan called "World Class."
He spent more than $50 million on consultants and some $110 million on equipment.
Figgie's machines and factories in fact needed updating, but the modernization plan idled plants and delayed production, cutting into the bottom line.
The company declined to comment on whether the plan contributed to the company's liquidity crisis.
People close to the company say Dr. Figgie has been moved aside from daily decision making and his father is back in full command.
The company spokesman said that, while the chairman is in charge, "nothing has changed in regard to the vice chairman."
Wall Street would like to see more dramatic changes, however.
"I think it would help the company and shareholders if strong outside management was brought in, both a new chairman and chief executive," said T. Edward O'Neil, research director at S.W. Ryan & Co. in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
But the Figgie family controls 25% of Figgie's voting stock.
And a shareholder suit, filed by a former executive who worked for Figgie for a dozen years, alleges that most of the board members have conflicts of interest, with several alleged to have been paid consulting fees.
The suit was filed in Lake County Common Pleas Court in Lake County, Ohio, in October.
The company says the suit is without merit and has filed for a dismissal, and has said it won't discuss individual allegations in the suit.
But the suit raises questions about the relationship between Figgie and the private family corporation, Clark-Reliance, which is in some of the same businesses.
Among other things, the suit alleges that key Figgie personnel were diverted to Clark-Reliance.
The suit also alleges that Figgie operated a $26 million Gulfstream IV Aircraft for family excursions and moved its headquarters from Ohio to Virginia -- to land purchased from a director -- then back to Ohio within a period of a few years.
The alleged reason: The elder Mr. Figgie had been denied access to an Ohio country club and wanted to enter "the inner social circles of Richmond's aristocratic elite."
