NORTH KOREA AGREED to allow inspections of its declared nuclear sites.
Pyongyang ended its yearlong refusal to permit inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency of seven nuclear plants.
However, North Korea still is barring inspections of two other sites suspected of possible use in a nuclear-weapons program.
As a result, the new IAEA inspections, which could start as soon as next week, won't resolve a debate over whether the North Koreans are developing nuclear weapons.
President Clinton had warned last week that U.N. economic sanctions were "one option" if North Korea continued to refuse to cooperate on inspections.
The Navy's top uniformed officer said he would retire two months early, in late April.
Adm. Frank Kelso, chief of naval operations, said he wanted to close the books on the Tailhook sex-abuse scandal, noting, "I clearly have become the lightning rod for Tailhook."
A likely successor is Adm. Jeremy "Mike" Boorda.
The U.S. insisted there wasn't any confusion over NATO's ultimatum on Bosnia and warned that weapons left operational in an exclusion zone around Sarajevo after midnight Sunday could trigger air strikes.
Meanwhile, the commander of Bosnian Serb troops ringing the capital declared that his artillery wouldn't be withdrawn.
Exiled President Aristide rejected a U.S.-backed plan for restoring democracy in Haiti, saying that to appoint a prime minister now would be "irresponsible."
Under the plan, a new prime minister would form a government that could begin a process leading to Aristide's return.
But the plan sets no firm date for his restoration to power.
Meat consumption was implicated in a new study as a possible factor in prostate cancer.
Researchers said men who eat red meat as a main dish five to six times a week were found to be 2.5 times more likely to have prostate cancer than men who ate red meat less than once a week.
A prior study found a similar link.
Relatively affluent parents are failing to get their children properly immunized, a study of 1,500 Johnson & Johnson employees showed.
The parents blamed their inability to take time off from work and the wait to see a physician as the biggest problems in getting their children vaccinated.
The ACLU filed a complaint with the Department of Education alleging that the test used to award National Merit scholarships is biased against girls.
The complaint, filed with the department's civil-rights office, asks for a ruling against the Educational Testing Service and College Board, the test's sponsors.
An accused serial killer pleaded guilty in the 1990 murders of five college students in Florida.
Danny Harold Rolling, 39, changed his plea moments before jury selection was to begin in his trial in Gainesville, Fla.
The judge said he would empanel a jury to recommend the death penalty or life in prison without parole for at least 25 years.
San Francisco health officials reported that the annual toll of new AIDS cases has peaked in the city, and they said new cases should decline over the next several years.
But the nationwide epidemic, while slowing from the rapid growth rate of the 1980s, has yet to peak, federal officials cautioned.
Reno's former top aide blasted the three-strikes-you're-out anticrime bill backed by Clinton, calling it "a bad idea."
Just a day after he officially left the Justice Department, former Deputy Attorney General Heymann said that the idea of housing aged prisoners long after their crime-committing years have ended makes no sense.
The National Institutes of Health said it is starting a large-scale clinical trial to see if juvenile diabetes can be prevented.
The government is seeking 830 volunteers related to people diagnosed with insulin-dependent diabetes.
Those chosen for the trial will be given insulin in hopes of preventing or delaying the onset of the disease.
Israeli planes attacked bases of Iranian-backed guerrillas opposed to Mideast peace talks.
The assaults came just hours before the negotiations were due to resume in Washington.
Separately, Israel's Rabin said he was "distressed" at what he called Syrian obstinacy in the peace talks.
