EINDHOVEN, the Netherlands -- Philips Electronics NV has built its reputation on soberly designed televisions, electric razors and light bulbs.
So why is it betting its future on Zombie Dinos, "Voyeur" and Laser Lords?
Because it sees the compact disk-interactive player, which plays those titles, as its most promising consumer product and its entry into the uncharted multimedia world.
The Dutch electronics giant was one of the first companies in the world to invest in multimedia, and among the first to find out it isn't easy making money in the field.
CD-I sales have been slow -- a total of just 300,000 players world-wide since the machines were introduced 2 1/2 years ago.
Many consumers remain unaware of the technology or confused by it, and limited disk offerings have left others unconvinced that the format will survive.
Philips is trying to salvage the market by increasing advertising and developing scores of CD-I games and educational programs.
CD-I machines play special compact disks that turn viewers into participants, allowing them to influence and interact with what they see and hear.
The basic machine, which looks like a simplified VCR, is priced at about $400; to use the machine for watching videos, buyers must shell out another $250 for a power-boosting cartridge.
Once it's hooked up to the TV, users choose what they want to see by manipulating an on-screen arrow and little symbols called icons with a remote control that has a joystick or trackball -- simple enough for a four-year-old.
CD-I users can play more-powerful games than kids are used to at home: popular arcade games such as Mad Dog McCree, or the 7th Guest, an interactive version of the board game Clue.
They can go on a video tour of the Louvre; study an interactive encyclopedia, complete with old Kennedy newsreels and musical excerpts of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony; or even follow a brain-surgery course.
The CD-I format also offers interactive movies, like "Voyeur," a Philips release.
It's about a sinister presidential candidate; the viewer, who lives next door, shapes the plot by peering into different windows of his house.
CD-I machines have much in common with CD-ROM players, which enjoy wider acceptance.
Both give users access to vast amounts of multimedia information on compact disks.
But CD-ROM machines must be connected to personal computers, which have more-limited video capability than televisions.
Philips officials say that difference points up one of CD-I's strengths: ease of use.
"Although there's a computer inside, we don't mention it," says Frans Speijer, a Philips marketing manager for interactive products.
"Computers scare people off."
Another selling point is versatility.
In addition to games, encyclopedias and interactive movies, owners can use their CD-I machines to listen to conventional music CDs, flip through a digital family photo album and watch noninteractive movies (with CD-quality sound, and pictures better than videocassettes, though not as sharp as ordinary laser disks).
So far, though, CD-I hasn't gained broad acceptance.
More than two-thirds of CD-I owners have children, Philips says.
But in the Netherlands, for example, most owners are also technophiles: Two-thirds own PCs and 77% have car phones, according to Philips marketing data.
And retailers say the paucity of software -- Philips now distributes only 150 interactive titles in the CD-I format, plus about 80 noninteractive movies -- has made it hard to win a wider following.
"It's not exactly a bestseller," says Wolfgang Kirsch, deputy purchasing director at Mediamarkt-Saturn, a unit of Germany's Kaufhof AG department-store chain.
With 47 stores throughout Germany, Mediamarkt sold only 95 CD-I players last year, Mr. Kirsch says.
"There's never enough software," adds Victor Jachimovicz, marketing strategist with FNAC, a Paris-based chain of 46 consumer-electronics and music stores in four European countries.
This isn't the first time Philips has fared better at developing a technology than at marketing it.
Though the company almost single-handedly invented the audio cassette, the videocassette recorder and the compact disk, it got caught up in costly standards battles with other manufacturers during the 1970s and 1980s and had trouble profiting from its inventions.
In recent years Philips pumped a lot of time, energy and money into Europe's high-definition-television project.
It proved to be a costly white elephant; the development of affordable HDTV programming trailed years behind the hardware developed by Philips.
Philips invented the CD-I concept jointly with Sony Corp. in 1986.
But it had trouble deciding exactly what the technology's purpose should be and didn't begin selling the machines for five years.
Many consumers still aren't sure whether CD-I is a video player, a home computer or a game console, whether it's a toy or a tool.
The answer from Philips's marketing gurus: It's all those things in one.
To get that message out, Philips is running its first TV ads for CD-I in Europe and the U.S.
And, with its HDTV troubles having made clear the importance of programming, the company is making a big push to increase the number of CD-I titles available.
Philips is developing software on its own and forming partnerships with software publishers such as Hachette SA of France and General Magic Inc., a Mountain View, Calif., consortium.
By the end of the year, Philips says, 100 new CD-I titles will be available in stores, and more are in the pipeline.
The 80 conventional movies now available on CD-I include some big hits with continued appeal, such as "Top Gun" and "Star Trek VI."
To expand its library, Philips has formed joint ventures with Paramount Pictures and other studios.
And Polygram NV, a music publisher 80%-owned by Philips, is moving into movies.
Predicting a Boom With the number of CD-I titles poised for fast growth, John Hawkins, president of Philips's interactive-media division, boldly predicts that one million households world-wide will own CD-I systems by year's end.
Many retailers say CD-I still has promise, and they're doing their best to hawk it.
"We can't overlook a major new technology," says a spokeswoman for Dixons Group PLC, which owns 850 Dixons and Currys consumer-electronics stores in Britain.
"There is a lot of potential there," she says, adding that since Christmas, Dixons has been featuring its CD-I demonstration stands more prominently.
By next Christmas, however, competition may have heated up substantially.
3DO Corp. of Redwood City, Calif., plans to start selling its interactive game machine in Europe and Japan this year.
The $500 player, introduced in the U.S. in October, has become CD-I's biggest competitor, with sales analysts estimate at 10,000 units.
Though Philips claims the rival machine is inferior in picture quality and ease of use, 3DO has the support of New York-based American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Time Warner Inc., and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. of Japan.
The battle to establish the world standard in the interactive multimedia business has only just begun.
Mr. du Bois and Ms. Rohwedder are staff reporters in The Wall Street Journal's Brussels bureau.
