A long-awaited cut in the Bundesbank's discount rate yesterday did little to stem the dollar's week-long skid against the mark, baffling many traders who expected the dollar to regain some luster on the announcement.
But analysts noted that a slew of economic data released yesterday appeared to point to a slowing U.S. economic recovery, helping to firmly cap a potential dollar rise.
Late in New York, the dollar was trading mixed from day-earlier levels.
It was quoted at 1.7233 marks, unchanged from late Wednesday in New York, and at 104.10 yen, up from 103.80 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4790, up from $1.4765.
About midday Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 103.75 yen and at 1.7135 marks.
The Bundesbank cut its discount rate 0.50 percentage point to 5.25%, but left the Lombard rate unchanged at 6.75%.
Almost as significant, according to analysts, was the fact that the German central bank kept unchanged at a fixed 6% repurchase agreements, or "repos" -- its main instrument for influencing the money market.
The fact that repos were left unchanged "leaves the discount rate cut as being more symbolic than anything else," said Randolph Donney, director of research at Pegasus Econometric Group.
Mr. Donney added that the mark may also have benefited from the perception that lower German rates will help push the economy out of recession.
Other European central banks have seen their currencies rise after rate cuts in recent months on those grounds.
Players also said the mark was protected by the timing of the rate cut, noting it occurred as the market was still focusing heavily on the dollar-yen exchange rate.
The dollar has fallen sharply since the failure last Friday of U.S.-Japan trade talks.
As well as plunging against the yen, the dollar has dropped against other major currencies -- sinking steadily from 1.7545 marks late last Friday in New York.
Indeed, the market was keenly awaiting news on the Japan-U.S. trade dispute and the release of key U.S. economic data -- including the latest reading on Japan's trade surplus with the U.S. -- when the German central bank surprised traders with its announcement.
"When we got news about Germany, the market was focused on the Japanese and the trade-surplus numbers," said Cornelius Luca, assistant vice president at Credit Anstalt Bankverein in New York.
"The market then began acting in the exact opposite of how fundamentals and technicals would have dictated," Mr. Luca added.
The dollar made an unimpressive rally to intraday highs of around 1.7355 marks before massive selling pushed it into lower ranges.
The unexpected reaction to the rate cut, which would normally reduce the attraction of mark-denominated assets, fueled unconfirmed rumors that the Bundesbank had intervened to support the mark.
The dollar also failed to get much support from U.S. Department of Commerce data, which showed the U.S. merchandise trade deficit had narrowed to $7.41 billion in December from a revised $9.68 billion in November.
Any dollar euphoria was quickly muffled by yearly data showing that the U.S. trade gap in 1993 totaled $115.8 billion, the highest since 1988 -- and that the trade gap with Japan reached a record, all-time high of $59.3 billion.
