Most of the working press, hoping as they had for seven years that Iran-Contra special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh would somehow pull a fluffy crime out of his empty hat, treated Mr. Walsh's final report as old news, and in one sense they were right.
After Mr. Walsh's election-eve indictment of Caspar Weinberger (the statute of limitations having quite clearly expired), after his tendentious "interim reports" that slandered his targets without enabling them to reply, after his utterly unethical public statements about the "guilt" of one or another target, the special prosecutor expired with a long sigh.
There was no evidence to justify any further prosecutions.
He even had some kind words for Ronald Reagan: He meant well; he thought he was advancing the national interest.
Yet there is news in the final report.
For starters, there is a drastically revised portrait of Secretary of State George Shultz, previously enthroned as the lone teller of truth of the Reagan cabinet.
It appears that Mr. Shultz systematically misled Mr. Walsh and Congress about the extent of his knowledge throughout Iran-Contra.
The final report contains dozens of excerpts from notes and memorandums prepared by Mr. Shultz's two top assistants that show that many State Department officials were very well informed, indeed, about matters that Mr. Shultz had sworn the department in general and he in particular had been kept in the dark about.
"Shultz . . . ultimately acknowledged that his testimony had been incorrect," the report says, but Mr. Walsh decided not to prosecute the former secretary of state because he couldn't prove "beyond a reasonable doubt that his testimony was willfully false."
Yet he did prosecute Mr. Weinberger for allegedly doing precisely what Mr. Shultz had done, and the evidence presented against Mr. Shultz is, if anything, more copious than that against Mr. Weinberger.
The choice was probably dictated by personal rapport and political calculation: Mr. Shultz was the darling of Capitol Hill, while Mr. Weinberger was a pricklier personality; Mr. Shultz was cooperative with Mr. Walsh and admitted false testimony, while Mr. Weinberger defiantly held his ground.
A second bit of news is a return to one of Mr. Walsh's original theories about Iran-Contra: that among Mr. Shultz, Mr. Weinberger, Donald Regan, John Poindexter, William Casey, Ed Meese and Robert McFarlane there was a great conspiracy to prevent the special prosecutor and the American people from learning what had really happened.
It is a hilarious notion, evidently written by Mr. Walsh's left hand, for the right hand has given us copious evidence that the would-be conspiratorsat the very moment Mr. Walsh says they were plotting -- were actually making feverish efforts to get each other fired.
It requires a hyperactive imagination to believe that such antagonisms could be sublimated in the creation of an Iran-Contra coverup, and then sustained for seven years.
The third headline concerns George Bush, or rather Mr. Walsh's newfound obsession with him.
After years of shadowing Mr. Reagan, and hinting darkly that he'd eventually be harpooned, Mr. Walsh suddenly gave up the chase and shifted targets.
Whatever the explanation, the shift bespeaks a certain capriciousness in Mr. Walsh's decision-making process, rather than the relentless investigatory rigor he would have us believe he employed.
But most of the news is about Mr. Walsh and his team.
Appended to Mr. Walsh's account are more than 1,000 pages of responses from persons named in the report (or, given the nature of Washington, from their lawyers) -- a victim's guide to how we subverted our own legal system.
Much of this is brand-new, for it comes from the Indians, not from the chiefs: from secretaries and assistants and other midlevel civil servants.
No one is too small to become a target of Mr. Walsh's cruelty; he accuses them all of crime or sin.
While stressing he does not have enough to warrant indictment or ensure conviction, he puts his black spot on them.
Their responses constitute a bloodcurdling catalog of Mr. Walsh's viciousness, unethical behavior and astounding incompetence.
For example, both of Mr. Weinberger's secretaries, Pentagon professionals for more than 20 years, were accused of lying.
Both denied it.
One of them, Thelma Stubbs Smith, was hauled in front of a grand jury, where one of Mr. Walsh's men accused her of lying.
Shocked, she denied it, and her lawyer demanded a correction.
None was made.
Later, Mr. Walsh's lawyer asked to interview her without her lawyer being present; the request was categorically denied.
Three days later, Mr. Walsh's lawyer showed up at her door at 8 asking to talk to her.
Her husband sent the rogue away.
Meanwhile, the other secretary, Kay Leisz, was informed that she was now a "subject" of Mr. Walsh's investigation.
The report accuses her of false testimony; her lawyer's response shows the opposite and says: "It appears that the only rationale that Mr. Walsh's office might have . . . is that she may not have said what they wanted to hear."
The same kinds of vengeful actions were taken against Samuel Watson, one of Mr. Bush's assistants.
Mr. Watson was accused of pronouncing the magic words "Contra resupply" as a possible subject for discussion at a meeting in the vice president's office.
He didn't remember it, and denied any knowledge of the supply of military equipment to the Contras.
Mr. Walsh, somehow convinced that Mr. Watson was covering up for Mr. Bush, proclaims him a liar.
Mr. Watson's lawyer, former special prosecutor Jacob Stein, observed that "it was not for illegal acts themselves that the special prosecutor sought Mr. Watson but rather . . . for his inability years later to remember events as the special prosecutor wished him to."
Mr. Stein delicately observes that such behavior "violates the fairness of our American sense of right and wrong."
The entire case against CIA station chief Joe Fernandez was a joke.
Mr. Walsh bungled the handling of classified information so badly that not even an appeal from the Justice Department to the court could save him.
Typically, Mr. Walsh thanked Justice by blaming them for the screwup.
His key witness to the charge of false testimony against Mr. Fernandez had already told the Office of the Independent Counsel that his own memory was "tainted" by the public testimony of others, thereby making him a useless source.
Mr. Walsh's lawyers attempted to browbeat him into testifying that there was no "taint."
And lawyers' replies show that several of the statements Mr. Walsh characterized as false were in fact true.
Strikingly, given Mr. Walsh's propensity for accusing folks of withholding information from him, there are several cases where Mr. Walsh was chastised by federal judges for failing to provide the defense with exculpatory material.
In the Weinberger and Fernandez cases, defense attorneys had to use pretty rough language to get Mr. Walsh's team to comply, and -- in one of those odd moments that make Iran-Contra such an unlikely tale -- it was only when Oliver North's lawyers insisted on it that Mr. Walsh realized he had dozens of cartons of Mr. North's files in his possession.
Such testimony -- and there are dozens of examples -- shows Mr. Walsh stomping on his victims' basic rights.
Indeed, publishing the report is itself profoundly unfair if not illegal.
From time immemorial it has been considered unethical for prosecutors to make allegations against persons they do not indict, yet the final report contains hundreds, perhaps thousands, of such unproven allegations, even including excerpts of grand-jury testimony.
Grand-jury proceedings have always been secret, in part to protect people the grand jury decides not to indict.
Mr. Walsh bizarrely proclaimed that such requirements do not apply to special prosecutors and stuck the testimony in his report.
The special court that theoretically oversees the work of special prosecutors rejected his theory but permitted the report to appear anyway, on the feeble grounds that very little of the material was really secret anyway and a lot of people -- especially journalists -- would be angry if the court didn't publish it.
It was a cowardly thing for the court to do, and the three judges obviously knew it, for they took pains to indicate their sympathy for those unindicted people besmirched by the report.
Had they been made of sterner stuff, the judges would have instructed Mr. Walsh to delete all accusations against unindicted people, and to remove all references to grand-jury testimony.
Such a document would have fulfilled Mr. Walsh's obligation to submit a final report and also maintained the quaint notion that Americans are held innocent unless proved guilty.
We learned some years ago that Mr. Walsh was contemptuous of such archaic legal notions; it was bad news that the special court wouldn't defend them either.
Mr. Ledeen, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, was a consultant to National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane in 1985.
He was the first American official to make contact with Israelis and Iranians in what later became the Iran initiative, and was cleared of all allegations of wrongdoing in the final Iran-Contra report.
