Jonathan Schoolar has a reminder of the past connected to his office phone: a button that once tethered him directly to the New York office of Harry Hutzler, the man who guided the Weingarten and Constellation mutual funds to some of the best records on Wall Street.
These days, the button is inoperable; Mr. Hutzler retired a month ago.
But his style of stock picking remains in the hands of Mr. Schoolar, whom Mr. Hutzler groomed as successor for eight years.
And what a record Mr. Schoolar has been given.
Amid the long-term weakness of most Texas-based mutual funds, Constellation and Weingarten -- both managed by Houston's AIM Advisors Inc. -- stand out as exceptions.
Over the 10 years ended in December, Constellation was the top capital-appreciation fund in the country, returning a cumulative 410%.
Over the past 15 years, Weingarten, a growth fund, ranks as the ninth-best equity fund in the country: A $10,000 investment in 1978 would today be worth more than $150,000.
"That type of performance tells you Harry's basic philosophy works," says Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
That philosophy stresses three principles: Stay fully invested, through bull markets and bear markets; base buy and sell decisions only on accelerating or flagging earnings; and don't worry about being late to join or leave the party.
"Ninety-nine percent of Wall Street is trying to forecast tops and bottoms," says Mr. Schoolar.
"We just wait for them to happen."
As a result, Weingarten and Constellation typically buy in after the party has begun, and sell out after the party is over.
But, Mr. Schoolar notes, "we don't mind taking our meat out of the middle."
Not that Weingarten and Constellation are infallible.
In 1984, for instance, Constellation's return was -15%; in 1990, the fund's value dropped 4%.
(A year later, however, the fund made up ground in a big way, returning 70.4%.)
Weingarten, too, has suffered its share of mistakes.
For the past two years, the fund has resided in the bottom 15% of all growth stocks, according to Morningstar Mutual Funds, Chicago.
Blame it on health care: Messrs. Schoolar and Hutzler, ever true to the principles, hung on to those stocks until earnings fell -- despite a Clinton-administration-induced plunge that had already knocked 50% off the value of some stocks.
"Sometimes you lose, despite principles," Mr. Schoolar shrugs.
Prior to 1986, both Weingarten and Constellation were independent funds managed by Mr. Hutzler.
In 1986, AIM, then primarily a fixed-income firm, purchased the rights to manage the two funds, with their combined assets of about $250 million.
Mr. Hutzler agreed to stay on for a while.
That same year, AIM hired Mr. Schoolar, then 25 years old and a trader at crosstown fund rival American Capital.
He was assigned to co-manage both Constellation and Weingarten.
His duties: "Learn everything I could from Harry, and unlearn everything I already knew," says Mr. Schoolar, now 32.
Now that Mr. Hutzler has retired, Mr. Schoolar alone manages Weingarten, which has nearly $5 billion in assets.
He co-manages Constellation -- with $3.1 billion in assets -- with Robert Kippes.
But Mr. Schoolar plans to keep the Hutzler philosophy alive.
As he says: "Why change a good thing?"
