Faced with increasing pressure to address the problems of crime and welfare, President Clinton said in his State of the Union address that he would give those two issues near-equal billing with his top priority, health-care overhaul.
At the same time, he increased the stakes for health legislation.
He issued his first veto threat, saying he would kill any health-care reform bill that doesn't provide coverage for every American.
"I want to make this very clear," the president said, waving a black pen at the lawmakers in the audience.
"If you send me legislation that does not guarantee every American private health insurance that can never be taken away, you will force me to take this pen, veto the legislation and we'll come right back here and start over again."
As recently as last month, the White House expected last night's nationally televised speech to focus on health care.
But Mr. Clinton changed the focus to include crime and welfare as well.
He even tied the three issues together, and insisted that legislation affecting them be enacted this year.
"I know it will be difficult to tackle welfare reform in 1994 at the same time we tackle health care," Mr. Clinton said.
But he said "it is inevitable and imperative" to do so.
He then added, "It is estimated that one million people. . . are on welfare today because it is the only way they could get health care coverage for their children."
While there aren't any conclusive findings about the link between welfare and health insurance, welfare experts say that about 6% of recipients -- those with special medical needs -- collect welfare specifically to get the attendant health coverage.
At least one study shows that welfare caseloads would drop by 25% if private health insurance that matches the comprehensive coverage of Medicaid were extended to all working women who head households.
Last night's speech was a marked departure for Mr. Clinton, who to date has concentrated on economic matters, particularly reducing the federal budget deficit and expanding foreign trade.
Last night, he effectively declared victory on that subject-taking credit for the improving economy -- and prepared to move on.
The president signaled that he wants to set a new, socially conscious tone for his administration.
Taking on the mantle of moral leader, he trumpeted the need for family values and a sense of community.
He also vowed to press for an end to violence on the streets and for citizens to take responsibility for their actions.
Mr. Clinton clearly has been influenced by the growing public drum beat for action on crime and welfare changes.
In a recent Wall Street Journal/NBC Poll, 93% of the respondents said dealing with crime is an absolute priority, 83% named revising the welfare system and 67% cited health care.
Al From, president of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council, said Mr. Clinton's "political instincts" alerted him to the need to add crime and welfare to the agenda -- two issues that traditionally have been championed by Republicans.
If Congress manages to act on health care, welfare and crime, Mr. From said, the president will have changed the political landscape, taking "the turf that the Republicans have held."
Responding to the president, Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) credited Mr. Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton with sparking the debate on health care.
But Sen. Dole complained that the administration's plan would lead to too much government control.
"The president's idea," Mr. Dole said, "is to put a mountain of bureaucrats between you and your doctor."
Mr. Dole also wondered whether Mr. Clinton will follow through on tough talk against crime.
"Republicans want President Clinton to sign the toughest bill possible," he said, citing several measures such as the death penalty for drug kingpins, that the administration hasn't endorsed.
Mr. Clinton entered the House 10 minutes later than scheduled, and he grew hoarse during the speech, which lasted more than an hour.
He was most passionate when discussing crime and values instilled by his mother, who died earlier this month.
He used the speech to mend fences with the labor movement; seated next to Mr. Clinton's wife in the visitors' gallery was Lane Kirkland, president of the AFL-CIO, who had bitterly opposed the president on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
On her other side was Jack Smith, chief executive officer of General Motors Corp., a supporter of the trade accord.
Health care remained first among equals for the president's attention.
Mr. Clinton strongly rejected the notion advanced by some Republicans that the American people don't see the need for health-care changes as a crisis.
"I know there are people here who say there is no health-care crisis," Mr. Clinton said.
"Tell it to the 58 million Americans" who don't have health coverage at some time during each year, he challenged.
The president's threat to veto anything less than universal health coverage is a politically risky move.
His advisers were divided over whether he should make it.
The statement will thrill the left wing of the Democratic Party -- particularly the almost 100 House members who back a bill that would establish a federally run, taxpayer-financed system of national health insurance.
The White House needs these lawmakers to pass any comprehensive health plan.
But the president also must have the votes of some moderate Democrats and Republican to pass a health bill, and the veto threat could antagonize both groups.
Many of them dislike the two principal ways that have been proposed to achieve universal coverage: setting up a national, government-run system, or requiring all employers to pay for part of their workers' health coverage.
A group of 24 Senate Republicans, led by Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.), does back a third way, though: they have proposed requiring all individuals to obtain health insurance, and offering federal subsidies to those who can't afford it.
Emphasizing the need for a larger government retraining program, Mr. Clinton said the U.S. must "transform our outdated unemployment system" into a "new re-employment" system.
He also called for enactment of legislation creating a national information superhighway this year.
To combat crime, Mr. Clinton indicated he favors the tough approach of the Senate crime bill over the more prevention-oriented measures passed by the House.
While mentioning just a few items in the almost 1,000-page Senate legislation, he specifically endorsed one of the strict sentencing proposals that many liberals oppose: a provision that would imprison for life criminals who commit three violent crimes.
The president also urged passage of measures that would ban semi-automatic assault weapons and put 100,000 police officers on the streets.
To help prevent crime, he called for approval of increases in drug treatment and drug education programs.
While polished at domestic politics, Mr. Clinton has struggled in the past at articulating his foreign-policy goals.
He tried to be clearer about them last night.
First, he said he will refuse to cut military spending further.
"The budget I will send to this Congress draws the line against further defense cuts and fully protects the readiness and quality of our forces."
Further, Mr. Clinton also tried to focus on the need to assist struggling new democracies.
Among the president's priorities will be fighting proliferation of nuclear weapons, supporting reform in Russia and bringing Europe's new democracies into a closer relationship with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
He barely mentioned the lingering humanitarian crises in Bosnia and Somalia, areas where Mr. Clinton has failed to find solutions to complicated problems.
In Haiti, he vowed the U.S. would continue to press for the restoration of democracy.
Mr. Clinton also appealed to an increasingly skeptical Congress to continue to support reform efforts in Russia.
And, for the first time, he hinted at two areas of potential trouble between Moscow and Washington, saying that he would press the Russians to move forward with flagging economic-reform efforts and insist that Russia's dealings with its closest neighbors be limited by "strict international standards."
Mr. Clinton crowed about the improving economy and his role in reducing the budget deficit, which for fiscal 1995 is now projected to be below $180 billion.
A year ago, the White House budget office predicted that the 1995 deficit would be $296 billion without any action.
After the deficit-reduction law was enacted last August, both the White House and the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the 1995 deficit would be about $200 billion.
Depending on who is doing the estimating, between 60% and 80% of the decline from $296 billion reflected the new law; the remainder reflected revised economic and technical assumptions.
Both the CBO and the White House project that if current policies remain in place, the deficit will level off and then begin to grow again later in this decade.
