Wiener magazine is not about hot dogs.
Oh, dear no.
It is about the life and times of Vienna -- which in German is called Wien -- and the city's residents, known as Wieners.
It has never, ever, published a paragraph about wieners.
For in Wien, you see, there are no wieners.
"Certainly not," sniffs Georg Bernert of the Vienna Butchers' Guild.
"No Wiener would walk into a butcher shop and order a couple of wieners."
Of course not.
A Wiener would walk into a butcher shop and order a couple of . . .
"Frankfurters," says Mr. Bernert.
"In Wien, we have always called wieners frankfurters."
In Frankfurt, the Frankfurters, naturally, call the Vienna frankfurter, which is a mixture of beef and pork, a wiener.
But Frankfurt has another dachshund-shaped sausage, this one all pork, that the Frankfurters call a . . .
Why not?
We Frankfurters have no problem calling a frankfurter a frankfurter," boasts Theo Wershoven, general manager of the German Butchers' Association.
"Some cities have a soccer team that carries the name of the city around the world.
Frankfurt has a sausage.
Are the Wieners not so proud of their sausage?"
It's easy for the Frankfurters to talk, for it is much simpler to go through life as a Frankfurter -- or a Hamburger, or a Berliner (jelly doughnut), for that matter.
None of those names have taken on the unsavory meanings in other languages that wiener has in English.
Thus President Kennedy could stand up in West Berlin and declare himself to be a jelly doughnut, while no American president would rise before an entire city and shout, "Ich bin ein Wiener."
But that isn't why the Wieners call the wiener a frankfurter.
"No one here is insulted to be called a wiener.
We're all Wieners," laughs Mr. Bernert.
To explain, Mr. Bernert produces a file stuffed with sausage lore.
As he opens it, yellowing papers spill onto his desk, taking the tale back to the heyday of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy.
It is 1789.
Johann Georg Lahner, a penniless butcher's apprentice in Germany, hops a barge floating down the Danube to seek his fortune in Vienna.
In his new home, he opens a humble meat shop.
One day in 1805, he throws some beef and pork together into a pot, stirs in a combination of spices and produces a new sausage.
As a tribute to Frankfurt, where he had learned his skills, he dubs his creation "the frankfurter."
Which is just fine with 19th-century Wieners, residents of a city considered the epitome of civilization.
Besides, imperial Vienna already has a hearty gastronomical ambassador: the Wiener schnitzel.
Not that the Wieners are sausage snobs.
Actually, the Wieners love their frankfurters.
They eat them boiled, fried or grilled, with mustard, ketchup or horseradish.
They eat them wearing tuxedos and they eat them wearing lederhosen.
Johann Strauss chomps on frankfurters while composing his waltzes.
Kaiser Franz II, the emperor himself, tosses them back for breakfast, a practice continued by Kaiser Franz Joseph, who washes them down with a couple of beers.
Meanwhile, the sausage from Wien is making its way through the empire, and beyond.
In these distant, uncouth reaches, a great paradox is born: The sausage that the Wieners call a frankfurter is called a wiener, for the city whence it came, by everyone else.
Soon, the Wieners themselves forget that their frankfurter came from Wien.
So, in 1955, the butchers of the city take it upon themselves to remind everyone with a big party celebrating the Wiener frankfurter's 150th birthday.
They rent the Vienna Concert House.
The police orchestra and the slaughterhouse band play waltzes.
The city's butchers donate money to the Vienna orphanage.
A poem, titled the Sausage Revue, is recited:
Come from Austria every year.
Eat the wurst at 10 a.m.
And they won't forget again."
Alas, the Wieners forget again.
In fact, modern Wieners have taken to sticking their frankfurter in a bun and calling it, of all things, a hot dog.
In Frankfurt, by contrast, the all-pork frankfurter occupies an honored place.
Almuth Westecker, part of a team that nurtures that city's image, enthusiastically offers a glossy hard-cover book, published by one of the city's frankfurter makers, dedicated to the sausage.
The book glows with the Frankfurters' pride in their frankfurter.
In 1905, for instance, when the Hessian field-artillery regiment was given the name "Frankfurt," an artist proudly proposed that the soldiers wear epaulets depicting a pair of frankfurters and a pot of mustard.
(They never did.)
In 1929, the Frankfurters, appalled that sausages of lesser quality bearing their name were being marketed around the world, tried in vain to protect their sausages with a "designation of origin" trademark, meaning that only butchers in the Frankfurt region could really make frankfurters.
"The Frankfurters stand by their frankfurters.
We don't have such lofty ideals as the Kaiser city," says Ms. Westecker, winking toward Wien.
"We have no aristocratic tradition here.
We appreciate that the frankfurter is a symbol of Frankfurt."
In Vienna, there is no book, no trademark exalting the wiener.
At City Hall, the boasting is of the Wiener schnitzel and the Wiener strudel, the Wiener waltzes and the Wiener opera.
"Probably one reason we've never thought about promoting Wien with the wiener," shrugs Jutta Wipplinger of the Vienna Tourist Board, "is that in Wien, a wiener is a frankfurter."
One of these days, though, the Wieners may be forced to own up to what one of their rendering machines wrought.
Austria is campaigning to join the European Union, which is contemplating a law regulating "designation of origin" trademarks.
If the law is adopted, reserving the word frankfurter only for the sausages made in Frankfurt, and if Austria is accepted into the EU, well, then . . .
"Then," says Dieter Stang, sales director of Hans Wirth KG, one of only three companies in the Frankfurt area that make the true frankfurter, "the Viennese would have to call their frankfurters wieners."
For the Wieners, it is the wurst-case scenario.
