THE U.S. CHARGED a CIA officer and his wife with spying for the Russians.
A former top CIA counterintelligence officer, Aldrich Ames, and his wife were arrested and charged with selling national security secrets to the Kremlin.
"It is a very serious case," President Clinton said.
Ames, 52, a CIA employee since 1962, not only spied for the Soviet KGB for more than five years, according to court papers, but he was also an agent of the KGB's successor and met with Russian contacts as recently as November.
He and his wife have been under U.S. government surveillance for two years.
The couple stands accused of receiving more than $1.5 million in payments from the Soviets and Russians from 1985 to late 1993.
Five Swedish peacekeepers were injured by shelling near the eastern Bosnian city of Tuzla, but the U.N. decided not to ask NATO for air support.
In Germany, U.S., Russian and European envoys decided the cease-fire model for Sarajevo should be extended to other towns.
But Russia blocked consideration of new NATO ultimatums elsewhere.
The government decided to join Georgia in defending a newly redrawn congressional district that opponents contend was created to ensure election of a black candidate.
The government also is supporting new districts in North Carolina and Texas that were drawn to attract minority candidates.
Armed white rightists laid claim to two South African towns, dramatizing their bid for a separate homeland and their rejection of the country's first multiracial elections in April.
The protesters drove in convoys through Bloemfontein in the Orange Free State and Newcastle in north Natal to bolster their demand for an Afrikaner homeland.
The Church of England cleared the way for the ordination of women.
After years of debate, the church's governing General Synod voted in London to approve an amendment in ecclesiastical law to permit women to become priests.
The first group of women is scheduled to be ordained at Bristol Cathedral on March 12.
Justice Blackmun said he no longer would vote to affirm any death sentences, making him the only current member of the Supreme Court to take that position.
Blackmun, who has voiced his growing concern about capital punishment for some time, said he now considers all death penalty laws to be unconstitutional.
Russia faces huge problems in drafting this year's budget and will have to resort to measures such as gold sales to meet its commitments, central bank chief Gerashchenko said.
He told a briefing in Vienna that the Russian government wouldn't be able to keep its 1994 deficit below a figure of $40 billion to $45 billion.
A leading Vatican theologian declared that women who induce abortion by using drugs will automatically be expelled from the Roman Catholic Church.
Separately, Pope John Paul II, in a 100-page letter issued to the world's families, said that society can recognize only a marriage between a man and a woman.
Canadian scientists found evidence of cigarette smoke in fetal hair, the first solid proof that even the offspring of nonsmoking mothers can be affected by passive cigarette smoke.
The Toronto study appears in today's issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.
Soldiers in Gabon destroyed a popular opposition radio station and patrolled the capital in armored cars, setting off rioting, looting and the slaying of a man accused of backing Gabon's autocratic leader, Omar Bongo.
Most shops and businesses in central Libreville were closed.
Bongo has ruled the West African nation since 1967.
North Korea is expected to permit international inspectors to examine seven declared nuclear sites, Secretary of State Christopher said.
However, a spokesman for the IAEA, the U.N. nuclear safeguards agency, said it hasn't received any indication from the Pyongyang government that visas had been issued to the inspectors.
Mexican rebel leaders met with officials of seven opposition parties and received support for their efforts to democratize the country through sweeping political reforms.
The meeting came just before the rebels were due to resume talks with government peace negotiators.
