As Tommy Moe glides into position at the starting gate of the men's Super G ski race, technicians hover over him to rub his thighs and adjust his bindings.
A few steps away, Jack Vincent watches the young champion intently.
"Tommy looks good, Tommy looks real good," Mr. Vincent says.
"Just two square centimeters over his visor, his strap is clean.
He looks great."
Mr. Vincent isn't talking about the Alaskan skier's racing condition.
He likes what he sees on Tommy Moe -- a tiny "Smith" label -- because it doesn't violate the International Olympic Committee's rules on goggle logos: Maximum area of six square centimeters, only one per side.
Surrounded by tense skiers and murmuring coaches, Mr. Vincent is policing the high crest of the Kvitfjell downhill run for the IOC's official Ambush Patrol.
The patrol swoops down on all of the Olympic venues and searches for outlaw marketers trying to sneak a free plug onto international TV.
The outlaws have been busy this week.
Ambush Patrol spotted a wily ski manufacturer's billboard just outside the Kvitfjell fence -- in clear range of a television crew.
The sign went down.
At one race, the brand name on a piece of technical equipment exceeded the IOC size limit: 10 centimeters high or one-tenth of the surface area, whichever is smaller.
Ambush Patrol slapped a sticker over the name.
Banning billboards and all but the most discreet brand IDs is an important part of the Olympics' lofty prestige.
It's also a gold-plated business strategy: The Olympic committee commands a steep price for sponsorships because it can guarantee a pristine setting without lots of competing commercial clutter.
For the Games in Lillehammer and Atlanta, the IOC expects to rake in $300 million from just 10 world-wide sponsors.
One elite sponsor is the Rochester, N.Y., eye-wear giant Bausch & Lomb, which helps to explain Mr. Vincent's fixation on goggles.
At the 1992 Winter Games, which the company also sponsored, Bausch & Lomb officials counted the minutes that goggle brand names flashed on TV and estimated its rivals snagged more than $20 million in free plugs.
Appalled, the company vowed to crack down in Lillehammer and the IOC promised to help.
And so it is that at the start of the Super G, Mr. Vincent, a silver-haired marketing executive on skis, glides among the stony-faced young racers silently stamping their feet and doing knee bends.
"Hi, remember me, we're checking goggles," Mr. Vincent calls to a Norwegian coach.
Mr. Vincent takes a roll of duct tape out of his pocket and hangs it on a fence.
"Good straps, good straps," he says, surveying the scene.
He spots a forerunner, a skier who tests the course before the race.
"He'll get camera time," Mr. Vincent says with a frown.
His face brightens as he sees that someone has obliterated the "Scott" brand on the skier's goggle straps.
More racers file past, a parade of fierce concentration and full compliance with marketing rules.
One racer has his Carrera strap turned inside out.
A Norwegian racer sports tape over his jacket's badge for the Bergersen shipping company, which sponsors the team.
Daniel Mahrer of Switzerland, stretching his legs nearby, presents a thorny dilemma.
Like the rest of his team, sponsored by the Swiss Cheese Union, he wears a bright yellow uniform emblazoned with Swiss cheese holes.
"We've been talking about it at our meetings," Mr. Vincent says.
"But there's nothing we can do.
Swiss cheese is Swiss cheese."
Surveying practice runs last week, he spotted a swarm of offending ski racers and sent word to coaches and technicians to get their straps with the program.
The message got through: At Sunday's men's downhill, Mr. Vincent watched happily at the start as 80% of the racers took off with legal straps.
Yesterday's Super G went even better, with nearly 95% of the racers lawfully strapped, including a clean sweep of the medals.
Markus Wasmeier of Germany took the gold with a time of 1:32.53 and a six-square-centimeter Uvex logo, Mr. Moe and his tiny Smith logo followed 0.08 of a second behind, and Norway's bronze medalist Kjetil Andre Aamodt finished at 1:32.93, with an extremely discreet Swans brand over one ear.
