So, what does Richard Rainwater know about real estate?
We'll soon find out.
Last week, Mr. Rainwater, who made millions for himself and Fort Worth's Bass brothers from investments in the entertainment, healthcare and oil and gas industries, unveiled a long-awaited -- and unusual -- $334 million offering for a real-estate investment trust.
For Mr. Rainwater, the REIT is a gamble that his golden touch will extend to an entirely new investment area.
It's also a gamble on Texas: All but one of the properties is in the Dallas-Fort Worth or Houston area.
(The exception: a Colorado office building.)
If successful, the proposal to take Crescent Real Estate Equities Inc. public will wipe out $275 million of debt on the properties ($111 million of which is personally guaranteed by Mr. Rainwater), and leave the Fort Worth millionaire with 20% of the company's stock, valued at $100.5 million.
As part of the transaction, Mr. Rainwater, who has agreed to serve as chairman of the new company, will throw in $10 million of his own money to acquire 400,000 shares at the $25 per share initial offering price.
The deal also includes a $300 million line of credit for the trust to pursue other real-estate investments.
The property in the REIT includes Continental Plaza, a Fort Worth office building that a Rainwater partnership purchased from Ray Hunt.
In addition, Rosewood Property Co., the real-estate operation controlled by Caroline Rose Hunt, is contributing its Las Colinas Center in Irving and Citadel office building in Denver, and its Crescent office and retail complex, which is owned by a Rosewood-Rainwater partnership.
In exchange, Rosewood will receive about 6% of the company's stock, valued at an estimated $30.5 million.
For investors, the attraction of the REIT is simple: They get a piece of Mr. Rainwater, whose highly successful investment picks have included such companies as Walt Disney Co. and Fort Worth's Columbia Health Care Corp.
"Is he a real-estate genius?
No," says Ronald Steinhart president and chief operating officer of Bank One Texas, Dallas.
"But I didn't think he was an entertainment genius when he bought Disney, or an oil and gas genius when he bought Texaco, or a health-care genius when he bought Columbia.
He's just a real smart guy who does his homework."
Perhaps, but some real-estate analysts are dubious about Mr. Rainwater's new venture.
That's in part because of Mr. Rainwater's lack of real-estate experience.
But the deal itself, these skeptics say, has some troubling aspects.
"It has a couple of unusual characteristics about it that may well turn out to be handicaps," says Jon Fosheim, a principal at Green Street Advisors, a Newport Beach, Calif., institutional research firm.
For one thing, most successful ventures tend to focus on one type of real estate.
But Mr. Rainwater's plan includes five office projects, one retail center and three residential developments.
"There are almost no successful REITs that we know of that are multi-asset," Mr. Fosheim says.
The small number of properties in the REIT also troubles analysts.
Because the credit line will be used to buy more properties, investors are pretty much being asked to buy into a blind pool.
"It's sort of a `Trust me: You give me the cash and I'll find the opportunity,' " says John Pattillo, a principal in Penobscot Group Inc., a Boston real-estate stock research firm.
Although Mr. Patillo says that Mr. Rainwater's reputation gives the offering a good chance of succeeding, he believes that his clients, mostly institutional investors, will stay out of the deal.
"It's an offering that many traditional REIT investors will clearly take a pass on," says Mr. Pattillo.
"The negative connotations associated with even a partially blind pool are too great, and people's stomachs won't be strong enough."
Another concern of analysts: timing.
Last fall, new REIT offerings were the hottest thing going on Wall Street.
Formed to operate and acquire real-estate assets, REITs don't pay corporate taxes, as long as they distribute 95% of their taxable income in dividends to shareholders.
But in recent months, a glut of new issues prompted the postponement of several high-profile offerings.
Other REITs were forced to boost the dividend yield to convince Wall Street to buy.
For his part, Mr. Rainwater is promising a 7.8% yield to investors; real-estate analysts say traditional REIT offerings in recent weeks have promised investors rates of return ranging from about 7.7% to 9.25%.
Crescent Real Estate officials say Securities and Exchange Commission rules prohibit extensive comment on the deal.
But the company's president, Gerald Haddock, disputes the comparison to a blind pool, and says the company sees an advantage in the diversity of properties.
"The hands are not going to be tied to do only certain types of deals," says Mr. Haddock.
"The strength of this transaction, coupled with a premier portfolio, is the ability to be unleveraged and utilize a line of credit to continue the Rainwater opportunistic approach to strategic real-estate acquisitions."
In an interview last August, Mr. Rainwater said he is convinced his plan -- guided by a philosophy that Texas is a good place to put his money now -- will work.
"It's hard not to be enthusiastic about it, because I'm spending my own money," Mr. Rainwater said.
"I think it's one of the best ideas I've ever run across," Mr. Rainwater said.
Crescent officials leave open the possibility that the trust will invest in places other than Texas, particularly in the Southwest.
According to the company's prospectus, the REIT also may make realestate investments in industries in which Mr. Rainwater has experience, such as health care and oil and gas.
Whether Mr. Rainwater will have the same luck in real estate as he has with previous investments remains to be seen.
But even skeptics don't dismiss him.
"I would never underestimate his abilities," says Green Street's Mr. Fosheim.
"He's made a lot more money than you and I ever will."
