U.S. economic data that shone initially but faded somewhat later, combined with a surprise Federal Reserve move to enhance liquidity, sent the dollar tumbling late yesterday against European currencies.
The dollar also fell against the yen as rumors of an exchange-rate accord between the U.S. and Japan were denied by officials of both nations.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7172 marks, down from 1.7284 marks late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 104.95 yen, down from 105.75 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4855, up from 1.4785.
About noon Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 104.88 yen and at 1.7168 marks.
U.S. durable-goods orders rose a hefty 3.7% in January, the sixth consecutive monthly rise and far above market expectations of a 1% increase.
The data initially inspired a rally in the dollar, which was bid as high as 1.7410 marks within minutes of the news being released.
Traders, citing Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan's testimony earlier this week that durable goods would be a key indicator of inflationary pressures, believed the numbers might trigger the second rate boost by the Fed this month.
But those expectations began to unravel when a closer look at the data showed the sharp rise in orders to be due almost entirely to the volatile transportation sector.
Indeed, with transportation excluded, durable-goods orders had risen only a paltry 0.3%.
"People bought the dollar once they saw the blip upward," said Victor Polce, foreign-exchange manager of Commerzbank in New York.
"But when you dug into the number a little deeper there was much less than meets the eye," he added.
Many traders, however, remained hesitant to overly unwind their long dollar positions, said Lizbeth Goldberg, assistant vice president of Bayerische Hypothekenund Wechsel-Bank AG in New York.
"Traders were looking at it through Greenspan's eyes," she said, noting the data could be read as a warning on inflation and as reason enough to boost the target for Fed funds, currently at 3 1/4.
Later yesterday, the Fed sent out the exact opposite message, announcing four-day system repurchase agreements.
The move added liquidity to the U.S. banking system and traders took it as a signal that the Fed wouldn't tighten monetary policy soon.
With that, the dollar dropped to an intraday low of 1.7145 marks about midafternoon in New York, and lows against the Swiss franc and sterling were hit soon after.
The dollar then scratched its way to higher ground on short-covering and bargain-hunting, traders said.
"People were a little overexcited on durable goods, and were reading too much into Greenspan's comments," said Dennis Pettit, foreign-exchange manager for the Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan in New York.
"But any thoughts that durable goods would trigger a Fed funds rate boost were dispelled when the Fed came in and added reserves," he said.
Mr. Pettit noted that it would have been "out of character" for the Fed to take a single month's durable-goods number "because it is such a volatile figure."
Meanwhile, the dollar lost ground against the yen after officials of the U.S. and Japan discredited a Japanese news report that the two nations had agreed to support the dollar at 110 yen.
Rumors of such an accord had begun to circulate in financial markets early Wednesday.
