Now that the U.S. embargo against Vietnam has been lifted, the largest U.S. airlines are eager to start serving the Southeast Asian country.
But not all of them may be allowed in, by Hanoi or by Washington.
So the intense lobbying that preceded the embargo's end is turning into a hotly competitive horse race.
U.S. airlines are eager to add a new country to their Asian route maps, especially one where they wouldn't have to shell out millions of dollars to pay for route rights.
They expect a flood of business travelers intent on doing deals in the country of 72 million, as well as traffic from some of the one million ethnic Vietnamese who live in the U.S. "Vietnam is one of the most promising countries in Asia," says a Continental Airlines executive.
In the past few days, carriers have peppered Washington with route applications and dispatched squads of executives to Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City to further their cause with airline and government officials there.
"This is the 20th century version of the Oklahoma land rush," declares an official of another U.S. airline jockeying to enter the market.
Within two hours of President Clinton's lifting of the embargo Thursday, UAL Corp.'s United Airlines announced that it intends to fly to Ho Chi Minh City from Los Angeles, probably via Taipei.
The next day, Northwest Airlines said it applied to the U.S. Transportation Department for a license to fly to Ho Chi Minh City from Detroit via Tokyo.
Continental confirmed that its Continental Micronesia unit applied last year for route rights to Vietnam and has had extensive discussions with Vietnam Airlines on training, aircraft leasing, support activities and joint flights from Guam and Honolulu.
Delta Air Lines said it hasn't yet filed for route authority but called Vietnam "a market that has appeal."
The carrier probably would serve Vietnam as an extension of its flights to Taipei from Los Angeles, a spokesman said.
American Airlines' parent, AMR Corp., said it continues to be interested in selling airport management and other aviation services to the Vietnamese.
(American, which has dropped all of its Asian destinations except for Japan, probably wouldn't want to fly to Vietnam).
Cargo carrier Federal Express Corp. also has indicated a desire to fly to Vietnam, according to the U.S. Transportation Department.
U.S. airlines have spent the past two years wooing Vietnamese government and airline officials in order to get a leg up once the embargo ended.
But it may not be in Vietnam's best interests to let all the U.S. carriers in.
"The Vietnam market is so small it might be spoiled by too many" airlines, says Nguyen Ngoc Quang, director of corporate affairs at state-owned Vietnam Airlines.
Moreover, "there is no agreement between the two countries" on air services, adds Mr. Quang.
"I can't imagine" the Vietnamese opening their skies, says one U.S. airline's representative in Southeast Asia.
"With only one national carrier, they would be overwhelmed."
Moreover, "they can exact whatever they want from the U.S. carriers that want to get in there," he says.
Complicating this is Vietnam Airlines' own problems.
The carrier wants to offer a credible service to the U.S. but it lacks the necessary aircraft for such long flights, Mr. Quang says.
The small airline, which carried 800,000 passengers in 1992, has only two types of modern, long-distance planes: leased Boeing Co. 767s that it flies to Australia, Russia, South Korea and some regional destinations; and five Airbus Industrie A-320s it recently leased for shorter hops.
The bulk of its fleet consists of elderly Russian-built jets and turboprops.
"They almost certainly won't operate on routes to the U.S. themselves," says Stephen Miller, whose Hong Kong-based Trinity Aviation Ltd., leases the Boeings to Vietnam Airlines.
"They'll probably opt to operate with a U.S. carrier in a joint venture.
They'll go with whoever will give them the best deal."
Without reciprocal service to the U.S. by Vietnam Airlines or the nation's small, troubled Pacific Airlines, it's doubtful that Hanoi would open its skies to a slew of U.S. airlines.
"The Vietnamese know in a war of attrition on the Pacific, they could never win," says Mr. Miller.
Washington has "not received notice that the Vietnamese want to fly here," says one administration official.
"If they don't want to come here, they'd clearly call the shots."
And if the Vietnamese aren't willing to admit all U.S. operators, "this administration might have to make some choices on which U.S. carriers will go in," he says.
United believes it has the best case.
It inherited operating authority to Vietnam from several Asian cities when it bought Pan Am Corp.'s Pacific routes in 1986.
While the U.S. Transportation Department hasn't yet renewed United's license to fly to Vietnam, the carrier last week urged the department to notify Hanoi that United has the route authority.
A United spokesman notes that the airline will need permission from Vietnam as well, both to fly there and also for rights to pick up passengers at an intermediate point such as Taipei.
He confirmed that Stephen Wolf, UAL's chairman and chief executive, is scheduled to visit Hanoi Feb. 16, his second visit in a year.
"We've had quite a close relationship with United over the past six months," says Pham Phu Khoi, Vietnam Airlines' Hong Kong-based manager for Northeast Asia.
When pressed, he adds that the two airlines have had lots of talks, but not made any deals.
Northwest, United's biggest rival in the Pacific, also believes it has a good chance.
Northwest since 1991 has flown charter flights between Ho Chi Minh City and Bangkok, carrying Vietnamese refugees resettling in the U.S.
But the others have been active as well.
Mr. Quang says he visited Houston, Los Angeles and San Francisco late last year, courtesy of Continental.
He and Continental representatives discussed many initiatives, including having Vietnam Airlines pick up Continental passengers in Manila for onward flights, he says.
Continental, which flew charter flights in Vietnam during the Vietnam War, has a sizable presence in the Pacific through its Continental Micronesia unit.
Continental expects that "all U.S. airlines will have an equal opportunity to compete for whatever traffic rights are agreed upon" by the two governments, a spokesman says.
Delta's chairman, Ronald Allen, visited Vietnam in 1992 and the airline that year hosted Vietnam Airlines officials on a visit to Walt Disney World in Florida.
Still, in the absence of diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Vietnam, it's not clear when the two countries will sit down and negotiate an aviation agreement.
A U.S. regulation still in effect bars U.S.-registered aircraft from flying in Communist-controlled Vietnam.
The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration will have to certify that Vietnam's airports, air-traffic control system and security measures are adequate.
The U.S. Treasury Department, which enforced the embargo, will have to make new regulations governing relations without the trade ban.
One Continental executive predicts it will be at least three to six months before U.S. planes land in Vietnam.
"This should be looked at as an entirely new ball game," says a Transportation Department official.
Vietnam Air's Mr. Quang last week in Hanoi said that his company plans meetings today to decide what to do.
