The economic slowdown is pitting Japanese bureaucrats, who want to build a better tomorrow, against corporations that just want to make it through today.
Japan's Labor Ministry, worried about the day early in the 21st century when one out of four Japanese will be senior citizens, wants to push through legislation that will keep people on the job as long as possible.
The goal is to create revenue to help pay increasingly hefty hospital bills as Japan's baby boomer generation ages.
Businesses, however, are stuck now with bloated payrolls amid the worst economic slump in decades and are pushing workers into early retirement.
The issue made the headlines this week after executives of Okuma Corp., a machine tool maker based in Japan's northern Aichi Prefecture, were called into a regional branch of the Labor Ministry to explain their decision to lower the company's mandatory retirement age to 56 from 60.
To be publicly called in by the bureaucrats in such a fashion is the Japanese corporate equivalent of being pilloried in the town square.
"This runs counter to the policies we are trying to pursue as Japan's society ages," said a Labor Ministry spokesman.
The ministry is preparing to submit to parliament in its spring session a bill that would make it legally binding for companies to keep the retirement age at 60.
Labor Ministry statistics show that 94.4% of Japanese companies still have a retirement age of 60.
Ministry officials say they would prefer companies to pursue a policy of voluntary retirements rather than across-the-board reductions in retirement ages, so as to keep more people on the job.
But that's something a lot of companies currently can't afford.
Okuma posted a pre-tax loss of 5.7 billion yen ($50.6 million) in the year ended March 1993.
And Toyo Keizai, a Japanese research concern, expects Okuma to post a loss of 5.8 billion yen in the current fiscal year.
"We've been hit hard by slack demand for our products in Japan, and the strong yen has hurt our exports," said an executive of Okuma, which says it plans to proceed with the plan despite the ministry's objections.
"We hope to raise the retirement age back to 60 as soon as we complete restructuring," he said.
The executives declined to say how many workers are likely to be affected by the lower retirement age.
Other companies are also suffering from the same hardships.
As a result, labor issues make news in Japan on a daily basis these days.
In the latest development, Japan's Federation of Employers Associations said Wednesday that workers won't be offered a wage increase during the annual spring negotiations this year.
The Japanese Trade Union Confederation countered on the evening news with a promise to fight for as much as it can get, setting the stage for more labor disputes.
