A deep economic recession and nasty weather took the fizzle out of beer consumption throughout Europe last year, although a growing consumer preference for higher-margin premium brews helped bolster dollar sales.
The European beer market showed a "drastic drop" in consumption last year, says Joan Delaney, the secretary general of the confederation of European Union breweries in Brussels.
Beer "usually tends to be impervious to recession; it's a little bit of comfort and when people start to give that up that means things are really bad."
Although consumption was down an estimated 6% to 8% throughout Europe in 1993, led by falls in Britain, the Netherlands and Germany, data compiled by the market-research firm A.C. Nielsen indicate that dollar sales actually rose an average of 2.5% in 16 European countries.
With many economies throughout Europe on the mend, beer sales may improve this year, particularly in southern European countries -- where tourism is likely to give consumption a lift -- and in Ireland -- where beer drinking is expected to increase during the World Cup soccer games.
Throughout Europe, though, analysts expect the froth to sink on nonalcoholic beer, as consumers return to the solid taste of the real thing.
"Production is declining throughout Europe," says John Wakely, an analyst at Lehman Brothers in London.
"But on the positive side, premium beer is growing in almost every country.
People drink less but drink better."
Take Heineken NV, the Dutch brewer that reported last week a 12% increase in 1993 net profit before extraordinary items, despite a steep fall in consumption in its key European market.
The increase can be attributed to consumers who "upgrade" their brand of beer, says Mr. Wakely.
Southern Europe showed a sharp increase in dollar sales, although production and consumption volumes were down.
Not only did fewer foreigners visit southern Europe, but nationals frequented bars less than in past years, buying instead more beer from supermarkets and other retailers.
Analysts warn that an expected surge in tourism in southern Europe this year may not spur sales of local brews as much as expected, because of tourists' preference for familiar brands.
In the case of Spain, 80% of beer sales are made in bars and restaurants.
As beer drinking in bars falls, damped by higher prices, lower disposable income and the recent introduction of private television, sales increase at supermarkets but not enough to offset the fall.
The reason, industry analysts say, is because people don't tend to drink as much beer at home as they do on a night out.
According to Nielsen, which draws heavily on data provided by big retailers, sales in Spain climbed 5.7% last year in dollar terms.
Consumption fell, though, because Spain last year raised the excise levy on beer 129% and increased value-added tax by two points, in an attempt to bring fiscal policy in line with the EU.
"For us it'll be good news if the volume of beer sales remains flat this year," says Alfonso Marques, managing director of the Spanish breweries association.
Spain's 1994 economic growth will likely be spurred by a rise in consumer spending.
If Spaniards, as expected, dig into their savings and spend more, "it'll be for consumer goods, not for beer," says a Madrid analyst.
In the long run, though, "there may still be a way for beer sales to go, because the switch from wine to beer still has some gas," he says.
In France, like Spain and Italy, bars and cafes have raised prices in recent years to offset the fall in sales volume caused by the growing preference for spending more time at home in the evenings.
That price increase contributed to even steeper falls in consumption and an eventual change in consumer habits.
According to Nielsen, dollar sales surged 21% in Portugal last year, although consumption in volume terms slipped about 3% from 1992, hurt by an increase in excise and value-added taxes.
"Although Portugal is still a wine country, there has been a change of habits, mainly among young people," says Americo Martins, the managing director of the Portuguese brewery association.
Portugal, he says, raised annual per capita beer consumption, from one liter in the 1950s to 35 liters in the mid-1970s and finally to its current 68 liters, still way below Germany's 140 liters a year.
A sudden rise in wine prices, coupled with a blitz of advertising, helped boost beer drinking and narrow this gap with northern Europe in the late 1980s.
In Ireland, growing imports of cheaper wine from other EU countries is undercutting beer sales by volume, while more people stay home in the evenings instead of visiting the local pub.
One of the main reasons is that authorities are cracking down on drunk drivers.
Because of this trend, beer sales have risen in supermarkets and other stores, a big change for a country where more than 85% of beer has traditionally been sold in bars, cafes and pubs.
According to Nielsen data, most of which is based on figures from big retailers, dollar sales surged 17% in Ireland last year.
"There's been a trend toward packaged beer and away from draft," says Ailish Ford of the Irish Brewers' Association.
"The popularity of premium-lagers has risen.
There's more drinking from bottles than glasses."
Also to the north, Switzerland suffered a 7.8% plunge in dollar sales, which analysts attribute to the breakdown of an informal cartel that kept beer prices high.
In Sweden, high excise taxes on liquor continued to encourage consumers to switch to beer from other alcoholic beverages, although recession kept the rise in check.
Lower prices in France attracted many Belgians from over the border in search of cheaper beer, pushing dollar sales in Belgium down 3.4% last year.
Although beer production and consumption fell in Germany in 1993, the country's market is still foaming.
Not only are big breweries rushing to eastern Europe in search of new opportunities, but many small producers are forming alliances within the domestic market to increase economies of scale and improve efficiency.
That could lead to a process of concentration, analysts say, much the way it did in neighboring Austria.
"The biggest question right now is what will happen to Germany?" says an industry analyst in London.
"Germany has the biggest market and the best beer, but it's a country where production costs are too high.
Now if the Germans start to get more efficient, other producers will really have to start to worry."
