Victor Posner is fighting a judge's order barring him from running any publicly traded company, but in the meantime, the ban appears to have boosted the value of his stock portfolio by as much as $2.6 million.
A federal judge ordered the unprecedented ban on Dec. 1, citing Mr. Posner's previous run-ins with securities regulators and calling the financier "contemptuous of the interests of public shareholders."
The Securities and Exchange Commission sought the harsh penalty in connection with Mr. Posner's alleged role in an illegal stock-buying scheme involving Ivan Boesky and Michael Milken.
The order required that Mr. Posner step down as chairman and chief executive officer of Salem Corp., the only publicly traded company at which he was an officer at the time.
Salem's stock price jumped 15% on the day of the judge's order, which was reported early in the afternoon, and it has continued to climb.
Currently, the stock price, adjusted for a stock split earlier this month, is 23% higher than it was trading just before the court ruling.
Mr. Posner's 49.2% stake in the industrial-equipment company makes him the biggest beneficiary of the stock-price increase.
Under Judge Milton Pollack's order, Mr. Posner retains all economic benefit from his Salem shares, though they will be held by an independent trust so that Mr. Posner cannot have any say in how the shares are voted.
A spokeswoman for Salem and for Mr. Posner said the rise in the stock price has had nothing to do with the court order.
Instead, she said, Mr. Posner and company officials believe the increase reflects improvements in the company's business and a 60-cent-a-share annual dividend that was approved by the board on Dec. 13.
The stock price had climbed about 20% in the four months before the court order, too.
In American Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Salem shares closed $15.25, unchanged.
The spokeswoman said that Mr. Posner "believes in the stock" and plans to continue holding his stake.
Mr. Posner's appeal of the court-ordered ban avoids the issue of how the market has responded since his removal from a leadership role at the company.
The improved stock price "isn't the issue here," said Dennis Block, an attorney for Mr. Posner at the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal & Manges.
In a brief filed in federal appeals court in New York, Mr. Posner's lawyers argued that the Dec. 1 order by Judge Pollack disenfranchises the shareholders.
"The election of directors, who in turn appoint corporate officers, is a fundamental incident of shareholders' rights," Mr. Posner's brief said.
"Whether the SEC, the trial court, or even the appeals court would vote for the Posners is not the issue; the issue is whether shareholders should be given the opportunity to make up their own minds."
Mr. Posner's supporters say that the current stock price isn't the only factor that has to be considered in evaluating the impact a top executive has on a company.
In a court document filed before the appeals court, Phillip H. Smith, a Salem director, urged the court to allow Mr. Posner to continue serving the company.
"It is my opinion that he has keen insight and an ability to focus on key basic issues that others might overlook. . . .
He is encouraging and supporting long-range planning initiatives which are vital to the corporation and to the enhancement of shareholders' values," Mr. Smith said in the court document.
SEC officials, however, say they believe the changes in the stock price reflect the market's relief that Mr. Posner no longer is running Salem.
In the wake of the ruling, said Barry Goldsmith, chief litigator for the SEC, "the marketplace has reacted favorably."
Salem isn't the only instance in which Mr. Posner's removal from a company appeared to boost its stock price.
In a separate case involving DWG Corp., another Posner-controlled company, the stock price more than quadrupled in the two years after a consent decree with shareholders was announced in 1991 removing Mr. Posner from any active role in the company, now known as Triarc Cos.
On appeal in the Salem case, Mr. Block maintains that Judge Pollack exceeded his authority by approving the harsh penalty, and that the law providing such measures can't be applied to Mr. Posner.
Mr. Block also argues that Mr. Posner did nothing wrong, and that the SEC didn't adequately back up its allegations against the 74-year-old Mr. Posner.
"There was no basis for Judge Pollack's decision," Mr. Block said.
Mr. Posner resigned his positions at Salem on Jan. 4 and, pending his appeal, has turned over $3.6 million sought by the SEC in allegedly illegal profits.
