Viacom Inc. has lured veteran Hollywood business executive Jonathan Dolgen away from Sony Corp.'s Sony Pictures unit to head a new entertainment group that will include most of the operations of its recently acquired Paramount Pictures Corp., according to people familiar with the situation.
Neither Viacom nor Sony officials, nor Mr. Dolgen could be reached for comment.
But Mr. Dolgen reportedly has persuaded Sony to let him out of his contract with the company's filmed-entertainment operations.
The move is something of a surprise because Mr. Dolgen, 47-year-old president of Sony's motion-picture group, was just given expanded responsibilities there.
But the Viacom post, with the acquisition of Paramount is a far bigger job, reporting to Frank Biondi, Viacom's chief executive officer.
Moreover, at Sony, Mr. Dolgen wasn't the top executive, operating as a management "team" in tandem with Mark Canton, who last month was named to head both the Columbia and Tri-Star Pictures units of Sony Pictures.
Mr. Canton oversees creative operations while Mr. Dolgen was responsible for business operations.
Late yesterday, Hollywood executives said the departure is a blow to Sony Pictures, where Mr. Dolgen is considered the most astute and experienced business executive in the company's management ranks.
As reported, Sony Corp. has been seeking to sell a 25% interest in its entertainment operations to a telecommunications company or other strategic investor.
Mr. Dolgen gained a reputation as a tough, financially savvy deal-maker and strategist during an earlier stint at Columbia, where Viacom's Mr. Biondi also once worked, and at News Corp.'s Fox Inc.
At Columbia before Sony's acquisition, he held a number of executive positions starting in 1976 before leaving to join Fox as senior executive vice president in 1985.
Barry Diller, then chairman of Fox, and now chairman of QVC Inc., once described Mr. Dolgen as "a strong, willful executive who is the best person I know to look into the broken corners of a company and fix them to generate earnings."
Though he is known as tough on subordinates and somewhat rough around the edges, he is likely to bring a strong discipline to Paramount's troubled entertainment operations.
Sherry Lansing, head of the motion-picture group, will stay on and report to Mr. Dolgen, but other changes are expected once he takes control.
