The Group of Seven meeting on "structural unemployment," scheduled for today and tomorrow in Detroit, promises to focus overdue attention on this serious problem.
From the '60s to the relatively prosperous late '80s, the unemployment rate tripled within the European Community.
It nearly doubled in most European Free Trade Association countries and in Canada.
The U.S., by contrast, has gotten off relatively lightly, with an increase of only one-third by 1990 -- about one-half by now.
But this comes on top of a fall in real wages unseen in the rest of the West.
What countermeasures should the G-7 leaders endorse to get their citizens working again?
Models of the long-run volume of unemployment now make it clear that nearly every European country has brought much of its unemployment on itself -- through its punishing taxation of labor.
Reversing that process is the best cure.
And keeping it from taking firm hold in the U.S. is the best prevention.
The beginning of wisdom, but only the beginning, was the realization that money -- its supply and velocity -- has no lasting influence over employment.
In the now-standard thesis of Milton Friedman and myself in the '60s, a high level of money spending can always prop up employment at an artificial level for a while, but only at the price of worsening inflation; a dearth of spending can depress employment to an artificially low level, but then inflation will steadily shrink, which will encourage the government to pep up spending and thus revive employment.
As a result, the sort of slump -- or boom -- engineered by money is invariably temporary and usually short-lived.
(The '30s, when government actions intensified the slump, were an exception.)
The unemployment rate ultimately returns to some basic level -- dubbed the natural unemployment rate -- that is independent of the artificial forces of money, its supply and velocity.
From this natural-rate perspective, the rise of unemployment since the '60s cannot be laid to the '80s crusade of central banks to subdue inflation or to their problems with the strong German mark in the '90s.
The decline of world inflation since the '60s has been gentle, and it came largely after the rise in world unemployment.
The epidemic of joblessness must be seen as an upward drift of the basic level of unemployment.
Structural changes -- nonmonetary shocks operating through nonmonetary mechanisms -- must have driven up the natural unemployment rate.
But how do various structural shifts affect the natural rate?
And what are the key shifts?
In recent years I, and several others, have studied the mechanism determining the natural rate, to which I pointed in my early work.
This modern theory argues that serious joblessness is root-ed in an "unclassical" fact as old as the labor market: An unemployed person cannot get a job by offering to work for less.
(McDonalds reportedly hires about one in 20 applicants.)
Employers do not try to hire at the lowest wage that would be accepted.
They need to pay a higher wage -- an incentive wage -- to deter (to the degree judged cost-effective) employees' quitting, shirking, absenteeism and strikes.
This is the required wage.
The wage level that businesses can afford to pay and still keep their work force is another matter -- a matter of their demand for labor.
If the required wage exceeds the affordable wage, hiring stops and unemployment mounts until the required wage has sunk to the affordable wage.
This steady unemployment rate is the natural rate.
This framework has implications for joblessness.
Shocks forcing up the required wage without similarly boosting the affordable wage drive up the natural unemployment rate.
For example, a fatter financial cushion -- more income from savings, home ownership or welfare entitlements -- weakens employee incentives, thus forcing up the required wage.
Shocks having a negative impact on the affordable wage without similarly shrinking the required wage also drive up the natural rate.
For example, payroll taxes lower the take-home pay that companies can afford to provide.
A wave of empirical results from this framework have now come in.
My own statistical study of 17 Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development countries confirms the importance of multiple factors in the rise of unemployment, of which three stand out.
Two of these, world oil prices and world real interest rates, have abated at least somewhat.
In any case, a country acting unilaterally can do little to moderate these global factors.
But every country can control a domestic source of much of the unemployment increase in several countries.
Big increases in payroll and personal-income taxes in most countries have been mass job-killers.
(In France the 10-point rise has boosted the unemployment rate by about a point and a half.)
Value-added and sales taxes are neutral.
These results conform to the theory.
When businesses or workers are taxed on wages, a business must pay more to provide the same employee incentives as before, and it cannot then afford the same work force as before.
Employee incentives cost business still more if the taxes finance welfare entitlements that make wage earning less attractive.
The rise in these two damaging tax rates has been steepest in Canada and on the Continent.
These economies also tend to show the steepest rise in unemployment -- from a rate below the American one to a rate well above it.
American resistance to new tax burdens on employment, which the Clinton health plan threatens to require, is the first defense against joblessness on the Euro-Canadian scale.
Reducing the swollen payroll levies that the American worker already faces or countering them with low-wage employment subsidies may be the surest way to regain the low unemployment so essential for the general welfare.
Mr. Phelps, a professor of economics at Columbia University, is the author of "Structural Slumps: The Modern Equilibrium Theory of Unemployment, Interest and Assets," just out from Harvard University Press.
