Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt said his agency will become more active in attempting to curb unnecessary shareholder litigation, and might intervene in cases that the agency deems frivolous.
Mr. Levitt suggested that the agency could weigh in on the side of companies seeking to dismiss shareholders' lawsuits or seeking to obtain fines against plaintiffs' lawyers who file frivolous lawsuits and motions.
Such involvement by the SEC would come in the trial phase of lawsuits, rather than in the appeals phase, when the agency's involvement is more typical.
"We might also consider advising courts on the appropriateness of proposed settlements in particular cases," Mr. Levitt said in a speech to the Securities Regulation Institute in San Diego.
Mr. Levitt's speech indicates a shift in the SEC's attitude toward shareholder litigation.
Such suits are filed against companies when their actions are deemed to have hurt shareholders' stock value.
The grounds for such suits include failure to warn shareholders of product delays or other circumstances that could affect stock prices, and may even include overly optimistic earnings reports.
The SEC historically has viewed such suits as an important supplement to its own enforcement efforts, and the agency last year presented Congress with data showing that the numbers of suits have held steady since the 1970s.
But companies, particularly start-ups, have long complained that they are penalized by shareholder suits when stock prices move even slightly downward.
Companies also complain about "professional plaintiffs" who buy stock in industry groups susceptible to sudden drops in stock price and about plaintiffs' attorneys who encourage such litigation.
Mr. Levitt said the SEC would support federal legislation that would prohibit law firms from "using professional plaintiffs or otherwise maintaining an inventory of shareholders to serve as nominal plaintiffs in class-action filings."
In addition, he said, the SEC would support efforts to prohibit extra compensation for lead plaintiffs in class-action lawsuits.
It would also bar lawyers who own securities that are the subject of litigation from being the lead lawyers for plaintiffs in such lawsuits.
Lead lawyers in class-action cases typically reap a larger share of fees.
"Without going into specifics today, I am especially interested in ways to give shareholders greater control over their own litigation and curb potential conflicts of interest between class-action lawyers and the shareholders they represent," Mr. Levitt said.
The SEC will also "continue to support legislative efforts" to eliminate the use of the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations statute, which allows plaintiffs to win triple damages, in securities cases.
"Issuers and other market participants should not be exposed to RICO claims seeking treble damages for disclosure violations," he said.
Mr. Levitt said the SEC will also examine its own rule-making process to see if its statutes are worded so ambiguously as to encourage litigation.
More specific language "would provide greater certainty to business transactions and allow issuers to avoid litigation, or at least to dispose of lawsuits at an early stage."
