Paul Jain, president and chief executive of Media Vision Technology Inc., predicted last year that he and other makers of multimedia sound cards would trounce industry leader Creative Technology Ltd., saying: "If I were them, I'd be really scared."
Mr. Jain has cause for concern himself these days.
Angry investors have turned on his company with a vengeance after two ugly surprises concerning Media Vision's financial condition.
The latest came Thursday, when Mr. Jain disclosed that unexpected new price-cutting and a delayed product shipment will result in a "substantial loss" in the first quarter.
The stock fell $10.50 a share, or 49%, that day to $11 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
It closed even lower Friday at $10.75.
In the past five weeks, about $500 million in Media Vision's market capitalization has been obliterated.
The stock traded as high as $43.25 in February; the sell-off began Feb. 18 after the Fremont, Calif., concern disclosed that unsold inventory jumped fourfold in the fourth quarter at a time when other major competitors barely kept pace with frenetic Christmas buying demand.
Start-up technology firms such as Media Vision often experience growing pains.
But because management's competence and credibility are being called into question, Media Vision is drawing inordinate attention on Wall Street.
Just eight days before disclosing the expected loss, for instance, Mr. Jain provided a rosy forecast to analysts.
Analysts and investors also wonder how Media Vision could have so badly miscalculated Christmas orders, given that its biggest competitors, Creative Technology and Aztech Systems Ltd., held their inventories in check.
"The general feeling is . . . what is going on with management?" says Bruce Goedde, analyst at L.H. Alton & Co.
Mr. Jain denies misleading anyone and says his inventory problems resulted from honest error.
He adds Media Vision's troubles have been blown out of proportion by skeptics, and that the company will rebound.
"When you grow as fast as we have grown, you hit a bump," he says.
"What you have to do . . . is take care of those bumps."
The saga is also a potential embarrassment for analysts who have been touting the stock as a multimedia play, and for San Francisco-based Montgomery Securities, which served as lead underwriter for Media Vision's $75 million debt offering four months ago, when the balance sheet was already showing signs of strain.
Montgomery Securities analysts didn't return calls for comment.
But the firm made huge cuts Thursday in its projections for Media Vision's 1994 revenue, to a range of $280 million to $320 million from a previous estimate of $406 million, and for earnings to a range of 40 cents to 80 cents a share from $2.10.
Mr. Jain, a dapper Indian entrepreneur, attended college in Vienna before emigrating to the U.S. to earn a master's degree in computer science at the University of California at Berkeley.
The 48-year-old Mr. Jain founded a number of Silicon Valley start-ups before launching Media Vision in May 1990 with $500,000 and three employees.
After Media Vision went public, the stock soared from $20.25 to a December 1993 peak of $43.75 as the company rode a boom in sales of personal computers outfitted with new "multimedia" capabilities for processing moving video and sound.
It expanded from its core business of sound cards to video cards, as well as multimedia upgrade kits and even some multimedia software programs.
For 1993, Media Vision posted $241.4 million in sales and ranked second behind Creative Technology in the world-wide sound-card market.
Multimedia sound cards give a personal computer the ability to produce sound.
For example, while viewing a CD-ROM encyclopedia on screen, an image of a dinosaur could be accompanied by the sounds that it makes.
The management missteps began in the fourth quarter, when Steve Allan, Media Vision's chief financial officer, and other executives worried about rumored parts shortages in coming months.
Fearing shortages might crimp Media Vision's ability to keep up with demand, Mr. Allan says the company produced goods in November and December that it would have postponed.
"We did it as an insurance policy," Mr. Allan says.
"As it turned out, the rumors turned out not to be true."
The resulting miscalculation left Media Vision with $80.9 million in unsold inventory, nearly double the previous quarter.
Creative's unsold inventory, by contrast, edged up to $64.5 million in the fourth quarter from $63 million in the previous quarter.
Accounts receivables, which reflect goods shipped for which payment hasn't yet been received, also nearly doubled from $66 million in the third quarter to $122.1 million in the fourth, while Creative's receivables increased to $71.8 million from $64.5 million.
All this, critics say, indicates Media Vision was "pushing" product into the retail channel.
"The speculation mat the time was they would end up oversaturating Media Vision's product," says Bill Crouch, a marketing vice president for Aztech Labs Inc., Aztech's North American unit in Fremont, Calif.
"I think they wanted to show a big sales number to satisfy Wall Street." asserts Jeff Matthews, general partner of Ram Partners, a Greenwich, Conn.-based firm that has shorted Media Vision's stock.
Mr. Jain lashes out at short-sellers like Mr. Matthews, whom he says contributed to the initial fall in Media Vision's stock when the fourth-quarter results were released.
"When you build a company as beautifully as we have, it doesn't feel good to have rumors spread about you that are absurd," he says.
But the other shoe dropped last week when Media Vision issued a terse press release that price cutting by the competition forced it to slash prices on unspecified products, and that the company expected a "significant" fall in first-quarter revenue because shipment of an unspecified new product is being delayed until the second quarter.
The combined actions would result in a loss for the first period, the company said.
Investors reacted with surprise, because Mr. Jain as recently as March 16 had appeared at a Morgan Stanley-sponsored conference in Laguna Niguel, Calif. to proclaim all was well with the company.
"It {Mr. Jain's forecast} didn't jibe with what happened," says L.H. Alton's Mr. Goedde.
Messrs. Jain and Allan claim the forecast came before the company realized that Creative Technology was deepening price cuts, which "hit us like a 9.0 earthquake," says Mr. Allan.
Officials at Creative Technology, however, say they instituted no unusual price cuts, but continued with gradual reductions that have taken place for months.
REVENUE (millions) $241.4 $69.4
NET INCOME (millions) $19.9 $0.6*
EARNINGS PER SHARE $1.42 $0.06 litigation.
Manufactures multimedia equipment for personal computers, including sound and video cards and multimedia upgrade kits; produces multimedia software titles.
Creative Technology Ltd., Aztech Systems Ltd.
