Abortion-rights forces won an important procedural victory, as the Supreme Court said they may use the federal racketeering law as a weapon against protesters who try to shut down abortion clinics.
Yesterday's unanimous ruling will allow the National Organization for Women to go forward with a civil lawsuit alleging that Operation Rescue and other anti-abortion groups engaged in a nationwide conspiracy to use harassment and violence to force clinics to close.
The high court's decision could imperil militant anti-abortion organizations because the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, known as RICO, allows plaintiffs to seek damages equal to triple their actual harm.
But the justices emphasized that they weren't ruling on the merits of the NOW suit, which now will go back to a U.S. trial court in Chicago for further proceedings.
Abortion-rights lawyers said that as a result of the high court's decision, they will consider adding or beefing up RICO allegations in dozens of other pending suits filed on behalf of targeted clinics.
Randall Terry, founder of Operation Rescue, called the ruling "a vulgar betrayal of over 200 years of tolerance toward protest and civil disobedience."
The decision turned on a relatively narrow, technical question: Must a plaintiff using RICO prove that a defendant's bad deeds had an "economic motive"?
The court's answer was no.
RICO prohibits conducting an "enterprise" in a "pattern of racketeering activity;" the pattern can be shown by proving two or more of a long list of underlying offenses such as extortion.
Writing for the court, Chief Justice William Rehnquist stressed that the relevant sections of the racketeering law neither state or imply the need for an economic motive.
The court's conclusion wasn't surprising because the justices have resisted most invitations to narrow the scope of the broadly worded RICO statute.
Some lower federal courts, including the two that had considered the NOW suit, improperly imposed the economic-motive requirement, the chief justice said.
The Clinton administration had urged the high court to reject the requirement, in part because it would make it more difficult for prosecutors to bring cases under RICO's criminal provisions against terrorists who aren't motivated primarily by profits.
The ruling on RICO comes at a time of activity on a number of fronts in the clash between protesters' rights to oppose abortion and the rights of women and their doctors to carry out the procedure.
Just last Friday, for example, the Supreme Court agreed to hear a separate case involving how far courts and local governments may go in barring protest activities in "buffer zones" around clinics.
Meanwhile, Congress is expected in the near future to pass legislation that would make it a federal crime to block women from entering or leaving abortion clinics.
That bill, slightly different versions of which have passed both houses, would create a new basis for civil suits.
Unlike RICO, the clinic-protection law wouldn't require plaintiffs to prove a "pattern of racketeering."
"Most litigators will use both laws, depending on the facts of the their cases," said Kathryn Kolbert, a prominent abortion-rights attorney.
(NOW vs. Scheidler)
