Because you have had such balanced and accurate reporting of the Zale bankruptcy cases, I was surprised that you permitted Mark Dickstein, a purchaser at sharp discounts of claims against financially distressed entities, to extemporize and mischaracterize the facts of that case in order to support what appears to be a tactical objective of his as a creditor in the Macy's case ("Macy's Debtor Paradise," editorial page, Jan. 19).
As Zale's lead bankruptcy counsel, I was in a good position to observe not only the value of the debtor's exclusivity period (which was extended by the presiding bankruptcy judge in that case), but also the costs and complications that certain creditors can visit upon a Chapter 11 reorganization as leverage to attempt to satisfy their own goals.
The Zale Chapter 11 cases were begun involuntarily against the company on Jan. 1, 1992.
They were not prearranged in any sense.
The U.S. trustee appointed five creditor committees, which immediately undertook a pattern of litigation and bellicosity on every conceivable issue relating to the operation of this billion-dollar retailer with 10,000 employees.
It certainly was "chaotic."
Nevertheless, within four months of the filing of the involuntary petitions, the debtor (not the creditor committees) proposed a solution to the chaos: a fast-track schedule for the resolution of the case.
This included sequenced presentations of contested issues, formulation of economic proposals, deadlines for the preparation of plans of reorganization and plenary meetings of all creditor constituencies, with the goal of a possible resolution of the Chapter 11 case by September 1992.
Every creditor constituency, except the trade creditors, opposed Zale's proposal as unrealistic.
Fortunately, the bankruptcy judge embraced it, including the continuation of exclusivity.
Indeed, the debtors' exclusivity period was extended by the bankruptcy court until Zale, supported eventually by several creditor constituencies, gave antagonistic groups the option of filing competing plans of reorganization for some or all of the Zale companies in Chapter 11.
Ultimately, within the time frame originally proposed by Zale, every creditor constituency, except Mr. Dickstein's, was in accord for a consensual plan.
Mr. Dickstein was the chairperson of the one hold-out creditors committee.
Constantly threatening massive litigation of all sorts against all parties, that committee extended the life of the Chapter 11 case by many months and cost the estate millions of dollars in professional fees and tens of millions in aggravation, perhaps the "sort of chaos" that Mr. Dickstein meant in his acknowledgment.
Indeed, an investment banker who was advising Mr. Dickstein's committee dared to threaten representatives of Zale and the creditors that such adviser would "get what {he} wanted or blow up the debtor."
The presiding bankruptcy judge commented on the record that Mr. Dickstein's constituents would be invited to consider the alternatives of either a consensus plan on the format achieved by Zale with the other creditor constituencies or "years of litigation" with the attendant uncertainties and costs.
Yes, the Zale case was relatively fast.
However, I fail to see how an opponent of case resolution in the Zale reorganization could possibly lecture those involved in other cases.
The debtors' exclusivity period was a very helpful part of case management in Zale, and it lasted as long as it was necessary to assist in the rehabilitation process.
Without the exclusivity period, we could never have climbed out of the chaos at the start of the case or have achieved a consensual plan.
