Venezuela's new president, Rafael Caldera, said the nation would have to make sacrifices to overcome its dependence on oil, but added that a recently imposed value-added tax was an unjust burden that he would attempt to repeal.
Mr. Caldera, who campaigned as a populist, takes office at a moment when Venezuela's economy is wracked by recession, high inflation and a shaky banking system.
The Venezuelan stock market surged 7.4% yesterday in the wake of his inauguration speech, a rise that analysts attributed more to the broad goals Mr. Caldera outlined than to the specific proposals he presented.
In general terms, Mr. Caldera promised to struggle "incessantly" against inflation.
He said he intended to pursue trade liberalization, primarily through reciprocal trade agreements.
And he pledged government austerity, including a reduced budget this year.
But Mr. Caldera's proposal to scale back the controversial 10% value-added tax raised questions about how he intends to control the budget deficit, which swelled last year to 5% of gross domestic product.
That deficit has fueled spiraling prices.
The value-added tax, which was projected to generate revenues roughly equal to 3% of GDP, was designed to compensate for budget shortfalls caused by the decline in the oil revenues that have long been the mainstay of Venezuela's economy.
But since it was put into effect last October, the tax has faced challenges in Venezuelan courts and resistance from both businesses and consumers.
Mr. Caldera said that he would shortly present legislation to eliminate the value-added tax and replace it with a sales tax that would be applied selectively at the wholesale level.
He added the revision in the value-added tax would be part of a broad overhaul of the tax system that would provide for improved collection and higher income taxes on the wealthy.
Many analysts were dubious.
Some said Mr. Caldera's revised levy might ultimately bear a close resemblance to the current version of the tax.
They added that it was unclear whether Mr. Caldera, a political independent whose loyalists hold only 50 of the 199 seats of the lower house of Congress, has the congressional support to repeal the tax.
The outgoing finance minister, Carlos Rafael Silva, recently warned Congress that a repeal of the tax could cause the deficit to balloon to 9% of GDP.
Earlier this week, Mr. Caldera named his cabinet, which included as Finance Minister, Julio Sosa Rodriguez, the chief of a bank and chemical company and the former Venezuelan ambassador to the U.S.
Upon being named to the post, Mr. Sosa pleased international markets by identifying inflation as the country's major problem.
Nevertheless, some in Venezuela view Mr. Sosa as being aligned with protectionist interests within the business community.
While Wall Street reacted favorably to the cabinet, some analysts based in Venezuela tended to take a less sanguine view of the Caldera team.
"The cabinet basically is made up of people who are not very market oriented and not particularly experienced at running a government," says Robert Bottome, an economic analyst in Caracas.
