Prices of U.S. Treasury securities shot higher yesterday, when the Federal Reserve announced it had decided to again nudge up short-term interest rates.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose nearly 1 1/4 points, or nearly $12.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 92 12/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, dropped to 6.85% from 6.95% on Monday.
But economists and money managers warned against reading too much into the bond market's performance yesterday.
They argued that it was largely a rebound from weak market conditions and that it will only be a matter of time before the market starts wondering when the Fed will raise short-term interest rates again.
"This is a rising interest-rate environment . . . and you can't get comfortable in a bear market," said Joseph Liro, chief economist at S.G. Warburg & Co.
William Gross, a managing director for fixed-income investments at Pacific Investment Management Co., said he expected the bond market to head into a period of relative stability for longer-term securities while yields on short-term and intermediate-term Treasurys will continue to gradually climb.
"I'd step back a bit from the euphoria," Mr. Gross said.
The yield on the 30-year bond likely remains trapped in a range of 6.75% to 7%, Mr. Gross said.
"Once the Fed embarks on a tightening mode, it tends to persist for a year to two years, and with that probably being the case now, it's not the right time to get overwhelmingly optimistic on bonds."
Paul Denoon, a portfolio manager at Alliance Capital Management, also said the market's rally was not likely to last too long.
"I think we'll find a level around here and build a base."
Typically, when the Fed raises short-term interest rates, prices of Treasury securities fall.
But traders and investors had been expecting such a move for some time, and as a result, such an increase had already been priced into the market.
Nervousness over when and by how much the Fed would raise interest rates has weighed on the market since early February, when the Fed tightened for the first time in five years.
But yesterday's action cleared the air.
The Fed's rate increase "cleared up the near-term uncertainty," over the course of monetary policy, said Samuel Kahan, chief eonomist at Fuji Securities Inc.
"They made clear that at least for now, the Fed is continuing with a moderate, slow approach to tightening," he said.
Investors, feeling a bit more comfortable with how the Fed is handling monetary policy, snapped up Treasurys that offered yields fattened by the sell-off of the last few weeks.
Although it isn't yet certain exactly how much higher the Fed wants to push short-term interest rates, analysts believe the central bank now wants the federal-funds rate -- the rate at which banks lend each other money overnight -- at 3.5%.
Back on Feb. 4, the Fed had nudged the funds rate up to 3.25% from 3%.
Analysts expect the Fed to indicate to the market this morning precisely where the funds rate should be.
As it did in February, the Fed issued an announcement that it was tightening.
But early yesterday, there had been some confusion in the market when, through an open-market operation, the Fed appeared to send a signal that it wasn't changing policy.
But a Fed spokesman, quickly attempting to clarify the situation, indicated that the policy-making Federal Open Market Committee hadn't yet made a decision.
At midafternoon, however, the Fed issued a brief statement, saying that the FOMC had "decided to increase slightly the degree of pressure on reserve positions," which was "expected to be associated with a small increase in short-term interest rates."
Following the Fed's tightening announcement, prices moved higher across the entire spectrum of Treasury issues.
"There was good buying by a mix of speculative accounts and investors who had accumulated cash and were willing to put a portion of that to work, now that the other shoe has dropped," said John Costas, manager of government securities trading at CS First Boston Inc.
Mr. Costas added that there was also some relief that the Fed had not raised the funds rate more than a quarter of a percentage point.
The flurry of investor interest resulted in a somewhat unusual set of circumstances yesterday: Traders who bought two-year notes at a government auction earlier in the afternoon are holding on to profits even though the Fed tightened.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note finished the day at a yield of 5.01%.
The Treasury Department had awarded the $17.01 billion offering at a yield of 5.15%.
The auction results, which were announced about a half-hour before the Fed tightening decision, had already showed that investors were viewing the yield levels as attractive.
The bid-to-cover ratio, which is a measure of demand comparing the number of bids at the auction with the number accepted, was 2.64-to-1.
Noncompetitive bids, which typically reflect interest from investors outside the Wall Street dealer community, were $1.17 billion.
In comparison, over the last 12 two-year note offerings, the issue had drawn an average bid-to-cover ratio of 2.74-to-1 and noncompetitive bids have averaged $814 million.
Traders and investors will have a fresh challenge to confront today, when the Treasury auctions $11 billion of new fiveyear notes.
In when-issued trading late yesterday, the five-year note yielded 5.91%.
All bids are awarded at a single price at the market-clearing yield.
Rates are determined by the difference between that price and the face value.
The notes are dated March 31, and mature March 31, 1996.
The yield of Republic of Turkey Yankee bonds rose dramatically on news that Standard & Poor's Corp. downgraded Turkey's long-term foreign-currency debt to double-B from triple-B-minus.
The debt was also placed on CreditWatch with negative implications.
Yankee bonds are securities sold by a foreign entity in the U.S.
About $2.7 billion of foreign-currency debt is affected, S&P said.
Meanwhile the new-issue market was slow.
Many players were sidelined, correctly anticipating the Fed's tightening.
Trading in the investment-grade market was light yesterday with little change in spreads, or the yield gap between corporate bond yields and those of comparable Treasurys.
In the junk-bond market, trading perked up with the Fed's policy move.
Prices, which had been lower during the morning, finished unchanged to slightly higher.
The downgrade of the Republic of Turkey's debt caught the market by surprise yesterday.
Its 9% coupon bonds maturing in 1999 dropped 2 1/8 points, or $21.25 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 94.5.
The yield rose to 10.4% from 9.84%, and the yield spread over Treasurys widened to about 4.5 percentage points from 3.75 percentage points.
The bonds were downgraded in January by both S&P and Moody's Investors Service Inc.
Before the downgrades in January, the yields of the bonds had been at about 2.5 to 2.75 percentage points over those of Treasurys, slightly wider than when the bonds were originally sold.
J.P. Morgan Securities Inc. was the lead manager of the offering in June 1992, when the bonds were priced at a yield 2.22 percentage points above Treasurys.
"The downgrade and CreditWatch placement reflect a heightened risk that a workable fiscal program won't be implemented in the near term to tackle Turkey's economic crisis," S&P said in a news release yesterday.
"Heavy public-sector borrowing . . . is the root cause of spiraling inflation and serious balance-of-payments pressures.
Yet, continuing differences among the governing and opposition parties are likely to slow implementation of an austerity plan.
The March 27, 1994, municipal elections aren't expected to break this political gridlock."
S&P downgraded Turkey's debt in January to triple-B-minus from triple-B, maintaining its long-term negative outlook.
Moody's also downgraded the debt then to Ba1 from Baa3.
"We sensed that things were deteriorating," said Guillermo Estebanez, an analyst at Moody's.
Prices of municipal bonds leaped with Treasurys in brisk trading after the announcement of the Fed's tightening, finishing as much as 3/4 point higher.
Among secondary issues, the New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's 5.00% bonds of 2024 ended 5/8 higher at 87 to yield 5.90%.
Municipal issuers sold more than $1 billion of debt yesterday even though trading was very nervous because of the FOMC meeting.
The venture into the volatile market turned out well for a number of the issuers, as there was a warm reception for much of the new supply.
The Philadelphia School District's $160 million issue of Series A of 1994 general obligation bonds was sold through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch & Co.
Demand was so strong that yields for most bonds were trimmed 0.05 to 0.10 percentage point at a repricing.
Following that repricing, yields for the sold-out issue range from 3.65% in 1995 to 5.85% in 2009.
The bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corp. and carry triple-A ratings from Moody's and S&P.
Prices of mortgage securities climbed along with Treasurys following the Fed's tightening.
In secondary trading of 7% issues for April delivery, Government National Mortgage Association issues finished 19/32 higher at 97 28/32, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues jumped 5/8 point to 98 10/32, and Federal National Mortgage Association issues spurted 5/8 to 98 3/32.
The market, however, continued its recent general trend of lagging behind the more liquid Treasury market as investors continue reassessing and locating spots for value in mortgage securities.
A wait-and-see attitude was clear in the market for real estate mortgage investment conduit deals, where just one offering was announced in advance of the Fed policy shift.
That deal was a $300 million Freddie Mac Remic, series G031, which was backed by Ginnie Mae 30-year 8% issues and underwritten by Kidder, Peabody & Co.
But other Remic makers were dormant, and the market typically looks for support from underwriters seeking collateral for new Remics.
