Precious-metals prices rose on positive retail sales figures and broad commodity-price gains that fueled inflation fears, analysts said.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for February delivery climbed $3.70 to $390.60 an ounce, while the actively traded March silver futures contract was up 10.5 cents to settle at $5.205 an ounce.
The Commerce Department yesterday reported retail sales for December up 0.8%, or roughly double the level of increase that most analysts had expected.
"That gave a boost to the entire metals complex," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
Meanwhile, huge gains in grain futures prices drove a surge in the Commodity Research Bureau's index of commodity prices, which settled at 227.97, up 2.54 for the day.
Strength in this widely watched index often is interpreted as an early hint of an upturn in inflation.
According to some news reports, an economic policy document of the African National Congress has called for reverting South Africa's vast mineral wealth to national control.
The ANC is widely expected to win conclusive victories when black South Africans go to the polls on April 27 to elect a new government.
South Africa is the source of much of the world's gold supply.
Analysts acknowledged yesterday that the reports about possible nationalization of the country's gold mines may have pressured gold prices upward, but they said the rally was driven primarily by other factors.
"Nobody was talking about this ANC thing in the markets," said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
Probably more influential on silver prices yesterday were indications that supplies of silver are declining in Comex-approved warehouses.
Comex stocks were reported to have declined by 1.4 million ounces on Wednesday and 500,000 yesterday, leaving stocks at an unusually low 257.3 million ounces.
"This conveys ideas that physical demand for silver is picking up," Mr. Savaiko said.
Commodity funds, or managed pools of investors' money, helped drive yesterday's rally in precious-metals markets, buying futures contracts as prices rose through significant levels.
"The rally was highly technical in nature," Mr. O'Neill said.
"We had a spurt of buying that came into the silver late in the day."
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Grain futures prices leaped higher, as expected, in the wake of the U.S. Agriculture Department's gloomy final report on the 1993-94 U.S. crop.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, soybeans for March delivery were up 25.75 cents to $7.195 a bushel; March corn rose 5.25 cents to $3.10 a bushel; and March wheat climbed 4.25 cents to $3.92 a bushel.
The USDA estimated last summer's grain crops at an anemic 6.34 billion bushels of corn, 1.8 billion bushels of soybeans and 2.4 billion bushels of wheat.
In the next few weeks, traders will monitor feed usage of grain, which needs to drop in order to ensure that enough grain is left for human consumption.
ENERGY: News reports that Iraq continues to refuse a United Nations offer of a one-time sale of $1.6 billion of oil lifted February crude-oil futures prices by 18 cents a barrel in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
February crude settled at $14.51 a barrel.
Iraq has been banned from world oil markets since it invaded Kuwait in August 1990.
But the U.N. has for some time held out the possibility of a one-time oil sale for humanitarian reasons.
Iraq, generally, has been holding out for sanctions to be lifted completely.
Oil markets also continued to be affected by the threat that MG Corp., a big futures player, will have to liquidate large positions if a bank group fails to agree to rescue MG's parent, Metallgesellschaft.
The German company has said it could learn this weekend whether it has the bank group's agreement.
Meanwhile, U.S. Department of Energy data echoed an earlier bullish industry report on crude inventories.
