The potential for a clash between Russia and Ukraine sharpened yesterday as voters in Ukraine's autonomous republic of Crimea sent an angry signal that they would rather tie their future to their traditional overlords in Moscow than to Kiev.
With votes still being counted in the runoff election for Crimea's newly created presidency, it looked likely that voters on this peninsula in Ukraine had handed a big win to a pro-Russian secessionist candidate, Yuri Meshkov.
Awaiting victory in his campaign headquarters at the Simferopol Society of Afghanistan Veterans, a low building decorated with the blue, white and red Crimean flag, Mr. Meshkov said that his aim in campaigning to break free of Kiev is not to launch Crimea into conflict but "to save ourselves from it."
Though the streets of Simferopol were quiet, tension here has been evident during an election campaign in which at least four political figures have been murdered, including the sole Tatar deputy to Crimea's parliament, a local deputy of Ukraine's parliament and spokesman for the Black Sea Fleet, which is based in Crimea's port of Sevastopol and is claimed by both Russia and Ukraine.
To protect himself from attack, Mr. Meshkov has enlisted the services of more than a dozen bodyguards, who stroll the cramped rooms of the Afghan Veterans club wearing flak jackets and cradling Kalashnikov rifles.
The tall, trim 49-year-old Mr. Meshkov says he wants to unhitch the Crimean peninsula from Ukraine's post-Soviet economic free fall, which on its current course of 90% monthly inflation and zero reform, he warns, is speeding all Ukraine toward "chaos" and "civil war."
Mr. Meshkov's published campaign platform takes his policy a step further, promising Crimea a referendum that could "lead to the re-creation of unity with Russia."
Up north in the Ukrainian capital of Kiev, President Leonid Kravchuk was threatening last week that he would overrule Crimea's election results should they point toward secession.
This mounting showdown between Kiev and Crimea was among the reasons that Central Intelligence Agency Director James Woolsey in testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee last week pinpointed Ukraine, and Crimea in particular, as a site of "potential crisis."
The fear is that Russia, which has been increasingly prone to meddle in its former fellow Soviet states, might back a Crimean bid for secession from Ukraine.
This would scotch the deal signed by Presidents Clinton, Yeltsin and Kravchuk in Moscow earlier this month for Ukraine to ship its nuclear missiles to Russia for dismantling.
Behind the rising tensions lies a tangled history, in which the political fictions that helped underpin Soviet power have wrought trouble in the post-Soviet realm.
Crimea, long part of Russia, was given to Ukraine in 1954 by Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev as a token of friendship.
It was a meaningless gift at the time, hailed by the then-Soviet Ukraine as a "clear illustration of the limitless trust and sincere love of the Russian people for the Ukrainian people."
When Ukraine gained independence in 1991, the redrawn border suddenly came to life.
Today, some 70% of Crimea's people consider themselves ethnic Russians, stranded in a Ukraine deteriorating so fast that from here Russia looks rich.
"We are plunged into poverty right now," said a mechanical engineer, Viktor Sidoryenko, explaining why he had just cast his ballot at a Simferopol polling station for Mr. Meshkov.
Another voter just behind him, Valentina Moroz, says she too voted for Mr. Meshkov because her former Russian ruble pension was enough to live on.
Today, says Ms. Moroz, her 500,000 Ukrainian coupons a month buy only bread and milk.
A visit to Mr. Meshkov's rival in the two-man presidential runoff, Nykola Bagrov, the pro-Ukrainian speaker of the Crimean parliament, suggests why many Crimeans are desperate enough to risk supporting Mr. Meshkov's secessionist platform.
Sitting in his vast parliamentary office, equipped with seven telephones and a 54-volume set of Lenin's works, Mr. Bagrov has no hope to offer.
"Everything I could do for Crimea I have done," he says, blaming "the hard economic situation in Crimea" on "the dragging of reforms in Kiev."
At least, says Mr. Bagrov, "I was honest."
He adds, "The time will come when Meshkov will have to answer the people's questions."
That time may be coming this week.
Poised to try to deliver on his promise of a return to Russia, Mr. Meshkov has begun wavering.
Since winning 38.5% of the vote in the first round of the election two weeks ago, compared with Mr. Bagrov's 17% in a field of six candidates, Mr. Meshkov has stopped talking about a straight switch of allegiance to Russia and started playing up a bid for economic independence.
"I would like to bring the ruble to Crimea," he said yesterday.
The timing of his promised referendum, Mr. Meshkov explained, will "depend on the situation after the election," including "Kiev's reaction."
Earlier Mr. Meshkov had said he might hold the referendum March 27, to coincide with Ukraine's parliamentary elections.
For Russia, watching the rifts grow ever wider in Ukraine, the hope seems to be that Crimea will come Moscow's way whether Mr. Meshkov backpedals or not, bringing with it the Black Sea Fleet.
Speaking to the Russian parliament last week, the chairman of the State Duma's Committee for Commonwealth of Independent States Affairs, Konstantin Zatulin, said "nobody wants to steal Crimea from Ukraine overnight."
