Heating oil futures plunged more than three cents a gallon on the promise of a thaw in the frigid weather in the Northeast U.S.
That pulled the props from under world oil markets, and prices of crude oil and other fuels also plummeted.
In U.S. futures trading, crude oil for March delivery fell 59 cents to settle at $14.13 a barrel.
That was the lowest settlement price since late December for the so-called prompt-month crude traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
In U.S. oil fields, meanwhile, some refiners were reducing the prices they post for West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, by 50 cents a barrel.
And, on London's International Petroleum Exchange, Brent blend crude futures closed yesterday between 30 cents and 40 cents a barrel lower.
Published reports that Saudi Arabia won't commit to a second-quarter cut in its oil production, despite weekend appeals from others in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, contributed to the declines in crude prices.
"Until OPEC readdresses the oil overhang that's anticipated for the second quarter, the market is going to be under psychological pressure," said Peter Beutel, president of Cameron Hanover Inc., a New York-based energy research and trading firm.
But he and others agreed that yesterday's sell-off in world oil markets was mostly triggered by a sudden weakening in U.S. heating oil futures.
Very cold weather over the U.S. in recent weeks had drained much of the excess from fuel inventories and had held a floor under heating oil prices.
But the heating oil market often softens this time of the year in the U.S. -- between Valentine's Day and Presidents Day -- as traders begin looking ahead to spring and repositioning themselves for the shift in demand for fuels.
Yesterday, heating oil prices began falling steeply after a National Weather Service forecast of warmer temperatures in the Northeast after the weekend's heavy snowfall.
In heavy trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, heating oil for March delivery dropped 3.16 cents a gallon to settle at 47.82 cents.
April heating oil was 1.86 cents lower at 44.3 cents a gallon.
In natural gas futures trading, the March contract fell 10.4 cents to settle at $2.252 a million British thermal units.
The April gas contract was down 5.6 cents to $2.18 a million BTUs.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Corn prices settled mixed in the wake of the Agriculture Department's widely expected decision to further reduce its estimate of the U.S. corn stockpile, which is already at its tightest level since the mid-1970s.
The department last week cut its one-month-old forecast of the Aug. 31 corn supply to 777 million bushels from 802 million bushels.
The U.S. had 2.1 billion bushels of corn left over in August 1993.
The grain supply reaches its lowest level of the year in August because the harvest begins to replenish supplies in September.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for March delivery slipped 0.25 cents a bushel to settle at $2.98 a bushel.
Supplies are tight because record rain and flooding across the Midwest last year reduced the corn harvest by 33%.
Farmers in states such as Wisconsin will have to import unusually large amounts of corn from other states in order to feed their livestock.
Spot shortages are also expected in several counties across the Midwest this year.
PRECIOUS METALS: The dollar's swoon against the Japanese yen was a boost to precious-metals prices -- but not as much as might have been expected, analysts said.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery rose $3.90 to $385.60 an ounce, and the price of the silver contract for March delivery was up 9.5 cents to $5.35 an ounce.
However, "the metals are not receiving the amount of support you might expect," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"Given the magnitude of movement in the yen and European currencies, the response of precious metals was tame.
It makes me suspect that there won't be any really strong rallies based on currency situations."
The price of gold has been mired in a $380-to-$390-an-ounce trading range for weeks.
