Say what you will about President and Mrs. Clinton, they don't lack for brass.
The couple who appointed a protegee and friend to supervise Madison Guaranty S&L in Little Rock now want a chum of the First Lady to regulate American banks.
Does anyone else find this odd?
In Arkansas, Beverly Bassett Schaffer was the Clinton appointee who gave Madison a regulatory pass, informing Mrs. Clinton with a "Dear Hillary" letter.
In Washington, Ricki Tigert is Mr. Clinton's nominee to lead the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
Time magazine has reported that "Hillary's favorite activity" at Renaissance Weekend each year is "hanging out with friends, including FDIC nominee Ricki Tigert."
Every president appoints pals, but this nomination is notable because it fits a pattern of Clinton regulatory cronyism that produced Whitewater-Madison in Arkansas and is now migrating to the Beltway.
Combine this pattern with the Clinton Treasury's remarkable proposal to unite all U.S. bank regulation under one agency, thus grabbing power from the independent Federal Reserve, and at least some questions deserve to be asked.
For starters, what's going on here?
Perhaps Ms. Tigert will turn out to be a tiger of independence.
But the Beltway attorney sounded more like a White Housecat at her Senate confirmation hearings on Tuesday.
North Carolina's Lauch Faircloth and New York's Al D'Amato gave her several chances to say she'd recuse herself from any matter involving the Clintons.
Ms. Tigert refused to recuse, offering lawyer-like evasions.
And she wasn't even asked tough questions, such as what role she played in monitoring BCCI during her seven years as a Federal Reserve lawyer.
Ms. Tigert was "associate general counsel" when that corrupt banking empire infiltrated the U.S. financial system.
Moreover, Ms. Tigert was slavish in endorsing the Clinton administration's bank regulatory heist.
This is the proposal to consolidate all regulatory powers into one new agency, ostensibly "independent" but in practice beholden to Treasury.
The new banking czar would in effect be another Clinton pal from their Oxford and Yale days, Eugene Ludwig, the current comptroller of the currency.
This power grab is being sold as more "reinventing government," and some streamlining is desirable.
But maybe politics also explains a lot.
One big supporter is Senate Banking Chairman Don Riegle, who perfected the link between politics and regulation with his exertions for Charlie Keating.
Mr. Riegle, who doesn't dare stand for re-election this year, wants to go down in history for something more than being Charlie's angel.
Two former Riegle aides are now pushing "consolidation" from key positions at Treasury and the comptroller's office.
The Treasury aide, Richard Carnell, actually wrote much of the burdensome financial regulation of recent years.
So now he is flacking a proposal that would in effect give him more power, all in the name of easing the overregulation he helped create!
He's not short of brass either.
Having a single, all-powerful regulator would also enhance the, well, opportunities for political mediation.
Last week Mr. Carnell exulted in public that "the proposal will give consumer interests something they have never had before: a federal regulator that takes them seriously."
Parse that sentence: By "consumer interests" he means not Joe Depositor but interest groups and Nader-type lobbies trying to allocate bank lending via politics.
Fear of such power is one reason bankers are resisting all of this, or at least most of them are.
One laggard so far is the American Bankers Association (ABA), a fact that has raised eyebrows because of the presence of Curt Bradbury on the 23-member ABA board.
Mr. Bradbury is the CEO of Arkansas's Worthen Banking Corp., which lent Mr. Clinton's campaign cash at a time of need in 1992.
Worthen has been in a spat with the Fed, which has been tougher on Worthen than the comptroller and would lose clout under the Clinton proposal.
Donald Ogilvie, the ABA's man in Washington, says Mr. Bradbury hasn't dictated ABA policy, which he expects will be decided next week.
If the ABA blinks, eyebrows will stay raised.
The biggest political play here, however, is the slap at the Fed, one Beltway institution the Clinton team doesn't yet dominate.
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan and his colleagues are fighting the Riegle-Clinton power grab, and in unusually blunt terms.
This, along with banker resistance, means Congress probably won't go along.
Unless, that is, Mr. Clinton can change the Fed.
At least that's the message sent by Frank Newman, a senior Treasury aide, when he, Mr. Carnell and Mr. Ludwig met last month with the executive committee of the Independent Bankers Association of America, which is fighting the Clinton plan.
Mr. Newman said the administration will get three Fed appointments in the coming years.
"The message was, if we don't get you now, we'll get you later," says a witness.
With Fed Vice Chairman David Mullins's surprise departure this week, that later could be even sooner.
Every president needs pals in high places, but maybe not in regulatory places if you've taken on as much Whitewater as this president has.
If Mr. Clinton is going to insist on naming cronies as the nation's top financial regulators, then maybe he can at least stop trying to give them all of the regulatory power.
People might get the wrong idea.
