By hosting representatives from the Group of Seven leading industrialized countries at a jobs conference in Detroit that ends today, President Clinton runs the risk of promoting three myths about the nature of the global employment problem and how to respond to it.
The first myth is that all of the G-7 members face the same problem.
There are certainly parallels: downsizing of public and private work forces; defense cuts; technological innovation that boosts productivity at the expense of jobs.
But at a private forum of international political and business leaders, John Yochelson of the Center for Strategic and International Studies and I found a clear consensus that there are overwhelming divergences in the organization and flexibility of these countries' labor markets.
The brightening picture in the U.S., for example, strikes a vivid contrast to the bleak outlook in Europe, where a 12% jobless rate and marginal economic growth is forecast.
The more flexible, entrepreneurial U.S. economy has been the world's top job producer for the past two decades -- absorbing 20 million additional workers -- and the U.S. economic recovery has renewed confidence in the market's capacity to create more jobs.
The chief U.S. problem is "qualitative": underemployment caused by corporate layoffs and big increases in the number of people working less than they would like.
Mr. Clinton is correctly concerned about a growing differential in income and skills and the disproportionate number of largely urban, minority youth who are unable to compete for full-time, better-paying jobs.
Across the Atlantic, the principal concern is "quantitative": massive, long-term unemployment.
Europe's heavily unionized and rigidly regulated economy has realized scant job growth during the past 20 years.
Governments there have slowed the departure of ailing industries by throwing government funds at them, and European economies have underperformed and visibly lost competitiveness in key sectors.
Many European governments have embarked on ambitious privatization plans designed to stimulate growth.
But to sell state-owned enterprises, governments must slash employment rolls -- which only adds to costly welfare payments that are already strangling job creation.
Japan, meanwhile, confronts problems different from both Europe and the U.S.: principally, an aging population and an appreciating currency.
But Japan also has key advantages not enjoyed by the rest of the G-7.
First, it remains largely insulated from a heavy influx of foreign workers.
Second, it has a very low jobless rate (2.5%).
And, third, the Japanese government has more money to spend on fiscal stimulus than any other major nation.
A second flawed premise of the Detroit conference is that governments are central to solving the unemployment problem.
This tete-a-tete among senior G-7 officials sends a signal that they can and should assume the role of job creators.
That couldn't be more off-base.
Even Mr. Clinton, after failing to push through a fiscal stimulus plan, sees the limits of the federal budget and recognizes that a vital private sector is critical in meeting the jobs challenge.
But this fundamental point is likely to be lost in White House efforts to meld micro-policies affecting employment with macro-tools of fiscal adjustment into a grand strategy to combat joblessness.
As Europe has clearly shown, government is the problem, not the solution.
While the European private sector would like to push government out of the way, both national authorities and the Brussels-based bureaucracy of the European Union are only grudgingly attempting to do so.
The European Commission's recent blueprint for stimulating growth and jobs, for example, balanced its call for privatization and deregulation with a proposal for vast new government expenditures on transportation and information services.
Furthermore in Germany, which represents more than 30% of the EU's gross domestic product, the Bundesbank has narrowed options for economic expansion throughout Europe.
It rigidly adheres to its own anti-inflationary priorities, easing monetary policy at a pace that its European partners find damaging.
So much for Detroit's reliance on government cooperation.
The third misconception is that each of the participating nations brings some success on the jobs front that the others should emulate.
Mr. Clinton, for example, is considering the German model for job training -- and health care -- without taking account of the larger government-industry relationship in which Germany's distinctive programs function.
They cannot be duplicated in the U.S. without fundamentally increasing government intervention in the economy.
But it is precisely this intrusive government role that inhibits growth in Europe.
When it comes to meeting the jobs challenge, the proper prescription for change is not "convergence."
Rather, the G-7 officials should distinguish between constructive and destructive policies.
The Detroit summit should point the way toward an escape from some of the stifling mandates of governments and unions.
This would increase the mobility of the work force, and be a true elixir for job growth.
Ms. Kaslow covers economics for the Christian Science Monitor in Washington.
