"We ought to have confidence in our nation's attorney general -- confidence that she {Janet Reno} can conduct criminal investigations with independence and without the intrusion of politics."
-- Sen. Robert Dole on the Senate floor, Nov. 18, 1993
"She's {Ms. Reno's} wasted a lot of time dragging her feet, and it's time she moved and appointed an independent counsel."
-- Sen. Dole on "Meet the Press," Jan. 2, 1994
The year isn't even a week old and Bob Dole already is a candidate for the political hypocrisy award of 1994.
What transpired in 45 days was that President Clinton and Ms. Clinton's relationship with a failed savings and loan in the 1980s began to dominate the headlines; Bob Dole, who blocked extending the independent counsel legislation in 1992 when a Republican was in the White House, smelled blood.
The political context is Washington returning from the holidays readying for a rough year while a couple potential scandals circle the first family.
Some early conclusions from all this are:
-- The Clinton sex scandal is dying a well-deserved death, but the financial allegations may have legs.
The public, to the surprise of cynics, has much less interest than the press in stories about Bill Clinton's alleged infidelities as governor of Arkansas.
The story was seamy, if not specious, from the start.
The essence, as most everyone knows by now, involved several former Arkansas state troopers, represented by a Clinton-hating Republican politico, telling how the former Arkansas governor used them to facilitate sexual assignations.
Titillation aside, it seems obvious that a) the stories added little to the knowledge voters possessed during the 1992 election that Bill Clinton had a philandering past; b) the allegations, at the core true, were probably embellished to make a more marketable story; and c) the most serious charge -- that the president may have tried to silence accusers with job offers -- was flimsy at best.
By contrast, the S&L flap won't fade as easily.
The central issue is: Did the now-defunct Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan illegally funnel political and personal funds to the Clintons in the 1980s?
The head of Madison, James McDougal, and the Clintons were partners in a separate land development company, Whitewater Development Co., which also may have illicitly gotten money from a small business investment company run by David Hale, whom Gov. Clinton appointed a state judge.
The plot thickened following the tragic suicide last July of Vince Foster, a White House counsel and the Clintons' former lawyer; within hours, presidential aides hastily spirited Whitewater files out of Mr. Foster's office.
The Clintons -- the first lady once received a $2,000-a-month retainer as Madison's attorney -- deny any improprieties and say they actually lost almost $69,000 from the Whitewater investment.
Yet a report asserting this by a Clinton friend last year is flawed and there are key records missing.
Meanwhile, Mr. Hale, under indictment himself, privately is trying to cut a deal claiming that he has some incriminating documents.
-- This is exactly the sort of case for which the independent counsel measure was intended.
When interviewed, with promise of confidentiality, two top lawyers, both with criminal and financial expertise though not involved in this case, separately arrive at the same deduction: The Clintons may have engaged in ethical transgressions, but the possibility of any criminal violation is far-fetched.
The Clintons should have avoided any deals with Mr. McDougal, a well-known hustler in Arkansas political circles, but the first family has no history of seeking big bucks or cutting shady deals.
But this is why a truly independent counsel, to investigate serious allegations by very top executive-branch, and sometimes congressional, figures, is necessary: to establish innocence as well as guilt.
"The appearance of justice having been done is equally as important as justice having been done," says Sen. William Cohen (R., Maine), a champion of independent counsel legislation.
Conservative critics forget it was their hero, Ed Meese, who requested an independent counsel back in 1984 and was cleared of any criminal conduct.
Legislation extending the law is essential.
A measure has passed the Senate, and the House expects it to do likewise by early February.
An undeniable problem is that the statute of limitations on some of the Madison allegations expires in March, but even the current investigation -- being conducted by a highly respected career official -- is unlikely to wrap up in two months.
What Sen. Dole proposes is for Attorney General Reno, on her own, to appoint a so-called "independent" counsel.
That person, of course, would report to her and Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell, whose father-in-law got a huge loan forgiveness from Madison.
That's like setting up a blind trust that you can peek at.
If a Justice Department-designated counsel issues a report exonerating the Clintons, one already can hear the Kansas Republican questioning the "independence" of the conclusion.
-- With Democrats running the executive branch for the first time in a dozen years, Republican views on executive privileges and perquisites are in a metamorphic free fall.
Remember those days when Republicans passionately protested against any encroachment on executive authority?
That started to end about 351 days ago -- when Bill Clinton was sworn in.
A mainstay in the old argument was opposition to counsels truly independent of the executive branch.
Now conservatives are calling for independent counsels to investigate allegations not only against the Clintons but separately against Commerce Secretary Ron Brown.
Similarly, on foreign policy, remember those impassioned conservatives who protested against any efforts to tie the president's hands on Nicaragua or El Salvador or Beirut during the 1980s?
Suddenly, for Bob Dole and others, the principles changed this year when it came to Somalia and a Democratic president.
"These Republicans don't even come up with an argument for changing their position," notes Rep. Barney Frank (D., Mass.).
"They just figure the public doesn't have any memory."
In a variation on this separation-of-powers issue, here's one more prediction: If the GOP picks up 20 or 25 House seats this year and a half-dozen Senate seats -- putting them within striking distance of congressional control -- watch all the conservative clamor for term limits follow the same fate as worries about encroaching on executive authority with measures like independent counsels.
