French, the language of diplomacy.
Italian, the language of tragic opera, love.
Portuguese, the language of . . . ?
As far as modern languages go, Portuguese just doesn't get any respect.
So says Jean-Pierre Van Deth, president of Expolangues, a Paris-based association that encourages the study of foreign tongues.
But it's a bum rap.
That's why Expolangues chose to highlight Portuguese at its 1994 Conference last week in Paris.
"It's the language of travel, adventure, discovery," says Mr. Van Deth in French, his preferred tongue.
(He says he can understand Portuguese but doesn't speak it.)
Portuguese is the world's eighth most spoken language -- the native tongue of 183 million people.
Only about 10.2 million of these people live in Portugal, but Portuguese is the official language of Brazilians -- who number 154 million -- as well as the folks in Mozambique, Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau and Sao Tome e Principe.
Those countries recently formed their own union (the Community of Portuguese Speaking Nations) to increase ties between themselves and to make their voices -- in Portuguese -- heard on the international scene.
Among European languages used around the world, Portuguese ranks third, behind English and Spanish, says Mr. Van Deth, who invited Portuguese-speaking writers and rock musicians from various countries to the Expolangues conference in Paris to showcase the language's finer points.
Fans of Portuguese have also succeeded in getting Lisbon named Europe's Cultural Capital of 1994.
But the language still faces an uphill battle.
Except perhaps for "samba" and "bossa nova," few Portuguese words have worked their way into English usage.
"You will find Portuguese expressions in Japan because we were the first to arrive there by sea," says Maria Jose Rau of the Camoes Portuguese Institute in Paris.
Such as?
Well, Ms. Rau couldn't remember any offhand.
Even Ms. Rau admits Portuguese's nasal vowels and "sh" sounds are difficult for non-native speakers.
But spoken the way it is, say, in Brazil, "it can be very melodious.
It's almost sung," she says.
So forget Japanese, Chinese and Arabic, and try Portuguese, Mr. Van Deth urges.
"This is a language of today -- a language of countries emerging in importance," he says.
