Just one day after flaunting a minor legal victory over General Motors Corp., Volkswagen AG was forced to eat its words about broad exoneration in an ongoing industrial espionage dispute.
In a humiliating reversal of statements made Wednesday, VW conceded yesterday that a Frankfurt district court judge never said there was no proof GM documents made their way to VW and promised not to repeat that false assertion.
On Wednesday, the court dismissed GM's case to get seven of its former staffers temporarily barred from working at rival VW.
Upon that decision, the German auto maker had issued a triumphant statement touting its success in the civil case.
VW's statement also claimed District Court Judge Guenther Kinnel had added in his oral statements that criminal allegations that GM documents made their way to VW "could not be proven."
VW spokesmen went on to suggest that the judge thereby exonerated VW not only of the labor-poaching charges, but also in the separate, broader scandal over whether former GM purchasing chief J. Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua absconded with sensitive GM documents when he jumped to the German car maker last March.
After these assertions were brought to the attention of Judge Kinnel, he called VW's lawyers to his chambers and encouraged the company to issue a public retraction.
VW did so, saying it made a "regrettable mistake" in publicizing remarks the judge never actually made.
VW said its statement Wednesday "contained a misinterpretation of the oral statements of the judge . . . .
He did not make any statement on the state of evidence concerning whether secret documents reached Volkswagen AG."
VW offered no explanation as to how the misinterpretation of the judge's remarks came about.
Judge Kinnel couldn't be reached for comment.
A spokesman for the Darmstadt public prosecutor's office, which has been investigating the industrial-espionage allegations for months, called it "complete rubbish" for VW to imply that a judge in a civil court could or would make a statement having any bearing on the criminal investigations.
The question of industrial espionage isn't in the jurisdiction of the civil court and was therefore not commented on in the 17-page decision.
The public relations blunder comes as the latest in a series of actions that undermine VW's credibility with the public.
When the industrial-espionage allegations first erupted, Mr. Lopez and the seven men who followed him to VW said they had taken nothing with them "except what they had in their heads."
After boxes stuffed full of GM documents were found, the story was amended: Documents may have been taken, they said, but they weren't secret documents.
Mr. Lopez later confirmed that he and his colleagues had shredded many GM documents shortly after leaving the company to prevent them from inadvertently falling into VW hands.
For now, the investigation continues.
However, no charges have been filed, and Mr. Lopez denies any wrongdoing.
