Commerce Secretary Ron Brown is recommending that telecommunications legislation in the Senate incorporate changes that could hasten competition in the cable and telephone industries.
In draft remarks prepared for testimony today before the Commerce Committee, Mr. Brown broadly endorses the bill that was introduced this month by Chairman Ernest Hollings (D., S.C.).
While emphasizing the "broad level of consensus" between the goals of the legislation and those of the Clinton administration, Mr. Brown suggests that the bill incorporate the administration's plan to set up a flexible, streamlined regulatory framework for companies that provide interactive video services.
Beyond that, the testimony obtained by The Wall Street Journal offers changes to several provisions, and pledges that the administration will work with lawmakers to forge a consensus.
Among other things, Mr. Brown suggests eliminating the bill's specific details on a so-called universal service system and instead substituting more general guidance to state and federal regulators.
The universal service provisions of the bill are a top priority for Sen. Hollings, who comes from a largely rural state, and whether he will agree to changes is uncertain.
In large part, the provisions are designed to ensure that customers in rural areas can obtain telecommunications services, especially as new competitors enter the market for local phone service.
While Mr. Brown urges fewer details on how to accomplish universal service, he suggests more-specific language governing how telephone companies allow emerging competitors and other communications companies to connect with their networks.
That, he argues, could help competition take hold soon.
Along the same lines, Mr. Brown recommends immediately eliminating state rules that bar competition to the telephone companies.
The legislation allows those rules to stay in place for two years while a universal service program is established.
To give cable companies more competition sooner, Mr. Brown suggests letting phone companies build networks that can transmit video signals and make channel capacity available to programmers that aren't affiliated with the phone company.
"The requirement should create market opportunities for competing providers of video services," he says, "thereby reducing prices and expanding the diversity of services available to television viewers."
The commerce secretary also proposes changing the market test that would let the seven regional Bell companies provide long-distance services.
Instead of Sen. Hollings's requirement that the Baby Bells meet several conditions, including proving that they face actual competition, Mr. Brown urges a Justice Department review.
Before allowing a Baby Bell to provide long-distance service, department officials would have to find that the company posed "no substantial possibility of harm" to the long-distance market.
