High-quality, affordable, readily available day care?
Forget it.
It can't happen.
While offering all working parents first-rate child-care services at moderate fees appears to be an enlightened response to inescapable modern realities, it actually is a totally impractical solution based on a dismal sense of defeatism.
Let's take a look at the real realities.
By nature, high-quality day care must be enormously expensive and somewhat restricted.
Regulations in model states stipulate a maximum of three infants or four toddlers to one care-giver, and many child development specialists would contend that 2-to-1 and 3-to-1 are more appropriate ratios.
Furthermore, the care-givers should possess outstanding personal qualities, have substantial training and experience, and be willing to stay with the job so as to ensure an acceptable level of consistency for the children.
Given the required ratios, and given that competent care-givers deserve commensurate salaries, it is clear that the cost of high-quality day care gets out of hand in a hurry.
If you add in the other financial factors, from facilities and equipment to juice and cookies, you're talking about amounts of money that are well beyond the means of most families, that businesses can't contribute as they struggle to remain competitive, and that government won't be able to subsidize while striving toward tax relief and deficit reduction.
Even if the funds were miraculously found, where would the vast supply of day-care personnel come from?
Given those ratios, a large percentage of working parents would have to end up working as care-givers for the children of other working parents.
It would be considerably more cost-effective, and would make a lot more sense, if most parents simply opted to take care of their own infants and toddlers.
Which brings us to the subject of choice.
The notion that having two paychecks is now a "necessity" is nonsense.
Sure, a lot of poverty-stricken and single parents need day care to survive, but too many of the parents clamoring for such services -- and thereby stretching a system beyond its capacity -- are merely seeking to sustain a lifestyle that their own parents only dreamed about a generation ago.
And no matter what level of income some couples decide is insufficient, you will always find others who conclude that it's enough to get by for the few years their children will be infants and toddlers.
Although every family has the right to set its own priorities in this regard, placing child care comparatively low on one's personal agenda does not bestow the right to insist that it be granted a top spot on the nation's political agenda.
Of course, it would be grossly unfair to classify the majority of middle-class parents pleading for day care as selfish, child-neglecting sybarites.
But let's be honest about this.
Economics often is just a smokescreen.
If earning a few bucks to make ends meet were the major motivation, we would be hearing much more about such measures as part-time and at-home jobs, flex-time and job sharing.
The real issue underlying the increasing demand for day care is equal opportunity for participation and recognition in the workplace.
There is nothing wrong with someone feeling that the rewards of child-rearing can't completely compensate for major sacrifices in professional fulfillment and career advancement.
But more day care is a bad answer.
The real solution is twofold.
First, society must be persuaded to recognize the value of parenting, both for the nation as a whole and for individual development.
After all, we have a strong tradition of respecting and rewarding military service.
Those who have spent a few years in the armed forces, as well as those who take regular time off to meet Reserve and National Guard obligations, are given our gratitude; and when it comes to employment and promotion policies, they are given ample credit for the management skills, organizational abilities, self-discipline and other attributes it is assumed they have gleaned from the experience.
Nurturing our citizens of the future is no less critical than protecting our borders, and the lessons learned are no less relevant to the workplace.
There is no reason why people who have devoted some portion of their lives to this essential task should not be held in at least as much esteem as soldiers and sailors.
Second, any and all questions regarding child-care roles and responsibilities must be moved from the exclusive realm of motherhood.
Women will never achieve equality and peace of mind in the workplace until fathers are forced to bear an equal burden at home.
As long as this remains strictly a "women's issue," we will always be dealing with inherently imperfect alternatives.
Those pushing for the simultaneous expansion and improvement of day-care services say that society in general and men in particular will never accept these attitude adjustments.
Sadly, many of them are the same people who 20 or 30 years ago laughed defiantly when they were told that the South would never be desegregated, that student protests would never stop a war, and that little girls would never grow up to be doctors, lawyers, engineers, entrepreneurs, plumbers and coal miners.
Let's stop fooling ourselves and really face the facts.
We have come a long way in the past two or three decades, but we've made only a half-turn toward a full revolution.
Just ask the dedicated day-care personnel currently laboring, at slightly above minimum wage, to cope with ever greater numbers of infants and toddlers.
Mr. Meyerhoff is the executive director of The Epicenter Inc., a family advisory and advocacy agency based in Wellesley Hills, Mass.
