Big brands have never seemed more embattled.
Sales of even the most venerable ones suffered during the prolonged economic slump, when price became consumers' passion, and the challenge from cheaper private-label rivals mounted.
Yet many of the nation's biggest brands performed surprisingly well last year, according to Information Resources Inc.
Supermarket sales of six of the 10 largest supermarket brands fared better in 1993 than they had the year before -- either posting gains or significantly slowing declines.
Among the strongest performers: Campbell's, Oscar Mayer and Tropicana.
The improving fortunes of these billionaire brands indicate that the defensive maneuvers of consumer-products marketers are beginning to pay off.
Some companies are increasing spending on advertising and marketing after years of penny pinching.
Others are tinkering with their product lines -- adding spouts to orange juice containers or making bigger, juicier hot dogs -- in an effort to gain an edge over private-label rivals.
Many companies have also cut the prices of their flagship brands.
"Big brands have battled back," says John McMillin, a food analyst with Prudential Securities Inc.
"There is a greater sense of realism on the part of managers of the big brands that you can't overprice your products."
Mr. McMillin is quick to add, though, that the battle for consumers' loyalty is far from over.
While the momentum of store brands has slowed from the boom years between 1988 and 1992, private-label goods continue to eke out increases in market share.
And sales of private-label products continue to rise in categories that were once considered bastions of brand loyalty, such as cold remedies and feminine-protection products.
Certainly not all of the biggest brands fared well last year.
Supermarket sales of Marlboro cigarettes declined more steeply than they had in the previous period, largely because of price cuts and the fact that consumers are now more likely to buy single cigarette packs in convenience stores than expensive cartons in grocery stores.
Sales of Anheuser-Busch Cos.'
Budweiser beer also took a turn for the worse as mainstream competitors cut prices and consumers bought more fancy beers from regional breweries.
The big marketers themselves are largely to blame for their predicament in recent years.
Throughout the 1980s, they kept their revenue up despite slow population growth by steadily raising prices.
Consumers paid for a while, but during the recession many realized they could make do with less -- or simply buy cheaper store-brand alternatives.
Now, many top marketers say they have learned some hard lessons.
"We've been burned by taking too many price increases," concedes Rob Hawthorne, chief operating officer of Pillsbury Co., a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan PLC.
The Pillsbury brand registered a sales decline of 1.8% in 1993 and dropped below the $1 billion mark.
"We're much more mindful of prices now," he says.
Pillsbury also recently improved such products as its bundt cake mixes, including more fudge with the Tunnel of Fudge flavor and reducing the number of steps in the recipe to three from five.
Managers at Philip Morris Cos.'
Kraft General Foods unit seem similarly chastened.
A few years ago, Kraft Singles cheeses were about 50% more expensive than private-label rivals; today they sell for about 35% more.
The company has also added such varieties as Swiss and Cheddar and begun pushing more contemporary uses for the product, such as microwave quesadillas.
As a result, unit sales of Kraft Singles cheeses edged up slightly during the 52 weeks ended Oct. 10, 1993, after falling during the previous year.
Oscar Mayer, meanwhile, has focused its efforts more tightly on its core prepared meat business, selling a seafood business and discontinuing several lines, such as its Oscar Mayer Zappetites frozen snacks.
The company is also trying to cook up new products that will make consumers feel that its meat products are worth the price.
For example, the company has made its flagship bacon product leaner and launched a bigger wiener called the Big & Juicy.
"There are less expensive alternatives to every product we make," says Bob Eckert, president of Oscar Mayer.
"So we have to add other kinds of value."
Price hasn't been the primary focus for PepsiCo Inc.'s flagship soft drink.
Competition between Coke and Pepsi has kept soda prices low for years: Two liters of Pepsi now cost about 99 cents, about the same as a decade ago.
But the company has returned to the brand's traditional advertising positioning as the choice of a younger generation and focused on such packaging innovations as the easier-to-guzzle Big Slam bottle and cube-shaped cases of soft drink cans that are meant to fit into refrigerators more easily.
"One of the good things to come out of this difficult period is that we're geared up to deliver value big time," says Jeff Campbell, senior vice president of brand development for Pepsi-Cola Co.
"If the economy improves and spring ever comes, we'll be set."
1993, and Oct. 11, 1992
Source: Information Resources Inc.
