Consider, for a moment, the Texas lottery.
Not the penny-ante one that gets all the attention these days.
But the one with the real money, the one worth hundreds of millions of dollars.
This year's winner?
Amoco Corp.
The Chicago-based energy company, with plants in Texas City and Galveston, won two of the top picks in a statewide drawing held earlier this year to determine which companies are eligible for tax-exempt financing.
Amoco's draw guarantees it at least $78 million in tax-free bonds this year.
Amoco's coup is part of an annual scramble by energy companies, apartment builders, student-loan organizations and others to win a piece of an estimated $900 million in tax-exempt financing for private companies.
Although no tax dollars are used to repay the bonds, federal guidelines limit the amount of tax-exempt bonds a state can issue for private use.
The theory behind the program: Many of the projects serve a public purpose.
Amoco, for instance, will use its $78 million to finance pollution-control and solid-waste facilities.
As a result, limited tax-exempt bonds are issued by various public agencies or special issuing corporations at lower-than-market interest rates, and are then repaid by the companies.
But because demand for the financing far exceeds the limit, state officials have resorted to a lottery drawing to decide who wins the coveted bonds.
This year, a total of 62 private entities vied for the money in four categories: mortgage-revenue bonds (to provide mortgages for low- and moderate-income home buyers), industrial-development bonds (to help small manufacturing companies expand), multifamily-housing bonds (to build and renovate affordable rental apartments), and a catchall "other" category that includes pollution-control facilities and student-loan bonds.
Of the contenders, 27 were chosen to receive financing.
Other winners this year include Texaco Inc., White Plains, N.Y.; Hoechst Celanese Corp., Somerville, N.J.; and the Comanche Peak nuclear power plant owned by Texas Utilities Co., Dallas.
Each of the companies is eligible for $50 million in tax-exempt financing for Texas-based projects.
In addition, the Southeast Texas Housing Finance Corp. in Pasadena can now issue up to $25 million for six different low-income apartment projects, and Grapevine's Trencor Jetco Inc. will receive $8 million to expand its excavating-equipment-manufacturing company.
The big losers this year?
Nonprofit higher-education authorities that purchase student loans from banks.
For the first time since anyone can remember, no student-loan authority was among the top picks in the bond lottery.
Tax-exempt financing, which carries an interest rate about 1.5% to 2% lower than market rates, is considered the lifeblood of student-loan agencies, which rely on the bonds to borrow at a lower interest rate than the rate on the loans they buy from the banks.
Without the agencies to buy the loans, the banks are less likely to make them to students.
"It truly is the luck of the draw," says Jeanne Talerico, who administers the private activity bond program for the Bond Review Board.
"I can't think of a year that they've all been so low on the list."
Although student-loan officials say they aren't panicking yet, another year without the financing could begin to curtail the availability of student loans in Texas.
For the Central Texas Higher Education Authority in San Marcos, this is the third year in a row that it has fallen out of the money.
The agency drew 12th place, but currently only the top eight will receive financing.
"We're not in a critical situation yet, but it could happen," says Robert W. Martenis, the authority's executive director.
"We'll be in a tight-money situation by the beginning of next year."
The short-term solution for some agencies is to borrow money at market rates.
But that often results in borrowing at higher rates than the low-interest student loans collect.
That can continue for a while, but eventually the authorities can't afford to continue the subsidy.
The Brazos Higher Education Authority in Waco already has secured $30 million in new credit at market rates to get by.
"We feel like if we can just break even on our cost on the lines of credit, we'll do that," says secretary/treasurer Murray Watson.
But Brazos has reason to be optimistic.
By drawing 10th place in its lottery category, the agency has a chance of receiving at least some financing, if any of the top eight picks falls out.
Firms have until late April and early May to finalize the financing.
Those that don't, lose their place, and the allocation goes to the next in line.
But the financing drought for the student-loan agencies has led some critics to call for a review of the lottery.
They are especially bothered by the fact that the student-loan organizations and the energy companies are lumped together in the same "other" category.
This year, requests in that category totaled about $1 billion, nearly three times the $378.6 million in financing that was available.
"I think the state Legislature needs to look at this," says Mr. Martenis.
"To be mixed in with Amoco and Citgo and other oil companies doesn't make sense."
But most agree that the lottery system, which began in 1990, is better than the old method.
Then, financing was allocated on a first-come, first-served basis.
Many companies hired security guards before Christmas to wait in line outside state offices until the January application date.
"People who don't get financing are disappointed," says Jerry Dunn, assistant general manager of the Gulf Coast Waste Disposal Authority, the government agency that will issue the bonds for four of the top eight energy companies selected.
"But I don't think anybody is complaining about the inherent fairness."
Standard & Poor's Corp. said it affirmed its ratings of triple-B-minus on senior unsecured debt and of A-3 on commercial paper for Northeast Utilities, but the agency revised its rating outlook on the utility to negative from stable.
Northeast Utilities has about $5.9 billion of total debt and preferred stock outstanding.
The negative outlooks for Northeast and its subsidiaries reflect a vast oversupply of power in the Northeast; the relatively weak regional economy; high and increasing utility rates, and the significant concentration of nuclear facilities.
Moreover, the utility's Millstone Nuclear Station, although currently operating well, is still in the process of re-establishing consistent reliable operations, S&P said.
The agency lowered its rating on Public Service Co. of New Hampshire's senior secured debt to double-B-plus from triple-B-minus and preferred stock to double-B-minus from double-B.
S&P also lowered its ratings on North Atlantic Energy Corp.'s senior secured debt to double-B from double-B-plus and senior unsecured debt to double-B-minus from double-B.
Both Public Service and North Atlantic Energy are units of Northeast Utilities.
S&P said it affirmed its triple-B-plus senior secured, triple-B preferred stock, and A-2 commercial paper ratings of Connecticut Light & Power Co.
However, S&P revises its rating outlook on Connecticut L&P to negative from stable.
S&P affirms its triple-B-plus senior secured, triple-B preferred stock, and A-2 commercial paper ratings of Western Massachusetts Electric Co.
Northeast Utilities expressed disappointment at S&P's report.
Both Public Service and North Atlantic Energy are on "significantly improving trends and in almost exactly the same position financially," as projected three years ago, the utility said.
With a healthy cash flow, Public Service has retired $164 million of long-term debt since it was acquired by Northeast Utilities in 1992.
It will pay down an additional $384 million of debt by December 1997, it said.
The utility said it disagrees with S&P, contending that it will continue to show improving trends in its subsidiaries' credit-worthiness.
