The biotechnology industry has launched an aggressive political crusade, arguing that price controls in the Clinton health plan will severely wound businesses' ability to attract critically needed investments.
Company officials want to block a proposal creating a federal board that would haggle with companies over prices charged for newly created prescription medicines.
The companies worry that the board will wind up dictating prices, sharply limiting the returns companies need to justify high-risk investments.
A pricing board "will be catastrophic; it will strangle the industry," says Richard Bagley, chairman and chief executive officer of Immulogic Pharmaceutical Corp. of Waltham, Mass.
"A lot of good technology and promising medical leads will get thrown down the drain."
Mr. Bagley and his peers at other young and small biotech companies are fanning out across their home states, pleading their case to congressional representatives and newspaper editorial boards.
In Washington, several biotech industry lobbyists are meeting quietly with key health staffers in the White House and Congress, suggesting a compromise eliminating the board's ability to mandate prices.
The biotech industry is composed of dozens of mostly small concerns created with venture capital in the past five to 10 years to commercialize advances in genetics.
Company officials bitterly complain that the pricing board is aimed at the large drug makers, such as Merck & Co. or Pfizer Inc., which raised prices sharply throughout the 1980s.
The few biotech medicines currently available are priced high, companies say, to provide premium returns investors seek for high-risk investments and to fuel future research.
"We are being hurt because of the anger at the excessive pricing policies of the big drug companies," says Leonard Schliefer, chief executive at Regeneron Inc. a Tarrytown, N.Y., company seeking drugs against neurological diseases.
No Promises Several government aides say they are sympathetic to the companies' concerns.
They say they are listening to the industry's proposals, but making no promises about the pricing board.
"At the end of the day, we still will need to control spending, especially if, as proposed, the health plan provides universal coverage for outpatient drug bills," one staffer says.
Under the proposed administration plan, the pricing board will review the price a company seeks to charge and evaluate whether it is justified by development costs.
If a company refuses to negotiate, the board, under the authority of the secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, can set the price itself, or refuse to have government insurance plans reimburse for the drug's use.
The biotech lobbyists are hoping Congress will enact their idea, allowing a federal agency to determine if a new drug provides a cost benefit, and then disseminating its findings to private health-insurance plans that would decide whether to fully reimburse for the drug's cost.
"That would allow the marketplace to determine if a drug's price is right or not," says one lobbyist.
Biotech businesses are warning politicians that the prospect of price controls is frightening Wall Street, already skittish about the speculative nature of most biotech projects.
Since last year when the pricing board was first proposed, stock prices of most biotech companies have plummeted.
Biotech officials say lower stock values and nervous investors already have forced companies to scale back or jettison research.
"If a price board really happens, then the whole industry will go out of favor," says Frederic Greenberg of EGS Partners, a New York money management fund.
"Stock value will drop; no one will touch the group."
Biotechnology companies are especially dependent on investor capital since even the successful enterprises have yet to generate a steady flow of products to keep expensive research laboratories humming.
"These firms are ravenous," Mr. Greenberg says.
"They constantly need more cash."
Officials at BIO, the industry's trade group in Washington, are presenting politicians with scenarios of companies already injured by investor anxiety.
They point, for example, to Tanox Biosystem Inc. of Houston, which says it can't raise new money to develop a synthetic antibody to fight off the AIDS virus.
"We have the antibody sitting in the refrigerator," says Herbert Loveless, vice president of clinical development.
But Dr. Loveless says he has been told by investors that in addition to the concern over the cost of developing a project, now "they are worried that you won't be able to get the price you need."
Cryopharm Corp., a six-year-old Pasadena, Calif., company investigating ways to extend the life of stored blood, says difficulty getting new financing forced it to shelve two experimental projects.
Macronex Inc., a private venture-backed company in Research Triangle Park, N.C., says it has been unable to tap new investors to back its asthma and arthritis drug programs.
"Venture funds have told me they are not investing because of health-care reform," says Dennis Burns, Macronex's chief executive.
"They are uncomfortable about my ability to take the company public."
Barry Weinberg, a partner of CW Ventures, a New York venture-capital firm that has helped seed many biotech startups over the years, says "the larger portion of his firm's investments" these days is outside the area of biotech.
Because of the risk of price controls, "the likelihood of getting the kind of returns we need isn't there," Mr. Weinberg says.
"We are making investments in biotech but we're being a lot more careful and it's taking us a lot longer to make up our minds."
Christopher Jennings, a White House health aide, says the Clinton administration wants "very much to support the biotechnology industry."
But he says the administration isn't convinced the industry has financing problems.
Feinstein Partners, a Boston consulting firm, says biotech companies in 1993 raised $2.9 billion in public and private stock offerings, up from $2.5 billion in 1992.
But the biotech companies say initial public stock offerings declined last year 53% to $662 million.
Moreover, many companies said they had to raise cash through private stock sales, called "pipes," in which shares are sold at 10% to 15% off the stock market prices.
Ernst & Young, the accounting firm, says about $335 million was raised through pipes in 1993, up from $10 million in 1992.
Mr. Bagley of Immulogic says Washington shouldn't be misled by these figures, arguing that the companies can't live long by selling stakes at a discount.
"Believe me, if we get price controls, half the companies go out of business," he says.
