Small investors aren't the only claimants winning big legal battles against Prudential Securities Inc.
A New York Stock Exchange arbitration panel ordered Prudential to pay a total of $3.7 million to five former executives who had run Prudential's institutional sales and trading subsidiary in Puerto Rico.
The award is among the largest won by employees in an arbitration case filed against a Wall Street brokerage firm.
The executives, of Prudential-Bache Capital Funding Puerto Rico Inc., had accused the firm of wrongful termination after Prudential shuttered the trading subsidiary in January 1990.
Prudential countered that it closed the unit for "business reasons" after a trading position left the firm at risk for $100 million.
The award comes as the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit braces for an onslaught of legal claims by individual investors who say they were misled into buying limited partnerships in the 1980s.
Investors are looking to tap into a $330 million restitution fund set up by Prudential as part of an October settlement with regulators.
To bolster its operations, Prudential on Friday named Robert Golden, its operations director, to head up the partnership settlement process, according to an internal memorandum.
Prudential, the U.S.'s fourth-largest brokerage firm, already has set aside about $800 million in the past few years to pay out legal claims by small investors, many involving the partnerships.
Mr. Golden's appointment appears to be a bid to ensure that the firm has an effective game plan for the settlements.
"Teamwork, communication and cooperation are essential as we devote our energies to what must be a successful endeavor," Hardwick Simmons, Prudential Securities's chief executive, wrote in the memo.
Though the Puerto Rican case had nothing to do with partnerships or individual investors -- the unit dealt exclusively with large institutional clients -- the award stunned Prudential executives.
"We think it's an outrageous result based on the facts," Prudential said in a statement.
"We fired an individual in that operation because of his failure to disclose terms of a very large trade and we shut down the merchant-banking business there for business reasons.
We think we're being penalized for having done the right thing."
Prudential hasn't yet decided whether to appeal.
The case, which dragged on for 56 hearings, was unusual.
The plaintiffs -- including Jose Rodriguez, president; and Robert Tanner, executive vice president and head trader -- said they were emotionally and professionally harmed because, among other things, armed guards ordered employees out of the building when Prudential shut the unit.
"You can't come in and close down a shop with utter disregard for people who invested years of their life being productive," said Harold Vicente, a lawyer for the plaintiffs in Santurce, Puerto Rico.
"That's not the way you finish a relationship."
In a counterclaim, Prudential accused Mr. Tanner of taking part in an unauthorized $100 million off-exchange trade.
As part of the transaction, Prudential alleged, Mr. Tanner improperly told the trade's counterparty, pharmaceutical giant Schering-Plough Corp., that it could "put back," or cancel the trade if it wished.
That claim was dismissed by Big Board arbitrators.
"The put was made in a letter to Schering-Plough -- it was all made in the open," says Mr. Vicente, Mr. Tanner's lawyer.
In papers filed with arbitrators, Mr. Tanner asserts that the trade was "profitable as a whole" for Prudential.
Of the five executives, Mr. Tanner received the biggest award: $1.02 million, plus nearly $300,000 in costs and attorney's fees.
Mr. Rodriguez received $1 million, plus $266,000 in costs and attorney's fees.
The other plaintiffs were Wolfram Pietri, a senior vice president, investment banking; Jose Cimadevilla, an investment-banking officer; and Garland Hedges, a senior vice president, funding.
The turning point in the executives' case came when plaintiffs' lawyers discovered that Prudential's star witness -- a former firm operations manager who now is chief financial officer at Kidder, Peabody Group Inc.'s Puerto Rican unit -- was still on Prudential's payroll, and didn't disclose it, people familiar with the case say.
Prudential declined to comment on the witness, Cesar Gandiaga; Mr. Gandiaga couldn't be reached.
Prudential had been paying Mr. Gandiaga about $2,500 a month as a "consultant" to unwind trading positions after the subsidiary was closed, without Kidder's knowledge, people familiar with the matter said.
Kidder declined to comment.
But the people said that when the General Electric Co. unit found out about Mr. Gandiaga's arrangement with Prudential, it ordered an end to the payments.
