It's been national news that U.S. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison is on trial this week on charges she exploited her former office as Texas state treasurer for political and personal purposes.
Sen. Hutchison is a Republican.
Having more difficulty making it across the Texas border, though, is the news that the office of Governor Ann Richards is said to have improperly pressured state archivists to justify the shredding of her own sensitive telephone records.
She's a Democrat.
If Senator Hutchison is driven from office, Governor Richards appoints her replacement, adding to the Democrats' strength in the Senate.
Democrats were shocked last June when Ms. Hutchison demolished Democrat Bob Kreuger by 2 to 1 in a special U.S. Senate election.
It was about then that state Democrats started grousing that Ms. Hutchison had misused her position as treasurer to advance her political activities.
Then Travis County District Attorney Ronnie Earle staged a raid of the treasurer's office and seized a pile of records.
Mr. Earle, a Democrat, is a longtime ally of Governor Richards.
Mr. Earle then got a grand jury to indict Sen. Hutchison on several felony counts of misusing state employees and concealing evidence that political calls had been made on a state phone.
But a state judge threw out most of the indictment as too vague.
Mr. Earle was forced to seek a revised indictment that charges her with concealing telephone records and asking state employees to shop for her and write personal thank-you notes.
Republicans cried foul, charging that Senator Hutchison was being prosecuted for practices common among Texas officials.
On August 4, GOP Chairman Fred Meyer noted that Governor Richards had 13 private phone lines in her official offices, including two tied directly to her campaign headquarters.
That month, it was reported Governor Richards ordered eight of the lines removed.
Now it turns out that at the same time Governor Richards yanked the lines out, her lawyers ordered the immediate destruction of 2 1/2 years of long-distance phone records and asked that future records be destroyed every 30 days.
This came to light only this past January 27, after which the Governor's aides offered four different versions of what happened.
They finally acknowledged that state law indeed requires such records be kept for three years, not 30 days.
The GOP's Mr. Meyer also notes that the State Department of Public Safety is also resisting efforts to subpoena the Governor's daily schedule on the grounds that it would "compromise" her safety.
The state's policies on record keeping are set by the Library and Archives Commission, which is chaired by Carolyn Armstrong.
She and William Gooch, the commission's director, have made signed statements that indicate the Governor's office was worried about the appearances of shredding the same kind of phone records Mrs. Hutchison was indicted for allegedly concealing.
The commission's Mr. Gooch says Governor Richards's aides told him on January 27, the day the story about shredding the phone records broke, that the Governor wanted him to issue a letter saying her office had done nothing wrong.
The Governor's aides were unhappy with the letter he wrote for them, which said the shredding was "an honest misinterpretation" of state rules.
They demanded -- and got from him -- a more sweeping exoneration.
"Our agency was placed in the untenable position of making judgments about what is legal and illegal," says Ms. Armstrong.
"I believe the agency was misused in an effort to provide cover for the destruction of telephone records by the Governor's office."
Now we should add it's not at all clear that either of these two have actually done anything wrong.
But it is clear that the Democrats lobbed the first insinuation.
We'd have thought that one lesson after Democrats tried to build Ed Rollins's New Jersey walking-around-money tale into a bonfire under Christie Whitman is that the wind can shift.
GOP Senator Phil Gramm predicts that if Mrs. Hutchison is acquitted, "They'll be hunting down Democrats with dogs" in Texas.
