Costa Mesa, Calif. -- With his staging of "The Nutcracker" for American Ballet Theatre, Kevin McKenzie joins the ranks of those directors of dance troupes who cannot choreograph but feel compelled to do so anyway.
Between 1989 and 1992, when ABT was led by Jane Herman, the company got by without a resident choreographer.
Ms. Herman invited guest artists to create new works and restage the classics whenever the box office needed stimulation.
To this policy of free-lance choreography, Mr. McKenzie, Ms. Herman's successor, has largely hewed.
For ABT's forthcoming season at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York, he has commissioned pieces from Lar Lubovich and James Kudelka.
For "The Nutcracker," however, he turned not to an outsider but to himself, a surprising choice given his lack of experience as a choreographer and the nature of the ballet in question.
"The Nutcracker," Tchaikovsky's final ballet, is the only full-length 19th-century classic in the international repertoire to survive without a generally accepted choreographic text.
As a result, anyone who has ever staged the work in this country, whether George Balanchine or Mark Morris, has necessarily been involved in a complex creative task.
Mr. McKenzie's determination to undertake the assignment suggests either that he has a very high opinion of his talent or a very low opinion of the ballet.
A low opinion of it, that is, as a work of art.
No one could question its commercial importance for ABT, which is still trying to recover from the financial as well as artistic damage it sustained under Ms. Herman.
Virtually any production of the ballet can be guaranteed to attract large audiences, and when Mr. McKenzie took charge of ABT he had no "Nutcracker" to present: Mikhail Baryshnikov had withdrawn his version of the work from the company's repertoire in 1989 when he was replaced as director by Ms. Herman.
Though Mr. McKenzie's production was launched at the Orange County Performing Arts Center in December -- at the very height, that is, of the annual "Nutcracker" mania -- it was evidently designed to be part of ABT's year-round offerings, and will figure prominently in the company's Lincoln Center season.
No doubt it is for this reason that in act two winter gives way to spring, albeit arbitrarily and in violation of the ballet's overall mood (though it is hard to talk of an overall mood in a production so marked by disarray).
Confusingly narrated, musically barbarous, vulgarly designed and so choreographically inept that even fine dancers such as Julie Kent and Paloma Herrera looked lost, this "Nutcracker" is as artistically null as anything presented by ABT during its erratic 54-year history.
Basic to this misadventure is Mr. McKenzie's failure to understand that the ballet's essential subject is Tchaikovsky's music.
The original scenario, though implicitly a fable of maturation, is slight, unresonant, short-breathed.
By the end of act one, the story, such as it is, is over.
Act two, set in Candy Land, consists of a divertissement given to honor Clara and the Nutcracker for having survived with courage and grace the onslaught of the mice in act one.
But the entertainment provided for them is irrelevant to their deeds.
Instead of amplifying the deeds' significance, it reduces it.
Seated throughout the act at a table piled with sweetmeats, they are not so much guests of honor as couch potatoes.
Even in act one, narrative is less important than atmosphere and situation.
What affects us most are such things as the party games; the children's excitement; the macabre mood introduced by Clara's godfather, Drosselmeyer, through whom we encounter the terrors that lurk behind the security of a bourgeois household; the sudden enlargement of the milieu of childhood; the magical journey of Clara and the Nutcracker Prince through the land of snow.
All this, Tchaikovsky bodies forth in music of such poetic vividness that it carries the entire evening.
The episode of the Christmas tree, in particular, is one of the miracles of lyric theater: In 48 bars of surging melody, the tree becomes colossal, and Clara's world is transformed from the familial to the heroic.
The episode is so rich in meaning, so full of passionate intensity, that, matched with appropriate stage action, it reawakens one's long-lost sense of childhood wonder.
But appropriate stage action is precisely what Mr. McKenzie fails to supply.
Instead of ensuring that the tree reaches its full, astonishing height as the music rises to a climax, the choreographer concludes its growth halfway through the passage.
For the glorious crescendo with which Tchaikovsky brings this extraordinary scene to a close, Mr. McKenzie has devised some inconsequential action involving the rats who have congregated at the foot of the tree.
The production as a whole is marked by musical insensitivity: The solemn adagio of the grand pas de deux for the Sugar Plum Fairy and her Cavalier comes afterand not, as Tchaikovsky intended, before -- their solos.
Mr. McKenzie has also made cuts throughout the score, as well as transpositions, the most startling of which is the use of the music for Mother Ginger and her Children for the final ensemble of act two.
It is the genius of Tchaikovsky that mitigates the weakness of Petipa's scenario and gives this ballet the blend of feeling and enchantment that has made it a classic.
Unfortunately, Mr. McKenzie has used the music not as an emotional resource or a guide to atmosphere and mood, but as a background for situations that mostly have nothing to do with its character and style.
Instead of listening to Tchaikovsky, Mr. McKenzie has listened to Wendy Wasserstein, author of "The Sisters Rosensweig," whom he invited to endow Petipa's simple narrative with greater complexity of theme and with what seems to have been intended as psychological plausibility but which comes over as unnecessary complication.
Thus Clara is involved in not one but two battles with the rats: In the first she saves the Nutcracker and in the second she ensures his transformation into the Prince by showing him compassion.
In the epilogue, he is again transformed, this time into Drosselmeyer's son, who hands her a bouquet as the curtain falls.
Like most of what comes before, this is not merely confusing, it is also pedestrian.
