The Securities and Exchange Commission said it will consider an ambitious package Wednesday to improve disclosures to investors and others in the municipal-bond market.
The initiative will include an interpretive release spelling out the responsibilities of muni issuers and others under the antifraud provisions of federal securities laws.
Munis are exempt from the registration and reporting requirements of those laws, but not the antifraud provisions.
An interpretive release would put bond issuers on notice that they have affirmative duties under the law.
The SEC also will consider a proposal to bar dealers from underwriting munis unless the issuer of the bonds formally agrees to provide annual financial information and notices of material events to a nationally recognized muni-information repository.
In addition, the agency will consider a proposal to prohibit dealers from recommending a municipal bond to an investor without first reviewing such information.
These latter two proposals, in particular, are aimed at improving disclosure in the secondary muni market.
Separately, a report commissioned by the Public Securities Association sharply disputes the contention that competitive municipal-bond sales are cheaper for states and localities than negotiated sales.
The report, conducted for the bond trade group by Prof. Paul Leonard of State University of New York at Albany, reviewed academic literature on muni issues and found "no conclusion one way or the other regarding the relative advantages" of the two methods.
Prof. Leonard said studies cited as favoring competitive underwritings predate major market changes and largely are irrelevant.
He said that until a proper contemporary study is done, "opinion leaders should refrain from citing `research on the subject.'"
Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt, who is to speak today at the PSA's annual convention in Orlando, Fla., has touted competitive underwritings as the preferred way for states and localities to sell their bond issues.
