All you techno-wizards may find this blasphemous, but it's true: Less is often more.
Especially with remote controls.
As any couch potato knows, remote controls already aren't what they used to be.
With their row after row of buttons with mysterious symbols and letters, they're fun to play with -- but does anybody really know what they do?
Now, imagine television with four or five times as many channels, along with a raft of "interactive" programming.
Will anyone even be able lift the remote?
The fight over who controls the thing may well be won by the person with the biggest biceps.
Well, don't start working out just yet.
The same technologies that will turbocharge television sets also promise to slim down remotes and make navigating the airwaves easier for a change.
Remote controls of the future, in fact, may well resemble ultrasimple models from the 1950s more than they will the 50-button behemoths of today.
"I'd like to get people down to a two-button remote," says Hal Krisbergh, president of the communications division of General Instrument Corp., a major supplier of cable-television equipment, including set-top boxes and remote controls.
You probably should be, given the techies' natural urge to load their gadgets with things that they think are cool, but that only bewilder the rest of us.
Consider, however, what happened with personal computers.
Early PCs were controlled by arcane keyboard commands.
As time passed, better microprocessors and more chips permitted the addition of so-called graphical user interfaces, allowing users to point with a "mouse" and click on simple icons to find their way through a program.
The same revolution is under way in television and cable equipment.
Future devices will incorporate sophisticated software that can act as a graphical interface for the television set.
The old-style keyboard remote will be replaced by the television equivalent of a computer mouse.
The eventual result: For every function added to the list of choices displayed on the TV-screen menu, the button for that function can be deleted from the hand-held remote.
Only the most basic functions -- power and volume control, for instance -- will remain on the remote.
Viewers would instead see a TV screen that would resemble a newspaper TV listing.
They would then use keys on the remote to move a cursor up, down, left or right across a grid of channel choices.
Once the cursor is on the right spot, a viewer taps a fifth key -- an "enter" or "select" button -- to activate the choice.
Such a system also may help overcome one of the world's most notorious technological problems: programming the VCR.
"Right now, with all this extra power, your television, VCR and cable box still don't work together," says Doug Patton, president of Patton Design Inc., an Irvine, Calif., remote-control-design firm.
"Yet the technology is there to do what we want."
Some systems on the drawing boards will simply make "record" another option on the remote.
Just move the cursor to the program, then click on the "record" button, and the beast has been tamed.
Such a "point and click" approach is the only way to deal with the elaborate options ahead, says Rob Logan, manager of user-interface design at Thomson Consumer Electronics, a unit of French electronics conglomerate Thomson-CSF, which makes television sets under the RCA name in the U.S.
"If you give humans a simple rule and apply the heck out of it, they can learn it and use it," Mr. Logan says.
"So our rule is `point and select.'"
To design the next generation of RCA remotes, Thomson assembled an eclectic group.
Mr. Logan has a Ph.D. in cognitive psychology, while others on his nine-member team have backgrounds in visual communications, creative writing and library science.
RCA already has transformed its remote controls from button-festooned bricks to more modern designs that use different button colors and shapes to isolate important functions.
Future units, says Mr. Logan, will abandon the rectangular candy-bar shape in favor of a hand-grip design that looks more like a phaser from "Star Trek."
In this design, the remote is dominated by a large circular control consisting of four pie-wedge-shaped arrow keys.
When not being used to maneuver an on-screen cursor, the arrows do double-duty as up/down buttons for volume and channel.
The first of this next generation of remotes will be introduced this spring.
At other companies, designers are working on remotes that use miniature versions of computer joysticks and trackballs, letting viewers thumb their way around menu selections.
Some companies are playing with an "air mouse" design that shifts the cursor in response to movements of the entire remote unit; wave the control to the left, and the cursor will obey.
Whatever the gadget, the switch to an on-screen system promises to bring viewers new capabilities -- and alter the way they watch television.
One of the biggest changes will be the rise of the on-screen program guide.
Most viewers are familiar with this now: It's the channel on your cable system that displays an annoyingly slow crawl of listings on the various channels, set to background music and framed by advertisements for pay-per-view.
Turning that guide into a menu grid commanded by the remote control will let users find a program selection at their own pace.
That alone should simplify things when the number of available channels climbs into three digits.
But future software will turn the listings into a "smart" menu, capable of sorting -- and even suggesting -- programming.
Viewers will call up a "sports" menu, for instance, or a list of all "situation comedies."
Moreover, they would start to think of networks, not channels.
"Numbers won't mean anything," says John Burns, executive vice president at StarSight Telecast Inc., an interactive interface developer in Fremont, Calif.
"Everything will be on screen, and it will be identified by the name of the channel."
Further in the future: software that observes a viewer's habits, and presents a listing of shows based on past choices.
"Eventually you can introduce a form of artificial intelligence," says Vinny Gross, project director for interactive television at American Telephone & Telegraph.
"The television can learn where you like to go and get you there faster."
Of course, all these wonderful new capabilities will require careful design and gradual introduction if they are to assist viewers and not just baffle them.
In plain English: Techies can't complicate things by throwing in every bell and whistle that technology allows.
That won't be an easy temptation to resist -- especially when cable-television companies have a strong interest in dangling out every new type of extra-charge service possible.
But restraint is crucial.
"People clearly don't want to feel that they're dealing with a computer," says Mr. Logan of Thomson.
"When you ask people about computers, they'll say all kinds of awful things, but when you ask them about their TV, they're very comfortable with it."
Again, a parallel from the development of personal computers is helpful.
"You have to mimic the interface that people are used to, at least for a while," says Elliot Soloway, a University of Michigan professor who is conducting research on computers and interactive applications for education.
"That's why computer spreadsheets took off like wildfire.
Accountants were able to treat them just like paper spreadsheets, but with one extra feature: When you changed one number, everything updated.
That was one thing, but it was very powerful."
One approach has been developed by Eon Corp., a Reston, Va., designer of interactive systems.
Whenever possible, the Eon design keeps a television program up on the screen as a link to the television paradigm viewers are accustomed to.
Instead of replacing the video pictures, onscreen menus are superimposed over them in the familiar style of television news graphics ("live from Dallas") or sports statistics ("125 RBIs this year").
"When you're talking programming, these are million-dollar images," Eon President Mike Sheridan says.
"You don't want those images crowded.
You don't want this to look like computer windows."
Another possible trap lies in making things too easy.
A system designed to be user-friendly to all, with detailed instructions, will soon frustrate viewers as they learn how the system works.
Imagine a video analog of phone-mail hell: "Press one to adjust volume; press two to adjust channel . . ."
That dilemma may be solved by creating software for the cable set-top boxes that can operate in several modes, such as "advanced," "simple," and even "child."
Power-watchers may be able to purchase souped-up remotes with short-cut buttons designed to work with the advanced mode.
Children will zap away with a child-size control that makes everything easy -- and notifies the TV set that the individual doing the zapping isn't authorized to tap into adult programming.
Once such problems have been solved, some of the really wild technology may start appearing.
Some industry observers say the best pointing device may be the eye; sensors could determine what part of the screen a viewer is looking at and highlight it accordingly.
And nearly everyone involved in designing television interfaces and remote controls expects voice recognition to play a part, perhaps before the end of the decade.
Voice commands could make flipping to the news as easy as stating aloud: "TVCNN."
It is unlikely, however, that the hand-held remote will disappear entirely.
Incurable channel-surfers would have to graze the offerings by chanting, "channel up . . . channel up . . channel up . . ."
If all of these possibilities sound daunting, remember that the interactive future will fall flat on its face if no one can understand how to operate a TV set.
The powers that be in the entertainment and electronics industries know that, says Bill Luehrs, vice president and general manager of subscriber video systems at Scientific-Atlanta Inc., an Atlanta-based supplier of cable equipment.
"You've got to have a system that enables the subscriber to find the content easily," Mr. Luehrs says.
"If we haven't found a way to allow that, then the whole thing is lost."
Mr. Weber is a reporter for the Dow Jones News Service in New York.
