The moment President Clinton's aides sat down with honchos from the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, civility ended in the debate over welfare reform.
The giant public-employees union read the riot act to the president's welfare-reform working group at the mid-December meeting, a Clinton aide says.
The labor officials complained that they'd been frozen out and disregarded by the White House, and that labor's demands had to be considered if welfare reform was to become a reality.
"Our people left the meeting in a daze," the Clinton aide says.
That was just the start.
As Mr. Clinton maps out precisely what he will propose to deliver on his promise of a welfare-reform initiative this spring, he is already encountering a vigorous lobbying effort by organized labor, which fears that low-cost welfare recipients put to work under the jobs component of any reform package could displace unionized workers.
The unions' concerns represent a real dilemma for Mr. Clinton.
After all, he just finished fighting with much of the labor establishment over the North American Free Trade Agreement, and badly needs union support in the impending battle over health-care reform.
Yet the president is also under pressure from Senate Finance Committee Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan and from his own "New Democrat" political advisers to push a bold proposal "to end welfare as we know it."
And the core of Mr. Clinton's expected proposal, a two-year limit on welfare benefits, requires some sort of program to move recipients off of welfare and into jobs, while allowing those left behind to collect checks in exchange for work.
White House officials insist that a collision with labor over welfare reform is far from inevitable.
"We'll work it out," says Bruce Reed, a top domestic policy adviser to the president.
"We have plenty of shared goals."
Mr. Clinton, he insists, never intended to recommend the type of "giant federal jobs program" that labor most fears.
"It won't be necessary, we won't do it, we can't afford it," he says.
His task of deflating expectations about welfare reform has been made more difficult by a recent New York Times report that as many as 2.3 million people could be subject to work requirements once they've reached the two-year limit on benefits.
That report set off alarm bells, not only in the labor movement but in Congress, where it stirred fears of a budget-busting public-jobs proposal.
Mr. Reed, though, insists that the latest drafts of the president's reform plan envision only about one-third that many community service-type jobs, once the program becomes fully phased in five or six years from now.
That modest estimate, he says, stems from one huge exemption expected to be included in the president's proposal: Nearly two million of the projected 5.6 million welfare cases in 1999 wouldn't face any work requirements.
Specifically, the exempted recipients would be those who are disabled, have small children or special needs, or cases in which abandoned or immigrant children are being raised by someone other than their parents.
On the positive, and maybe overly optimistic side, the administration also expects nearly two million recipients to leave the welfare rolls if universal healthcare and child-care coverage are added to the already enacted earned income tax credit.
That leaves the problem group of about 1.5 million to 1.8 million cases.
The administration's plan will call for these people to be pushed into an intensive two-year job training and placement effort, while employers are offered incentives to hire them.
"There will be pressure from across the spectrum to move these people into meaningful private-sector jobs," says David Ellwood, a leading antipoverty researcher who is co-chairman of the president's welfare working group with Mr. Reed.
"Everyone, including labor, shares that goal."
But the administration's current projection that nearly half those people will actually get jobs is a notion that many welfare experts consider fanciful.
"It's pie in the sky," says Douglas Besharov, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute.
"There is no verifiable evidence that any jobs program has ever succeeded in getting a significant number of welfare recipients into work.
The administration is diving into this thing without any clear idea where it will end up, or how much it will cost."
Cost is indeed one of the major imponderables.
The 1970s-era Comprehensive Employment and Training Act jobs program cost the federal government nearly $10 billion a year at its peak.
Many outside experts suggest that a meaningful welfare-reform plan these days could cost $25 billion to $30 billion a year, vastly more than the administration's current estimate of $4 billion to $7 billion.
"To do welfare reform right, you have to help welfare recipients while making sure you don't hurt the working poor, many of whom are in public-sector unions," says Sar Levitan, director of the Center for Social Policy Studies at George Washington University.
"Of course, that costs the kind of money no one is willing to commit."
What most concerns unions, though, is that a failed training and placement program will leave more than a million welfare recipients at the two-year limit, an able-bodied avalanche moving into a loosely defined array of minimum-wage, community-service work or jobs with nonprofit organizations such as hospitals.
States and cities, struggling under tight budgets, might turn to this work force instead of to workers they'd ordinarily hire at union wages, labor leaders say.
Or worse, they say, government officials may discontinue public programs in expectation of later filling them with low-cost former welfare recipients.
AFSCME lobbyists, in daily calls to the White House, are pushing labor's time-honored solution: Make sure the community-service jobs are "the types of things no one would ever hire someone to do," says Arnold Packer, who ran CETA programs as an assistant labor secretary in the 1970s.
But administration officials argue that such a solution would defeat the purpose of community work, which is to build skills that will eventually make the recipient attractive to some private-sector employer.
Indeed, observes Mr. Packer, in CETA, "We found that experience raking leaves or picking up garbage doesn't offer much of a leg up in the job market."
AFSCME officials believe they are well-positioned to influence the White House in their direction.
Gerald McEntee, the union's president, is arguably Mr. Clinton's strongest loyalist in labor; although the AFSCME opposed Nafta, it didn't do so as vigorously as other unions.
Beyond that, the union's former lobbyist, Jerry Klepner, is now assistant secretary of Health and Human Services for legislation and will have a key role in negotiating welfare reform.
But the American Enterprise Institute's Mr. Besharov thinks those ties won't be enough.
"Listen, because labor will be so opposed to welfare reform, the administration will simply have to move to the right and rely on Republican support to get it passed," he predicts.
"In the end, it'll look like the Nafta coalition all over again."
