The dollar was little changed yesterday after gyrating wildly during a confusing session that included a credit-tightening move by the Federal Reserve.
Though the announcement by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, of a "slight" tightening in monetary policy was widely anticipated, traders were hurt by its timing.
It came just hours after the Fed was seen intervening in its routine open market operations to keep interest rates steady.
Mr. Greenspan's statement followed a meeting of the Federal Open Markets Committee, or FOMC, and was interpreted by the market to mean a 0.25 percentage point boost in U.S. short-term interest rates, traders said.
The dollar was helped somewhat higher late in the North American day by the rate-increase news, but was unable to break out of its earlier-established intraday ranges.
The dollar wound up only marginally mixed against major currencies.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.6885 marks, unchanged from late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 106 yen -- unchanged from late Monday.
Sterling was trading at $1.4880, down from $1.4895.
About noon Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 106.05 yen and at 1.6893 marks.
Traders said that while the bond market surged on news of the rate boost -- amid relief that the Fed wasn't tightening credit conditions even more sharply -- the dollar appeared unsure of which direction to take.
Traders noted that a 25-basis-point rise was so fully anticipated that the size could actually be regarded as a disappointment.
Many thought it would have taken a 50-basis-point rise for the dollar to move to new, higher ground.
Earlier, the market was caught offguard when the Fed was seen -- against all expectations -- adding liquidity to the reserve system during its normal intervention period around midday in New York.
That suggested the Fed intended to keep its closely watched Fed funds rate -- the rate at which commercial banks charge each other for overnight loans -- at around the 3.25% target level that has prevailed since the Feb. 4 rate boost.
Up to that point, the dollar had been rising steadily in anticipation of another rate increase.
But on the Fed action, the dollar spiraled to intraday lows against other major currencies -- as the market realized the Fed was unwilling to boost rates just yet.
The dollar then made an equally spectacular recovery when a Fed spokesman made the unusual announcement -- apparently to placate a jittery market -- that the FOMC meeting was still under way and hadn't yet discussed monetary policy.
Later, the market was surprised yet again by the formal Fed statement that the FOMC had ratified a rate boost.
Though widely anticipated, many traders had been looking for the news to emerge at the Fed's intervention period today.
The jerky intraday movements for the dollar points to "how nervous the market is," said Win Thin, international economist at MCM Currencywatch in New York.
But in the longer term, the rate increase should give some support to a dollar that has been hurt by bearish sentiment even as the U.S. economy steams ahead, said Hillel Waxman, vice president at Bank Leumi in New York.
On the other hand, neither will it boost the dollar to levels around 1.8000 marks -- the range that the dollar was seen gravitating toward earlier this year, Mr. Waxman added.
He noted that the next major rate move is up to the Germans.
