CLINTON CHOSE Washington lawyer Cutler to be White House special counsel.
Lloyd Cutler took the job on an interim basis only, until a permanent replacement can be found for Nussbaum, the White House counsel who resigned under pressure over the Whitewater affair.
Cutler, 76, said he requested a limited, 130-day appointment because of his age and the rigors of the job.
In 1979, he was brought in as counsel for the Carter White House when it was mired in ethical problems.
The hurried appointment by Clinton almost seemed an act of desperation to restore credibility to his administration.
Cutler said he probably would advise White House staffers and other administration officials to testify before any congressional hearings on Whitewater.
Democrats are proposing to pare the basic benefits package in Clinton's health plan and make further concessions to small business.
A House panel is considering a plan that would guarantee a benefit package costing a single person about 14% less than what the administration has proposed.
Chinese police picked up a leader of the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations for the second time in a week and threatened to imprison him again if he continues his pro-democracy activities.
The hour-long detention of Wang Dan came three days before Secretary of State Christopher is to arrive in Beijing.
An Israeli army official said that only one of three soldiers assigned to guard the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron was at his post when a Jewish gunman opened fire.
The presence of the full guard contingent might have prevented the Feb. 25 massacre of Palestinians, he added.
Antiaircraft fire struck a Spanish air force plane taking part in a NATO operation over Croatia, forcing the aircraft to make an emergency landing.
In Belgrade, Clinton's special envoy, Charles Redman, held talks with Serb officials, who reacted coolly to a U.S.-supported federation plan for Bosnia.
Federal investigators found no evidence of scientific misconduct by a prominent lead-poisoning researcher.
But they cited "numerous errors and misstatements" in the published work of University of Pittsburgh researcher Herbert Needleman, who has warned of lead's adverse health effects.
The FCC voted to clear the way for a new pocket-phone industry by removing police, fire and emergency medical systems from a portion of the airwaves.
The agency also adopted general bidding methods it will use to auction off the airwaves for personal communications services, including pocket phones.
U.S. planes were repaired with unapproved or counterfeit parts at 14 facilities in the U.S. and Europe, a government report found.
The report faulted the FAA for not adequately policing the repair stations.
A speeding train derailed on a sharp curve outside the South African port city of Durban, and 63 people -- mostly black commuters -- died when the cars smashed into a wooded hill.
A railway investigator was trying to determine if a bomb caused the derailment.
Some 370 other commuters were injured, officials said.
Soldiers killed about 300 civilians with bayonets last weekend in the capital of the African nation of Burundi, Vatican Radio said.
The military, dominated by the minority Tutsi group, entered a neighborhood of the rival Hutu people to hunt for weapons, according to a missionary.
The soldiers massacred all the residents, he said.
A Mexican rebel leader is encountering criticism from some of his own supporters over a tentative peace accord to end an uprising in the southern state of Chiapas.
Criticism of the leader, known as Marcos, came as his supporters began to debate terms of the agreement that was announced last week.
Democratic lawmakers accused the Clinton administration of pressuring ousted Haitian President Aristide to accept a flawed plan for restoring democracy.
Some said the threat of U.S. military force may be needed to return Aristide to power.
He has rejected a series of recent U.N. proposals.
