From the figs of a tree growing not far from her kitchen window, my Grandma Minnie makes the best fig jam in the state of Louisiana.
Don't take my word for it.
Grandma Minnie has won more blue ribbons for fig jam at the Rapides Parish Fair than she can count.
She was named outstanding senior citizen fair winner for the first time 20 years ago.
And she has placed in virtually every food category, from plain old white bread to watermelon rind pickles.
She is a solid winner at the state level, too.
At 87, she lives alone in a white wooden house near a dense stretch of woods that runs along the muddy banks of Bayou Rapides, where she gardens three large patches of nearby farmland.
Since the parish festival began in 1960, my grandmother has won more than 3,500 ribbons -- some for arts and crafts, but most for her jams, jellies and endless varieties of canned fruits and vegetables.
Each fall, a hundred or so entries fill the shelves in her pantry, stacked in pint- and quart-size jars like giant gems in a treasure chest.
She slacked off in 1993 -- only 63 ribbons, including 21 first places.
Canning is serious business in central Louisiana.
Carolyn Phillips, a retired home economist with Louisiana State University, has judged parish and state fairs for the past 29 years and written extensively on canning standards and methods.
She told me that after the judging, my grandma always wanted to know what she could do to improve her technique.
Though Grandma would never admit it to strangers, the ribbons don't amount to much.
She's thrown most of them out anyhow.
"They were just taking up space in the back room," she told me once.
In 1980, she "recycled" a pile of blue ribbons by wiring them into a wreath, entered that in the fair, and won a blue ribbon with it in the "seasonal decorations" category.
She is a made member of the Dixie Homemakers Club -- christened outstanding club member two years running.
Her crocheted sweaters have competed nationally.
But arthritis robbed her of needle and thread years ago, and today aching joints and dizzy spells have forced her to plant seeds in more convenient locales.
"She's got green onions and mustard greens in the flower bed in front of her house right now," says my aunt Mary Melanie "Tookie" Juneau, her oldest and closest daughter.
From the fruit of that garden, Grandma Minnie makes sweet cucumber pickles, chowchow, pepper and pear relish, peach preserves and plum jelly.
Her favorite is string beans, cooked slow, with an onion, an Irish potato and a thick slab of bacon.
"I love 'em so much, I've eaten them for breakfast," she says.
Though her pickles are peachy, and her peaches are keen, it's her jam that reveals her genius.
And of all the jams that have won blue ribbons -- huckleberry, blueberry, dewberry, blackberry, strawberry, to name a few -- give me her fig jam any day.
I ration her fig jam in my Brooklyn apartment like a castaway with a canteen.
Ms. Phillips, the judge, describes it as "tender enough to cut, but not runny enough to drip off toast."
The velvety texture dissolves on the tongue like a dollop of ecstasy.
The rich fruity flavor lingers down the back of my tongue to my toes.
Eating a buttered biscuit without it should be a crime.
She rarely reads a recipe or measures ingredients.
And though figs can scorch on high heat in seconds, she knows intuitively when to remove a bubbling pot of the brown sugary paste.
"You've got to stay right with it," she told me on the phone the other night.
The jam has a taste that is familiar and heartening.
I've spent many frosty fall mornings in her kitchen as a boy eating biscuits and fig jam with my brother and father, just before we slipped a pirogue into the bayou.
Paddling silently through the haze of dawn, we hunted small game that would later go into a gumbo.
About 15 years ago, I got lost on that bayou hunting rabbits late one autumn afternoon.
The sun fell too quickly behind towering sycamore and cottonwood trees that lined the water, and I was about a mile from grandma's house.
The moonless night made steering impossible, so I heaved the boat up on the bank where I was and started walking alone through the pitch-black woods.
With each step on the crunchy carpet of leaves, I became more anxious.
Then, at the eerie scream of a screech owl, I broke into a run that did not let up till I could see the porch light of my grandparents' house.
There, in the warm light of her kitchen, I drank hot cocoa and ate crackers smeared with her jam.
She cultivated these talents for nurturing while growing up on a farm with eight brothers and sisters, picking corn and cotton.
Christened Mary Melanie Robichaux in 1906, she got her nickname as a girl from a cousin's teasing.
"Cousin Joe called me `Minnie, Minnie, Meow . . .
Minnie, Minnie, Meow,'" she says in a singsong voice.
She and grandpa raised eight children of their own, including my father.
And today she rides herd over 40 grandchildren and 62 great-grandchildren.
She has lived alone ever since my Grandpa Bill, a gifted carpenter who built the woodwork on the altar of my parish church, passed away at 80.
They were married 57 years.
Grandpa Bill, a man with a powerful sense of humor and a weakness for Prince Albert tobacco, died 10 years ago of cancer on the saddest day of my life.
It's been nearly 10 years since I left home and I miss Grandma Minnie dearly.
The years have weakened her memory and whitened her hair.
At night she prays for herself and for loved ones, and periodically takes a belt of Mogen David wine before going to bed.
But Grandma toils in the winter of her life.
She is tired, she says, and I know that she cannot make fig jam forever.
Grandma Minnie claims ailments that I cannot see in a woman who still gets up at dawn and plants and tills and picks, some days till dusk.
She is still sturdy as an oak and lovely as the magnolia blossoms that bloom on the tree in the pasture not far from her front door.
1. Chop figs fine by hand.
Combine them with lemon juice and sugar in a large nonaluminum pot.
Stir well.
2. Place on high heat and stir constantly.
Bring quickly to a full rolling boil.
Boil hard for one minute, stirring constantly.
3. Remove from heat and stir in pectin.
Skim the foam off the top.
Fill and seal pint jars with two-piece lids.
4. Process five minutes in boiling water bath, with water 2 inches above the jar tops.
Makes about nine half-pint jars.
Mr. Robichaux is a reporter in the Journal's New York bureau.
