The New York Stock Exchange said it took disciplinary action against two member firms and 18 individuals for violations of exchange rules and federal securities laws.
Russo Securities Inc., Staten Island, N.Y., was fined $10,000 for violating certain financial and reporting requirements and failing to maintain reasonable supervision of certain business activities.
The firm, which consented to the exchange's findings without admitting or denying allegations, also is required to employ a chief financial officer who passed the examination for financial and operational principals unless the NYSE waives the requirement.
Anthony T. DeCarlo Securities Inc., Parlin, N.J., was fined $10,000 without admitting or denying allegations that it violated certain financial and reporting requirements.
The exchange also fined the firm's president and chief executive officer, Anthony T. DeCarlo, $10,000 for causing certain of the firm's violations.
The exchange found that Mr. DeCarlo failed to provide appropriate supervisory control over the firm's books and records.
Mr. DeCarlo consented to the penalties without admitting or denying the findings.
Unless otherwise noted, none of the firms and individuals could be reached or had any comment.
Dan A. Druz, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., a former branch manager, was censured after a contested hearing for failing to reasonably supervise a broker who allegedly made unauthorized transactions.
The decision is on appeal with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In other proceedings, Simon Alexander, New York, a former branch manager, was fined $4,000 without admitting or denying allegations.
Stephen John Timyan, Grand Rapids, Mich., a broker, was suspended for two years without admitting or denying allegations.
Richard R. Falbo Jr., Northbrook, Ill., a former broker, was barred for four years for improper trading in his own account, and for sales misconduct in two customers' accounts.
Mr. Falbo didn't admit or deny the allegations.
Andrew L. Weitz, New York, a former broker, was barred for two years for sale misconduct in the accounts of three customers; he didn't admit or deny the allegations.
Robert G. Bacharach, Denver, a former broker, was barred for 18 months.
The bar was deemed served.
Frederick Warren Bliss, Highlands Ranch, Colo., a broker, was suspended for six months without admitting or denying allegations.
Juergens Otto Winkler, Plantation, Fla., a former broker, was barred for six months without admitting or denying allegations.
Michael Joseph Kearns, Houston, a former broker, was found guilty of sales-practice misconduct in one customer account and barred for six months.
William C. Boxley, Pittsburgh, a former broker, was barred for three months without admitting or denying allegations.
Thomas Kay Mayer, Iselin, N.J., a former broker, was suspended for one month without admitting or denying allegations.
Nicholas Robert Bokron, Wethersfield, Conn., a former broker, was barred for three months after a contested hearing.
David W. Neff, Warsaw, Ind., a former employee at a member firm, was barred for seven months without admitting or denying allegations.
Osborne Jones, Hinsdale, Ill., a former broker, was barred permanently without admitting or denying allegations that he misappropriated funds from customers.
William Joseph Davis, Mountainside, N.J., a former broker, was barred permanently, without admitting or denying allegations that he misappropriated customer funds.
Doreen A. Lisciandrello, Yonkers, N.Y., a former secretary, was permanently barred without admitting or denying allegations that she misappropriated funds from her employer.
Patricia Kacanic, San Mateo, Calif., a former broker, was barred until she complies with NYSE requests that she testify concerning certain activities while employed as a broker.
