The likelihood of congressional hearings into the Whitewater affair increased despite Special Counsel Robert Fiske's efforts to persuade lawmakers that the public sessions could thwart his investigation.
Meanwhile, top Clinton administration officials today will hand over documents subpoenaed by Mr. Fiske.
Mr. Fiske received encouragement from two Senate GOP leaders, Alfonse D'Amato of New York and William Cohen of Maine, that Republicans might agree to delay any congressional hearings at least until Mr. Fiske finished the first phase of his inquiries.
That phase centers on three White House and Treasury meetings on a pending Resolution Trust Corp. investigation into a failed Arkansas thrift whose former owner was once a business partner with the Clintons in Whitewater Development Co.
Mr. Fiske came away with no ironclad commitments on delaying the hearings, but Sen. D'Amato, one of President Clinton's most vocal critics on Whitewater, did assure the special counsel that Congress wouldn't grant immunity from prosecution to any witnesses called to testify.
Congress granted immunity to leading witnesses in the Iran-Contra hearings, which greatly complicated prosecution efforts in subsequent trials.
In the House, leaders of both parties met without reaching agreement over how to proceed with a Banking Committee hearing set for March 24.
The savings-and-loan cleanup law requires periodic oversight hearings on the RTC.
House Republicans, led by Iowa Rep. James Leach, have vowed to use the forum to pursue Whitewater queries, over Mr. Fiske's objections.
Rep. Leach has listed 40 witnesses he wants to question, but none has been officially notified of the hearing.
A committee spokeswoman last night denied a news report that the hearing has been postponed.
As Whitewater ramifications consumed official Washington, a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll finds that more Americans perceive the Whitewater affair as a Beltway political squabble than as evidence of any misconduct by Mr. Clinton.
The poll, conducted last Friday through Tuesday, found that 34% believe the issue is being used against the president for political purposes, while only 16% think Mr. Clinton committed financial wrongdoing.
But a plurality, 41%, say they don't know enough to have an opinion.
The poll found approval ratings for Mr. Clinton have fallen since the previous Journal/NBC poll in January.
Some 55% of the 1,503 adults surveyed approve of the president's job performance, down from 60% in January; 47% view him positively, down from 55% in January.
Hillary Rodham Clinton, the president's wife, is viewed positively by 47%, down from 51% two months ago.
In the meantime, the RTC has begun an audit of Rose Law Firm legal bills.
Yesterday, three auditors from the RTC's inspector-general's office met with Rose representatives in Little Rock for the first time.
The RTC will audit all Rose bills to ensure there wasn't any overbilling and that all work is documented.
Assistant Inspector General Sharon Vander Vennet said the review is being handled as a routine audit except that "we're going back a little bit longer than we normally do."
The RTC auditors will spend roughly six weeks at the firm.
It will then take about three months for the RTC to compile its report.
The Rose firm has been conducting its own review of former partner Webster Hubbell's legal bills, including some for the RTC.
The firm hasn't commented on overbilling allegations against Mr. Hubbell, now a top Justice Department official.
Ronald Clark, Rose's managing partner, would say only that the firm hadn't reached any conclusions in its review.
The Rose firm also was struggling with allegations concerning the destruction of a box that may have contained files of Vincent Foster, former White House deputy counsel.
A courier for the firm in Little Rock said he shredded documents that had belonged to Mr. Foster after the special counsel was appointed to look into Mr. Foster's death and the Whitewater controversy.
In an interview in Little Rock, Jeremy Hedges said he shredded documents in file folders marked with Mr. Foster's initials in late January.
Mr. Hedges said he believes the shredding occurred after Mr. Fiske was appointed special counsel on Jan. 20, because by then he was aware of Mr. Fiske's name.
"There is no reason I would have known his name before," explained Mr. Hedges.
The timing of the shredding is of particular importance to Mr. Fiske, who is looking into any apparent effort to impede his investigation.
Another Rose courier, Clayton Lindsey, who helped shred the contents of the box bearing Mr. Foster's initials, said "I'm not positive" about the date of the shredding.
In a telephone interview, he said: "I think it might have been after Jan. 20, but I'm not sure."
Mr. Hedges testified before a grand jury in Little Rock last month.
Mr. Fiske's staff also has interviewed five other couriers, their supervisor and a building supervisor for the Rose Law Firm.
In addition, Rose's Mr. Clark was questioned about the shredding when he testified before a grand jury in Little Rock last month.
Mr. Clark said that two file clerks interviewed by the firm disputed Mr. Hedges's account of what documents were shredded.
Mr. Clark said the file clerks say there weren't any file folders in the box.
He said that a lawyer who shuffled through the contents agrees, and that the firm still has the file folders that once contained the papers shredded.
Mr. Clark, who wouldn't identify the file clerks, said the shredded papers were Rose financial statements, recruiting correspondence and other internal papers.
"There is a difference in fact," said Mr. Clark.
"I can't explain the difference."
Mr. Clark said the firm had anticipated getting subpoenaed even before Mr. Fiske was appointed and had operated under the "assumption that it would be improper to destroy any document related to this investigation."
He said the firm has been gathering and preserving documents for investigators since late 1993, and had "backed up every computer, every hard drive, in this building."
The White House also prepared to turn over six inches of documents subpoenaed by Mr. Fiske, who praised the White House for being "very responsive and cooperative."
Ten White House and Treasury Department officials had been subpoenaed to appear before a grand jury in Washington today.
However, many of the officials have been granted a delay.
President Clinton yesterday instructed his aides to "just tell them what happened" when they appear before the grand jury.
"Be very open."
Michael K. Frisby also contributed to this article.
