Once the French government disposes of its majority stakes in insurer Union des Assurances de Paris and auto maker Renault SA, deciding which state-owned enterprises will be privatized next becomes a riskier game.
Investors aren't expected to need much prodding to snap up UAP shares, which may be offered in the next three to four weeks and which could raise up to 30 billion francs ($5 billion) for the state.
The move to sell UAP conforms to Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's preference for sure winners in the early stages of a privatization program that is supposed to include 21 companies over five years.
The government so far has sold mostly well-known, financially solid companies: hydrocarbons producer Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Hervet and chemical/pharmaceutical group Rhone-Poulenc SA.
But the select group is quickly being whittled down.
Renault, coming off a failed merger with Sweden's AB Volvo and facing cyclical weakness in the auto industry, is the only other company that the government has pledged to privatize this year.
Despite a tarnished image from the Volvo affair, Renault's strong European market presence and innovative product range likely will attract plenty of bids, analysts say.
"The company used to be considered a lame duck.
But since 1987, Renault has been run as a private company, and it has completely respectable results," noted Roland Gagnon of Massonaud, Fontenay, Kervern SA, a French brokerage unit of the Netherland's ABN-Amro Holding NV.
"Selling it won't be a problem."
The sales already set for this year will bring in lots of cash.
Elf and UAP alone will generate privatization receipts well beyond the 1994 target of 55 billion francs.
But after them, what's left?
"There is indeed a quality issue," noted Eric Taze-Bernard, an equities fund manager at Banque Indosuez, a unit of France's Cie. de Suez.
"The companies already sold, or on board, are very highly regarded, so those to follow could pale in comparison."
Some observers think the prime minister may wait until 1995 to give some weaker companies time to work out their financial problems.
With a presidential election coming up in March 1995, observers also suggest Mr. Balladur may try to avoid selling state groups that may subsequently trim their bloated payrolls.
That wouldn't win Mr. Balladur many votes.
But if privatizations continue, the safest choice likely would be one or more of the insurers remaining on the list: Assurances Generales de France, Groupe des Assurances Nationales, Caisse Centrale de Reassurance and Caisse Nationale de Preyvoyance.
All are in relatively good financial shape, except for AGF, which has yet to fully purge losses at its real estate financing affiliate.
Some market watchers are concerned that, after UAP and BNP, demand for financial shares will have been saturated for the short term.
But Richard Davidson, who follows the French market for Morgan Stanley International in London, disagrees.
"As long as they're priced right, I don't see any problem.
There's still plenty of demand from fund managers as well as individual investors for privatizing financials.
The liquidity is there."
On the industrial side, a favorite selloff candidate this year is Seita, the cigarette group that produces the Gauloises brand.
Its domination of domestic cigarette distribution makes it a glittering prize for a number of foreign tobacco groups.
B.A.TT Industries PLC, Philip Morris Cos., and France's Bollores Technologies have expressed interest in a stake in Seita.
Pechiney SA, the aluminum and packaging conglomerate, remains a wild card that could soon show up on the auction block.
Pechiney Chairman Jean Gandois has said more than once that he will use "the first window that opens to privatize Pechiney," but he acknowledges that a slump in aluminum prices makes any short-term move improbable.
The government is seen less pressed to release its grip on the clutch of defense companies included in its list of 21 candidates: Thomson SA, which makes missiles, radar and other warfare electronics; aircraft engine maker Snecma; and Aerospatiale, which primarily makes commercial jets but also has a missiles sideline.
Then there are the big money-losers: Air France; computer maker Groupe Bull SA; steel group Usinor Sacilor; and Credit Lyonnais, the retail bank.
In the first three cases, the government will be busy enough this year trying to ward off European Union officials who disapprove of the large cash infusions used to keep Air France, Bull and Usinor out of bankruptcy.
It seems unlikely the government would want to dispose of these assets in their most fragile conditions.
As for Credit Lyonnais, officials earlier this week confirmed French news reports that the government is considering a recapitalization of the bank.
