Wendy's International Inc. said the difficult winter weather shouldn't affect its current quarter, and the company sees continued strong growth for its chain of hamburger-oriented restaurants.
James W. Near, chairman and chief executive officer of the fast-food chain, said in an interview that he was confident the company would meet analysts' expectations for the fourth quarter and the year.
According to First Call, analysts' consensus is 17 cents a share for the quarter and 76 cents a share for the year.
In the 1992 fourth quarter, Wendy's reported net income of $14.7 million, or 14 cents a share, on sales of $305.9 million.
In 1992, the company reported net income of $64.7 million, or 64 cents a share, on sales of $1.24 billion.
"It's been a cold winter, but I think we'll still be fine," Mr. Near said.
"We had a good year in 1993, and I think shareholders will be pleased with the results."
Mr. Near also said he was confident about 1994 projections of 91 cents a share.
And despite the poor first-quarter weather, he still expects the company to stick to its 20% growth goals.
While Wendy's continues to grow at a strong clip, the hamburger chain failed to meet its 1993 building goals.
In its annual letter to shareholders, Wendy's said it wanted to open or have under construction 350 restaurants in 1993.
But Mr. Near said only 310 restaurants opened or were under construction in the year.
"It just takes more time today than it used to take," Mr. Near said.
"We have a lot of things in the hopper, but we're waiting on permits and other approvals.
We used to be able to do the deal in 30 days, but now it can take up to a year to get the necessary permits."
Slower-than-expected building plans may make a 5,000-store goal by 1995 less likely than originally thought.
But Mr. Near insisted that the 5,000-store goal is for the "mid-1990s," perhaps in early 1996.
"Meantime, let's think about 800 stores a year and think about when we could get to 8,000 stores," he said.
Mr. Near's expansionist vision stems from Wendy's light penetration in several regions of the U.S. and the growing international market.
Wendy's has a strong presence in the Midwest, but still lacks numbers in the West and the Southeast, Mr. Near said.
Internationally, Mr. Near said East Asia is a potentially lucrative market, but he is wary of going overboard.
"Demand has been huge on us in the international market, but I'm afraid to unleash this thing," Mr. Near said.
"We need to do it right, so I would like to go about the international expansion methodically."
To that end, Mr. Near hired John Wright, a PepsiCo executive, to the newly created post of president, international division, in October 1993.
The company has more than 400 outlets outside the U.S.
While expansion opportunities abound internationally, the U.S. market has grown tighter.
With Americans increasingly value-conscious, pricing has become crucial.
"We haven't raised prices in about 3 1/2 years," Mr. Near said.
"Our thinking is, let's build the volume.
The simple fact is that our customers simply won't pay more."
The fierce marketplace has begun to hurt some competitors.
For instance, Rally's Hamburgers Inc. recently announced it would trim expansion plans.
Also complicating the American burger market: the American diet.
Attitudes toward red meat have been enigmatic, at best.
But Mr. Near sees no reason for extensive concern.
"Steakhouses seem to be back bigger than ever," Mr. Near said.
"And, I believe, if you have a good, lean product, people don't mind so much.
I think the consumer still has the tastebud every once in a while for a good hamburger."
To be sure, Wendy's has not ignored the trends away from red meat.
The company touts chicken meals, salad and other diversions.
In fact, one of Mr. Near's favorite meals is spicy chicken -- with a pickle.
