Borden Inc.'s chief financial officer and its general counsel are leaving the beleaguered food and chemicals company as part of a management shake-up.
Borden yesterday said Lawrence O. Doza, its 55-year-old senior vice president and chief financial officer for nearly nine years, will take early retirement, effective March 1.
Earlier this month, Walter W. Kocher, Borden's vice president and general counsel, resigned after 25 years with the company.
In addition, people close to Borden say George J. Waydo, one-time executive vice president in charge of the struggling snack-food unit, is expected to leave Borden after completing an international assignment.
Most recently, Mr. Waydo, 50, served as a vice president in charge of special projects.
Messrs. Doza, Kocher and Waydo couldn't be reached for comment.
Borden also declined to comment on the changes, but people familiar with the situation say the departures of Messrs. Doza and Kocher, as well as the expected resignation of Mr. Waydo, are part of a management overhaul by Ervin R. Shames, Borden's recently appointed chief executive officer.
In the past, Borden's management hasn't been highly regarded, particularly in the food industry.
"Obviously, there's a changing of the guard going on," says John McMillin, an analyst at Prudential Securities Inc.
"To some extent, Doza represents a scorekeeper of the past regime."
In a statement, Mr. Shames praised Mr. Doza for "creating innovative, low-cost corporate financing vehicles."
But others have more mixed reactions to the decisions made during his tenure.
Goldman, Sachs & Co.'s Nomi Ghez says that in 1991, Borden created an unusual partnership that basically allowed it to reduce some of its debt.
Under the partnership, Borden put in as assets its best-known trademarks, including Cracker Jack and Cremora creamer.
In exchange, an "outside investor" contributed $500 million.
"It was all gimmicks," said Ms. Ghez, who added that the partnership enabled Borden to book a gain and keep the $500 million off its debt total.
"It was a financing vehicle that allowed them to underestimate debt levels . . . disguised in the form of something else."
People familiar with Borden add that Mr. Doza was perhaps too closely associated with the company's past -- particularly its last two restructuring efforts, which did little to bolster results.
Borden declined to comment on Ms. Ghez's statements.
Borden said it is seeking an outside replacement for Mr. Doza.
George P. Morris, vice president and chief strategic officer, has been selected to act as chief financial officer in the interim.
The departure of Mr. Kocher, 59, is said to be primarily because of cost considerations.
Mr. Kocher's functions overlapped with those of Chief Administrative Officer Allan L. Miller, and the decision is said to have come down to selecting which one should depart.
But the expected departure of Mr. Waydo, who is said to have already negotiated a severance package with Borden, concludes a more controversial career.
From 1985 to March 1993, Mr. Waydo served as executive vice president of Borden with responsibility for its snacks and international consumer-products unit.
During Mr. Waydo's tenure, Borden made a number of acquisitions that later turned sour -- most notably, its 1987 purchase of Laura Scudder potato chips for nearly $100 million.
Major union problems prompted Borden to close all of Laura Scudder's California plants a year after the purchase.
Borden began using a plant in Salt Lake City, only to incur high costs and quality problems.
Last May, Borden sold Laura Scudder for less than $20 million.
Now, it is trying to sell its entire snack-food business.
Borden reported a fourth-quarter loss of $635.9 million, or $4.50 a share, including a $632 million restructuring charge.
In the year-earlier quarter, it had a profit of $28.4 million, or 20 cents a share.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading, Borden stock rose 12.5 cents to $15 a share yesterday.
