The Senate is finally joining the debate over the future of telecommunications in the U.S.
A bipartisan group of influential senators is expected to introduce legislation today designed to ensure access to telephone services while breaking down barriers between cable television companies and long-distance and regional telephone companies.
Their plan has been eagerly awaited.
In the House, two bills already are on the fast track, and many lawmakers and interest groups have been waiting impatiently for the Senate to spring into action.
Sponsors of the Senate legislation include Commerce Committee Chairman Ernest Hollings of South Carolina and Communications Subcommittee Chairman Daniel Inouye of Hawaii, both Democrats, as well as Republicans John Danforth of Missouri and Ted Stevens of Alaska.
Their bill emphasizes the goal of ensuring that every U.S. household can receive telephone service.
All telecommunications carriers, for example, would be required to contribute to a fund, or provide in-kind payments, to ensure that phone services remain available to all households.
Beyond that, the bill would allow regional Bell telephone companies to manufacture telecommunications equipment, an activity that is off limits for the "Baby Bells" under the 1982 consent decree that broke up the Bell System.
The Senate legislation also would set up a framework that eventually would allow the seven giant Bell companies into the long-distance business, the other activity banned by the consent decree.
The decision on that would rest with the Federal Communications Commission, which would be required to consult with the attorney general.
Before entering the long-distance arena, Baby Bells would have to meet fairly stringent tests designed to prevent them from using market power to squash competitors.
To provide long-distance service outside of its region, a regional Bell would have to show that there is "no substantial possibility" it could use market power to harm competition in the market it plans to enter.
Before entering long-distance service inside its territory, a Bell company would have to jump a much higher hurdle: The FCC would have to find that the Bell company not only has opened its own network to competitors but also actually faces real competition.
To hasten competition in local telephone service, the bill would remove barriers that prevent cable and telephone companies from entering each other's businesses.
Unlike a House bill that would require Baby Bells to wait five years before federal regulators can begin reviewing whether they can enter the long-distance market, the Senate bill wouldn't impose a waiting period.
The House bill, sponsored by Judiciary Chairman Jack Brooks of Texas and Commerce Committee Chairman John Dingell of Michigan, would let state regulators decide when a Bell company can provide intrastate long-distance service.
The House also is considering a bill designed to spur competition in the local telephone arena and to establish a regulatory framework for future high-speed interactive networks that carry voice, data and video signals.
That bill was introduced by Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.), chairman of the telecommunications panel, and Rep. Jack Fields (D., Texas), ranking minority member.
House action on both bills is expected later this month.
A major provision of the Senate bill would encourage media diversity, including by allowing broadcasters to use the airwaves to offer data-transmission and other nontraditional services as long as they pay for use of the spectrum.
Meanwhile, long-distance carriers warned Rep. Brooks and other lawmakers that the delicately crafted compromise with Rep. Dingell could put many smaller long-distance carriers out of business.
In an often-contentious hearing before the House Judiciary Committee's economic and commercial law panel, they took aim at the bill's provision allowing state regulators to decide whether a Bell company can offer long-distance service within state boundaries.
Bernard J. Ebbers, president of LDDS-Metromedia Communications Inc., told lawmakers that instead of fueling competition, the Bell companies could smother it because the long-distance industry's smallest players generally concentrate on in-state service.
