Prudential Securities Inc. quietly agreed to pay a former star partnership broker $250,000 to settle an arbitration case he filed against the firm, people familiar with the case said.
The settlement reached with William Webb -- who sold more than $25 million of energy partnerships in his six-year career at the firm -- came on the eve of a hearing before the National Association of Securities Dealers in Tampa, Fla., the people said.
Mr. Webb had accused Prudential of, among other things, pressuring brokers to peddle the partnerships without adequately disclosing the risks, and wrongful termination.
The accord, which contains a confidentiality clause, is believed to be the largest amount paid to a former broker by Prudential, the nation's fourth-largest securities firm.
The confidentiality provision means Mr. Webb can't publicly discuss the case.
But the clause doesn't preclude Mr. Webb from being subpoenaed by prosecutors, who are seeking evidence of wrongdoing by senior Prudential Securities management from former brokers who have accused the firm of misleading investors.
The Webb case was among the most closely watched in a handful of cases former Prudential brokers have filed against the firm, securities lawyers said.
"Prudential had been saying that the Webb case would not be settled -- that it would be the case where Prudential would set an example and establish that brokers do not have valid claims against the firm," asserted Thomas R. Grady, a Naples, Fla., lawyer representing a former broker and investors with claims against Prudential.
"That's not the way it worked out."
Mr. Webb's saga provides a window into how some Prudential brokers peddled limited partnerships in the 1980s.
Mr. Webb asserts in papers filed with arbitrators that the firm aggressively prodded him to sell partnerships to safety-conscious investors, often promising annual returns of 15% or more, and to rely solely on sales materials provided by the firm -- not the tell-all document known as the prospectus.
In an unrelated arbitration case filed by partnership investors against Prudential, Mr. Webb was asked if he relied on the prospectus to sell partnerships.
"Well, I would disclose it and hand it to the client normally after they left," he testified.
"In terms of going over the prospectus in a detailed fashion, no, I did not do that."
The Webb case could have gotten messy for the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit.
On the one hand, Mr. Webb was one of the first whistle-blowers in the Prudential partnership matter.
In his case against the firm, he accused Prudential of misleading brokers into selling the partnerships, and his testimony could potentially have been damaging for Prudential.
Mr. Webb left Prudential in November 1990; he has testified in other cases that Prudential says it fired him for buying stock in an outside account maintained at a securities-trading unit of Barnett Bank.
In this testimony, Mr. Webb says he earlier had told Prudential about the account.
On the other hand, Mr. Webb was vulnerable to attack by his former firm; indeed, he has conceded in separate arbitration cases that investors have filed more than 100 legal claims involving partnerships that he sold.
In some cases, investors have accused Mr. Webb of concentrating the bulk of their portfolios in high-risk partnerships and penny stocks.
Prudential declined to comment on the settlement.
Both Mr. Webb, who now is a broker for Advest Inc., and Michael Criden, his attorney in Miami, declined to comment on any aspect of the case, citing the confidentiality clause.
Prudential hasn't yet paid the money from the settlement, which was reached late last week, the people familiar with the case said.
In cases in which he has testified, Mr. Webb painted a picture of a firm driven to push brokers to aggressively sell the partnerships.
In an unrelated arbitration case, Mr. Webb testified that the firm urged brokers to play off investors' fear of stocks following the 1987 stock-market crash.
"After the crash in '87, the partnership department used that method as a selling technique quite a bit, you know, in terms of limited partnerships," Mr. Webb testified in that earlier case.
"If you were in the limited partnerships as opposed to the market, you wouldn't have seen a loss in value like you had in the stock market."
This is not the first legal claim filed by former Prudential brokers that the securities firm has settled.
Prudential last year settled cases with four former brokers, paying a law firm representing the brokers a total of $700,000, people familiar with the case said.
Those brokers had contended that Prudential deliberately launched a sales campaign to deceive investors into buying the partnerships.
Separately, several current and former Prudential employees will begin receiving subpoenas in the next few days in a federal investigation of the firm's partnership practices, according to people familiar with the matter.
The subpoenas, which were expected, come as the U.S. Attorney's office in Manhattan and the Securities and Exchange Commission investigate what role current and former Prudential employees played in the firm's partnership practices.
