The Transportation Department said it will require transportation companies to test for alcohol use 25% of workers whose jobs affect safety, but will allow the rate to change depending on how each industry performs.
The new testing rules, crafted to meet a law passed in 1991, also would double the number of transportation workers covered by federal drug-testing rules, to about 7.5 million workers.
The alcohol and drug-testing rules will cover airlines, trucking companies, transit systems, railroads and gas-pipeline concerns.
The extra drug and alcohol testing would cost businesses an estimated $2 billion over the next 10 years, and the rules could face legal challenges from unions and employers.
Both groups found fault with the regulations yesterday.
Unions said the rules don't give workers enough protection against erroneous test results, and allow employers to impose a tougher standard than the government does.
The rules require an employee whose blood-alcohol level tests above .04% to be relieved from safety-related duties.
But "an employee could fall under the threshold and still be fired," said Ed Wytkind, an executive director of the AFL-CIO's transportation trades department.
Industry representatives said the rules would be costly for businesses to put into effect, particularly because the Transportation Department would also require employees to be tested for alcohol when they apply for a job.
"Pre-employment testing is an IQ test, not a safety test," said John J. Collins, a lobbyist for the American Trucking Associations.
He also questioned the value of alcohol tests that truckers would receive only when they returned to the terminals, and tests that independent truckers would perform themselves.
Transportation Department officials said the safety benefits far exceed the costs.
They said the government couldn't prevent employers from taking their own actions against employees, and that people have shown up for airline interviews with drugs in their system.
Federico Pena, Transportation secretary, said unions and businesses should spend their money reducing drug and alcohol use instead of fighting the rules.
Mr. Pena noted that small businesses would have until January 1996, instead of next January, to begin alcohol-testing and said the rules have "clear common-sense incentives" for businesses to decrease alcohol and drug use.
Industries that perform well in random alcohol tests could test as few as 10% of their workers each year, while industries that perform poorly would have to test 50%.
The airline industry must now test 50% of pilots, flight attendants and ground crews for drugs.
Airlines would now be allowed to test 25% instead, since positive results have been below the Transportation Department's threshold.
