Anthony Smith, a principal in Valenti, Smith & Associates Inc., occasionally shouts and paces wildly when he counsels the New York consulting firm's clients, mainly small-business owners.
The former Harvard football player even inspired a client, Francisco Salas, to tackle him in the office.
Mr. Smith was stressing to his client that business success sometimes requires "you to get in somebody's face and make your point," recalls Mr. Salas, the six-foot-one, 200-pound president of CSR Construction Corp., a builder in Nutley, N.J.
Mr. Smith's methods may seem more pregame pep talk than management consulting, but among small business owners like Mr. Salas, that kind of coaching is becoming more popular.
Firms like Valenti Smith blend conventional business advice with motivational counseling to inspire a desire to win big.
Rather than simply helping clients achieve incremental sales increases, coaches encourage meteoric growth.
According to Mr. Smith and his partner, Angelo Valenti, the unusual methods get results.
The men say more than half of their 275 clients since 1991 -- when they began coaching -- have achieved their growth goals.
These goals, which clients are required to set, can be as ambitious as a 2,000% sales rise over the course of their coaching contract.
Valenti Smith's own revenue has climbed about 30% annually since 1991 to nearly $500,000 last year, the partners report.
The company charges small-business clients $6,000 for six months of coaching, comparable to fees for traditional consulting.
A growing number of small-business consultants promote themselves as coaches, says David Lord, editor of Consultants News, a newsletter in Fitzwilliam, N.H.
The trend reflects rising interest "in personally oriented management consulting," Mr. Lord continues.
"We're seeing a greater recognition of how personal hangups get in the way of business decisions."
But Mr. Lord and other industry observers urge small-business owners to be wary of personal business consultants, particularly those who promote far-fetched performance gains.
"I would never be so arrogant as to think I could increase sales 1,000%," says Mortimer Feinberg, president of BFS Psychology Associates Inc., a New York consulting firm.
"There are too many variables in business, and psychology is just one of them."
Also, many entrepreneurs cannot manage torrid growth, Dr. Feinberg adds.
Rapid expansion often is "not only imprudent -- it's suicidal," he says.
"Modest growth is much better."
Messrs. Smith and Valenti disagree.
They say that through motivational counseling, small-business owners can achieve a breakthrough.
"This kind of coaching frees up people to take on bolder, riskier and far more profitable projects and actions," says Mr. Smith.
The 46-year-old, who has a master's degree in counseling and has advised prison inmates with drug problems, began working with Mr. Valenti in 1984.
Mr. Valenti, 45, formerly sold educational aids to schools.
In 1990, they started Valenti Smith.
Fred Piumelli, president of Getpaid Software in Montvale, N.J., says a year of sessions with Valenti Smith helped him to cope with missed deadlines by his software developers.
Their chronic design delays had forced him to postpone marketing new products, slowing the small company's sales, he says.
Now, Mr. Piumelli says, he warns software developers that they face dismissal unless they can meet delivery schedules promised to customers.
One result: an annual doubling of sales since 1990, when the sessions with Valenti Smith ended, to an expected $2 million this year, Mr. Piumelli says.
CSR Construction's Mr. Salas says he and his partner, Leon Cohen, also benefited from six months of coaching last year by Valenti Smith.
Mr. Salas says their firm was on the verge of losing a bid to build a $6 million power plant in New Jersey.
The electric utility's project-review committee had rated CSR's bid the best technically but not the lowest, Mr. Salas recalls.
Mr. Smith's advice: Forget the committee and make a pitch to the utility's president.
Mr. Salas says he did and a month later got the job -- without lowering his price.
The contract became a major contributor to CSR Construction's $10 million in revenue last year, he notes.
Mr. Salas says he wouldn't have thought of the simple approach on his own.
"I was trained to follow protocol, to think linearly that there's a certain way to do things that goes from step A to step B to step C." He adds: "Breakthroughs don't go from A to B. They skip steps."
Valenti and Smith concede their breakthrough concept sometimes produces "breakdowns," or management problems related to the firm's growth plan.
In fact, "the bigger the breakthrough you want, the more breakdowns you're going to have," Mr. Valenti explains.
"The companies that can handle breakdowns are going to grow quickest and be more profitable."
Daniel Van Starrenburg, president of Nature's Tree Inc., in Bedford Hills, N.Y., says a breakdown enabled him to achieve a breakthrough in his business confidence.
His company hired Valenti Smith in 1990.
The sessions inspired him to believe that "you can make a commitment to something and have no idea how you're going to do it," he says.
Thus, Mr. Van Starrenburg says he acquired a small New Jersey tree-care company in 1992 even though he knew he had too few managers to handle the expansion.
He transferred his vice president of finance and top salesperson to the new office.
He says he delegated the financial officer's duties to his controller.
But by early 1993, the controller had resigned to have a baby and the financial vice president left for a competitor.
Mr. Van Starrenburg found himself dangerously shorthanded.
He says accounting fell behind, delaying a project and the firm's response to rising costs.
He finally filled the two vacant posts in August.
Mr. Van Starrenburg insists that the temporary "breakdown" in management made him a better business owner.
Today, for instance, "we make sure everybody in the company is training somebody to be their successor," he says.
Sales related to the acquisition have increased 64% since 1992, accounting for $1.8 million of the company's $10 million in sales last year.
Perhaps most significantly, Valenti Smith coached him "to overcome the natural fears you face as an entrepreneur," Mr. Van Starrenburg explains.
He adds: "You can generate a more predictable future if you do things cautiously.
But if you have only one life to live, why not play it all out?"
