Working for Nucor Corp., a steel company in Charlotte, N.C., "doesn't appeal to a lot of ladies, says personnel manager Jim Coblin.
Only 2.6%, or 11 of the 423 managers, are women, putting Nucor at the bottom of the Journal's list of 200 companies.
Mr. Coblin adds: "It is certainly not an unwillingness to hire ladies, it is an unwillingness to come to the steel industry.
Even in the hands of a firebrand feminist, Nucor could present a challenge.
About 80% of the company's 5,800 employees work in factories near 2,300-degree furnaces and lots of dirt.
Also, the company says, women who do interview for jobs usually lose interest as soon as they discover employees are rotated among the morning, afternoon and night shifts, which is a common practice in the industry.
"If they have children to take care of or if they have an outside life, it's difficult to fit that in, Mr. Coblin says.
Turnover is low at this minimill and promotions come from within.
For these reasons, "you almost have to be willed a job at Nucor, says John Correnti, president.
Mr. Coblin says that he wants to bring more women in, but clearly the company hasn't made it a priority.
Other minimills have low percentages of women managers, but few as low as Nucor's.
For 41-year-old Mindy Hodge, overseeing men didn't come easily.
"Of course, I was a nervous wreck for the first few months, says Ms. Hodge, who manages seven men as supervisor of the supply warehouse in Norfolk, Neb.
With only 20 women at the 500-person plant, Ms. Hodge says she wasn't even sure the company would hire a woman for the job when it became available several years ago.
After she got the offer, she began worrying whether her colleagues would accept her as a manager.
At first, Ms. Hodge, who had worked for 17 years at Nucor in various clerical jobs, says she felt scrutinized, expecting someone to challenge her authority.
"I kept waiting for who's going to jump up in front of me and mess me up, she says.
No one ever did.
After two years in her new role, Ms. Hodge says she now feels that men are comfortable with her.
But "I don't do the lunch thing with men, she says.
"I don't think it would look right.
Because she is single, she is partly concerned about becoming a target of office gossip.
