Unmarried couples face some difficult financial-planning problems, especially if the partners are gay.
In a world where law and custom favor conventional husband-and-wife pairings, unmarried heterosexual and gay couples typically don't have the right to inherit each other's property, speak for each other in a crisis, or sometimes even visit one another in the hospital -- unless they've done some careful planning.
Unmarried people "have a responsibility to do this for their partner," particularly if "they have antagonistic family members," says Judith Turkel, a lawyer with Turkel Forman & Zimmerman in New York.
Houston attorney Marc Grossberg tells of a client whose HIV-positive partner died last summer before signing a will that provided for the client.
Now, Mr. Grossberg and his client are suing the late partner's father so the man can remain in the home the couple shared and inherit other assets he says his partner intended him to have.
"All of those problems wouldn't have happened if the late partner had signed the documents his lawyer had prepared," says Mr. Grossberg.
Everyone should have an up-to-date will, of course.
But married couples have a safety net: Under the laws of every state, a spouse is first in line to inherit a mate's estate, if the person dies without a will, known as dying "intestate."
That holds even if the marriage occurs just before death.
For those unwilling or unable to get married -- no state, for example, recognizes "marriages" between same-sex couples -- a will becomes absolutely essential.
Unmarried partners, are "nowhere on the map unless you are in the will," says Beatrice Dohrn, legal director at Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, a gay-rights group in New York.
Unmarried partners should take steps to ensure that the will could withstand a legal challenge by disgruntled relatives.
Max Gutierrez, chairman-elect of the American Bar Association's real property, probate and trust law section, says each partner should contact his or her own lawyer.
If they use one lawyer who was originally hired by the surviving partner, that fact could give ammunition to a family member contesting the will.
Another suggestion: People who are hospitalized with AIDS or other debilitating illnesses when they make their will may want one or two doctors' signed opinions that they are aware of their actions, says Mr. Gutierrez.
Some couples may want to consider ways to transfer property to one another outside of probate, the process by which estates are valued and wills are settled.
If a member of the deceased's legal or biological family is going to challenge the surviving partner's right to property, probate is the likeliest arena.
Perhaps the simplest approach is to have the ownership papers of shared property, such as a home, list them as owning the property "jointly with right of survivorship," planners say.
Upon one partner's death, the property belongs to the survivor.
If both partners didn't originally pay for the property, the buyer may want to simply add the partner's name to the deed as a joint owner.
However, the buyer may owe federal gift tax of 18% to 55% on the value of transferred ownership above $10,000.
(Spouses don't have this problem, lawyers say.)
Another strategy is to put some property into a "revocable living trust," to bypass probate, some planners say.
Such trusts are best for someone anticipating a long illness who wants his partner to be able to handle assets for him.
But there are no income-tax or estate-tax advantages to living trusts, planners caution.
And if the partners don't trust each other thoroughly, they may not want to give unfettered power over their assets.
State laws vary, but most living trusts for unmarried couples work this way: One partner makes himself trustee and his partner co-trustee.
He transfers title of certain property he'd like out of the glare of probate.
Within the trust, he can sell, exchange or spend the assets, and his partner and co-trustee can do so for him if he's incapacitated.
Upon the death of the partner who put the property in the trust, the assets will be taxable as part of his estate, but they will go directly to beneficiaries the deceased named, frequently within a few weeks.
It can take months or even years for property to make it through the probate process.
But if your primary assets are bank or brokerage accounts, life-insurance policies or employee-benefit plans, it might be simpler to make your partner the beneficiary, rather than putting them into a trust, says Steven Bing, a New York attorney.
Banks or brokerages may have you set up "in-trust-for" accounts for this purpose, and a simple name change may make your partner the beneficiary on insurance or benefits forms.
Unfortunately, advisers say there is little escape from estate taxes that can eat up more than 50% of the inheritance.
For those with sizable estates, one avenue to consider is buying a life-insurance policy on yourself that will pay the estate taxes upon your death.
The insurance proceeds themselves probably won't be taxed as part of your estate if the policy is bought through an "irrevocable life-insurance trust," says Martin M. Shenkman, a New York attorney.
A knowledgeable estate attorney can tell you if such a strategy is right for you.
Couples in which one partner is HIV-positive or has other health problems might be able to trim estate taxes on some property by using a "private annuity agreement," says Stephan Leimberg, a professor of taxation and estate planning at the American College in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Essentially, one partner agrees to buy a big-ticket asset from the other over the owner's actuarial life.
Mr. Leimberg gives the example of a 30-year-old man who is HIV-positive but healthy and owns a $500,000 home that he would like his partner to inherit.
They sign a private annuity agreement, in which the partner becomes owner of the home in exchange for lifetime payments to the current owner.
The amount of the payments is calculated on the home's current fair market value, spread over the seller's life expectancy as determined by acutuarial tables.
In all likelihood, the seller would die in a shorter period of time.
When the seller dies, the partner who has been making the payments has no further obligation, even if he hasn't made $500,000 of payments.
Such a contract won't work, however, if the current owner's death is imminent, Mr. Leimberg says.
It's crucial to use a knowledgeable attorney to set up such an arrangement.
In addition to thinking about property, couples need to give each other certain rights to avoid family interference.
A financial and a medical "durable power of attorney" are two other crucial documents to have in medical emergencies, advisers note.
The former authorizes your partner to handle financial chores like paying taxes, applying for benefits, paying bills or borrowing money if you can't.
The medical durable power of attorney (known as a health-care proxy in some states) gives your partner priority to tell doctors or hospitals what medical measures you would want taken in an emergency.
In addition to having your partner stand in for you this way, you should also look into signing a living will, recognized in most states.
A living will spells out your wishes about whether resuscitation, artificial feeding or "heroic measures" should be undertaken to keep you alive in extreme circumstances.
Here are a few words you'd never expect to hear from an entrepreneur: Not all regulatory delays are bad.
Take the Federal Communication Commission's current effort to "reconsider" its earlier decision on the licensing and deployment of new wireless telecommunications services.
This regulation, which will effectively determine the competitive picture of the $100 billion wireless industry -- and what consumers will pay -- is worth taking the time to get right.
In September, the FCC announced rules governing the emerging, and converging, markets for the next generation of cellular phones, personal communicators, and handheld wireless data devices.
Attempting to balance the concerns of entrepreneurs and consumers against the well-represented voices of telecommunications giants, the FCC decided to try to please everyone by creating a "class system" for the upcoming auction.
Small players fare well: The decision sets aside licenses for minority- and women-owned businesses.
Big players also do nicely: The FCC agreed to auction off huge chunks of radio spectrum, a move that effectively shuts out medium-sized firms from bidding.
But the telecommunications "middle class" will likely be squeezed in a fierce bidding war with cellular companies for the spectrum that's left.
This approach is akin to giving five first-round draft picks to the Dallas Cowboys and the San Francisco '49ers in this year's NFL draft -- and only one to every other team in the league.
Not exactly a good formula for competitive parity.
Unfortunately, the problems don't end there.
Not only do telecommunications giants get the opportunity to bid for spectrum with only limited competition, but they also get an extra edge by receiving licenses covering more territory than their smaller rivals.
This unequal allocation will allow the biggest firms to use cheaper, "spectrum-greedy" cellular-standard technologies to provide wireless services instead of more efficient new methods using digital technology.
The experience of my own company, OneComm, with a service known as specialized mobile radio, or SMR, illustrates this point well.
SMR companies like mine are updating what were once nonconnected, less-sophisticated wireless systems -- such as fleet dispatch channels -- into integrated wireless service networks that are competing directly with the old cellular duopoly in local markets.
Our innovative system is set to reach the market later this year.
Companies like mine provide advanced wireless services with only a fraction of the spectrum that giants like Pacific Telesis and Time Warner insist they require for new wireless communications services.
The digital technology that OneComm is deploying can transmit voice communications six times more efficiently than standard analog cellular technology.
We are not alone.
Some of our competitors claim to be developing spectrum efficiency 10 times greater than existing systems.
But the current FCC plan provides no incentive for winners of larger spectrum blocks to be efficient and innovative.
It's actually cheaper for them to use older, less efficient, cellular-clone technologies.
If implemented, the FCC rules would create an incentive for inefficiency by granting larger blocks of spectrum than are required to implement a system and giving the large block winners a competitive leg up on firms that can't raise the billion dollars it will take to buy market success all at once.
There is a better way: Let the market work from the bottom up, not the top down.
Our firm has become an emerging wireless competitor by finding innovative ways to consolidate small blocks of old SMR spectrum, piece together regional networks and deploy advanced digital technology.
In our view, this market-driven model can also govern the development of a competitive market for personal communications services and the next generation of wireless communicators.
We hope, therefore, that the FCC will reconsider its current approach of choosing winners and losers based on who can afford to buy the most spectrum.
Instead, the commission should award small licenses of equal size to more competitors -- say by divvying up the 120 megahertz of spectrum into 12 licenses of equal size.
This will allow more companies to participate in wireless personal communications, providing a wider variety of strategies and technologies for the market to choose from.
The market will ultimately determine the winners based on service capabilities and operating effectiveness.
The winners will then be positioned to accumulate more spectrum as needed for future growth.
That's a development worth waiting for.
Mr. Jaschke is president of OneComm Corp., a wireless communications company based in Denver.
