The Japanese economy is producing some of its brightest economic signals in almost a year, raising hopes among political leaders that the long downturn is finally bottoming out.
But the nation's business people don't share that perception.
The Bank of Japan's quarterly survey of corporate sentiment, released Tuesday, showed a halt in the nine-month deterioration in the business outlook.
The mood as measured by the closely watched survey, which is called the tankan, remained negative, but the leveling off cheered some analysts, especially on the heels of bullish data about Japanese housing starts and industrial production.
Skeptics, however, noted that Japan's economy was showing similar signs of brightness last year before it fell into a second phase of economic decline.
The outlook for Japan's economy draws a special scrutiny in the U.S., whose annual trade deficit with Japan approaches $60 billion.
As Japan's economy strengthens, U.S. officials hope the nation's appetite for American goods will increase as well.
Officials in Washington thus have pressed the Tokyo government to do more to stimulate the economy, and at last weekend's meeting of the major industrial nations, the U.S. expressed frustration at the pace of action by Japan.
But for the economic policy makers in Tokyo, the split between the positive indicators and the continuing perception of sluggishness underscores the quandary they face.
On the one hand, the signs of improvement are enough to tempt some Japanese officials to delay or even abandon additional stimulative measures that may be needed.
"Policies taken by the Japanese government have been tremendous," said Iwao Matsuda, a senior member of the Shinseito party, a key bloc in Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's coalition government.
"Frankly speaking, I don't think anyone can suggest any good measures at the moment."
On the other hand, many Japanese executives and some members of the bureaucracy say the economy needs additional stimulus -- including interest-rate cuts from already historic lows -- to ensure that the economy picks up significant steam.
"There's no feeling that the economy will improve any time soon," said Nobuyuki Horiuchi, general manager of corporate planning at Toshiba Corp.
"We need deregulation and a tax cut" that would be permanent and that would replace this year's one-time reduction in income taxes.
On Monday, the day before the tankan was released, the government said that housing starts jumped at a 20.7% annual rate in January and that industrial production rose 0.9% from December.
Unemployment fell 0.1 percentage point in January, to 2.7%, the government said Tuesday.
The housing and industrial-production data "got people really excited about a recovery," said James Vestal, chief economist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities (Japan) Ltd.
"But the further you get away from the headline numbers, the more suspicious things look."
"The numbers may look better, but the profitability isn't there," said Mikio Kunisawa, managing director of Nishimatsu Construction Co., reflecting a view commonly held among businesses.
The Bank of Japan's survey itself reflected the corporate ambivalence.
The level of pessimism about the future among manufacturers didn't worsen, for the first time since May, and business people projected improved profits in the coming fiscal year.
Still, the outlook was stuck at its weakest level in 18 years, and business investment was seen shrinking by 9.2% in the year starting April 1.
It could have been worse.
The central bank's survey was taken in early February, before U.S.-Japan trade talks broke down and a stronger yen made Japanese exports less attractive to foreign buyers.
Many of the Japanese statistics may also have been distorted by corporate balance-sheet adjustments made ahead of the March 31 book closing.
To be sure, some analysts found good news in the survey.
"We didn't have a further decline, which is a positive sign," said Michael Lockrow, economist at Baring Securities Japan Ltd.
"From here on, confidence will pick up."
For their part, foreign investors in Japan have confidence aplenty.
They have led a buying spree that has lifted the Nikkei Stock Average, Japan's benchmark stock-market indicator, about 16% so far this year.
Foreign brokerage firms now print analyst reports with titles such as "Boom Ahead."
At the Bank of Japan, bureaucrats were cautious in their views.
"We're not sure yet whether this is the bottom or not," said a central bank official.
"We're looking for a gentle recovery sometime" in the next 13 months, he added.
Japanese companies, hit hard by the long business downturn, want a rebound that goes beyond "gentle," and are calling for cuts in interest rates, economic deregulation and more stimulative spending.
A cut in the discount rate is the most likely next step.
The discount rate, which is charged on loans to banks by the central bank, stands at a postwar low of 1.75%.
But with private-sector loan growth stalled and inflation in Japan at 1% or less, there are compelling reasons to move rates even lower.
"Given this tankan, an interest-rate cut is necessary," said Robert Feldman, chief economist at Salomon Brothers Asia Ltd.
He noted that a rate cut "would also help the banking system," which is struggling under an estimated $285 billion in bad loans.
But Japanese politics make it hard to carry out other measures.
On Monday, the prime minister reportedly told leaders of the ruling party to speed the implementation of market-opening measures aimed at reducing Japan's trade surplus, but Mr. Hosokawa also hopes to reshuffle his cabinet later this week, possibly including shifts in the finance and economic-planning portfolios.
That probably means that power struggles will take place within the fragile coalition, and that would sidetrack politicians from concentrating on economic policy and U.S.-Japan trade relations.
