Soon there will be four national magazines for people who are HIV positive.
The newest entrants in the field, Plus Voice and POZ, are glossy publications for men and women that will try to rival the circulations of the most successful gay magazines in the country.
They are joining the very fringe, sardonic DPN (which stands for Diseased Pariah News) and Art and Understanding, a literary magazine.
These magazines arrive at a time when gay publishing is flourishing generally.
Bruce Fryer, director of magazines for the Waldenbooks chain, says that in 1993, "gay publications showed the largest increase in our stores of any category, growing 85% in unit sales."
In recent years, Out and the Advocate are said to have reached circulations well over 100,000.
Plus Voice, which calls itself "the magazine about life and HIV," published its first issue last month and says it distributed 50,000 free copies in 31 states.
Arriving on newstands today will be POZ, which Richard Perez-Feria, the editor, says is "a cross between Vanity Fair and the New England Journal of Medicine."
While existing gay magazines regularly carry articles about AIDS, the publishers of both Plus Voice and POZ say they believe there is more to say.
The first issue of Plus Voice carried an interview with Kristine Gebbie, President Clinton's new AIDS czar, nutrition tips and an article on how to become an AIDS volunteer.
POZ's premiere issue includes a profile of Barry Goldwater's grandson Ty Ross, who is HIV positive, plus a section on "AIDS and the courts" and movie and television reviews.
Both magazines plan extensive coverage of new research and drug trials.
Though they may seem morbid, the new magazines have found a surprisingly good response from advertisers.
Some, such as insurance and medical-supply companies, are eager to get their message to this group, while other companies say they're buying ads to show support for a worthy cause.
Steve Simon has advertised in both POZ and Plus Voice and has donated money to DPN.
"I've spent millions advertising in gay publications in the past five or so years, and I think these publications are long overdue," he says.
Mr. Simon is president of American Life Resources Group Inc. of Miami Beach, Fla., a company that buys out the life insurance policies of terminally ill people so they can raise money while alive.
POZ "is very efficient for us," says Robert Yassky, director of marketing for a nutritional supplement made by Medagenics Inc. of San Clemente, Calif.
"Our supplement is designed for people with HIV or cancer and though we have a sales force, it is very small.
Sean Strub the publisher of POZ has developed over the years what seems to be a very good list of people affected by HIV, and this allows us to reach them directly."
Many blue-chip advertisers, however, have declined to buy space in these publications.
Magazines are often created by members of a group who feel passionately that their special interests aren't otherwise served, and the founders of these publications are no exception.
Brett Grodeck, the 27-year-old who started Plus Voice in Chicago, discovered six years ago that he carried HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
And Mr. Strub, the founder and publisher of POZ, is a New York-based entrepreneur and AIDS activist who came down with full-blown AIDS several years ago.
"I'm funding this myself and have provided for POZ to go on after I'm gone," says Mr. Strub.
"This is the most important thing in my life."
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that about one million Americans are now infected with HIV but don't yet have AIDS.
But Mr. Strub sees a broader audience.
"We want to reach not just people who are HIV positive, but everybody else who is affected by this, including friends, family and medical caretakers."
The first issue of POZ will be mailed free to a list of 70,000 "AIDS-involved households," a list compiled by Mr. Strub that includes regular contributors to AIDS causes.
A six-issue subscription will be offered for $19.95, but those who identify themselves as HIV positive can receive the magazine free.
Plus Voice asks for a $30 donation from subscribers, but also gives the magazine free to those infected.
While he says he is very satisfied with the first response, Mr. Strub hasn't been able to sign up as many lifestyle and clothing advertisers -- such as Benetton and Kenneth Cole -- as he had hoped.
"I've tried to tell them that when someone finds out they are positive, they'll go out and spend money if they're affluent at all," says Mr. Strub.
"They'll fly to Paris or buy that Versace suit they always wanted."
Mr. Strub says he'll keep after those reluctant companies, and he believes that the newsiness and professionalism of POZ will eventually convert them.
Nancy Kerrigan had to settle for silver in Lillehammer, but can she still mine gold on Madison Avenue?
Apparently so.
Revlon, a unit of MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings, said it has signed an exclusive multiyear agreement with the 24-year-old figure skater to appear in television and print ads.
Details are still under discussion, a Revlon spokesman said, including which Revlon products Ms. Kerrigan will endorse.
News of the deal follows an estimated $6 million multiyear agreement between Ms. Kerrigan and Walt Disney Co. covering personal and commercial appearances, a made-for-TV movie to be aired on the ABC network and a children's book to be published by Disney's Hyperion Books.
Sports marketing experts said they believe it is one of the single largest deals between a marketer and an athlete, in either professional or Olympic sports.
Experts in sports marketing say the color of Ms. Kerrigan's medal is insignificant.
"My feeling was that after she won the technicals, it really didn't matter what she did," said David Burns, founder of Burns Sports Celebrity Network, Chicago.
But some of them said they were dismayed to see Ms. Kerrigan behaving less than graciously over the weekend.
She made a tart remark on camera about her rival, Oksana Baiul, before the medal ceremony, offered critical remarks about Ms. Baiul's skating in published news reports and skipped the closing ceremonies.
"I would prefer that she hadn't brought up the fact that she deserved to get the gold," Mr. Burns said.
"She should be advised to just shut up about that."
Others disagreed.
"I think the public has already forgiven her for those things," said Allen Furst, a partner at D&F Group, a Washington, D.C., sponsorship agency.
"They know what she's been through over the last month, and for the most part they'll remember her for what she achieved on the ice."
Ms. Kerrigan and her agent couldn't be reached.
Ad Notes. . . .
COCA-COLA: Chiat/Day is expected to unveil advertising today for a new product from Coca-Cola Co.
The new ads are expected to be for a juice-based New Age-type beverage.
Separately, knowledgable executives said Coke had awarded an estimated $30 million European assignment for Fanta soft drinks to Interpublic's Lowe Group.
A spokesman for Coke declined comment.
TOBACCO AD BAN: The Baltimore City Council voted to ban several forms of outdoor tobacco advertising, including billboards, sides of buildings and free-standing boards, according to City Wide Liquor Coalition, a Baltimore community group.
Excepted are outdoor ads on interstate highways and at certain sports venues, the group said.
A similar ban on alcohol advertising went into effect in December but is under appeal by liquor industry interests.
