The Postal Service board, meeting behind closed doors, voted to propose a 10.3% rate boost for almost all classes of mail.
The price of mailing a first-class letter would rise to 32 cents.
The proposal, which will be announced today, now goes to the Postal Rate Commission, an independent five-person panel that has 10 months to decide whether to approve or adjust the new rates.
Any price increase would go into effect early next year.
Postal rates were last increased in February 1991 to the current 29 cents for a first-class letter.
In that case, the Postal Rate Commission scaled back the proposal from 30 cents.
Yesterday's action came after debate among the governors over whether the roughly $5 billion a year in additional revenue from the rate increase would cover the Postal Service's costs.
The agency has been posting larger-than-expected monthly deficits, including a loss of $64 million in the most recent four-week accounting period.
But officials close to the agency said that Postmaster General Marvin Runyon has been prodding postal governors to accept the 10.3% increase instead of a larger 13.8% boost.
Mr. Runyon told governors that he would work harder to cut costs at the agency, stepping up an already ambitious plan he launched over the past two years.
The 10.3% boost would be unique because it would raise rates by the same amount on almost all mailers, from catalog companies to individual senders of Christmas cards.
As a result, the Postal Service would sidestep the contentious legal battles that have traditionally followed rate announcements that place unequal burdens on different mailers.
The four-year gap between rate increases would be the longest stretch since the Postal Service was created as a separate government corporation in 1971.
Postal Service officials declined to comment on the board's action, except to say that a news briefing will be held today.
The business community has been lobbying for the 10.3% increase, in part because it wants to avoid the type of legal battle that has accompanied earlier increases.
But business mailers also are pressing to keep rates down.
The 10.3% rise would be substantially below the 13.8% rise in overall prices projected for the period between the last increase in February 1991 and early next year.
Business mailers already have begun putting pressure on the rate commission.
"This rate case is not going to be a cakewalk," said Gene Del Polito, executive director of the Advertising Mail Marketing Association.
"But what does the Postal Rate Commission lose by approving this?"
If it turns out a higher rate increase is needed, the Postal Service could ask for a second increase, although that would be embarrassing, he noted.
Under the Postal Service plan, certain second-class mailers, specifically nonprofit organizations that send magazines, would be asked to pay more to cover the cost of shipping their publications.
Their boost probably will be closer to 20%.
The Postal Service is under tremendous pressure to keep rates down because of increasing competition from fax machines, private express-mail services and other rivals.
In particular, the agency is struggling to keep its place among businesses that might turn to other means to disseminate their message.
