Bell Atlantic Corp. today plans to issue a formal call to software developers worldwide to come up with applications that can be turned into new services for the interactive network that it hopes to build in the next two years.
The new initiative is aimed at speeding development of new multimedia features and other services for homes and businesses that could wind up as part of the Baby Bell's push into the interactive market later this year, said John Prisco, a Bell Atlantic marketing vice president.
That would help fill at least part of the considerable void that has been left by the collapse of Bell Atlantic's deal to acquire Tele-Communications Inc., a cable and programming powerhouse.
The deal fell apart last month, leaving Bell Atlantic without a major cable partner -- and without TCI's Liberty Media spinoff as a major source of video programming.
Even so, the Baby Bell, which provides telephone service to six mid-Atlantic states and Washington, has vowed to carry through with its plans of wiring 1.2 million homes in its region for interactive services by the end of next year.
The new software effort is a sign that the Philadelphia-based company doesn't intend to back down from those promises.
"They're painting themselves to be masters of their own destiny," said Marion Boucher of Bear, Stearns & Co.
The new effort, however, will target business-oriented services first, coaxing software firms to develop such applications as health-insurance claims processing and video-conferencing.
That appears to indicate that while Bell Atlantic Chairman Raymond Smith has often played up the consumer applications of the new interactive technology, the business market may offer a safer entry.
As part of the initiative, Bell Atlantic is wooing developers to visit its Silver Spring, Md., lab to test programs and seek technical advice -- and will even help pay their travel expenses.
It has signed Novell Corp., a major player in network software, to develop jointly a tool kit for writing applications.
And it is inviting developers to adopt a tool known as Space, created by the Bellcore research lab, which lets developers use point-and-click icons to design applications.
"The measure of our success will be the number of applications we can get to market this year," said Mr. Prisco.
