Bosnia's Serbs withdrew or gave up nearly all of their big guns from the hills surrounding Sarajevo, ending the threat of immediate air strikes.
But the demands for deeper U.S. diplomatic and military involvement in Bosnia will only grow.
The U.S. and its allies will have to decide whether to extend their air-strike ultimatum to Bosnia's other killing fields.
While France and several other European governments have endorsed the idea, U.S. officials warned yesterday that peacekeeping troops in Bosnia already are dangerously overextended.
But if the Serbs turn some of the estimated 250 heavy weapons they retrieved from Sarajevo last weekend against other besieged towns, the demands for Western retaliation will be hard to resist.
U.S. officials are hoping to shift their focus to diplomatic efforts to end the war, presenting another potential area of disagreement among Western allies.
Even reaching a peace settlement would have a high military cost attached -- one that has yet to register with the American public.
U.S. officials say that Bosnia's Muslim-led government will never sign a peace settlement without solid security guarantees, foremost among them the promise of a large number of U.S. ground troops.
"That is the cost of doing peace," said a senior U.S. official, adding: "It just hasn't sunk in" to the American people yet.
Speaking to reporters yesterday, President Clinton said that he had long been committed to sending peacekeepers to Bosnia, provided all sides "freely" accepted a peace agreement and "as long as we had fewer than half of the troops there."
In fact, Mr. Clinton and his aides, girding for a tough political fight at home, have been trying to downsize an earlier promise to provide half of a North Atlantic Treaty Organization peacekeeping force, floating the idea of one-third of the overall troops and settling on the president's safely nonspecific "fewer than a half."
"We just don't want to give Congress the impression that we're carrying the biggest load," another U.S. official said.
While White House planners debate their public-relations strategy, Pentagon planners are trying to figure out just how many soldiers will be needed to keep the peace safely.
U.S. officials say that an original NATO estimate of 50,000 to 60,000 troops -- half of them Americans -- applied to an earlier peace map and not the current three-way partition plan.
And officials say that if Washington's efforts to encourage a confederation between Bosnian Croats and Muslims succeed, the numbers could decline further.
NATO planners, however, say they still would like to see around 25,000 U.S. troops in Bosnia.
U.S. officials, meanwhile, expressed strong doubts about extending NATO's air-strike ultimatum to other "safe areas."
President Clinton said it was important "that NATO not undertake any mission it is not fully capable of performing."
Privately, U.S. officials warned that there simply aren't enough United Nations troops on the ground to monitor weapons caches and separate the warring parties.
"It's a labor-intensive activity," warned a White House official.
Instead, U.S. officials are hoping that a mixture of diplomacy and threats will restrain the Serbs.
Hoping to enlist the Russians in that cause, Defense Secretary William Perry told reporters that he had told his Russian counterpart, Gen. Pavel Grachev, that "it would be a step backward for peace" if the removed artillery pieces were used to shell other cities.
Gen. Grachev pointedly replied that U.S. ground troops would enhance peace efforts considerably.
But if the Serbs prove recalcitrant, U.S. officials say that the air-strike strategy still could be used to force open the airport at Tuzla and to relieve Canadian peacekeepers in the eastern enclave of Srebrenica.
The U.N. plans to reopen Tuzla airport by March 7.
The airport is essential for bringing relief to thousands of starving Bosnians in the center of the country.
As part of the diplomatic effort, the U.S. is expected to press the Muslims hard in coming days to come up with a "bottomline" peace proposal.
In Washington yesterday, Secretary of State Warren Christopher discussed Muslim terms with Bosnian Prime Minister Haris Siladjic.
U.S., European and Russian officials will meet today in Bonn to discuss a joint approach to the negotiations.
While the U.S. and European officials clearly differ over where to go with the negotiations, relations with the Russians are even more tense.
Mr. Christopher, speaking on television's MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour last night warned that Russian peacekeepers in Bosnia would act professionally or "they won't be doing their job very long."
U.S. officials say they see three difficult areas for negotiation: the economic viability of a rump Bosnian state, Bosnian access to the Sava River and the Adriatic Sea, and whether Sarajevo should be ethnically partitioned, an idea rejected by Bosnia's Muslim-led government.
The issue of Sarajevo's future appeared to get more complicated yesterday, when French President Francois Mitterrand called for the Bosnian capital to be placed under U.N. control -- an idea originally championed by the Russians.
U.S. and Muslim officials are expected to oppose the idea of a "separate peace for Sarajevo," which could rob momentum from the broader peace effort as well as open the door for an ethnic partition.
Thomas E. Ricks contributed to this article.
