The murmur for months around Hong Kong has been that Jardine Matheson is a bit of a stick-in-the-mud.
The venerable trading house recently has been dickering with both Hong Kong's market regulators and the government in China.
Now comes word that the firm will pull its listing off the Hong Kong stock exchange.
This tension over control and markets looks to us like a tale for our times.
Jardine has lived through several previous global frenzies over the seeming richness of the China market.
No doubt somebody around the office would be able to remind you that long before "the Open Door" became a slogan of Dengism, it was a principle enunciated by U.S. Secretary of State John Hay.
His goal was to secure equal trading rights in China for all countries, of course, but also to block moves by other powers to dismember China into separate economic zones.
That was almost a century ago.
Funny how the fundamental challenges of culture and geography have a way of never quite being laid to rest.
Some inkling of history perhaps also led the Keswicks to say what are by now famously kind words about Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's democratic reforms, and this at a time when other captains of industry were keeping their heads down or pandering to China.
Those statements provoked an angry response from Beijing and Jardine's business has no doubt suffered in the short run.
The announcement that Jardine will delist from the Hong Kong stock exchange drew another blistering lecture from the Xinhua News Agency, Beijing's official voice in the colony.
Deputy Director Zheng Guoxiong accused the 150-year-old company of being "extremely irresponsible."
It seems to us that Jardine's shareholders have fared better than the mainland residents who've had to endure 45 years of the Communist Party's "responsible" government.
Jardine's latest move follows the transfer of its legal domicile to Bermuda in 1984 and the shift of its primary listing to the London stock exchange two years ago.
Announcing the shift, Directors Nigel Rich and Charles Powell alluded to the company's British background and international character, but it would be unwise to impute cultural chauvinism to Jardine's decision.
It's hard to see why any world-class company would want to become a corporate citizen of the People's Republic.
Do shareholders really want their property governed by Beijing's laws and subject to a political culture that periodically descends into warlordism and now threatens to protect a nuclear blackmailer like Kim Il Sung?
Divorces are always sad, but in this case both Jardine and the stock exchange are doing the right thing.
Hong Kong's regulators have an interest in preserving the exchange's reputation as a level playing field.
Granting the exemption the firm wanted from local takeover rules would have looked like a bribe to keep Jardine on board, a tacit endorsement of its dour view.
That said, the responsible folks at the exchange must feel 1997 breathing down their own necks.
Private concentrations of power necessarily quail before the power of the state, which includes the power to deprive people of their property.
With China looming, both Jardine and the stock exchange are trying to stake out ground that will allow them to preserve their integrity.
Our own view is that full and immediate democracy would give Hong Kong its best hope for surviving a new ruling class that shows little inclination to honor the sanctity of the private sphere.
