China has agreed to enforce compliance with international copyright laws in order to curtail the production of counterfeit compact disks, U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said.
The agreement, with Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, removes one of the irritants in what appears to be a less confrontational, more productive economic relationship evolving between China and the U.S.
Before he leaves China this weekend, Mr. Bentsen still hopes to widen the scope of services U.S. and other foreign financial service firms can provide in China.
In return, the U.S. is preparing to offer China a wider range of technical assistance on issues ranging from financial regulation to the control of inflation.
China's inflation rate is running at 20% a year or more, and Chinese leaders are becoming increasingly concerned that their economy is overheating.
Mr. Bentsen said President Jiang Zemin told him that they wanted to move deliberately toward reform.
"He thought it was very important that they test out some of the free-market ideas," Mr. Bentsen said.
He expressed some reservations about making the Chinese currency fully convertible.
There are some other signs that China wants to moderate the pace of economic reform.
Last week Mr. Zhu, who is also the governor of the People's Bank of China, warned banks to stick with previously announced credit limits designed to slow inflation, according to China Daily.
And President Jiang, while touring stores in Beijing, called for the maintenance of low prices.
But the chief of China's anti-inflation efforts may be about to change.
A Chinese source says Mr. Zhu plans to resign as head of the Bank of China in March.
He would continue as a vice premier.
Speculation about Mr. Zhu's resignation has been circulating for some time, and Mr. Zhu already has selected his successor, the source said.
Mr. Bentsen announced Thursday that Washington and Beijing "have agreed on measures to ensure more effective prevention of the export of goods made with prison labor."
China hopes that the verbal accord will defuse congressional concern about its human-rights policies and thereby help it win continuation of its Most Favored Nation trade status, which gives it the lowest possible tariffs in its trade with the U.S.
