Sen. John Breaux's campaign committee does more than make sure the Louisiana Democrat gets re-elected: It also makes sure he's well-fed.
Last year, according to Federal Election Commission records, the campaign picked up the tab at a number of Washington's more posh restaurants: $78 at Le Mistral, $100 at Bice, $110 at Red Sage and $166 at La Brasserie.
The campaign also spent $964 at the Senate gift shop on birthday and wedding presents.
On top of that, the campaign paid for $1,050 worth of New Orleans Saints football tickets.
In theory, it has been illegal since 1979 for candidates and members of Congress to use campaign funds to cover personal expenses.
But in practice, the FEC and House and Senate ethics committees have given lawmakers such wide latitude in defining campaign-related expenses that most any disbursement has been deemed to be legitimate.
Members of Congress have tapped their campaign funds to buy fancy cars, extend business trips into family vacations and purchase evening gowns for their wives.
Now, the FEC is finally looking into closing the lid on such uses of campaign war chests; it is scheduled to hold a hearing today on proposed regulations that, in general, would bar the use of campaign funds for any expense that would exist irrespective of a candidate's campaign or official business as an officeholder.
Many politicians are not happy.
"There seems to have been a mild outbreak of panic" on Capitol Hill, says Elizabeth Hedlund, director of FEC Watch, a project of the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics.
FEC officials say they have gotten phone calls from some concerned lawmakers; others have written letters.
"A politician must meet and mingle with people," Florida Democratic Rep. Earl Hutto asserts in a letter to the FEC.
"There is no better way than to attend a Friday night high-school football game."
Others who have written the FEC to question certain aspects of the proposed rules include Democratic Rep. Jolene Unsoeld of Washington and California Republican Rep. Bill Thomas, the ranking minority member of the House Administration Committee.
Trevor Potter, who has been an FEC commissioner since 1992 and took over as chairman earlier this month, isn't surprised at the protests.
"I think any candidate would like to keep a lot of discretion" in how campaign money can be spent, says Mr. Potter, who gets credit from FECwatchers such as Ms. Hedlund for trying to shake things up at an agency traditionally viewed as a toothless tiger.
Up till now, that discretion has been virtually unchallenged.
In the 15 years that the personal-use prohibition has been on the books, the FEC has never punished anyone for violating it, and the broad power over how campaign money is used has remained one of lawmakers' most prized perks.
In "Handbook of Campaign Spending," a study of how money was used in the 1990 congressional races, journalists Sara Fritz and Dwight Morris found that Republican Sen. Ted Stevens of Alaska spent more than $70,000 in campaign funds on automobiles and maintenance for two cars kept in Washington.
In all, they found, 94 members of Congress either bought or leased cars with campaign dollars.
A 1992 report by the citizens' lobby Common Cause showed that between 1978 and 1990, former Republican Rep. Robert Davis had his campaign pay nearly $225,000 between 1978 and 1990 for "travel, lodging, meals -- virtually everything he did in Michigan," his home state.
The same report found that Democratic Sen. Daniel Inouye of Hawaii consumed $892 worth of "campaign meals" during visits to Indonesia and Taiwan.
When Congress passed the personal-use law, it put in a grandfather clause that allowed sitting members of Congress to convert campaign funds to personal use upon retirement; many did.
In 1989, the grandfather clause was removed, but the revision was written so that no lawmaker was actually affected until last year.
The proposed FEC rules spell out a number of areas that would be automatically considered personal use of campaign funds: mortgage, rent and utility payments, food, child support, health care, insurance, clothing and tuition.
The rules would also ban using campaign money for country-club dues, as well as greens and tennis court fees, unless these costs were part of a fund-raising event.
In addition, the proposed regulations would prevent candidates from paying salaries to themselves out of campaign funds.
And, in what would be a reversal of previous policy, the rules raise the possibility of preventing candidates from having their campaigns rent portions of their homes or offices.
Among those urging the FEC to go slow are two leading campaign attorneys, Republican Jan Baran and Democrat Robert Bauer.
Although they have represented campaign committees of their respective parties, Mr. Baran says he and Mr. Bauer "are not representing anyone in particular" in this instance.
In a joint letter to the commission, they argue that prohibiting expenditures that would have been made irrespective of a person's candidacy is "at once too broad and too uncertain."
They also say that any new FEC regulations should comport with House and Senate ethics rules, which critics feel are looser than what the FEC has proposed.
Their bottom line: The FEC "should not impinge on the appropriate discretion of candidates to determine which expenditures are campaign related."
But critics say this is precisely the nostrum that led to so much abuse in the first place.
"If we're going to reform this system, we have to put an end to members of Congress living off of their campaign money," says Fred Wertheimer, president of Common Cause.
"What you end up here with is special-interest groups not only financing the campaigns of members of Congress, but their personal lifestyles as well."
Nor is it just a question of lifestyles.
Also on the FEC's proposed list of items to be counted as "personal use" are funeral, cremation and burial expenses for deceased lawmakers; the FEC says it "is aware that campaign funds have been used" to cover such costs.
