Yields fell in the Treasury market yesterday but anxiety remained high.
After one of the most brutal weeks that bond traders have ever seen, the market seemed to pause for a breather yesterday.
The yield 30-year Treasury bond fell to 6.79% from 6.83% on Friday.
Its price, which moves in the opposite direction of its yield, rose more than 3/8 point, or more than $3.75 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 93.
"People are still very nervous," said Mark Grant, managing director of fixed income at Josephthal, Lyon & Ross Inc. of New York, an investment banking firm.
"But there's a tremendous amount of cash" on the sidelines, he said, where many investors are waiting to see if the bond market has stabilized.
Since Feb. 4, when the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates, bond prices have dropped more than six points, or more than $60 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
An investor who bought a bond then and sold it yesterday lost more than 6% of his principal.
That's more than twice as much as what an investor could have earned in a money-market fund over an entire year.
Meanwhile, the prices of Denver Airport bonds appeared to stabilize yesterday after a week of sharp drops in reaction to news of delays in its opening and of plans by Continental Airlines to move personnel to other airports.
Bond prices were much higher earlier in the day, when they posted gains of about 7/8 point with support from rallying European bond markets.
Late in the day, however, the market was affected by low volume and further second-guessing about the next change in monetary policy.
But even at the day's highs, the memory of the market's losses in the past several weeks wasn't erased: Traders and investors readily noted that the yield on the 30-year bond is still nearly 1/2 percentage point higher than a month ago.
"I think you're getting a little bit of a bounce in what's longer-term a bear market," said Michael Strauss, economist at Yamaichi International America Inc., of yesterday's gains.
The dominant force behind yesterday's gains was already in place by late in the weekend: Germany's powerful IG Metall labor union settled with employers, agreeing to a modest 2% wage increase and cuts in the work week for more than three million industrial workers.
While the goings-on of one union in Europe -- even one as influential as IG Metall -- normally might not gain notice in the U.S., the settlement was seen as important to interest rates throughout Europe.
That guaranteed that its influence would be felt across the Atlantic.
Had the German union struck, analysts said, it would have sent rising price pressures throughout that country's economy.
That, in turn, would have been viewed by European bond players as ending any near-term chances for a rate cut by the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank.
One of the most-damaging factors for Europe's bond markets in recent weeks has been high interest rates in Germany, so the news of the union settlement there sent a rally through bond markets on the continent.
U.S. bonds -- whose losses late last week were characterized as overdone by some traders -- enjoyed some "short covering" in overnight trade under the influence of European trading, and that buying continued briefly after the open of dealings here.
Selling a borrowed security in the hopes of a drop in prices is called short selling, and buying the security to close out the position is called covering the short.
After reading in Sunday's papers that the IG Metall and employers had settled, "I had the feeling that we'd have a nice little bounce" Monday, said Joseph Liro, senior vice president and chief economist at S.G. Warburg & Co.
Bond mutual-fund managers, absent from the market in recent sessions, were among those buying bonds during the morning, traders said.
Also, a handful of European accounts that were finally able to get out of losing positions in European markets were able to buy back some some shorts set in U.S. Treasurys, said Mr. Strauss of Yamaichi.
By late morning, most of the yesterday's trading was done.
But other news kept the market near its best levels.
Traders pointed to falling oil prices as a positive influence.
On a day-to-day basis, oil prices are often one of the market's favorite inflation gauges.
Falling inflationary pressures is good news for the bond markets because it means that a fixed coupon payment from a bond is worth more.
The decision by the Fed not to raise short-term rates on Friday seemed to help support bond prices as well.
Late last week, some well-known bond players, primary dealer CS First Boston Inc. among them, let it be known that they were looking for the Fed to hike rates again yesterday.
The central bank last did so in early February, when it nudged its target for the Federal Funds rate -- the overnight lending rate for banks -- up to 3.25% from 3%.
If the Fed is changing its policy, it usually does so by entering the open market late in the morning to buy or sell securities.
When it didn't do so Monday, the bond touched its best level of the session.
But the wait for the Fed to move is far from over, traders and Wall Street economists said, and the stress of that wait was weighing upon Treasurys again by session's end.
"I think it's this attitude that the Fed's going to give you something and it's just a matter of timing," said Morton Swinsky, president of Fuji Securities Inc.
Most Fed watchers now figure the central bank to move to influence rates again before March 22, the day the bank's policy-making Federal Open Market Committee next meets.
"I think as we go through the next day or so, and the Fed doesn't show . . . the chances become less and less they'll make a move before that meeting," said Mr. Liro of Warburg.
Mr. Liro and his colleagues figure that the Treasury market is so sensitive to reports due to be released over the next week's worth of trading sessions that the Fed won't take any chances of making dealings any more volatile.
Meanwhile, yesterday the U.S. Treasury sold $25.25 billion of three-month and six-month bills at its regular weekly auction.
The three-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.52% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.6%.
The six-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.75% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.88%.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated March 10.
The 13-week bills mature June 9 and the 26-week bills mature Sept. 8.
Municipal-bond sales eased yesterday and allowed better performances for issues including Denver's troubled airport revenue bonds.
Those bonds have been in focus since early last week, when the opening of the city's new international airport was delayed -- for the third time -- to May 15.
It was to open tomorrow.
While munis were generally up as much as 1/2 point in late trading yesterday due to a correction after last week's bond sell-off, the good news for Denver's airport revenue bonds was an ebb in sales that simply allowed the securities to stabilize.
The yield for Denver's 6.75% of 2022 airport bonds was 6.9% in late trading yesterday, unchanged from the level seen Friday, but up from 6.5% last Tuesday, before the wave of sales began.
The price of the bonds was unchanged at 98 1/8, but over the past week the price of those bonds has dropped nearly four points, or nearly $40 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
The selling occurred because of the muni market's general weakness and negative developments concerning the new Denver International Airport.
After the announcement of the latest delay in the opening, Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard & Poor's Corp. expressed strong concerns about the series of postponements, and Continental Airlines announced its plan to relocate more than 1,300 of its Denver-based employees to other cities between May and July.
Continental told Dow Jones Capital Markets Report on Friday that the relocations are a "totally separate matter" from issues involved with the delay in the opening of the new airport.
Postponement costs of the latest delay, which are estimated at $30 million, are to be covered by Continental and United Airlines.
Despite the current scenario, sentiment about Denver's airport bonds seemed more "evenly divided" yesterday, said a trader based in New York.
While some investors were selling small holdings, he added, widespread selling had clearly abated.
Although sales have ebbed, buyers may shun Denver airport bonds for a while, some muni specialists said.
Market participants will probably want to "stay in the trenches" until there are fewer uncertainties about the new airport, a Denver-based trader said.
The municipal bond market's general strength yesterday was attributed to a long-awaited correction.
Traders warned, however, that sentiment remains bearish due to concerns about the possibility of further Fed moves to raise short-term interest rates in the near future.
"Perhaps we've reached a near-term bottom," said Gregory Gizzi, a trader at Dillon, Read & Co.
He said that other signs of a market bottom would be a few days of range-trading and the appearance of fewer bid-wanted, or selling, lists.
The corporate-bond market focused on news, rather than new issues.
An announcement that British Airways PLC will suspend further investments in USAir Group Inc. pushed USAir bond prices down.
The British company currently holds a 24% stake in USAir.
In other news, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal by bondholders who sued Donald Trump and his Taj Mahal casino in Atlantic City, N.J.
New issues were slim Monday, with only $250 million of debt priced.
Hoechst Celanese Corp., a unit of Hoechst Celanese AG, sold $100 million of medium-term notes through CS First Boston Inc.
Trading in the investment-grade market was light, with prices following Treasurys.
Junk-bond trading was extremely light, focusing mainly on Trump's Taj Mahal and USAir.
USAir bond prices have been sliding on concerns about its margins amid pressure from lower-cost carriers.
By midday, its 10% coupon debentures due in 2003 were quoted at 86 to yield 12.6%, a two-week drop of some 11 points, or $110 for a bond with a $1,000 face value.
In the Trump case, the Supreme Court decided not to hear an appeal of a ruling by the federal appeals court in Philadelphia that investors generally can't sue companies for misrepresentations in a prospectus if the document also includes sufficient cautionary statements.
The casino's 11.35% bonds maturing in 2003 rose one point, or $10 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 92.5 in yesterday's session.
The yield dropped to 13.13% from 13.33%.
Trump Taj Mahal is a unit of the Trump Organization.
Mortgages were unchanged late yesterday amid lackluster trading and the release of data revealing a marked slowing of home-loan refinancing.
Ginnie Mae 7s for March delivery were ending up 6/32 at 98 29/32, Freddie Mac 7s were ending up 7/32 at 99 8/32 and Fannie Mae 7s were ending up 7/32 at 99 1/32.
The Treasury's 10-year note, a pricing benchmark for current coupon securities, was ending the day up 7/32 at 96 22/32 to yield 6.33%.
The news of slower prepayments, while largely expected, underlies the dilemma of "extension risk" facing holders of mortgage securities.
Slower prepayments mean investors may own their securities for longer than they initially expected.
This problem was long forgotten by mortgage investors who have witnessed four waves of unprecedented refinancing.
Instead, the fear for the last two years has been the early call of their securities as the underlying mortgages prepaid.
That fear has so dominated the market that prices of mortgage securities have yet to compensate investors for the new risk of extension, according to analysts.
Candace Cumberbatch contributed to this article.
