Secretary of State Warren Christopher had barely begun his human-rights lecture to Chinese Premier Li Peng during his recent trip when the Chinese leader interrupted.
He had held many positive meetings with top executives of U.S. companies recently, he noted, including General Electric, AT&T, IBM and "Gold Sacks" -- an apparent reference to the Wall Street investment house.
The message was clear enough: Beijing isn't taking Mr. Christopher's lectures very seriously.
A cacophony of conflicting signals from the U.S. has led Chinese leaders to conclude that the Clinton team won't follow through on its threat to totally revoke China's trading rights.
And they may be right.
Without strong leadership from the top, even the U.S. government isn't speaking in unison.
Earlier this month, John Shattuck, assistant secretary of state for human rights, went to China to warn that the U.S. would revoke China's favored trading status by June unless Beijing significantly improves its human-rights performance.
Without checking in advance with Mr. Christopher, Mr. Shattuck also met in secret with a leading Chinese dissident -- a move that incensed Chinese leaders after news of the session surfaced in Beijing.
But at the same time as Mr. Shattuck was threatening to cut off trade relations, a top Commerce Department official, Jeffrey Garten, was in the Chinese capital trying to strengthen those ties.
He was discussing arrangements for a trade meeting that will bring more than 100 Chinese officials to Washington next month.
His visit was paving the way as well for a planned trip by Commerce Secretary Ron Brown and two dozen U.S. corporate chieftains to Beijing in August -- two months after the deadline for China to show progress on human rights.
The president's National Economic Council and his National Security Council plan a joint meeting today in an effort to find a way out of a hole they have dug for themselves.
Meanwhile, China's leaders continue to defy U.S. demands that they make improvements on human-rights issues in exchange for trade privileges.
Just yesterday, China's foreign minister publically lashed out at U.S. policy, declaring that China could live without the American market.
One U.S. official predicts that today's session will be a tense one.
In the wake of Mr. Christopher's stormy trip to Beijing, senior officials concede the odds have dropped that China will make significant progress on human rights over the next two months.
If they don't, and President Clinton agrees to continue China's Most Favored Nation trading status, he will be accused of breaking his word, kowtowing to the Chinese Communists and demonstrating once again that in the new world, the U.S. lacks the courage of its convictions.
But if Mr. Clinton fails to extend trading privileges, he will be cutting off what his Commerce Department calls the world's most promising market for U.S. goods over the next two decades and tarnishing his own promise to make economics a guiding principle of U.S. foreign policy.
These vast economic stakes have triggered the bickering among officials over China policy.
Economic aides in the White House and at the Commerce and Treasury departments complain bitterly about their colleagues at the State Department, including Mr. Shattuck and Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Winston Lord.
One White House official joked last week that while many Americans go to China to buy shirts, Mr. Christopher went there and lost his.
State Department officials counter that economic officials are responsible for undercutting the president's threat.
Senior U.S. officials still were emitting mixed signals as recently as last weekend.
On his way to a meeting of Asian finance ministers in Honolulu on Friday, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen adopted Mr. Christopher's tough line, saying: "If the decision were made today, I assume that China would lose that most favored nation privilege."
But after arriving in Honolulu, Mr. Bentsen started talking compromise, telling reporters the U.S. needed to avoid "disengaging" from China.
"I think we have to explore alternatives to see if we can work this out," he said.
The next day, Mr. Bentsen tried to undo the damage, saying China had to do more, but he also said China "has made progress in the last few months."
Even the Chinese were confused.
An aide to Chinese Finance Minister Liu Zhongli who had heard Mr. Bentsen's comments scurried after reporters to double-check the message.
"Did he say China has made progress in recent months?"
Told by reporters he had heard the secretary correctly, the Chinese official replied: "This is a positive message."
While Mr. Christopher has been heaped with blame over the past week, the administration's no-win China policy really has its roots in the presidential campaign of 1992.
Candidate Clinton, taking his cues from congressional Democrats, repeatedly pummeled President Bush on a foreign-policy front where Mr. Bush seemed vulnerable: his "coddling" of aging Chinese rulers who sent tanks into Tiananmen Square in 1989 and mowed down pro-democracy students.
Mr. Bush angered congressional Democrats by thwarting their efforts to pass punitive measures against China.
Last spring, the Clinton administration finessed the Most Favored Nation issue by extending the trading privileges for another year.
But in doing so, the president issued an executive order setting conditions that China could realistically meet and that were less stringent than ones Congress was vowing to pass.
The order was hammered out by Mr. Lord and Samuel Berger, the deputy National Security adviser.
The two officials consulted closely with two congressional Democrats -- Rep. Nancy Pelosi of California and Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell of Maine -- who were spearheading the efforts for tough sanctions.
"At the White House signing ceremony, everyone from the head of the U.S.-China Business Council to representatives of agricultural exporters to members of Congress were there, and there was overwhelming support," recalls Mr. Lord.
That is, except among Mr. Clinton's economic team.
They felt the executive order overemphasized human rights at the expense of economic opportunity.
By last summer, it was becoming clear the policy was in trouble.
China was doing little to release political prisoners or ensure that products shipped to the U.S. weren't being made with prison labor -- steps they needed to take under the executive order.
Moreover, China's leaders were in a defiant mood; inflation problems were prompting them to clamp down on any signs of discontent.
And with the prospect of a succession battle looming when China's aging leader, Deng Xiaoping, passes from the scene, senior officials were anxious to stand up to the U.S.
In the meantime, President Clinton was getting an earful both from U.S. business executives and from overseas trading partners.
They were nervous that a rupture in U.S.-China relations could jeopardize their budding business profits and derail the Asian region's prosperity.
On the way back from the Group of Seven Tokyo summit in July, Mr. Clinton began grumbling about the way the China policy was working -- or not working -- presaging a switch in U.S. strategy.
Developed between mid-July and Labor Day, the new policy was dubbed "comprehensive engagement."
The idea was to broaden ties with China in trade, business and military affairs, as well as human rights.
U.S. officials believed this approach would reassure China that Washington valued the countries' overall relationship.
They also hoped that growing cooperation in other fields would enable Beijing to improve its human-rights record without looking as if it was knuckling under to the U.S.
U.S. economic officials continued to be uneasy about the thrust of the policy, however.
At the Commerce Department, Mr. Garten marched into the fray with a thick, classified economic analysis titled "U.S. Commercial Interests in China to the year 2000."
In it, he called for more specific economic analysis to be incorporated into China policy making.
Following a top-level meeting in early October, Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky, the Commerce Department's Mr. Garten and Treasury Undersecretary Lawrence Summers stayed behind to complain that Mr. Lord still was placing excessive emphasis on human rights and security issues at the expense of trade and economics.
They told Bowman Cutter, deputy director of the National Economic Council, that the policy was still unbalanced.
Mr. Cutter took the complaint to Mr. Berger, the deputy National Security adviser, and further adjustments in the policy process were made to give the economic officials a greater voice.
Yet the public contradictions continued.
Mr. Clinton tried to juggle the competing interests at a November gathering of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation organization in Seattle.
During a parley with top U.S. officials in his hotel suite before Mr. Clinton met with China's president, the focus was heavily on commercial interests, recalls one participant.
But after Mr. Clinton met with the Chinese leader, the U.S. president said he had emphasized "the need for early concrete progress" on human-rights issues.
The new policy continued to send mixed signals to China along diplomatic channels as well.
Mr. Christopher, who had already met four times with his Chinese counterpart, planned his recent trip to Beijing to underscore U.S. determination on human rights.
Not only was the June deadline approaching, but China's annual meeting of the People's Congress was leading to the customary roundup or harassment of dissidents.
Chinese officials' fury over Mr. Shattuck's meeting with Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng added further fuel to their antidissident campaign.
As Mr. Christopher made his way to Beijing, traveling first to Australia and Japan, prospects for the trip continued to dim.
Sitting in his suite at the Okura hotel in Tokyo, Mr. Christopher, prodded by some political advisers who saw a potential disaster in the making, asked Mr. Lord whether the trip should be postponed.
Mr. Lord, a former ambassador to China, argued that canceling it would deprive Mr. Christopher of the chance to carry the U.S. message directly to the Chinese leaders and might cause a rupture in relations that couldn't be healed by the June deadline.
The secretary of state decided to keep to his schedule.
After his first day in China, where the reception was as frigid as the winter wind blowing down from Mongolia, Mr. Christopher considered cutting the visit short.
But again Mr. Lord, along with the U.S. ambassador to China, Stapleton Roy, argued against such a move.
They said that Chinese negotiations often fit a pattern of becoming more accommodating after the first day.
According to U.S. officials, the Chinese leaders' tone did moderate somewhat on the second day, but Mr. Christopher ran into a buzz saw from American business executives.
The members of the American Chamber of Commerce in Beijing, citing the enormous business stake in China, openly criticized the administration's policy of linking MFN to human rights.
Mr. Christopher's aides, who were expecting such carping, tried to limit the damage by closing part of the meeting to the press.
But Mr. Christopher's traveling press corps objected as they were being asked to leave the session.
Noting that Mr. Christopher moments before had described American freedoms, one reporter asked if, "in the interest free speech," reporters could remain in the room.
Mr. Christopher called for a show of hands from those in the business audience who preferred the session closed.
The business executives wanted their message carried by the U.S. media.
Not one hand was raised.
"We are constantly reminded by our Chinese partners that the annual fear of MFN withdrawal raises serious questions about the credibility of our commitment to China," complained William Warwick, chairman of AT&T China Inc., during the session with the secretary of state.
Mr. Christopher says that China policy is on course and that there is still time for Beijing to meet the standards set in Mr. Clinton's executive order.
The secretary of state maintains that the noise level of his visit obscured some marginal progress that was achieved on the last day of his visit.
Nevertheless, U.S. officials continue to send mixed signals.
Last week, an administration official told the Washington Post that the U.S. is giving preliminary thought to limiting the impact of revoking MFN by applying it only to some imports from China.
The official explained that the Chinese might consider this a more credible threat than vows to totally rescind MFN.
But China hears different voices.
Speaking last weekend in Honolulu, Chinese Finance Minister Liu said, "I think in the U.S. Congress there are different views, and I think in the U.S. administration there are different views.
I think it is the view of U.S. business to solve this issue once and for all."
Bob Davis and David Wessel contributed to this article.
Countries' purchasing power, in trillions of dollars.
Figures are from 1991.
