International Business Machines Corp. said it will consolidate the design and development teams of two of its personal computer lines to cut costs and bring products to market faster.
Separately, IBM plans to introduce tomorrow the first portable computer that uses its PowerPC chip.
The Armonk, N.Y., computer maker said the decision to merge development of its ValuePoint and PS/2 desktop PC brands should allow the IBM Personal Computer Co. unit to use more common parts and designs.
The ValuePoint line, introduced 18 months ago, has been a big hit, leading some IBM-watchers to conclude that it would erode the market for PS/2s, IBM's "premium" PC brand.
Meanwhile, some customers have faulted IBM for failing to upgrade the PS/2 line as quickly as they'd like.
But Jose E. Garcia, the general manager for the combined development team, said PS/2 sales remain strong and that IBM continues to fully back the brand.
"We have many loyal PS/2 customers," Mr. Garcia said.
He says IBM has not determined whether the consolidated development team, called Commercial Desktop Systems, would require fewer workers at the Boca Raton, Fla., facility, but that any affected employees would be offered work elsewhere in IBM.
In January, IBM consolidated the U.S. sales and marketing of the ValuePoint and PS/2 lines.
Today, it will consolidate the marketing in Europe, Mr. Garcia said.
The new portable computer, the RISC System/6000 N40, is based on the PowerPC chip found in some IBM workstations, the fast desktop computers used by scientists and engineers.
It also is the chip design that IBM, Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc. hope to establish as a new PC standard.
But the $11,999 notebook is aimed at engineers, software developers and others who want to run workstation software, such as computer-aided design programs, while on the road.
The 6.9-pound computer, which features an active-matrix color screen and IBM's TrackPoint cursor control device, won't run standard PC software.
But selling a workstation-based notebook may be tough.
Few scientists and engineers have a need to do 3D modeling while traveling, says Wim Roelandts, general manager of Hewlett-Packard Co.'s computer systems group.
HP, he says, looked at making a workstation-class notebook but found little demand.
Perhaps in recognition of this, IBM co-developed its notebook with Tadpole PLC of Britain, which is also assembling it.
Tadpole makes a notebook based on Sun Microsystems Inc.'s workstation chip.
