For Chester C. Davenport, who is already worth nearly $90 million, the best may lie ahead.
Tough new federal rules on auto pollution could make Mr. Davenport, founder of the nation's biggest auto-emission testing company, even richer.
The rules essentially force every state to use specialized testing companies, such as Mr. Davenport's Envirotest Systems Corp.
But angry owners of service stations and auto repair shops may block Mr. Davenport's path.
Thousands of these small-business owners, who now conduct emissions testing, are outraged that they have been excluded under the Environmental Protection Agency rules.
Their outcry has helped persuade California officials to defy the federal mandate.
This "California rebellion" threatens to undermine EPA efforts to win compliance from other states and could seriously dim Envirotest's prospects.
Though Mr. Davenport denigrates his opponents as "garage guys," he isn't taking the protest lightly.
The executive, who is one of the nation's wealthiest African-American entrepreneurs, is personally lobbying state officials in California and elsewhere.
Envirotest has also joined the EPA in fighting a suit to overturn the rules brought by repair-shop trade groups.
Critics contend that Mr. Davenport has an unfair advantage because of the way the new EPA rules are written.
"For all practical purposes, the EPA has become Envirotest's agent," charges Jim Daskal, general counsel of the Service Station Dealers of America, a trade group involved in the suit.
(EPA officials say their sole aim is to help clean up the air.)
In a way, critics' complaints about Mr. Davenport represent a backhanded compliment.
The entrepreneur has made himself a consummate insider, despite black Americans' traditional exclusion from the halls of money and power.
In 1966, Mr. Davenport was the first black to graduate from the University of Georgia law school.
After graduation, he became a tax lawyer with the U.S. Justice Department, and then worked for California Sen. Alan Cranston as a banking aide.
He also began the intense networking that helped him build the foundation for a business empire.
In the early 1970s, Mr. Davenport became a protege of Ray Lapin, former chairman of the Federal National Mortgage Association, when Mr. Lapin began a San Francisco mortgage bank.
Then, at age 36, he became a transportation undersecretary in the Carter administration.
Soon after, Mr. Davenport says, he made his first $1 million by investing in commercial real-estate partnerships in Washington with developer and publisher Mort Zuckerman.
Mr. Zuckerman says he would like to do more deals with Mr. Davenport because "he knows who to deal with and how to deal with people when he's involved in a business venture."
In 1988, Mr. Davenport and a partner, corporate-finance executive Slivy C. Edmonds, set up an investment fund to buy companies based on opportunities created by pending federal legislation.
They targeted companies with annual revenue of between $50 million and $250 million.
Two years later, they formed Envirotest to buy the Hamilton Test Systems division of United Technologies Corp. for $51 million.
Mr. Davenport says that he and Ms. Edmonds borrowed most of the money for the purchase from a Dutch bank.
A few months later, tapping his network of Wall Street contacts, the entrepreneur began lining up financing to acquire a second major auto-emissions testing concern for $83.5 million.
Mr. Davenport took a big risk in making the two acquisitions.
He completed the purchases before the EPA had finished drafting its new auto-emissions testing rules.
If the regulations hadn't favored Envirotest, Mr. Davenport might have lost his nearly $2 million investment in the company.
But after years of working in Washington, he says he felt pretty certain about the EPA's direction.
"It was my business to know these things," he notes.
Intensive lobbying subsequently helped Envirotest become the nation's pre-eminent testing company.
In an effort to win the auto-emissions testing business for Connecticut, Mr. Davenport enlisted the assistance of various lobbyists and lawyers, among them Vernon Jordan, now a confidant of President Clinton.
When Connecticut officials initially passed over Envirotest for a $150 million testing contract late last year, its local lobbyists appealed to Gov. Lowell Weicker.
The governor overruled his motor vehicle commissioner, gave Envirotest the contract and then fired the commissioner.
Gov. Weicker believes Envirotest was the best choice, a spokeswoman says.
Nevertheless, the state attorney general has begun an investigation to make sure no improprieties were involved in the governor's award of the contract.
If the states comply, the new EPA rules could more than quadruple Envirotest's fiscal 1993 revenue of $88.5 million, predicts Chad E. Brown, president of IPO Research Inc. in New York.
But it looks as though Mr. Davenport's opponents could exact at least a partial victory in California.
State and EPA officials are discussing a compromise that would allow some small-business operators to continue testing cars there.
Other states are watching California.
Nevada Gov. Bob Miller, for instance, has halted his state's implementation of the new federal rules, pending the outcome of the California fight.
State officials and lawmakers in several other states, such as Pennsylvania and Georgia, are also seeking to resist the EPA rules.
A California compromise that spreads would reduce Envirotest's revenue growth, Mr. Brown says.
He believes the possibility that such events will significantly hurt the company is "remote but growing" the longer the controversy rages.
Mr. Davenport insists that the efforts of some "maverick" state officials won't stop the EPA from enforcing its new rules.
"I think there is absolutely, positively no chance of a large-scale revolt," he says.
The EPA takes the position that any agreement with California probably wouldn't apply to other states.
Colleagues of Mr. Davenport think the current fracas won't deter him from his longer-term ambitions.
Notes Ms. Edmonds, his long-time partner: "Chester wants to be a billionaire."
