Slovakia's Parliament voted to prohibit government appointees from serving on a panel privatizing state-owned property, as details emerged of an unprecedented flurry of sales during the former government's final weeks in power.
Beginning with an all-night session Feb. 15 and continuing to within hours of Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar's resignation last Monday, state assets valued at nearly $96 million were sold at a fraction of their value, often to ministers or their associates.
Mr. Meciar originally faced the threat of a parliamentary no-confidence vote on Feb. 16.
Under the law passed Friday, top privatization executives are to be chosen by Parliament, not the government.
The newly appointed privatization minister and others in the new government have vowed to clean up the process through a preference for public tenders.
Slovakia has struggled to stabilize its government since it split from the Czech Republic in January 1993.
Russian farmers face severe shortages of fuel, fertilizer and machinery as they begin the critical spring planting period, the Trud newspaper reported.
Farmers have 60,000 fewer tractors than a year ago, and only 70% of those are operable because of a shortage of spare parts.
Farmers also have only one-third as much fertilizer as last spring and are running short of fuel.
Moscow promised $2.9 billion to help with spring planting but has delivered barely a tenth of it so far.
The Trud report said 15 million acres won't be sown this year due to various difficulties, resulting in a drastic drop in production.
Turkey reopened the Bosporus after putting out a fire on an oil tanker that collided with a freighter, but bad weather hampered cleanup efforts.
Because of storms in the Black Sea region, traffic was limited to ships leaving that area, with passenger ships and small vessels going first.
The strait between the Mediterranean and Black seas had been closed for five days, backing up at least 200 ships in one of the world's busiest sea lanes.
Ukraine on Friday cut off one of three lines that supply electricity to Crimea, claiming that the secession-minded Black Sea peninsula had about $8 million in unpaid energy bills, the Interfax news agency reported.
Many regions of Ukraine have huge energy debts to the government, and it was possible the power cut was part of the political battle between Crimea and Ukraine over autonomy for the peninsula, whose leader favors ties to Russia.
Three U.S. lawyers are training 25 Cambodians as criminal-defense attorneys in an effort to resuscitate the Cambodian judicial system.
The U.S. Agency for International Development is funding the project, in which Cambodians are taught criminal-defense procedures.
The country's legal system was destroyed during the communist Khmer Rouge's reign of terror in the 1970s.
The present legal system is based on the laws of Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia in 1979, and on laws established by the United Nations when it supervised Cambodia's transition to democracy in 1993.
Polish legislators advanced new curbs on wage increases in state-owned enterprises.
The bill still must clear the Senate, and passage is expected.
The government worried that without the curbs, managers of state companies would surrender to worker demands for higher wages, fueling inflation, which is expected to decline to a 23% annual rate this year from 38% last year.
Under the legislation, state-owned enterprises would have to pay a 150% tax on wages that exceed limits approved through collective labor agreements or in consultations with government officials.
The French government backed down on a jobs proposal in the face of violent protests.
The government said it would open immediate consultations with unions and students to modify the proposal to lower entry-level pay for youths in an effort to boost employment.
The government's retreat didn't quell protests across the country by students and labor unions.
The proposal would have cut the minimum wage for recent graduates by 20% for a year if employers provided certain training.
The government argued it was necessary to bring down the 25% jobless rate among young people, but critics said the proposal created a double standard and would have lowered other wages.
France's labor minister offered a compromise that would pay youths 80% of the minimum wage for doing 80% of a normal day's work, keeping hourly pay unchanged.
The other 20% of work time would be spent in formal training.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Preservationists say India's Taj Mahal is showing damage from pollution and greasy fingers of millions of visitors.
The country's high court, which last year ordered 212 factories near the 17th-century mausoleum to install pollution-control equipment, threatened to shut down a nearby oil refinery if it failed to quickly curb emissions. . . .
Sweden scheduled a national referendum on membership in the European Union for Nov. 13.
Though the vote isn't binding, lawmakers have vowed to abide by the outcome.
