Union showdowns with management aren't limited to the negotiating table any more, as organized labor has become one of the most aggressive initiators of proxy fights.
As many as 60 union-related proposals could be slated for shareholder votes this spring, double the number of such proposals filed last year, according to the Investors Responsibility Research Center, a Washington, D.C., research group.
The proposals come both from pension-fund trustees, who manage union members' retirement money, and from active or retired union members, who typically own shares through their companies' stock-purchase programs.
While most of these proposals call for the same corporate-governance reforms that public pension funds have long championed, a growing number seek to push controversial union agendas.
That worries some shareholder-rights advocates, who fear that labor's new activism may subvert, not advance, their own goals.
For instance, a recent proposal at Roadway Services Inc., brought by an employee with backing from the Teamsters union, demanded that executive compensation at the Akron, Ohio, trucking company be directly linked to its investment in workers.
The Roadway case, and others like it, clearly contain "a conflict of interest" between workers' desires and those of the average shareholder, says Lilli Gordon of Gordon Group, a Newton, Mass., consulting firm specializing in corporate-governance issues.
Although the Roadway motion has already been disqualified by the company on grounds that the employee hasn't been a stockholder long enough, Ms. Gordon warns that such encroachments by people with "multiple agendas" may undermine the overall proxy process.
Labor's new activism is all the more striking since it comes as traditional shareholder activists, such as the California Public Employees Retirement System, the nation's biggest pension system for state employees, are sharply curtailing their proxy drives.
Public-pension activists have acquired so much clout that company executives and independent board members typically invite them to iron out corporate-governance differences in private, thus avoiding public proxy spats.
But companies don't view the union-related proposals so constructively.
"These proposals have everything to do with labor relations and nothing to do with corporate governance," says James Allen, a vice president at Consolidated Freightways Inc., a Palo Alto, Calif., transport company that faces two such proxy initiatives.
"These guys are the wolf in the sheep's clothing," he adds.
"It's strictly a campaign of harassment."
The Consolidated Freightways motions, brought by two employee-shareholders with active support of the Teamsters, call for the adoption of confidential shareholder voting and the elimination of staggered terms for the company's board members.
While both proposals touch on common corporate-governance issues, they have been vigorously contested by the company's management.
To settle such standoffs, the Securities and Exchange Commission usually ends up playing the role of King Solomon, deciding which union-related proposals should be put to a vote and which should be quashed.
In drawing that line, the SEC has so far tended to favor union-related proposals that address accepted corporate-governance themes, such as those brought in Consolidated Freightway's case.
Last week, the SEC ruled that at least one of the Teamster-backed motions could be submitted to shareholders for approval, despite management's efforts to get both thrown out.
The SEC did agree with management, however, that the two proposals essentially came from one source, the Teamsters.
Because SEC rules limit the number of proposals from shareholder groups to one each, the SEC's decision means the Teamsters must make a choice.
James Weaver, the 62-year-old retired trucker who filed the confidential-vote proposal is appealing that ruling, however.
"I'm no stooge of the Teamsters," he says.
Indeed, Mr. Weaver last year sponsored a shareholder proposal that isn't normally thought to be in the interests of organized labor -- elimination of a company antitakeover defense.
That proposal was withdrawn before the annual meeting when Consolidated Freightways agreed to eliminate the antitakeover defense by 1995.
Meanwhile, the SEC has been less sympathetic toward union-backed proxy proposals that involve labor relations, such as those brought by employees at Dow Jones & Co., which publishes The Wall Street Journal.
The Dow Jones case involved two proposals from two employee-shareholders: One seeking to link the chief executive officer's compensation to no more than 20 times that of the average Dow Jones employee, and another seeking to limit the CEO's annual percentage pay increase to that of an average worker.
The proposals were filed in September, at a time when the company was negotiating a wage package with the Independent Association of Publishers' Employees, the union that represents about a fifth of Dow Jones's employees.
In late January, the SEC accepted the company's argument that the proposals were part of a union campaign to win higher wages and other contract improvements.
As a result, it allowed Dow Jones to delete the proposals from its proxy statement.
IAPE representatives said they asked the SEC to reconsider its decision, but were turned down.
The union's main argument was that the company "challenged whether our motives, not our issues, were fair," says IAPE President Ronald Chen.
He adds that IAPE hopes to work with other unions to encourage the SEC to rethink using motivation as a litmus test in its proxy judgments.
Some other shareholder activists also express discomfort with the SEC's making judgments about shareholder motivations.
"It's none of the SEC's business if I'm a union member . . . if it's a legitimate grievance," says Sara Teslik, executive director of the Council of Institutional Investors, an organization of pension funds that promotes shareholder activism.
In any case, labor's new proxy initiatives aren't likely to die out soon.
"We hope to see more of this," says Michael Calabrese, a lawyer with the AFL-CIO's Department of Employee Benefits.
"Union activists do not view short-term portfolio returns as the sole criterion for taking positions on shareholder issues."
