Many prominent mutual-fund managers are moonlighting as corporate directors, taking time out from their regular jobs to sit on the boards of small companies.
The practice, revealed in regulatory filings, is fraught with potential conflicts of interest.
For instance, some of these directors get stock options -- a very lucrative proposition for them if the little stock becomes a highflier.
A look through the filings shows that John Kaweske isn't alone in taking a boardroom role that might clash with the job of fund manager.
Mr. Kaweske, fired by Invesco Funds Group for failing to report some personal stock trades, has been serving on the board of a Canadian biotech company.
Conflicts can arise in several ways.
A manager might hesitate to dump a company's stock from a fund while sitting on that company's board waiting for personal options to rise in value.
That's the situation facing Martin Whitman of Third Avenue Value Fund, with assets of $114 million.
He serves not only on the board but as chairman of a financial company that has given him stock options.
And he personally owns a chunk of stock.
As a director of Danielson Holding Corp., New York, he earns "only $75,000," according to last spring's proxy material.
But stock options promise to give him much more.
He received options to purchase 210,000 shares at $3 apiece, the 1993 proxy material shows.
With the stock now at $7.50 on the American Stock Exchange, Mr. Whitman has a paper profit of $945,000 -- and a big incentive to avoid having his fund dump the stock.
Mr. Whitman argues that it isn't as if his whole life depended on one stock.
"My family and I own maybe $4 million in Third Avenue Fund," he says.
"I eat my own cooking."
Moreover, in Danielson's case, "I was able to make what I thought was a real bargain purchase for the fund" at a "lower cost" per share than his personal investment.
Mr. Whitman says his personal holdings in a predecessor company go back to 1985, "six years before the fund" ever invested.
Now Third Avenue Value owns 5.3% of Danielson stock and Mr. Whitman controls 19% in total, including the fund's stake.
"It's hard for me to see how a conflict could happen between Third Avenue and Danielson, but I guess it could," the manager says.
It can be awkward to have inside information about a stock in which your fund is invested.
Last year, when Third Avenue Value Fund owned stock in troubled Kentucky Central Life Insurance Co., two partnerships affiliated with Mr. Whitman were bidding to infuse a sorely needed $100 million.
But in February 1993, they canceled that plan to invest.
The insurer's stock collapsed, and within days the Kentucky insurance commissioner took over the firm.
In this case, the nettlesome question was: Given Mr. Whitman's central role, how could the fund bail out of the stock before the damage occurred?
Legally, it couldn't.
Mr. Whitman says the mutual fund had to suffer through the stock-price dive holding 186,000 shares, since selling before the public announcement would have violated insider-trading laws.
However, Mr. Whitman says he isn't sure which day the fund sold Kentucky Central: "I don't readily have the data."
Securities and Exchange Commission filings by the fund show it was sometime in the three months through April 30 -- the period when the bailout plan fell through.
Sometimes conflicts arise that a manager can't foresee.
Besides getting personal options, one fund manager bought shares outright at a cheaper price than the fund did, which sounds like a conflict, even though he says he never intended things to turn out that way.
He is William Nasgovitz, co-manager of Heartland Value Fund with assets of $163 million; the stock is Milwaukee manufacturer Rexworks Inc.
Mr. Nasgovitz says he personally bought "over 200,000 shares," waiting until long after his fund had already bought in and acquired 175,500 shares, a 9.41% stake.
But Mr. Nasgovitz says he paid a lower per-share price than the fund did.
The reason: Rexworks was in crisis and its stock was plunging.
"I felt some moral responsibility, believe it or not," says Mr. Nasgovitz.
He had been instrumental in taking Rexworks public when he was president of Milwaukee Co., a regional brokerage firm, in 1987.
When he began buying the stock personally in 1989, "It looked to me like the company was going to go broke," he says.
"I had to be the catalyst for change, because nobody else was going to do it."
Mr. Nasgovitz and other dissident shareholders succeeded in throwing out the old management in a proxy fight.
Now he's a member of the compensation committee of the Rexworks board, according to last April's proxy material.
This committee awarded options.
During 1992, each independent director such as Mr. Nasgovitz got options to buy 7,500 Rexworks shares for $2.69 apiece.
The shares have since risen to $4.875 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
All told, as of last April's proxy material, Mr. Nasgovitz had options to buy a total of 15,000 Rexworks shares.
"It's a difficult situation, no doubt about it," he says.
"But I believe I protected the fund's assets by taking this position."
When it comes to what's a conflict of interest and what's not, fund managers at different companies don't follow the same script.
An example is Robert Gintel, chairman of Gintel Fund, who fought a proxy battle awhile back with Xtra Corp., a Boston company that leases out trailers for hauling cargo.
Unlike Mr. Nasgovitz, this manager says he felt compelled to sell his fund's holdings of Xtra -- and did so -- before beginning a proxy fight.
"I couldn't start a proxy contest if the fund held the shares," he opines.
With the proxy contest won, Mr. Gintel now sits on the board of Xtra as vice chairman.
Gintel Fund has assets of $144 million.
Mr. Gintel also is chairman of Oneita Industries, an Andrews, S.C., maker of T-shirts whose stock Gintel Fund owns.
He says he bought 900,000 shares personally, more than 12% of Oneita's stock, on Oct. 6, 1993.
(Several years earlier, Gintel Fund had bought 665,000 shares.)
Mr. Gintel says he bought the shares personally because the people who controlled Oneita were selling 25% of the stock, which "put the company on the block" and "hurt the company with customers."
Mr. Gintel has options on more than 2,000 shares of Xtra stock, and doesn't have any options on Oneita, where he draws a salary of $50,000.
At Oneita, "I'll make my money when the stock goes up along with everybody else," he says.
"If we can engineer a turnaround in Oneita, as we did in Xtra, fund shareholders will be pleased," he says.
Besides, "We only did it with the approval of the independent trustees (i.e., directors) of the fund."
Some managers who hold personal stock and options in a company try to keep some distance between that company and their mutual fund.
Is that good or bad for the fund?
It depends on whether the stock is a jewel or a dog.
Lawrence Auriana, co-manager of the strong-performing Kaufmann Fund, with assets of $1 billion, is chairman of Mediware Information Systems, a small hospital-software company.
It sounds like just the sort of stock his fund might want to buy.
Hans Utsch, the other manager of the fund, is also on the board.
But Kaufmann Fund deliberately hasn't invested in the stock.
"I don't think we can buy Mediware for the fund," Mr. Auriana says.
"It's SEC rules, plus it's just common sense as well."
And even if there's no specific SEC rule for this situation, he says "it would be a conflict of interest" anyway.
Messrs. Auriana and Utsch got on the board of Mediware "when we were in the venture-capital business" at Bowling Green Securities, their prior employer, says Mr. Auriana.
He has options on 12,500 shares, and Mr. Utsch has options on 3,300 shares.
Why stay on the board of an operating company while working as a fund manager?
"The advantage of continuing to have this exposure is we never forget how difficult it is for small venture companies and small companies in general to succeed," Mr. Auriana says.
Mediware has "struggled continuously -- and that's one of the best educations."
Some fund managers serving on boards do so at foreign companies or nonpublic businesses to avoid potential conflicts of interest.
John Neff, the highly regarded manager of Vanguard/Windsor, is on the board of General Accident Life Insurance Co., the U.S. subsidiary of a company based in Perth, Scotland.
Vanguard says Windsor, whose assets amount to $10.5 billion, hasn't ever invested in the Scottish parent, and won't in the future.
Mr. Neff took the post because he was invited, and felt it was proper to do so because the subsidiary wasn't publicly traded.
He concluded "there wouldn't be any conflict" with his role as fund manager, says a Vanguard spokesman.
He adds that Mr. Neff doesn't get options from being on the board.
Another manager whose mutual funds aren't investors in one of his big personal holdings is Mario Gabelli.
He is chairman and chief executive officer of Lynch Corp., a Greenwich, Conn., glass-machinery and communications concern whose shares are publicly traded.
Mr. Gabelli took the helm of Lynch in 1986, the year he also started up his first mutual fund.
Proxy material indicates that Mr. Gabelli controls nearly 40% of Lynch stock, including the shares held in private accounts he manages through investment manager Gamco Investors Inc.
This situation raises a less-obvious problem: If it's such a good investment that a smart investor like Mr. Gabelli has grabbed a big stake, why don't his mutual funds own Lynch stock too?
They're trying to avoid a conflict of interest.
An assistant to Mr. Gabelli says the mutual funds "are prohibited from buying" Lynch.
As chairman and CEO, Mr. Gabelli drew compensation of $150,000 from Lynch in 1992, which the proxy statement calls "materially below that of chief executive officers of comparable companies."
It adds that Lynch is "studying alternatives to provide Mr. Gabelli and the executive staff with long-term incentives."
