Real estate is back on the shopping lists of big institutional investors, with public and corporate pension funds expecting to increase their property holdings by $36 billion -- or about 40% -- during the next three years.
After two years of cutbacks, even pension funds that still have losses on existing real-estate investments are biting the bullet and preparing to re-enter the market.
But this time around, the funds are aiming to be smarter buyers.
"So many pension funds felt so helpless sitting back watching their real-estate assets deteriorate in the late 1980s that they've started taking a much more proactive approach," says Kevin Lynch, who advises pension plans on real estate for Cleveland-based Townsend Group.
The funds are particularly leery of getting burned again by hired managers in private investment pools known as "commingled funds."
As a result, they're tightening controls on outside real-estate advisers and insisting on clear strategies for exiting investments.
Some big pension plans are also earmarking big bucks for real-estate investment trusts, which trade like stocks on major exchanges.
After the past decade's buying binge, pension plans now have some $50 billion -- or about half their total real-estate holdings -- in commingled funds sponsored by insurance companies and real-estate advisory firms.
The sponsors promised the funds could cash in their holdings at any time.
But when the commercial real-estate market started collapsing after 1987, so many investors rushed to exit at once that fund sponsors couldn't comply.
Hundreds of millions of dollars in redemption requests are still outstanding.
Despite such bruising experiences, pension funds today find that real estate's fundamentals are too alluring to resist.
For instance, at today's depressed prices, many properties offer cash-on-cash yields of 7% or more.
In other words, the rents and other income generated by the properties, net of expenses and other adjustments, amount to at least 7% of the purchase price -- a higher yield than many long-term corporate bonds offer today.
What's more, with property prices already starting to recover in some areas, total returns on real estate might well be even higher in the long run.
At a time when stocks are at record highs and bond yields at long-term lows, few assets look as good as property to pension strategists today.
By 1996, public retirement funds expect to boost their holdings to $70 billion, or 4.7% of total assets, from $46 billion, or 3.8% of assets, today, according to a recent survey by Greenwich Associates, a pension consultant based in Greenwich, Conn.
Corporate plans, meanwhile, see holdings rising to $55 billion, or 3.8% of assets, from $43 billion, or 3.5%, currently.
Among large, sophisticated plans, the most popular route is still to buy real estate directly, because that gives the greatest control over those who manage properties on a day-to-day basis.
Unfortunately, small and midsize pension funds typically lack the means to build and manage diversified real-estate portfolios on their own.
But to avoid being lumped together with scores of other investors in commingled funds, they're opting to co-invest with small groups of like-minded pension funds.
Such arrangements give each investor more clout, and make it easier for individual funds to take action against hired managers.
"I think that co-investing is the way of the future," says Howard Harpster, director of pension investments at Cleveland-based BP America Inc.
"If you don't like management, you can `can' them.
It only takes three or four people to do it.
In a commingled fund it takes a hundred, so it never happened."
BP America has teamed up with four other funds in a $175 million limited partnership to invest in office, retail and industrial space in the United Kingdom and Europe.
More recently, it joined a state fund, which wasn't identified, to buy a $9 million apartment complex near Raleigh, N.C.
The Colorado Public Employees Retirement Association has similarly joined forces with the School Employees Retirement System of Ohio, the Alaska Permanent Fund and two other funds to buy residential properties.
The group purchased a 90% interest in 12 apartment projects owned by Phoenix Home Life Mutual Insurance Co. of Hartford, Conn., paying $108 million for the stake.
Phoenix will manage the properties and retain the remaining 10% ownership stake.
Colorado and its co-investors have the right to fire Phoenix Home Life as manager "in a fairly short period of time, without a lot of notice, and without litigation," says Sol Raso, Colorado's director of real estate.
"We have absolute control, but we don't have to get involved in micromanagement."
Meanwhile, Wall Street investment bankers, not wanting to miss out on the action, are touting "securitized" property in the form of REITs.
So far the funds haven't been avid buyers, because they worry that such investments would too closely track the rest of the stock market, and thus defeat the purpose of buying real estate.
But the funds are warming to the idea.
On Jan. 18, for instance, directors of the California Public Employees Retirement System, the nation's largest pension plan for state employees, decided that REITs could constitute up to 10% of the fund's real-estate holdings.
During the next two years, Calpers intends to buy about $250 million of publicly traded REITs.
Real-estate advisers that traditionally managed the funds' property investments are also jumping on the REIT bandwagon.
For instance, Aldridge, Eastman & Waltch, of Boston, and Dimensional Fund Advisors Inc., of Santa Monica, Calif., recently launched a real-estate index fund to invest in publicly traded real-estate companies, which so far has attracted $30 million.
The fund will trade like a normal mutual fund and is designed to track the return of the entire U.S. real-estate sector.
Other advisers, such as San Francisco-based RREEF Funds, have put together private REITs, which they manage on behalf of small groups of institutional shareholders.
Although private REITs aren't exchange-traded, they're supposed to give investors more liquidity than commingled funds, and more control over managers.
Meantime, there are two separate efforts afoot to launch a secondary market for commingled-fund shares: Liquidity Financial Group of Emeryville, Calif., and Atlanta-based Saylor Property Capital have teamed up in a venture called SMART; while Blake Eagle, chairman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Center for Real Estate in Cambridge, Mass., and a group of industry veterans are launching a nonprofit electronic network, called Clearinghouse, where pension funds can trade their shares.
