In a defeat for copyright owners, the Supreme Court gave greater legal protection to parodies.
The unanimous ruling was the high court's first clear statement that musical, written or visual parodies may be permissible despite objections by holders of copyrights to the original works.
"Like less ostensibly humorous forms of criticism, parody can provide social benefit by shedding light on an earlier work, and, in the process, creating a new one," wrote Justice David Souter for the court.
The decision reversed a lower-court ruling that essentially said the rap group 2 Live Crew violated the federal Copyright Act when it distributed a raunchy parody of the famous Roy Orbison song "Oh, Pretty Woman."
The case has been closely watched in the publishing and music industries, with political humorists like Mark Russell supporting the rap group and such songwriters as Michael Jackson and Dolly Parton on the other side.
Copyright owners generally may refuse permission for a creative work to be reproduced or closely imitated.
If an owner allows such a use, he may charge a fee for the license.
But there is an exception in the Copyright Act for the "fair use" of copyrighted material in "criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching . . . or scholarship."
Justice Souter said the federal appeals court in Cincinnati had made too much of the fact that 2 Live Crew sought to make a profit from its recording, which was part of a successful 1989 album.
A parodist's profit motive weighs against a finding of fair use, but isn't a conclusive factor, he wrote.
Other factors include the amount of material that is copied and the effect a parody has on a copyright holders' ability to market other versions of the original work.
Justice Souter limited the scope of the ruling by stressing that there aren't simple rules for applying the fair-use exception.
He said such cases must be analyzed based on their particular facts.
The high court accordingly rejected 2 Live Crew's suggestion that judges should automatically assume that any parody is a fair use.
To qualify as a parody, a work must do more than merely borrow part of a prior composition to provoke laughs, Justice Souter wrote.
Instead, the parody must comment on the substance or style of the original.
The rap take-off of "Oh, Pretty Woman" ridicules what 2 Live Crew sees as the 1964 original's naive view of romance by juxtaposing it to "degrading taunts, a bawdy demand for sex, and a sigh of relief from paternal responsibility," the justice explained.
The rap version imitates musical motifs of the Orbison song -- including its distinctive introductory bass and drum patterns -- but that is the nature of parody, Justice Souter maintained.
He pointed out that 2 Live Crew "departed markedly" from the original Orbison lyrics, substituting lines such as "Big hairy woman, you need to shave that stuff."
2 Live Crew had sought permission from Acuff-Rose Music Inc., the owner of the "Oh, Pretty Woman" copyright, to imitate the Orbison song and promised to pay appropriate royalties.
Acuff-Rose refused permission and then filed suit.
A trial judge ruled for 2 Live Crew, but the federal appeals court reversed the ruling.
The appellate court's decision was signficant because Nashville, Tenn., a popular music mecca, is within the Cincinnati-based court's jurisdiction.
Justice Souter observed that neither party in the case had presented evidence on a separate factor: whether the 2 Live Crew parody had hurt Acuff-Rose's ability to license another rap version of the song.
The high court instructed the appeals court to rethink this issue and the others discussed by Justice Souter.
(Campbell vs. Acuff-Rose Music Inc.)
-- Put an important securities-law issue back on its docket after an earlier case raising the question was settled.
The issue is whether a federal law barring fraud in initial public sales of stock also applies to resales of the shares.
Lower federal courts have issued conflicting rulings on the scope of the provision, which is known as Section 12 (2) of the Securities Act of 1933.
Asked by the high court for its views in the earlier case, the Clinton administration had filed a brief urging the justices to interpret the anti-fraud law broadly.
A broad interpretation would give plaintiffs a potent additional weapon in lawsuits alleging dishonesty in securities deals.
The justices are expected to hear arguments in the case next fall.
(Gustafson vs. Alloyd Co.)
-- Agreed to decide whether states may tax income from mutual funds that invest in U.S. securities by means of repurchase agreements.
Nebraska's top court had struck down such a tax, saying it violated a federal statute that exempts U.S. government securities from state taxation.
The state appealed.
In a standard repurchase agreement, a mutual fund buys Treasury bills, bonds or other government obligations with the understanding that the seller will buy back the obligations in the future at a higher price.
The resale price includes interest for the period of the sale.
Nebraska pointed out in its appeal that the highest courts of six other states have ruled that income from repurchase agreements isn't exempt from state taxation.
The U.S. Supreme Court presumably agreed to hear the Nebraska case to eliminate confusion over the issue.
Arguments are expected next fall.
(Nebraska Dept. of Revenue vs. Lowenstein)
