U S West Inc., Telecom Finland and Deutsche Bundespost Telekom emerged as the biggest winners in the latest round of mobile-telephone licenses awarded by the Russian government.
The bidding results indicated, however, that Western investors' interest in Russian mobile telephones may have peaked.
Licensees were chosen for fewer than half of the 67 city franchises offered -- partly because too few bidders emerged for some of the cities, said Western phone-company executives.
The three Western phone companies -- already among the largest investors in East European telecommunications -- were each selected to build four new cellular telephone systems in cities scattered across Russia.
The government didn't make a formal announcement of the license awards, but rather informed the winning bidders quietly last week.
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991, Western phone companies have been targeting cellular telephones as one of the fastest ways to make money in Russia.
Their users are among the few people in Russia with plenty of cash: Westerners living there, and Russian businessmen working with them.
Moscow's first round of 12 digital cellular licenses issued last year drew many Western bids.
But those were for Russia's biggest and wealthiest cities, including Moscow and St. Petersburg.
By contrast, the latest round of bidding was for generally smaller or poorer cities, such as Murmansk and Rostov.
As the bidding progressed last autumn, executives of several Western companies -- including U S West and Germany's state phone company -- said they were being more selective.
"The first round was more attractive," said Hans Kerler, head of international relations for Deutsche Telekom's mobile-phone division, called DeTeMobil.
According to a list compiled by one Western phone company, winners were named for just 33 of the 67 franchises being offered; 11 were for state-of-the art, so-called GSM networks, and 22 were for older-technology NMT-450 systems.
(Interfax Business Report, a Russian news service, reported 11 GMS awards and just 19 NMT-450 licenses; a ministry spokesman couldn't be reached last night to confirm the correct figure.)
What happened with the unassigned franchises isn't clear-though in some cases it appeared that too few bidders had stepped forward, forcing the ministry to postpone a decision.
In the case of the Murmansk franchise, the ministry formally withdrew its offer because only one bidder emerged, Interfax said.
Unlike Hungary, where bidding wars have erupted over cellular licenses, the ministry in Russia hadn't proposed charging Westerners anything beyond an administrative fee.
Instead, Westerners commit to build systems according to schedules negotiated with the ministry.
Those detailed talks about the terms of new licenses are likely to begin soon.
Deutsche Telekom's four new systems, in Pskov, Novgorod, Tver and Kaliningrad, may cost roughly $33 million to $40 million to build, Mr. Kerler indicated.
He said all four are near Moscow, where Deutsche Telekom is already an investor in another digital cellular system under construction for at least $60 million.
U S West is following a similar strategy of grouping its licenses geographically.
Three of its four new licenses are in Volgograd, Krasnodar and Rostov -- southern Russian cities close enough to allow the company to build one network for all three, a spokeswoman said.
The fourth, Udmirtiya, is near an earlier U S West franchise in Perm.
The four new digital licenses are in addition to eight awarded last year.
Telecom Finland's four awards were in Kareliya, Archangelsk, Pskov and Novgorod (the last two cities will have two systems-one involving Telecom Finland, and the other Deutsche Telekom.)
