CLINTON ENDORSED the U.N. chief's request for authority to order air strikes.
The U.S. and its European allies began mobilizing -- at least rhetorically -- in reaction to a deadly weekend shelling in Sarajevo.
Clinton said he welcomed U.N. Secretary General Boutros-Ghali's request for the power to order NATO air strikes on Bosnian Serb positions.
The U.S. also raised the prospect of other steps to punish Serb aggression.
In Brussels, European foreign ministers urged NATO to use all means necessary to end the siege of the Bosnian capital.
But given the West's record of tough talk without action, it isn't clear what steps will be taken.
The North Atlantic Council, NATO's political arm, is expected to meet tomorrow to discuss whether to grant the U.N. secretary general's request.
Israeli Foreign Minister Peres met with PLO Chairman Arafat in Cairo to discuss the long-delayed withdrawal of Israel's troops from the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
The decision to renew the stalled negotiations came after more than a week of bickering.
Egypt's foreign minister has been mediating between the two sides.
Israel launched three air raids on rebel positions in south Lebanon after pro-Iranian guerrillas killed four Israeli soldiers and wounded five others in their bloodiest attack in six months, security sources said.
Hezbollah guerrillas claimed responsibility for the ambush against the armored Israeli patrol on the edge of Israel's occupation zone.
The U.S. tried to revive talks on restoring democracy in Haiti, but key Haitian lawmakers gave the effort little chance at success.
Accompanied by U.S. Ambassador Swing, at least six top Haitian lawmakers flew to Washington for talks with exiled President Aristide, who has been blocked by the military in his bid to return to power.
Surgeon General Elders joined with five of her predecessors to endorse legislation that would protect nonsmokers by severely restricting smoking in nearly every nonresidential building in the country.
A tobacco industry representative denounced the proposal as government "social engineering on a vast scale."
Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison pleaded not guilty to four felony charges alleging that the Texas Republican misused state employees and state property for political gain and tampered with government records while she was state treasurer.
Hutchison's trial got under way in Fort Worth as a judge began considering pretrial motions.
A German court convicted two neo-Nazi skinheads and a bartender in the 1992 murder of a man the bartender thought was probably Jewish.
The defendants were sentenced to prison terms of eight, 10 and 14 years in the attack in Wuppertal.
The presiding judge called the attack "an explosion sparked by radical-right thoughts."
Shuttle Discovery's crew dropped plans to deploy a $13.5 million research satellite after encountering technical problems.
Release of the Wake Shield Facility was to have been a key part of the mission, which ends Friday.
Physicists had hoped to make pure semiconductor film on the satellite, aiding in efforts to make faster computers.
An Air Force Titan IV rocket blasted off from Florida on a $1.3 billion mission that critics say is no longer needed because of the end of the Cold War.
The Titan IV carried a military satellite to provide instant communications between the Pentagon and U.S. troops.
A botched Titan IV launch in August destroyed another satellite over California.
Iran said it arrested more than 20 "morally corrupt" suspects in a plot to assassinate President Rafsanjani last week, including some linked to leftist groups.
Separately, a French judge probing the 1991 slaying near Paris of exiled former Iranian Prime Minister Bakhtiar implicated Iran and recommended that nine Iranians stand trial.
Justice Souter was asked to block Pennsylvania's strict abortion law from taking effect while a group of abortion providers challenge its constitutionality.
Six abortion providers sought an emergency order to give them time to appeal a lower-court ruling that said the law must take effect before it can be challenged.
South African negotiators sought to bring the right-wing Freedom Alliance back into discussions concerning all-race national elections scheduled for late April.
But a meeting with the alliance reportedly ended in stalemate last night.
