Russians Alexander Golubev and Sergei Klevchenya, both breaking the Olympic record, swept the top two medals in men's 500-meter speed skating.
Dan Jansen of the U.S., the world record holder, slipped and finished eighth.
Mr. Golubev won in 36.33, followed by Mr. Klevchenya in 36.39.
Both broke the Olympic mark of 36.45 set by Uwe-Jens Mey of the former East Germany in Calgary in 1988.
Manabu Horii of Japan was the bronze medalist in 36.53.
Mr. Jansen, whose best Olympic finish is a fourth in the 500 in 1984 and again in 1992, is the only man ever to skate faster than 36 seconds in the 500.
He slipped on the home turn of yesterday's race, brushing his hand against the ice.
"It's a bit of a shock to me," Mr. Jansen said.
"I'm not making excuses, but it's not a place I've slipped before. . . .
I would have won by quite a bit if I didn't slip."
Mr. Jansen and several other skaters said the ice in the Viking Ship Olympic Hall was harder than they had seen it, a condition they didn't like.
Thomas Alsgaard of Norway won the men's 30-kilometer freestyle cross-country skiing race in a time of 1 hour, 12 minutes and 26.4 seconds, beating his teammate Bjorn Dahlie by 47.2 seconds.
Mika Myllyla, who is leading Finland's rejuvenated men's team, took the bronze, 1:47.6 behind the winner.
Mr. Alsgaard, 22 years old, took the lead only a few kilometers into the race and held a 5.2-second advantage over Mr. Dahlie at the 12 kilometer checkpoint.
Mr. Alsgaard, who was making his Olympic debut, increased it to 10 seconds at the halfway stage and after 22.1 kilometers, Mr. Dahlie trailed by 34.5 seconds.
By then Mr. Dahlie figured he had lost the race.
"I felt I would not be able to catch him when he led by half-a-minute," said Mr. Dahlie, a triple gold medalist in the 1992 Olympics at Albertville.
"I was very impressed by Thomas's performance today."
Mr. Alsgaard, a freestyle specialist, said he never expected to win.
"I thought I had a chance to medal, but only if everything worked 100%," he said.
"But I never even dreamed of winning the gold medal.
Coming into the second lap I knew I had a chance to win."
Germany's George Hackl became the first solo luger to repeat as an Olympic gold medalist when he edged Austrian Markus Prock by the smallest margin in Olympic luge history.
The difference between the two rivals was 0.013 second, roughly 13 inches.
Mr. Hackl's time for the four runs was 3 minutes, 21.571 seconds.
Duncan Kennedy, fourth after two runs and bidding to become the first male American luger to win an Olympic medal, crashed near the end of his third run while traveling at nearly 80 mph and careened off both walls, sending slivers of ice through the air.
Mr. Hackl had to make up 0.048 of a second in the fourth and final run.
"After the third run, I knew I could still make it because five hundredths (of a second) is like nothing," Mr. Hackl said.
"It was like a crime novel, there was so much suspense."
In a repeat of the Albertville Games, Mr. Prock had to settle for the silver again.
Italy's Armin Zoggeler brushed the wall on his first run of the day, losing valuable time, but held on for the bronze medal.
Lasse Kjus rekindled hopes of an Alpine victory for Norway when he won the downhill portion of the Alpine combined, edging Americans Kyle Rasmussen and Tommy Moe.
Mr. Kjus had a time of 1 minute, 36.95 seconds.
Mr. Rasmussen was timed in 1:36.96, and Mr. Moe, the Olympic downhill champion, clocked 1:37.14.
The combined medals are based on aggregate results of a downhill race and a slalom that will be run Feb. 25.
The Czech Republic defeated Austria 7-3.
The Czechs, who are expected to contend for the gold medal, are 1-1 after an earlier upset by Finland.
Austria fell to 0-2.
Germany defeated Norway by a score of 2-1 to go to 2-0.
Norway has lost both of its games.
