An unusual dispute between the chairman and president of Sovereign Bancorp, a thrift holding company, ended when the bank dropped a lawsuit against the chairman and the chairman ended a suit against the president.
The company filed suit against Frederick J. Jaindl, the non-executive chairman and a major stockholder, in December, claiming that he had violated federal regulations by attempting to sell Sovereign without first clearing it with the board.
Mr. Jaindl responded by filing a countersuit, charging the bank's president and chief executive officer, Jay S. Sidhu, with breach of fiduciary duty.
"The litigation is all over, and we are back on the road," Mr. Jaindl said in an interview.
Mr. Sidhu echoed the same feelings in a written statement: "We are very pleased to put all our past differences behind us."
The feud grew out of Mr. Jaindl's wish to take advantage of the high prices that have been paid for banks recently.
Complaining that the bank wasn't quick enough to respond to the interest of potential acquirers, he argued that the bank should hire an investment banker to evaluate the possibility of a sale.
Mr. Sidhu, however, argued that stockholders would be best served if the bank continued to be independent.
The bank's stock price rose more than 600% between December 1990 and last Dec. 31, according to Elizabeth Summers, a banking and thrift analyst with Ryan, Beck & Co., West Orange, N.J.
Sovereign reported fourth-quarter net income was $8.6 million, or 24 cents a share, up 91% from $4.5 million, or 18 cents a share, a year earlier.
The quarter's results include a $2.5 million charge for restructuring in connection with Sovereign's November acquisition of Valley Federal Savings & Loan Association.
The bank said the improvement was due, in part, to increased loan originations and continued progress in integrating its acquisitions.
Net interest income for the quarter was $32.1 million, up 72% from $18.7 million the year before.
The company said forecasts for 1994 net interest income are "very favorable."
For all of 1993, net increased 124% to $35.4 million, or $1 a share, from $15.8 million, or 63 cents a share, a year earlier.
Full-year earnings include a $4.8 million charge for income-tax changes.
Assets at year end totaled $4.5 billion.
