Jahan Bashir doesn't like President Clinton's health-care plan.
She thinks it's too confusing, too complex and probably too expensive.
What about a plan that would guarantee a standard private health benefits package to all Americans, try to promote competition in the medical industry, include some government regulation to keep prices under control and require all employers to buy health insurance for their workers with the promise of government subsidies to help the smallest companies?
"It sounds good," says Mrs. Bashir, a 43-year-old secretary and mother of seven.
"Employers may pick up a lot of the burden, but if the employer can't afford it, the government will subsidize.
So you're going to have the employer, the government and the insurance companies working together."
Actually, that plan is the Clinton plan.
Mr. Clinton is losing the battle to define his own health-care bill.
In the cacophony of negative television ads and sniping by critics, foes are raising doubts about the Clinton plan faster than the president and Hillary Rodham Clinton can explain it.
Unless the Clintons can cut through the confusion, the outlook for passage of major elements of their bill is in doubt.
A new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll shows that public support for "the Clinton health plan" is eroding.
Yet the same poll, conducted by Republican Robert Teeter and Democrat Peter Hart, shows that backing for the basic provisions in the president's plan is strong.
In the poll, 45% of Americans now say they oppose the Clinton plan, up from 39% in January and 18% in September, just after the president outlined the plan in a televised address to Congress.
Thirty-seven percent of those surveyed favor the Clinton program, down from 42% in January and 51% in September.
But when read a description of the major provisions of the White House bill -- without identifying it -- 76% of the respondents say it has either "a great deal of appeal" or "some appeal."
That is far better than the response to descriptions of four other congressional proposals:
A description of a plan by Rhode Island Sen. John Chafee and other moderate Republicans, which would require all individuals to obtain health coverage and provide financial assistance to low-income people, appeals to 48% of those surveyed.
A plan by Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper of Tennessee that has bipartisan backing and would require employers to offer -- but not pay for -- coverage for their workers and seek to control prices through market competition gets a 34% approval rating.
A plan by conservative GOP Sen. Phil Gramm of Texas that would allow people to set up tax-free savings accounts for medical expenses gets 42% approval.
And a government-run, taxpayer-funded system pushed by Rep. Jim McDermott of Washington and some other liberal Democrats appeals to 31%.
Forty percent of those surveyed say requiring employers to pay for their workers' health coverage, a cornerstone of the Clinton plan, is the best way to achieve universal health coverage.
This compares with 22% who favor requiring individuals to purchase their own coverage, and 18% who back having the government collect money through taxes and use it to pay medical bills.
Moreover, by 58% to 34%, Americans say the government should set controls on health prices.
The Clinton plan would place caps on the annual increase in private health insurance premiums.
Plans being pushed by Republicans and some other Democrats wouldn't.
Surprisingly, despite the push for fast action on health-care overhaul, Americans by 60% to 35% say it would be acceptable if Congress didn't pass a plan this year.
"The White House should find this both satisfying and sobering," says Mr. Hart.
"Satisfying because the basic ideas which they've drawn up are the right ideas" in the view of many people, he says.
But "sobering because they clearly have communicated very little to the public, and in that respect have ceded too much to the interest groups."
To further test public sentiment in the health-care debate, the Wall Street Journal asked Mr. Hart to convene a small group of people in York, a medium-sized city in the southern part of Pennsylvania.
Everyone in the group -- including a woman whose family lost its health coverage when her husband lost his job and a union member with a plan that "covers everything you can imagine" -- believes the U.S. health system is badly broken and needs to be overhauled to guarantee health coverage for everyone.
But no one expresses support for Mr. Clinton's sweeping proposal.
In fact, no one can explain it.
"I think nobody in this room realizes where Clinton's coming from with his plan, and it doesn't speak clearly," complains Keith Beatty, who runs a local youth-care program.
Yet when the group is read a description of the Clinton bill (without identifying it as the president's plan) and of the four other leading proposals in Congress, the Clinton plan is the first choice of everyone in the room.
Referring to the unidentified Clinton proposal, Mr. Beatty declares: "With the plan you just presented, it speaks clearly."
Most members of the group say they get their information about health care from television and newspapers.
To many, the most memorable source has been health-insurance-industry commercials strongly criticizing elements of the Clinton plan, including the famous "Harry and Louise" ads that depict an "ordinary couple" worrying about the White House bill.
Yet the Pennsylvanians insist they don't place much stock in such messages.
Robin Doll, a 44-year-old financial specialist for York County who has a Blue Cross/Blue Shield health plan paid for by her employer, says she sees critical advertisements from the health-insurance industry "constantly."
But, she declares, "they're in it to make billions, so who's going to believe them?"
Nevertheless, the people in this group seem to be taking away the ads' message and are waiting for Mr. Clinton to respond more clearly about his plan.
"I'd like to know exactly how it's going to work," says Debbie Rudisill, a stationery-store saleswoman with no health coverage.
"One day he says this, one day he says that."
Mr. Hart says the administration could learn a valuable lesson from such comments.
"If the White House had had access to these people in York, what it would recognize is they have to be able to simplify their message, to say this is what we're doing: A, B and C," he says.
"They have to be able to get out there and talk about it, day in and day out."
Everyone in the York group also agrees that health-care reform means coverage for every American.
No one in the room is willing to accept a compromise of anything less.
"We've got to have universal health care, whether you make a million bucks or nothing," says Ms. Doll.
In the Journal/NBC poll, 33% of Americans rank universal coverage as the most important goal of health-care reform, the highest for any of the suggested choices.
Lower medical rates and capping costs placed second, with 18%.
In contrast to the sentiments of the people in York, though, the poll found some willingness to accept a bill that doesn't guarantee coverage for everyone.
In the new poll, 43% of Americans say Mr. Clinton should refuse to sign a bill that doesn't guarantee universal coverage; 43% says he shouldn't refuse.
When the people in York discuss their own health care, they reflect the feeling among many Americans about the precariousness of medical coverage in the U.S. today.
Of the 12 people, seven have been without health insurance at some time in the past five years.
Another, Linda Luther Baumer, who works part-time, worries that she'll lose her coverage when her husband retires in the next year or two.
"Either I've got to get a full-time job that provides benefits or -- we don't know what we're going to do," she says.
Fred Bingaman, a customer service representative, receives coverage for his family through his employer in return for a $37.98 weekly contribution.
He's satisfied with his health coverage now, but figures "I may not be in good shape tomorrow -- or an hour from now."
While the people in York worry about rising health costs, they all say they would pay something to ensure universal coverage-if the system is fair.
"I don't pay now, but I'd be willing to pay an equal percentage as everyone else," says Mr. Rentzel, the steelworkers representative.
The Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll was based on nationwide telephone interviews of 1,503 adults conducted Friday through Tuesday by the polling organizations of Peter Hart and Robert Teeter.
The sample was drawn from 315 randomly selected geographic points in the continental U.S.
Each region was represented in proportion to its population.
Households were selected by a method that gave all telephone numbers, listed and unlisted, an equal chance of being included.
One adult, 18 years or older, was selected from each household by a procedure to provide the correct number of male and female respondents.
The results of the survey were minimally weighted by age and sex to ensure that the poll accurately reflects registered voters nationwide.
Chances are 19 of 20 that if all adults with telephones in the continental U.S. had been surveyed, the findings would differ from these poll results by no more than 2.6 percentage points in either direction.
A limited number of questions were asked of half the sample; for these, the margin of error was 3.6 percentage points.
The margin for any subgroup would depend on the size of that group.
