The main U.S. unit of the German conglomerate Metallgesellschaft AG, which was devastated late last year by more than $1 billion in oil-trading losses, plans to continue as a big player in the U.S. oil business, the unit's new chief executive officer said.
MG Corp.'s chief executive, Karl von der Heyden, said in an interview that the company has sharply reduced the massive position in oil "derivatives" contracts that nearly toppled its parent, which is Germany's 14th-largest corporation.
"The banks have rescued us from potential bankruptcy," Mr. von der Heyden said.
"We have new management both at the parent-company level and here in New York.
We are very committed to these energy businesses, and we expect to reduce our bank debt in half by the end of our fiscal year on Sept. 30."
MG Corp.'s oil business has returned to profitability, Mr. von der Heyden said, largely because of a resurgence in oil prices and profits on the company's many contracts to supply gasoline, oil and diesel fuel to customers for more than the current market prices.
These factors and others have contributed to positive cash flow of more than $100 million for MG since Jan. 1, he said.
Moreover, he said, MG Corp. has made good on its hundreds of millions of dollars in commitments to other oil dealers for "swaps" and other energy derivatives.
Derivatives are instruments whose values are based on the prices of other assets -- in this case, oil and gasoline -- and are typically used to hedge risks of unfavorable price swings in the underlying assets.
Mr. von der Heyden acknowledged that both MG Corp. and its parent tottered on the edge of insolvency in late December after plunging oil prices decimated MG's huge position in oil derivatives.
The company, he conceded, could have been forced into bankruptcy-law proceedings had its bankers chosen to demand payment on their outstanding loans to MG.
Instead, at MG's request, the company's creditors "stood still" throughout its financial crisis to allow MG, under new management, to regain its footing, he said.
And in January, a consortium of 120 European banks rescued both Metallgesellschaft and MG Corp. with a $1.95 billion bailout package.
Mr. von der Heyden, who had declined all requests for interviews in the past, went on the record, he said, because he wanted to assure MG's many U.S. customers -- service stations and others who have contracted to buy petroleum products from the company -- that it plans to continue in the business for years to come.
People familiar with MG's oil-trading activities said the company also wanted to dispel persistent rumors about its potential demise that continue to influence the oil-futures market at the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The company's colossal oil-trading losses stemmed from an ill-fated attempt to hedge its business risks as a wholesaler of oil products.
W. Arthur Benson, former president of MG Refining & Marketing Inc., another of Metallgesellschaft's many U.S. units, headed a staff that marketed long-term agreements to supply petroleum products, at fixed prices, to users throughout the U.S.
To hedge these contracts, Mr. Benson's staff bought futures contracts at the New York Merc and entered into swap arrangements and other derivatives positions.
The idea was that if oil prices rose and MG had to pay higher prices to supply oil to its customers for less, it could make up the difference in gains on its derivative holdings.
But oil prices fell precipitously in October and December, devastating the derivatives positions and forcing MG to pay margin calls, or performance guarantees, of hundreds of millions of dollars.
Mr. Benson was fired in February.
He has since filed a lawsuit in Baltimore's U.S. district court claiming Metallgesellschaft defamed him by blaming him for its near-collapse.
He is seeking $1 billion in damages.
Mr. von der Heyden wouldn't respond to Mr. Benson's allegations directly, but said MG has shifted its hedging strategy.
"We have a new risk-management policy in place," he said.
"We have developed new business plans in both our oil and natural gas businesses which we believe are prudent and risk adverse."
Mr. von der Heyden came to MG Corp. in December after the company's former chief executive officer, Siegfried Hodapp, was also fired.
The downsizing and restructuring of MG's derivatives positions has been overseen by Nancy Kropp Galdy, an experienced oil trader who, like Mr. von der Heyden, was brought in on short notice by the supervisory board now controlling Metallgesellschaft's affairs in Germany.
In an interview, Ms. Kropp Galdy said the downsizing is now complete, and that MG would trade derivatives only "routinely" as part of hedging the risks of its petroleum-supply business.
