Amid all the jitters over the fate of a government effort to sell a huge stake in China Steel Corp., Taiwan's stock market has lost sight of how strong a fundamental investment the company actually is.
For a global industry in which losses prevail, China Steel stands out as one of the world's most profitable steelmakers.
Jardine Fleming Taiwan Securities Ltd. reports that China Steel's profit margin of nearly 19% in its latest fiscal year is much higher than any other major steel company.
The closest is South Korea's Pohang Iron & Steel Co., which last year had a profit margin of 3%.
In the first eight months of the year ending June 30, China Steel saw its profit rise 72% to NT$7.82 billion (US$296.3 million), nearly equal to last year's 12month earnings of NT$7.84 billion and approaching the government's full-year projection of NT$8.1 billion for the current fiscal year.
Many brokers expect China Steel's earnings this year to rise more than 50% from last year.
"Most steel companies in the world are facing tremendous losses," says C.Y. Wang, China Steel's chairman, looking out proudly over the vast industrial complex dominating the shoreline of Kaohsiung, a port city in southern Taiwan.
"But at China Steel so far this fiscal year, we have had quite good results.
I should not say I'm happy, but I'd like to say I'm satisfied."
China Steel now is operating at full capacity, unable to fill all its domestic and foreign orders.
But construction is under way to expand steelmaking capacity 42% by late in the decade to eight million metric tons a year from the current level of about 5.65 million metric tons.
With that, analysts say, the company will be able to supply even more of Taiwan's needs -- including more steel for the country's infrastructure.
It also will be able to expand its sales to the insatiable Chinese market, currently limited to less than 100,000 tons a year.
"This stock could become one of the Taiwan stock market's most convincing China plays, as it is likely to take up a dominant position in China's booming southeastern coastal areas," says a recent report from S.G. Warburg Taiwan Securities Ltd.
That long-term view seems of little concern to Taiwanese investors.
The market has been taking a very short-term view of China Steel in recent weeks, just as the government has tried to sell local investors some 288 million shares of the company.
China Development Corp., the lead underwriter, said that the issue was four times oversubscribed, and an investment banker said that it could end up five times oversubscribed once all the subscriptions arrive in the mail.
But that has little meaning under Taiwan's unique underwriting process.
China Steel is looking at two more weeks of nail-biting before the issue's success or failure is determined.
The underwriters will have to wait until March 22 -- after a March 15 lottery that allocates shares to subscribers -- to see whether investors will shell out their money.
Everything depends on the stock market, which on Thursday declined 100.66 points to 5366.03.
That drop helped wipe out a rally last week in anticipation of a central bank announcement Saturday that an increased flow of foreign capital would be allowed into the stock market.
The new China Steel shares are being offered at NT$21.71 (US82 cents), which represented a substantial discount to the company's stock price in mid-February, when it hovered near NT$28.
But since then, the stock has fallen sharply, and on Thursday it closed at NT$22.20, down 40 New Taiwan cents on the day.
That offers investors a mere 3.5% discount on the new shares, which most analysts believe isn't enough to attract buyers to the issue.
"The timing we will worry about the most" is when payment comes due, says an investment banker involved in the underwriting syndicate.
"Many people agree the stock is reaching bottom, so we have more than a week to go" for the stock to rebound.
The government originally planned to issue up to 1.5 billion China Steel shares by June, in an effort to reduce its stake in the company to about 51% from its current 76% holding.
The current 288 million share follows a successful 72 million share private placement to institutional investors that closed last week.
But most analysts say this schedule now is extremely unrealistic, given the weak stock market.
Mr. Wang, China Steel's chairman, says that some of the problems with the current issue might have been avoided had the government decided to turn to international capital markets before calling on the local market.
Indeed, underwriters say that there is strong interest in seeking a New York Stock Exchange listing for China Steel later this year.
"In the very beginning, I suggested that the government sell on international markets first," Mr. Wang says.
"But they didn't listen."
Many analysts say that if the domestic issue falls short of expectations later this month, the climate for an international issue will be hurt, possibly undermining demand from investors who should be most interested in China Steel as a long-term investment.
In 1992, the last time China Steel shares were issued, an offering of 360 million global depositary receipts came first and was well received.
But the GDRs' price plummeted from the issue price of US$18.20 each to around US$14 when a subsequent issue of 509.5 million shares in Taiwan was only 38% subscribed.
Despite that experience, Mr. Wang, who presided over the government agency responsible for privatization at the time of those issues, says investors ultimately were best served by that approach.
"I felt sorry for the foreign investors then," he says.
"But they didn't keep the shares long enough.
If they had, they'd be OK now.
I told everybody, please take a long-term view."
As privatization proceeds and government ownership eventually drops below 50% -- as the government intends -- China Steel also can look forward to the reduction of political interference in its affairs.
As a state-owned company, China Steel's budget must be approved by the cabinet and the legislature, and the lawmakers have become a major problem.
Two years ago, the legislature blocked a proposed investment by China Steel in a steelmaking joint venture in Malaysia.
To make matters worse, China Steel must submit its budgets two years in advance.
"It's really impossible for any businessman to predict what will happen two years later," Mr. Wang says.
"How can I predict price movements?"
