Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., buoyed by strong growth in all its business segments, reported that fourth-quarter earnings jumped 71%.
The Fort Lauderdale, Fla., video and music retailer's results came in at the high end of analysts' estimates.
Fourth-quarter net income rose to $81.3 million, or 34 cents a share, from $47.6 million or 23 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue climbed 66% to $723.7 million from $436.7 million.
Revenue at Blockbuster video stores open for more than a year increased 5.5% in the quarter, and 9.2% for the year.
Same-store sales figures for the company's music stores aren't yet available.
Gregory K. Fairbanks, Blockbuster's vice chairman, said 35% of fourth-quarter revenue and 32% of operating profit came from the company's music retailing, programming and distribution operations.
During the fourth 1992 quarter, when Blockbuster was in the process of making acquisitions in those areas, only 17% of revenue and less than 10% of operating profit was generated by the company's nonvideo businesses, Mr. Fairbanks said.
Craig Bibb, an analyst at PaineWebber, said Blockbuster continues to reap the benefits of those acquisitions.
The profitability of the music stores has been better than expected, partly because of the successful integration of the music chain's back-office operations into Blockbuster.
Also, syndication revenue from Spelling Entertainment Group programs has been strong, he added.
Blockbuster owns 70.5% of Spelling, as well as 35% of Republic Pictures Corp.
Spelling and Republic, which produce and distribute film and television shows, have announced plans to merge, a move that is expected to be completed by the end of March.
Blockbuster itself is being acquired by Viacom Inc., an entertainment company with interests in cable-TV, radio and other related businesses.
Blockbuster said yesterday that the transaction is likely to be completed in the second quarter.
For the year, Blockbuster said earnings jumped 64% to $243.6 million, or $1.10 a share, from $148.3 million, or 76 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 69% to $2.23 billion from $1.32 billion.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Blockbuster stock dropped 75 cents to $26.875 a share.
Some analysts said Blockbuster's strong results took a back seat to concerns about the Viacom/Blockbuster bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
Paul Marsh of NatWest Securities Corp. lowered his rating on Blockbuster stock from "accumulate" to "buy" because of what he saw as future vulnerability in Blockbuster's stock price.
