Triumphing in a five-month struggle of ego and will, Sumner Redstone and his Viacom Inc. emerged victorious in the epic $10 billion takeover battle for publishing and entertainment giant Paramount Communications Inc.
But it is possible the victory could prove hollow.
Yesterday, with nearly 75% of Paramount shares tendered to Viacom, rival bidder QVC Network Inc. formally threw in the towel with this brief statement: "They won.
We lost.
The exit of QVC and its tenacious chairman, Barry Diller, clears the way for creation of a new entertainment conglomerate including not just Viacom and Paramount but also Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., the video-store chain that has agreed to merge with Viacom in a separate stock deal.
Together, executives from the three merger partners say, the new entity will be prepared to storm the entertainment markets by offering a huge supply of television programming, films, books and other "software."
Viacom envisions starring its crude but popular MTV characters Beavis and Butt-Head in Paramount films and in books published by Paramount's Simon & Schuster.
It foresees putting children's characters created by its Nickelodeon cable channel into Paramount's theme parks.
Blockbuster's video and music retail stores would carry merchandise from Paramount and Viacom movies and TV shows, and would help in setting up studio stores to compete with those of Walt Disney Co. and Time Warner Inc.
The combined company will have almost $12 billion in annual revenue.
"Today is only the beginning of the creation of this vast new enterprise," the 70-year-old Mr. Redstone proclaimed yesterday.
But without management brilliance, a strong stock market and some sheer luck, the victory could instead be the beginning of a treacherous road for Mr. Redstone and Viacom.
In the view of many on Wall Street and in Hollywood, Viacom is paying an astonishing premium for Paramount, whose coveted studio is in disarray following a string of film flops, most recently "Intersection."
The price is $2 billion higher than Viacom agreed to pay just last September, when the two first struck a friendly merger agreement.
Viacom will have to act quickly to shed some Paramount assets to raise cash.
There is likely to be a bloodletting as Viacom slashes staff at Paramount to meet its promise to save $200 million annually in overhead costs.
The impact of the deal on Hollywood and the rest of the entertainment business could be nearly as seismic.
With the long contest over, some of Hollywood's most powerful players are suddenly finding themselves about to be thrust into new careers -- or kicked out of old jobs -- in a way that could ripple through the industry.
The combined Viacom-Paramount-Blockbuster will be headed by Mr. Redstone and Frank Biondi, his longtime No. 2, who will serve as chief executive officer.
That means that Paramount's chairman, Martin Davis, 67, is going to be out of a job, as is, most likely, his second-in-command, Stanley Jaffe, 52.
Yesterday, Mr. Davis said that he plans to stay on to help with an orderly transition, but that he already has had discussions about going into another venture with some financial backers.
His own Paramount stake is worth about $150 million.
Said Mr. Davis: "I've always done extremely well with other people's money."
Mr. Jaffe has said that he will probably leave the company, and has expressed interest in buying Paramount's Knicks basketball and Rangers hockey teams.
QVC's Mr. Diller, meanwhile, is now free to turn his sights elsewhere; the Hollywood gossip mill is already buzzing about his supposed interest in Time Warner Inc.
Rumors also are swirling inside Paramount about something more imminent: possible firings and sales of some divisions.
In an interview, Mr. Biondi said the selling of assets "is clearly something we will look at."
He wouldn't elaborate, but likely candidates include Viacom's one-third interest in the Lifetime Cable Network and Paramount's half-interest in USA Network.
Analysts believe other candidates include Paramount's Madison Square Garden sports complex in New York, its sports teams and its TV stations and theme parks.
Viacom is also looking to sell an interest in its cable-TV systems, a strategy it was pursuing before the Paramount deal.
Mr. Biondi declined to say how many employees would lose their jobs.
Paramount has some 12,500 employees, to Viacom's 5,500; adding Blockbuster's national retail empire to the mix brings the total to 60,000.
Officials acknowledge that 1,000 or more employees at the corporate and administrative level could lose their jobs because of overlap, though some might be absorbed into new businesses such as the broadcast network Paramount is trying to form with partner Chris-Craft Industries Inc.
Mr. Biondi, like his boss Mr. Redstone, has long been respected as a deal maker and strategist.
But neither he nor anyone else at Viacom and Blockbuster has had hands-on experience running a studio.
That could mean an expensive learning curve.
Paramount's studio is by far its largest unit, and its recent poor record makes it unlikely that management there will be kept on for long.
In any management change in Hollywood, it typically takes 18 months to restart production and get new projects under way -- and the investment in new projects runs into the hundreds of million of dollars.
There are risks on the Viacom side of the equation as well.
Its Showtime and MTV Networks unit are facing growing competition.
MTV, its strongest unit, is about to be challenged by a new global music channel backed by the four largest record companies.
Viacom executives profess not to be worried, and say they are prepared to take legal action if the record companies act unfairly.
Moreover, Viacom's plan to merge with Blockbuster -- a move intended to bolster Viacom's balance sheet and provide cash for the bid for Paramount -- faces major uncertainties.
The decline in Viacom's stock price has already sharply cut the value of what Blockbuster shareholders would get, angering them and raising the possibility that that deal will have to be renegotiated or even abandoned.
Without Blockbuster's cash and its balance sheet, the $8 billion in debt Viacom would have after buying Paramount could be potentially crippling in the event of any unforeseen business setbacks.
With estimated cash flow of $1.2 billion, the combined Paramount-Viacom alone would have enough cash to cover its interest payment twice over.
But such a margin is still deemed narrow by some.
"Anytime you fall below 2.2 or 2.3, that is very tight," says Lisbeth Barron, an analyst with S.G. Warburg & Co.
"It puts a lot of strain on the management of Viacom in the sense that they are leaving little room for disappointment of cash flow or for more skeletons in Paramount's closet that they aren't aware of."
With Blockbuster's cash flow of $500 million, Viacom could cover interest payments a comfortable thrice over.
"That is really the incentive to do a merger with Blockbuster," Ms. Barron says.
"It would give them a very stable base."
At the same time, the merger with Blockbuster, if it does go through, presents troubling questions about the future.
As the nation's largest video and music retailer, Blockbuster has good immediate prospects.
But longer term, its video rental stores face stiff competition as cable and telephone companies race to provide many channels directly into the home, offering movies on demand.
Still, many analysts are bullish on a Viacom-Blockbuster-Paramount combine.
"They have their work cut out for them putting together three companies," says Ed Hatch, an analyst at UBS Securities.
"But after the dust settles, this combination could surprise investors."
Viacom's B shares have already dropped about 50% from a peak of $55 a share, and yesterday fell $1.875 to close at $28 a share in American Stock Exchange trading, though Mr. Hatch believes the stock price could bouce back somewhat over the next few months.
If the price doesn't reach at least $36 a share next year and $38 a share in three years, Viacom will be forced under the terms of its offer to pay Paramount shareholders as much as another $1 billion.
Mr. Hatch and other analysts agree that the most daunting task will be restoring the Paramount studio to strength.
Its cash flow will be some $100 million less than expected this year.
Though it has a rich library of nearly 1,000 movies and 6,000 TV episodes, the studio is expected to report a $35 million to $40 million loss in the third quarter ended Jan. 31, forcing the parent company to report an $18 million loss.
Movies like "Addams Family Values" and "The Search for Bobby Fischer" have been big disappointments.
Production budgets have gotten bloated; over the past six months, Mr. Jaffe, the Paramount president, and studio chief Sherry Lansing have continued to make high-priced deals in Hollywood and signed expensive contracts with producers and other talent.
According to insiders, the studio has invested a total of $180 million in production and marketing of "Blue Chips," another "Beverly Hills Cop" sequel and two other summer films, including "Forrest Gump," starring Tom Hanks.
"The issue is whether the pictures are too highly budgeted," Mr. Redstone said.
"Those won't be as high."
While Ms. Lansing was a respected film producer before she took the Paramount helm, she hasn't been able to achieve production of a steady stream of hit films at the studio.
She may stay in the near term, but Messrs. Redstone and Biondi are expected to seek a replacement.
Ms. Lansing couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Redstone said it is premature to discuss who will run the studio.
"We aren't at the point where we can make that decision," he said.
"I think Sherry Lansing is very good.
Barry Diller is good, but I don't think he is looking for a job."
He added: "We are looking at the long term.
We have a number of people who have a lot of familiarity with that business."
Mr. Redstone said Viacom "expects a total turnaround" in the Paramount operations.
Mr. Biondi said the company also plans to focus on producing more volume -- "more movies, more TV shows, more games, more cable networks overseas."
With Viacom's cable systems and investor Nynex's telecommunications expertise added to the mix, the company will be able to push its entertainment products into interactive applications, Mr. Biondi added.
Blockbuster is also experimenting with technology that would allow customers to make up their own compact disks in its 500 music stores.
Messrs. Redstone and Biondi play down the financial importance of the Paramount studio.
"The studio will account for only a small part of total cash flow," Mr. Redstone said.
"Our focus has been not so much on running the studio as on putting together assets of three great companies and maximizing their value."
Such statements raise eyebrows in Hollywood, where the whole reason for paying such a premium is thought to be the rarity of filmed entertainment companies.
Moreover, the conventional wisdom has long been that the studios drive the engines of such entertainment conglomerates as Time Warner, Matsushita Electric Co.'s MCA, and News Corp.
A bad year at a studio can crush the parent company's results -- as is the case with Paramount in the latest quarter -- while a good year can reap huge profits, as MCA found with the megahit of its Universal Studios, "Jurrassic Park."
Results from another blockbuster, "Home Alone," helped keep News Corp. above water during its financial crisis a few years ago.
But Viacom officials yesterday stressed the opportunities for growth and synergy across the merged company.
"You've got the largest TV-distribution company in the world," said Mr. Biondi, plus "the largest video retailer, a world-wide cable networking giant, a world-class publishing arm, one of the six major filmed-entertainment distributors, and one of the top videocassette-distribution companies," said Mr. Biondi.
"And you have a terrific collection of franchised copyrights which all three companies are distributing in various media."
