International Business Machines Corp. is expected to report its first quarterly profit in more than a year tomorrow, but some analysts said it is too soon to conclude that a turnaround is at hand for the ailing computer concern.
Instead, massive cost-cutting and seasonally strong fourth-quarter sales are likely to boost profit as high as 80 cents a share, or $480 million, on revenue of $20 billion.
The highest estimates for the quarter would leave IBM with a small operating profit of about $2 million for the year, but a net loss of about $8 billion after restructuring charges.
For the 1992 fourth quarter, IBM reported an operating loss of eight cents a share.
Restructuring charges dragged the bottom-line loss to $9.57 a share.
"Reading a big fourth quarter as a sign of recovery would be a dangerous thing to do," said Stephen Smith, an analyst for PaineWebber.
"Traditionally, IBM does 30% of its business in the last quarter of the year."
Dean Witter's Jay Stevens expects IBM to report fourth-quarter profit of 60 cents, or $346 million, and an operating loss for the year of $57 million.
After charges, the net loss would be about $8 billion, according to his estimates.
But Mr. Stevens says he's encouraged by recent actions at IBM.
"We think this is the beginning of a long-term turn for the company," he said.
"Expenses have come down rapidly and transitions are under way in the profit line."
He cites IBM's plan this year to launch its new PowerPC products, which are based on a powerful new chip, transitions under way to reduce manufacturing costs of mainframes and IBM's indications that it is going to make a big push into consumer markets.
But even Mr. Stevens conceded there's a "wait-and-see" period ahead for IBM.
While IBM has done an impressive job of cost cutting, including taking a massive second-quarter charge of $8.9 billion to reduce IBM's annual expenses by $5.25 billion, it still faces the long-term problem of growing revenue in an industry that's in a world-wide recession.
After explosive expansion in the 1980s, the technology industry is down to single-digit growth, partly because of economic difficulties in Japan and Europe.
Digital Equipment Corp.'s surprising loss reported last week for the second fiscal quarter was a bad sign, showing how difficult recoveries can be.
IBM's stock slid on Digital's news after enjoying a brief rally that took it to $60 earlier this year; Friday, it closed unchanged at $55.25 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
IBM's challenge is to find high-margin items to make up for declining profits in the mainframe division.
Analysts are expecting a further drop in IBM's profit margins in the fourth quarter to 36% from 38% in the third quarter.
Just two years ago, the company had profit margins of 55%.
"So far, IBM is faring better on the cost side of the ledger, but long term, you can't restore IBM's luster by going the cost-cutting route alone," says Ulric Weil, a former IBM employee who's now a Washington-based consultant.
