"Rich women," he told a Lithuanian newspaper, use Coca-Cola "to clean their sinks."
In other interviews, he has railed against Coke's "detrimental effects" on blood pressure.
He warns that Fanta, another Coke product, should be handled with extreme caution, because the sticky, orange-flavored liquid will eat the varnish off furniture.
As he sits in the headquarters of Utenos Gerimai, Lithuania's largest brewery and soft-drink factory, Mr. Saltis says he has no intention of ever doing business again with Coca-Cola, citing its aggressiveness in negotiations with him and a year-long attempt to "conquer" Lithuania.
Instead, he has made an exclusive bottling agreement with the "perfect gentlemen" from Pepsi.
Mr. Saltis's feud with Coca-Cola is just one example of the brutal battle now under way for the far-flung markets of the former Soviet Union.
The competition for 300 million people -- spread over 11 time zones, from the Baltic Sea to the Bering Strait -- frequently relies on people like Mr. Saltis, the local bottlers who often must be wooed by the soft-drink giants.
Coke officials decline to discuss the details of the relationship with Mr. Saltis.
The clash in Lithuania, home to 3.8 million, is just a detour in an otherwise successful journey into Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, officials say.
And Coke says it is in the final stages of finding another partner.
"I can assure you that we will be producing Coca-Cola in Lithuania very shortly -- this year," says Torre Bu, senior vice president of Coca-Cola International in Oslo, who is in charge of Coke's emerging Eurasian empire.
For Pepsi, the Lithuania story provides a rare ray of hope at a time when much of the former Soviet Union has been defecting to Coke.
Even though Pepsi outsold Coke there 3-to-1 in the 1980s, Coke seems to be the drink of the new free marketeers.
Pepsi continues to outpace Coke in Russia, and it is running neck and neck with its rival in the former Soviet Union overall.
But new Coke bottling deals in Central and Eastern Europe have created a tidal wave moving in Coke's favor.
Last year, Coke products had 86% of the market for Western soft drinks in Lithuania, compared with 14% for Pepsi products, according to trade publication Beverage Digest.
Pepsi hopes a beachhead in Lithuania will help turn the tide.
Utenos Gerimai "is the single largest soft-drink plant in all of the Baltics," says Richard Norton, PepsiCo Inc.'s senior vice president of business development for Eastern Europe.
"It has very good management.
We think they're very strong partners.
By working personally together with them we will be able to get a competitive advantage over Coca-Cola."
Getting Utenos Gerimai to sign an exclusive contract has been sweet revenge for Pepsi.
Utenos Gerimai started out as a Pepsi bottler back in the early 1980s.
But the marriage was never very successful, and certainly not monogamous.
The ties date from a 1972 vodka-for-cola barter deal with Soviet authorities that allowed Pepsi to spread to all the former republics, with practically no competition from Coke.
Utenos Gerimai got its contract around 1980.
But in the early 1990s, when freedom started leaking into the Baltics, Utenos Gerimai started bottling Coke and Fanta, at times in combination with Pepsi products.
By mid-1993, Coke had set up a bottling plant in Estonia and a regional headquarters in Latvia, and it was negotiating energetically with Utenos Gerimai for the future.
But Mr. Saltis just didn't like Coke's style.
For one thing, Mr. Saltis says he got the distinct impression that Coca-Cola's main long-term aim was to get rid of him.
It planned to do this, he says, with a series of large investments, gradually taking a larger share of Utenos Gerimai equity.
Last May, Coke agreed in principle with Utenos Gerimai on a new investment to which each would contribute $10 million, but Utenos Gerimai would be majority holder of the venture.
"Our purpose in this joint enterprise was always very clear: We wanted to have more than half the shares in this joint venture," he says.
But by the end of June, Coke had changed its mind, saying the investment would have to total $40 million.
Mr. Saltis says that's when he began to have doubts.
To top it off, Coke told him it found a third party interested in putting up money: Norwegian beer company Ringnes AS.
Mr. Saltis says he was convinced that Ringnes wanted to get its hands on his breweries, which generate two-thirds of his revenue.
"This was clearly going to be a two-against-one agreement, and they would in the future unite and decide everything," he says.
While Coke says it will announce a new partner shortly, beverage-industry officials in the region say that's easier said than done.
Not only do most of Coke's other potential partners have less to offer in terms of technology and equipment, but building a new factory from the ground up can be more costly here than in more-developed countries.
Because equipment has to be imported, such an investment probably wouldn't pay off.
This and other difficulties of doing business in the former Soviet Union give some comfort to local drink makers.
"We're afraid that these new investments by Pepsi and Coca-Cola will bankrupt the rest of us," says Audrius Vidzys, vice president of the Lithuanian Brewers Association.
"Whoever gets the new Coke factory will be the best in Lithuania overnight," Mr. Vidzys says, "and nobody else will be able to compete."
But not if Mr. Saltis gets his way.
He plans to improve his brewery and to begin making a greater variety of natural, fruit-based drinks.
In addition, under a less ambitious investment plan sponsored by Pepsi that gives the U.S. concern no equity in his company, he hopes to get Pepsi prominently back onto shelves.
And even if his battle against Coke also smears the name of Pepsi, he seems determined not to flinch.
"If somebody asks me what I drink," he says, "I will be honest and say beer."
