Roy Marsden, heretofore best-known to TV audiences as Inspector Dalgliesh, takes on a rather less-exalted role in the new two-part Sherlock Holmes "Mystery!" airing tonight.
Mr. Marsden portrays one John Stockton, who has come to a village once inhabited by his ancestor, an 18th-century nobleman suspected of being a vampire.
What with that and the rash of mysterious deaths that follow contacts with Stockton, the townspeople aren't sanguine about having him around.
The local clergyman (played by a masterful Maurice Denham) wisely seeks the counsel of Sherlock Holmes (Jeremy Brett), who promptly warns that humankind's need to find scapegoats for its fears may be at the root of the trouble.
This complicating spirit of rationality adds rather a nice dimension to the drama -- which rolls along on its bloodily suggestive way with a full complement of pierced throats and howls in the night.
9-10 p.m. EST, on PBS.
PBS air dates and times vary so check local listings.
From Atlanta's Georgia Dome, the ever-hopeful Bills battle the Cowboys, preempting all other activities in millions of living rooms, but not mine.
6 p.m. EST to conclusion, on NBC.
The creative team behind "The Simpsons" has produced another animated comedy series, this one about Jay, a tubby New York film critic who does movie reviews on cable TV.
In last week's opening show, the lovelorn Jay persuaded himself that the beautiful actress who had thrown herself at him had done so out of pure desire for his round and balding self, and not because she wanted a good review.
He naturally learns otherwise, but don't count Jay out.
The former executive producers of "The Simpsons," know how to make heroes of losers, as witness the stardom of one Homer Simpson.
It's too early to tell how the series will turn out, but given the opening episode's sendup of movie critic Gene Shalit, to say nothing of the action in a fancy nightclub called "The Wealthy Jackass" -- the signs are propitious.
8:30-9 p.m. EST, on ABC.
This Hallmark Hall of Fame presentation, based on an Anne Tyler novel, stars James Garner and Joanne Woodward as a married team trying to get through the little and big troubles of life.
Ms. Woodward plays Maggie, a woman of vague mind, strong will and cheery eccentricity, while Mr. Garner takes the role of husband Ira, a hard-minded skeptic.
The pleasure of watching these two masters at work is so considerable and consistent it hardly matters that the script is slow going (at least at first), if it can be said to go at all.
Even people -- we are many -- who loathe films about cheery eccentrics -- or who are unlikely to acquire a taste for Anne Tyler's fiction, will like this double star turn.
9-11 p.m. EST, on CBS.
This six-hour series on the sports industry provides, in the words of an old song, a little bit about a lot of things.
Overall, there is much that is interesting, though it takes a while to grow accustomed to the weight of its affectations (both musical and photographic).
The first segments especially could be mistaken for music videos.
But hang on.
The second night of this series brings an episode about hustling agents looking for promising players.
The cameras follow one hard-working rep and his client, and his client's large family, through an agonizing wait to see if the young player makes the first-round of the NFL draft.
This is an entirely memorable sequence, if one never again equalled in the segments that follow.
These include one about baseball owners, starring the Cincinnati Reds salty old Marge Schott, who is, like a lot of other famous old salts, a lot less interesting than advertised.
9-11 p.m. EST, on PBS.
Parts two and three air consecutive nights.
