The following is excerpted from an exchange Tuesday at the Senate Banking Committee confirmation hearings of the nominee to chair the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., Ricki Tigert:
Sen. Lauch Faircloth (R., N.C.): I had the opportunity last week to visit with Ms. Tigert very briefly, but there are a lot of issues that are going to be confronting the FDIC in the next few years.
But since there have been no hearings on the Whitewater fiasco, I wanted to talk to Miss Tigert today about Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
And unless and until Congress holds hearings, forums such as this are about the only opportunity we have to ask the questions the American people want answered.
If you would tend to as short an answer as possible, Ms. Tigert, I would appreciate it.
Ricki Tigert: Of course, Senator.
Faircloth: In looking at the news stories published, I see you are a personal friend -- and I did not know this in the meeting the other day -- of President and Mrs. Clinton.
I see in Time magazine (Jan. 17 edition) one of Mrs. Clinton's statements was that her favorite activity at Renaissance weekend was "hanging out with Ricki Tigert."
That was her favorite activity.
Is it accurate to say that you are a personal friend of both Mrs. Clinton and President Clinton?
Tigert: I've known the president and Mrs. Clinton for eight years, and I respect and admire both of them, Senator.
Faircloth: Did you know Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell?
Tigert: I've never met Mr. Hubbell.
Faircloth: Did you ever meet Vince Foster?
Tigert: I've never met, I did not meet, Mr. Foster.
Faircloth: Were these both not attendants at Renaissance weekend?
Tigert: To my knowledge, they never attended.
Faircloth: The FDIC has an ongoing investigation into the millions of dollars that Madison Guaranty lost that the taxpayers picked up.
Very briefly, what is the status of the investigation, and what have you learned about the involvement of Webster Hubbell and the Rose law firm.
Tigert: Senator, I know nothing about this matter other than what I've read in the newspaper.
I consider myself to be a private citizen until and if I am confirmed by the U.S. Senate. . . .
Faircloth: If you are confirmed, you are going to be head of what is supposed to be an independent agency.
You are also a very close friend of the Clintons and many others who are implicated in the Whitewater scandal.
Now every other friend of the Clintons that has been appointed to government has been discouraging congressional investigations into the Whitewater and Madison Savings & Loan scandals.
Ms. Reno was here Nov. 7 and I asked her very straightforward to appoint an independent investigator to take a look at it.
She was quite adamant in her statement that she was handling it, she would decide when to appoint an investigator, and that the buck stopped with her.
I was really impressed by what she had to say, but I find out three months, or two and a half months, later that she decides that she needs to appoint an investigator when the "investigatees" (i.e., President Clinton and Ms. Clinton) say it is fine to appoint somebody to investigate us.
She never moved until the president said, "Yes, it looks like now we better appoint an investigator."
And up she comes with an investigator.
Is that the kind of independence we can expect from you, or will there be another kind?
Tigert: Senator, I've spent most of my career in public service in nonpolitical jobs.
I spent seven of those years at the Federal Reserve.
I know what independence is.
I've served at an independent agency.
I believe in the credibility of the regulatory process, and I think it is essential that the FDIC continue its strong history of independence and if I'm confirmed by the Senate, I can assure you that the FDIC will be independent.
Faircloth: Well, doesn't it present an almost impossible situation when this very, very close friendship with Mrs. Clinton (she says she enjoys "hanging out" with you) -- doesn't that present almost an impossible situation that here you are investigating and in charge of any possible criminal violations, and certainly extreme embarrassment, of your favorite "hanging out friend"?
And she being the First Lady, that would present a problem to me.
Tigert: Senator, with respect to any issue that comes before the FDIC during my tenure, if I am confirmed by the U.S. Senate, I will be extremely sensitive to issues of potential conflicts of interest or any appearance of conflict of interest.
As I've indicated, I know nothing about this matter other than reading a few newspaper articles, but I am absolutely committed to assuring the credibility of every regulatory undertaking of the FDIC.
Should an occasion arise with respect to any issue where the issue of an appearance of conflict of interest could come up, I will consult with the ethics officials of the FDIC and with the Office of Government Ethics, and take the appropriate steps.
Faircloth: Well don't we almost go in with an inevitable conflict, when your closest personal friend -- you are responsible for investigating!
Wouldn't you almost have to withdraw before you . . .
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (R., N.Y.): Would the senator yield for a point on that?
Faircloth: I will.
D'Amato: Miss Tigert, let me ask you this: If indeed you found yourself in a situation where you are confirmed, and you have an ongoing investigation and it might possibly involve the president or Mrs. Clinton, would you recuse yourself?
Tigert: As I've indicated, Senator, with respect to any matter where there is an appearance of conflict of interest, after consultation with the appropriate ethics officials, I will take the necessary steps to assure the credibility of the regulatory and enforcement process.
D'Amato: I think what Sen. Faircloth is really coming to is that it would be, and would appear to be, extremely difficult -- if not impossible -- as it relates to any actions that the FDIC might have to take or decide to take one way or the other, that you would be in a position, in a just absolutely untenable position, if you were a person who had to make that decision.
I believe that what we are getting to is, How would you handle that?
Would you recuse yourself?
And I don't think you'd have to look to ethics people, I think anybody might tell you that -- you might want some time to think about this -- but it would seem that a recusal would be most obvious in this kind of situation.
In anything, in any dealings with Whitewater, or with the possible review, or with bringing any actions as it relates to Madison, etc., you would be in this position -- and anyone else in your position would do the same.
Good faith would probably require you to recuse yourself.
I couldn't see how you could get around this.
I do not mean to be argumentative, or to put you on the spot.
I'm trying to help you out.
Tigert: I appreciate that, Sen. D'Amato.
Faircloth: From what Mrs. Clinton has said, and from what you said, you are talking about avoiding a conflict, and if I have any sensitivity as to where we are headed, it is as straight into one as you can go!
Because from everything we have read -- and I certainly have no knowledge other than what I have read in every publication out -- that there is an investigation of Whitewater, Rose law firm, Madison Savings & Loan.
Many aspects of it involve Mrs. Clinton and President Clinton.
Now the FDIC is in the middle of the investigation, and the investigation involves your two closest personal friends.
What are you going to ask somebody -- the ethics committee -- what are you going to ask them?
Are they really your close, personal friends?
I don't even see . . . it seems inevitable. . . .
D'Amato: I don't think it's above question, and I think what we're attempting to get from you -- straight up or down -- will you recuse yourself in any matter as it relates to Madison and Whitewater?
Sen. Donald Riegle (D., Mich.): . . .
As I hear your answer, what you've said is that you don't know anything beyond what you've seen in the newspapers; you're about to assume this job, if confirmed, and that if you find that in the course of the way that issue is being handled within the FDIC -- or for that matter anything else -- but specifically on this one, if you find anything that suggests to you any conflict or appearance of conflict, you'll act on that.
You'll talk to the ethics officials and you'll take whatever steps are appropriate.
