For two years, Karnail Singh sat behind high walls, electric gates and swirling razor wire in San Pedro, Calif., 8,000 miles from home.
He wasn't a convict, and no one considered him dangerous.
Yet, he was held without bail in a federal detention center here.
Mr. Singh, a Sikh who is a vocal opponent of the government of India, landed at Los Angeles International Airport in January 1992 and sought political asylum.
But like thousands of asylum seekers fleeing a hostile government, he became a prisoner of a severely overloaded and poorly managed U.S. immigration system.
Yesterday, the Clinton administration announced what it called a new "fast-track handling of asylum claims" by the Justice Department's Immigration and Naturalization Service.
But skeptics question how much the changes will speed the process of sorting out who should, and who shouldn't, be granted entry into the U.S. from an ever-growing crush of applicants.
Currently, about 700,000 people, including children, are in the U.S. seeking political asylum -- a total that equals the population of South Dakota.
Of these, all but about 11,000 are applicants and their families who entered the U.S. legally, often on temporary visas.
The others include boat people and those who apply at airports and other points of entry, as Mr. Singh did.
The INS has been overwhelmed.
Justice Department figures show that about 5,100 people were granted asylum in the past fiscal year.
But with 10,000 new cases each month, the backlog is climbing.
The changes announced yesterday are designed to increase both the funding and personnel for asylum cases.
Immigration Commissioner Doris Meissner said new, proposed regulations would, for the first time, impose a $130 fee on asylum applicants; allow asylum officers to eliminate hearings at the officer level and immediately refer disallowed requests to an immigration judge, whose rulings could be appealed to the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA); and deny asylum seekers permission to work for at least five months after filing an asylum application.
The plan also would double to more than 300 the number of INS agents who interview asylum applicants.
The changes follow Ms. Meissner's announcement last month that the agency is being reorganized.
In a message sent to the agency's staff, she said that "the reorganization plan responds to the widely held view -- within INS and by our stakeholders -- that the agency is not working well as presently structured."
Although immigration specialists generally welcome the agency's reorganization, some are critical of new rules such as the $130 fee, which would make the U.S. the only nation to charge those fleeing political persecution for the right to seek political asylum.
"Some of the measures are extreme and could result in the denial of access to genuine refugees to the asylum procedures," complains Arthur Helton, director of migration programs for the Open Society Institute in New York.
INS officials concede that even with the new changes, those who enter the U.S. without visas and seek asylum may continue to face long periods of confinement, even if they have apparently valid claims.
To gain asylum, such applicants "must demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution based on race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership in a particular social group," says INS spokesman Vern Jervis.
"The law says they shall be detained until status has been determined," he says, adding that the applicant "can leave whenever he wants to" and go home.
But many, like Mr. Singh, say they can't just leave and go home -- at least, not safely.
The 40-year-old farmer says that in his village of Dharen Kot in the Punjab region of India, he was a local leader of a political party that frequently is at odds with India's government.
He tells of repeated beatings -- with leather straps and wooden rods -- by police because of his religious and political affiliations.
Mr. Singh recalls speaking at a January 1991 religious ceremony, when, he says, police began beating the crowd with clubs.
He was hauled to jail, where "they kicked me with their boots.
They forced me to disrobe, and I was beaten with leather straps."
The straps, he estimates, were about 18 inches long and nine inches wide with a handle.
Three months later he was arrested and beaten again.
He remembers "it was unbearable pain.
Then I fell unconscious."
Later, he says, after the police tried to kill him, he escaped and political associates arranged bogus travel documents for him to flee the country.
"When I had left my country, I thought every person who had been treated badly by his or her government and there were human rights problems . . .
America will help them and grant them asylum where we live our lives freely and safely," Mr. Singh says.
But when he arrived, he found instead mountains of red tape and legal obstacles.
During two years of detention, Mr. Singh says depression led to a year of illness.
"I'm very sad here," he told a visitor at one point.
"Now, I think I will die."
Mr. Singh had to run a gauntlet of legal steps.
An immigration judge believed his story -- saying he testified "in an honest and forthright manner" -- but in April 1992 rejected the argument that Mr. Singh has a legitimate asylum claim because of political oppression in India.
He next took his case to the Board of Immigration Appeals.
In February of last year, the board also denied his asylum petition and his request to avoid deportation.
But unlike some refugees, Mr. Singh had retained a lawyer, Robert Jobe, who is based in San Francisco.
Mr. Jobe appealed the BIA ruling to the federal court in Los Angeles.
He and other advocates for asylum seekers charge the appeals board with making mass judgments to exclude groups of people.
"In the early '80s they used their incompetence to deny asylum to Salvadorans, then Sri Lankans and now Indian Sikhs," Mr. Jobe contends.
Justice Department officials insist that all decisions are based on individual merit.
Still, Indian Sikhs have fared poorly before the board.
A December 1992 policy ruling adopted by the board lists situations that are common to many Sikhs seeking asylum, but do not, in the board's judgment mean Sikhs should be allowed to remain in the U.S. or granted asylum.
Last November, the federal court overturned the BIA's ruling against Mr. Singh, flatly stating that: "the BIA's decision is wrong as a matter of law and must be reversed . . . the evidence fully supports a conclusion of past persecution" due to Mr. Singh's political opinions.
He was released Jan. 29.
Mr. Singh is now a trainee at a Seattle doughnut shop.
He says he still longs for his home back in India.
Since he fled, he hasn't seen his eight-year-old daughter and a three-year-old son.
"As soon as conditions are all right in my country," he says, "I will try to go back."
