In a sign of continuing improvement, WPP Group, the British ad agency holding company, reported 1993 net income of #20.6 million ($30.7 million), compared with a loss of #11.9 million in 1992.
The results are in line with analysts' expectations and provide further evidence that WPP is continuing on the upswing after a difficult time paying down debt it accumulated when it went on an acquisition spending binge in the 1980s.
But there are still rough patches in WPP, which owns ad agencies Ogilvy & Mather and J. Walter Thompson.
For instance, its public relations unit, primarily Hill & Knowlton, continues to have problems, with revenue falling more than 5% to approximately #102 million from #108 million.
In a statement, WPP said Hill & Knowlton's operations "particularly in the United States are being restructured and reorganized."
WPP also reported Ogilvy's world-wide revenue rose over 5%, which analysts said would be to an estimated #650 million.
J. Walter Thompson's revenue rose over 4%, the agency said, which analysts estimated at close to #570 million.
Ogilvy's worldwide operation generated new billings of approximately #145 million and Thompson generated net new billings of #316 million.
Despite Ogilvy's strong world-wide results, the New York office hasn't won any new business lately and has lost several accounts, including Hardee's Food Systems and Crystal Light from Kraft General Foods.
Charlotte Beers, Ogilvy's chairman and chief executive officer, is reported to be working on a major restructuring of the agency that could affect Shelly Lazarus, president of Ogilvy's New York office.
Ms. Beers couldn't be reached to comment, but according to individuals with knowledge of the agency, Ms. Lazarus could be moved to another, conceivably larger role at the agency's North American operation.
Ms. Lazarus is considered popular among colleagues and has excellent relationships with clients, including American Express.
She couldn't be reached to comment.
Meanwhile, Martin Sorrell, WPP chief executive, has spoken with Steve Dworin, former president of Deutsch/Dworin, about joining Ogilvy's New York office in a senior position, which some speculate could be the post Ms. Lazarus now holds.
Mr. Sorrell wouldn't comment, adding that any statement should come from Ms. Beers.
Separately, Ogilvy announced a major executive shift, moving Rod Wright to Ogilvy & Mather Direct/North America as chairman and chief executive officer.
Mr. Wright had been Ms. Beers's lieutenant as executive director of Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide.
"I'm still part of Charlotte's core team," Mr. Wright said in an interview, adding that he is one of the executives in charge of implementing Ms. Beers's Brand Stewardship plan to Ogilvy's world-wide operations.
"We're looking at ways our clients can articulate their brands better and deliver that message in a more effective way," said Mr. Wright, who acknowledged that changes will occur.
"With a new vision, we are forced to look at how we work and how we're structured."
There is no timetable for changes at Ogilvy's New York operation, he added.
WPP's objective this year, other than strengthening Ogilvy, is to "staff up or buy interests in agencies in emerging markets," Mr. Sorrell said in an interview.
That includes operations in Southeast Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe.
James Dougherty, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds, said WPP is "doing OK.
I wouldn't be wildly enthusiastic.
WPP is cleaning up things and doing everything it should be doing.
But it isn't doing better than expected."
Revenue rose 12% to #1.4 billion and operating profit rose 34% to #94.9 million.
WPP said it is forecasting 1.5% revenue growth for 1994.
However, WPP executives say privately that the company would be "disappointed" if there isn't 4% growth.
WPP is still far from its peak year, which one analyst pegged as 1990.
Then it had profit of #53.7 million on revenue of #1.3 billion.
Said Mr. Dougherty: The results "are good but not worthy of handstanding yet."
Separately, WPP said it will appoint advisers to consider an offering of a minority interest in its market research businesses.
The company is considering the offering in either the U.S. or the U.K. in the second quarter.
WPP said it also is considering a senior debt issue as an alternative.
Either option, it said, could yield up to $200 million in proceeds for paying down debt.
Ad Notes. . . .
S.O.S. ACCOUNT: Clorox Co., Oakland, Calif., tapped the San Francisco office of Foote, Cone & Belding Communications to create advertising for S.O.S. soap pads.
Clorox acquired the S.O.S. brand, an inactive advertiser in recent years, in January from Miles Laboratories, a unit of Bayer AG.
STOLI UPDATE: Carillon Importers said it eliminated Waring & LaRosa, New York, from the pitch for Stolichnaya vodka.
The Grand Metropolitan unit said it added another agency, Palisades Communications, of Fort Lee, N.J., to the list of contenders.
Estimated billings exceed $10 million.
