Russia is rife with enough crime, corruption and confusion to dissuade all but the bravest foreign investors.
But some who decide to plunge in anyway can meet a more daunting obstacle: They aren't really wanted in the first place.
This may seem odd in a huge nation so rich in resources yet desperately short of modern technology, capital and organizational skills.
Making trouble for otherwise willing investors can delay the creation of wealth needed to pull Russia out of its economic mess.
Yet it happens.
For reasons ranging from philosophical to mercenary, foreign investors can find their efforts to develop Russian resources and share the wealth hindered or even blocked.
This is particularly true in the energy business, where officials known as the "oil and gas generals" don't want to cede control to newcomers, especially foreigners.
Such is the case in other areas that involve natural resources and large enterprises left over from Soviet days, such as mining and food processing.
It's almost as if they were saying "we don't want you there so give us the money and go away," says Marshall Goldman, a Harvard specialist on Russia's economy.
This echoes an old attitude.
Beginning in the 1830s, intellectuals known as the Slavophiles tried to turn Russia inward, seeking national salvation in historical values and traditions.
They thought the westward bent of Peter the Great and his successors subverted the very essence of Mother Russia.
They have modern counterparts; some Russians see no reason why a nation that put men into space needs foreigners to run its hotels and factories.
This nativist streak helped extremist politicians do so well in the last Russian elections.
But much of what's happening today also involves extremist turf protection.
Managers who control industries that perform moderately well and earn foreign exchange, particularly oil, gas and mining, enjoy great power and wealth in a nation struggling to avoid chaos.
So they don't want to give over, say, 50% shares to outsiders no matter how much that might enrich their operations.
The issue is important.
For example, the World Bank estimates Russia needs to invest $50 billion over the next few years just to keep oil production at current levels, and much more if output and exports are to rise.
And part must come from private investors or lenders; other available resources can't pay the bills.
Yet if existing enterprises make life unbearable for investors, or don't even let them in, these basic industries will suffer, and so will Russia itself.
As during 19th century quarrels between Slavophiles and Westernizers, there are disputes today within almost every organization about how much foreign participation to allow, foreigners involved there say.
Currently, the Westernizers, or reformers, are losing and no one knows exactly where policies of the new Moscow government, with a former "gas general" as prime minister, may lead.
"I can't stay on in this post, because I have always tried to defend Russia's national interests and not the interests of a small group of state-farm `barons' and fuel and energy-industry `generals,'" one reformer said when he resigned recently.
Petro-Canada of Calgary, Alberta, is one company that ran into trouble.
In 1990 it joined a Russian partner to upgrade a Siberian oil field only to see almost everything go wrong.
Above all, local authorities refused to honor the contract, and shifted two-thirds of the field into friendly Russian hands.
Other factors also were involved, but Petro-Canada closed its Moscow office for good Dec. 31 and came home poorer.
"The heart of any deal is control," says a company official.
"The old generals have people and power and money, and they're still there."
Not everyone has similar problems, of course.
Those developing new oil fields, for example, don't face such entrenched interests.
DuPont Co.'s Conoco Inc. unit expects a north Russian field to pay off if Moscow lifts an onerous oil-export tax as promised.
But many face man-made obstacles, which means closure is an active option.
With consistent and sustained reforms, says a Western banking official, Russia could attract enormous amounts of private capital.
But this could mean some loss of operational control, and so far, he adds, "the Russians are not willing to embrace this."
