Terry Schoening squeezes through the doorway of the Boone & Crockett Club's headquarters here with an enormous rack of mule-deer antlers and a question.
Mr. Schoening, a 34-year-old rancher from Drummond, Mont., says he has spent considerable time contemplating the animal's headgear and finally couldn't stand it any longer.
Are these antlers just big, he wonders, or are they bragging big?
He has come to the right place to find out.
To most non-hunters, Boone and Crockett are merely surnames for Daniel and Davy.
But among the nation's 15.7 million hunters they represent the pinnacle of big-time big-game hunting.
Blue Blood Theodore Roosevelt started the club in 1887.
An avid hunter who filled the White House dining room with stuffed heads during his presidency, he wanted a group with enough financial and political clout to make sure there would be plenty of big game left to hunt in the West after the depredations of the buffalo slaughter.
Boone & Crockett's headquarters in an elegant old railroad depot here attest to that.
An eight-foot stuffed Alaskan brown bear rears on its hind legs just inside the door.
Stuffed moose heads, elk antlers and bighorn sheep are piled in alcoves and closets, part of the club's collection of some 3,000 trophies.
The club itself remains tiny and elite.
Membership, limited to 100 by Mr. Roosevelt, has included a sprinkling of Rockefellers, Mellons and other wealthy Easterners.
But the club has become well known as the leading arbiter and scorekeeper for North American big-game records since it began publishing its record book in 1932.
Last year, hunters submitted some 1,200 kills -- everything from moose to musk ox -- seeking a spot in Boone & Crockett's 601-page record book.
"We're the gold standard and the authority on big-game records," boasts club spokesman James H. "Red" Duke, a Houston trauma surgeon and TV commentator on the outdoors.
Most trophies, including Mr. Schoening's mule deer, fall short of the club's rigid size and configuration standards.
But that doesn't seem to deter the rancher, who pulls a well-thumbed snapshot from his wallet of another deer he shot two years ago that nearly qualified.
"I want to make that book some day," he says solemnly.
Lots of hunters share that aim.
Animal-rights concerns and population shifts have flattened the growth of hunting in the U.S. over the past decade.
But there are plenty of affluent baby boomers blasting away in the woods in hopes of bagging a big-game record.
Federal wildlife officials estimate that $5.1 billion was spent on big-game hunting in 1992, up 13% from 10 years ago.
"You talk about a bunch of compulsive people," says Dr. Duke.
"This is serious business."
Submissions for entry in Boone & Crockett's "Records of North American Big Game" have climbed fourfold in the past 10 years.
"Everybody wants to brag they got the biggest," says Jerry Johnston, who heads the Texas Trophy Hunter Association in San Antonio.
For some of his members, Mr. Johnston says, a Boone & Crockett listing "is the ultimate goal in life."
(Records are falling fast as the population and health of some wildlife species improve.)
Randy Horn, general manager of Jonas Brothers Inc., a Denver taxidermist, says a big-game trophy certified by Boone & Crockett is the equivalent of "a work of fine art" for some hunters.
And ranked trophies can also cost as much as fine art.
Mr. Horn's company sold a set of mule-deer antlers ranked No. 18 by Boone & Crockett for $6,000.
White-tailed deer have fetched twice that, and a top-ranked rack of elk antlers could snag a six-figure price from trophy collectors, he says.
A hunter bid $303,000 for a state permit to shoot a rare Desert Bighorn sheep in Arizona last year.
Hunting musk ox in the high Arctic can cost $30,000.
And the White Mountain Apaches, who boast trophy-size elk on their Arizona reservation, charge hunters $11,000 for a spot on their five-year waiting list.
For those who can't wait, the tribe holds an auction for an immediate slot.
Top bid: $25,000.
Rare species stand the best chance of making the club's book.
Only about 20 hunters submitted musk-ox kills for consideration in 1992, for example, while nearly a quarter of last year's entries were white-tailed deer.
George Cook, a 32-year-old Poulsbo, Wash., hunter whose Boone & Crockett white-tail is ranked 220, shot the animal in 1985 and has been looking for a bigger one ever since.
Last year he spent more than $10,000 and 35 days on what he calls his "holy grail quest."
But making Boone & Crockett twice is a long shot.
"If you get a record in Boone & Crockett once you're a lucky SOB," says Peter Studwell, a retiree and hunter in Port Chester, N.Y.
"If you get in more than once, you're probably a poacher."
Over the years, Boone & Crockett officials have tossed out several dozen would-be record holders whose trophies were found to have been poached or, in one case, stolen.
Club rules require that all record-book animals be taken legally.
One man wound up convicted of poaching after submitting a bighorn sheep illegally shot from a helicopter in the 1960s.
So fierce is the competition for a listing that some hunters have threatened to sue when their entries were rejected.
Others have tried slipping in fake antlers made of plastic.
(The club's 700 volunteer scorers are trained to watch for counterfeits.)
In the late-1970s, club officials quietly dethroned a pronghorn that for decades held the world record.
A taxidermist discovered during a routine cleaning that someone had added two inches to the horns and covered up the extension with lampblack and papier-mache.
Club scorers also became suspicious when a hunter submitted an unusually large and odd-shaped skull in the early 1980s that he said was a cougar he shot in Arizona.
Philip Wright, the club's senior scorer, sent it to the Smithsonian Institution.
"It turned out to be a leopard," says Mr. Wright, who charitably attributes the mix-up to a taxidermist's mistake.
Making Boone & Crockett's membership rolls is even tougher than cracking its record book.
Members must be invited -- lobbying is frowned on -- and they must have bagged at least three big-game species.
Current members include two Roosevelts -- Theodore IV and Kermit -- and Sen. Frank H. Murkowski and Rep. Don Young, both Alaskan Republicans.
The club began inviting women in 1992; so far, two belong.
"There are quite a number of people," says Mr. Wright, "who are either not suitable to us, or we to them."
Among the latter are animal-rights groups who snarl at Boone & Crockett's boast that theirs is the nation's oldest conservation group.
"Boone & Crockett is a real antique.
They've got dust all over them," says Wayne Pacelle, director of the Fund for Animals, which has picketed the club's annual meetings.
Says Allen Rutberg, a scientist at the Humane Society of the U.S.: "You kill an elk and you get your name in the record book.
This is not going to save the planet."
Club members argue that they have spent millions on big-game conservation.
For example, Boone & Crockett bought a 6,000-acre ranch in Montana for $2 million to study wildlife habitat and gave $1 million to endow a chair in wildlife studies at the University of Montana.
"Some people just don't like hunting, period," says George Bettas, a Boone & Crockett member who is associate dean of students at Washington State University.
Big-game hunting is "a total experience," Mr. Bettas says.
"It's putting it all together, planning where to go, studying animals' habits, learning where they eat, packing in and setting up camp.
Then, if I see a nice bull elk, I'll take it."
