The first generation of personal communicators is dead in the water.
Long live the second generation.
Less than a year after their introduction, the first hand-held data communicators, sometimes called personal digital assistants, have been judged by the market and found wanting.
Apple Computer Co.'s Newton MessagePad started out with a bang last August, selling 50,000 units in the first month, but its sales curve is now going the wrong way, having dropped to an average of 7,500 units over the following four months.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s Eo device is a marketing disaster, selling a little more than 1,000 units a month since last March, according to estimates.
Another model, the Zoomer made by Casio and sold by Tandy Corp., has hardly made a dent in the market.
"The PDA market doesn't look real rosy for 1994," says William Lempesis, a market analyst in Pleasanton, Calif., who last month cut his forecast for the year to unit sales of 130,000 to 140,000 from a previous estimate of 340,000.
Personal communicators are intended to be handy little gadgets that store and link a user's personal information, such as addresses, phone numbers and to-do lists, and send and receive text messages via pagers, wireless networks and telephone lines.
But technologists and marketers alike say the pioneering companies delivered technically flawed, overpriced devices that didn't do anything particularly compelling, such as communicate wirelessly.
"I've heard people say that ease of use is one of the key barriers, but I think that's completely wrong," says Nathan Myhrvold, senior vice president of advanced technology at Microsoft Corp.
"The problem is they don't do anything useful."
Both Apple and AT&T made critical marketing and technical errors.
John Sculley, Apple's former chairman, created inflated expectations for the Newton by hyping it for a full year before its introduction, saying "it is the most important thing Apple has ever done" and would be instrumental in creating a $3.5 trillion digital information industry.
Other personal-communicator makers assert his tactics created a severe backlash when the very limited Newton was finally shipped.
Eo's makers misjudged their marketplace, incorrectly assuming users would want to use a stylus to enter large amounts of data in their devices.
Moreover, both the Newton and Eo rely on error-prone handwriting recognition software, and easy communications capability seems to be an afterthought.
For instance, neither has an internal modem for speedy wireless data communications.
The Eo includes a cellular phone, but costs a hefty $2,500.
The Newton starts out at $700, but needs a modem, pager and connectivity kit to communicate at all.
Total cost: about $1,300.
Still, the history of technology strongly indicates that there's nothing remarkable or particularly ominous about the personal communicator's problems or slow start.
Apple's Macintosh, for example, languished for two generations because it was too expensive, too limited and didn't have any jazzy software to run.
Motorola Inc., Sony Corp. and Compaq Computer Corp. are already working on more advanced personal communicators, and Apple and AT&T are going to come out with improved second-generation models later this year.
"It will take two or three iterations before these things are any good," says Kimball Brown, the chief analyst for mobile computing for Dataquest, a research firm.
Adds Andrew Seybold, publisher of a mobile-computing newsletter: "The grandson of Newton will be a great product."
A survey by a research firm, LINK Resources of New York, indicates strong interest by consumers in a product that would manipulate their personal data, provide both voice and wireless data communications and connect them to their desktop computers.
But LINK also found that business people will be the initial users of wireless devices, and that a consumer market won't begin to develop until next year at the earliest.
While all personal communicators will face external obstacles, such as an initial lack of attractive software applications and inexpensive wireless networks, Motorola and Sony are going to some pains to avoid the mistakes made by Apple and AT&T.
Motorola, for example, is creating a device that's a little thinner and lighter than the Newton and will have both a telephone-line modem and a wireless modem built in.
Both Motorola and Sony will offer a new operating system, called Magic Cap, that they assert will provide the added value and usefulness missing in first-generation PDAs.
Magic Cap, developed by General Magic Inc., a software consortium based in Mountain View, Calif., has the look and feel of an intriguing video game, but it allows users to send messages with the tap of a stylus or finger, and it facilitates the use of electronic agents that can be sent out on special networks to perform such tasks as finding and filtering information.
AT&T plans to introduce a nationwide, agent-based network, called PersonaLink, this summer, by which time Motorola and Sony plan to have their devices on store shelves.
"We hope this is a real business in 1995," says Robert Growney, the head of Motorola's wireless data group.
"It won't really start in 1994."
Models from Motorola and Sony are expected to cost about $1,000 each, or slightly more depending on the number of features.
Apple and AT&T can hardly be counted out at this stage.
Both are partners in General Magic and plan to use the agent-based technology themselves.
AT&T has gone back to the drawing board with the Eo, planning to shrink it to a cellular phone with built-in software for storing files and messages.
(BellSouth Corp. is about to ship a similar kind of personal communicator designed by IBM, called the Simon.)
Motorola and Japan's Sharp and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. have all licensed Newton's operating system, and intend to support the technology.
Motorola's Mr. Growney says ridicule of the Newton's handwriting-recognition software has been "almost vicious," and he believes it can be perfected in later models, although many technologists are dubious.
Apple itself is developing applications, in some cases with other companies, that will de-emphasize or eliminate the need for handwriting recognition, or offer alternative input options, such as automatic data transfer from desktops.
It will offer later this year a new model with a larger screen, to which a keyboard can be attached, and it doesn't rule out a keyboard attachment for the next generation of the current model.
Gaston Bastiaens, general manager of Apple's personal interactive electronics divison, says the Newton has been the victim of inflated sales projections by outside analysts, as well as Apple's own pre-introduction hype of the product.
"Newton sales have exceeded my wildest expectations," he says.
"Take the history of any new product or platform.
You've never seen a product take off so fast."
(Newton's five-month sales, although down sharply from the initial launch period, are still close to the total sales of CD players in their first two years on the market, according to Sony.)
Ira Brodsky, a wireless expert who heads Datacomm Research Co., Wilmette, Ill., says Apple shouldn't be faulted for not getting it right the first time.
"Companies now have to follow the product-development model more familiar in consumer electronics," he says.
"Put a product out every six months, and do your research in the marketplace by seeing how people respond to it."
He adds, "It would be a terrible mistake for some of these companies to conclude this market isn't to be."
Andy Hertzfeld, General Magic's software chief, agrees.
"At this point, we're all putting stakes in the ground as much as making real products.
This is a 10- to 15-year adventure."
Don Clark contributed to this article.
