The chairman of the Senate Finance Committee predicted that Congress will end up enacting a compromise system in which large and small companies face different health-coverage requirements.
Asked on CBS's "Face the Nation" if President Clinton's proposed employer mandate was dead, Chairman Daniel Moynihan (D., N.Y.) said, "You don't have to have a universal employer mandate . . .
You might divide it between somewhat larger firms and leave a different arrangement for the smaller firms.
Probably we're going to end up there because you'll have to have that to get the support of the smaller firms."
Mr. Moynihan appeared to be referring to an idea that is gaining increased attention in Congress and throughout the health-policy community: that of requiring employers with more than 100 workers to contribute to the cost of their worker's health-insurance premiums while employees of companies with fewer than 100 workers would be required to obtain health coverage on their own if their company chose not to pay for it.
Under this scenario, government subsidies would be available to assist low-income workers.
Mr. Clinton on the other hand, has proposed requiring all employers to pay on behalf of each full-time worker at least 80% of the average price of a federally defined package of benefits.
His plan would offer federal financial assistance to low-wage companies with fewer than 75 workers.
Mr. Moynihan's thoughts are important because he leads a panel that is critical to the fate of health legislation.
The chairman's comments also dovetail with recent remarks by House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) stressing the Democrats' flexibility in altering the president's plan.
During the television interview, Mr. Moynihan also signaled the likelihood that two other of President Clinton's proposals would be significantly altered by Congress.
Asked if the president's large regional-purchasing cooperatives, called "health alliances," would die in Congress, Mr. Moynihan said, "I think so."
However, he suggested the possibility of smaller, less powerful buying pools, such as those being advocated by an association of health-industry executives and academics, called the Jackson Hole Group.
Mr. Moynihan said the president's proposed caps on the annual increase in health-insurance premiums probably can survive Congress, but "they may have to be a little more flexible."
Mr. Moynihan's remarks came after congressional Republicans concluded a two-day retreat to discuss the party's strategy for health care.
The gathering, however, failed to resolve major differences among GOP members.
The House ways and means subcommittee on health is scheduled to begin drafting a health bill tomorrow, and the work there will test whether House Republicans are willing to at least help move the process forward.
The ranking Republican on the health subcommittee, Rep. Bill Thomas of California, has spoken of a shared commitment to the president's goal of universal coverage, but it is unclear how far they will go at this stage, given pressure from their more conservative leadership.
The party remains split over whether it should endorse mandates on either individuals or employers, which many experts say are necessary to achieve universal coverage.
"I believe in universal coverage, and I don't know how you get there without a mandate," said Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.), who has sponsored an alternative plan with Mr. Thomas.
But in his radio response to President Clinton over the weekend, Mr. Thomas used the more conservative phrase "universal access" to describe where Republicans are unitednot guaranteed coverage for all families.
The distinction is also important in measuring whether the GOP can promise to achieve the more limited goals of insurance-market reform and provisions guaranteeing "portability" of health plans, which all sides seem agreed upon.
Without universal coverage to ensure a large risk pool, many experts argue that insurance will go into a death spiral of ever rising prices with these reforms.
One of the leading supporters of some kind of mandates is the Health Insurance Association of America, the same group that has paid for millions of dollars in ads pummeling the Clinton plan on other issues.
Willis Gradison, Mr. Thomas's predecessor as the ranking member of the health panel and now is the insurance association's representative, was among the industry officials at the GOP retreat last week.
And though he found himself in conflict at times with Robert Winters, chairman of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, which pulled out of the association earlier this year, Mr. Gradison argued the GOP goal of portability can't truly be achieved without universal coverage.
