After several years of waiting for prices to rise, banks and insurance companies are now flooding the market with pools of soured real-estate loans and properties, trying to take advantage of what many say has become a seller's market.
"We're seeing as much quality product now as we've ever seen," said Joseph Robert Jr. of J.E. Robert Cos., Alexandria, Va., an early bulk-buyer of distressed assets.
"I think you're going to see a deluge of bulk offerings over the next year."
Chase Manhattan Corp., Midlantic Corp., California Federal Bank, Prudential Life Insurance Co. of America, and Kentucky Central Life Insurance Co. are among the lenders currently selling large portfolios.
BankAmerica Corp. and Travelers Inc., which have already sold large packages, are said to be mulling new offerings, as are Bank of Boston and Chemical Bank.
A confluence of factors is motivating sellers: Prices are rising, competition among buyers is keen, regulators are pressuring banks and insurers to sell, and many of them have finally written the assets down to market value.
Previously, many vowed to minimize their losses by holding the assets to sell one by one, after prices improved.
The offerings are filling a void in the market left by the Resolution Trust Corp.'s decision last year to stop selling such large portfolios, because only a couple of dozen heavily capitalized investors could afford to compete for them.
"Four months ago, I thought the business was drying up," said Andrew Davidoff, a partner in New York-based Emmis & Co., another veteran bulk buyer.
"Now, we seem to be getting the second wave."
Last Thursday , Chase closed bidding on a pool of nonperforming real-estate loans with an original face value of $480 million.
A group led by J.E. Robert Co. and a Goldman, Sachs & Co. investment fund was the high bidder, but Chase said it was not yet prepared to announce the buyer.
"I think the pricing went up over the course of the last year as more capital was attracted to the market, and also on the belief that real-estate fundamentals were improving," said Hugh Balloch, who heads the firm's real-estate investment banking operation.
Banks and insurance companies, which are under pressure from regulators to increase their reserves against nonperforming real estate, have found that rising corporate profits are making the decision easier.
Banks and insurers have been "recognizing their losses and reserving against them in increments as their earnings improved," explained Mr. Robert.
"That's left them in a far better position to sell without taking losses."
The presence of more well-capitalized buyers in the market has encouraged sales.
"A lot of people have raised a lot of money," says one real-estate adviser to banks and insurance companies.
"If you have a reasonable product, and a good selling process, there's an incredible amount of competition out there."
Richard Gunthel, head of real estate at Bankers Trust New York Corp., which has bought portfolios as well as advised sellers, said prices are clearly rising.
Sharper competition isn't the only reason.
"The prices are much higher because the risk is less," said Thomas Barrack Jr., president and chief executive of Los Angeles-based Colony Capital Inc., among the earliest buyers of distressed portfolios.
Buyers can now calculate with far more certainty how much they will earn on such portfolios, and consequently, are not demanding such steep discounts.
"The equity returns that folks are willing to accept are more reasonable," said Mr. Barrack.
The 30% and higher profit margins targeted by early buyers have shrunken toward 20%, he said.
This maturation of the market has an added benefit to the banks and insurers with bloated real-estate portfolios.
"The sellers are no longer dumping them into a vacuum market," said Mr. Barrack.
"They know within 5% what bidders will bid on a portfolio."
Buyers are bidding more aggressively because there are more options for reselling the assets at a profit than were available to buyers just a couple of years ago.
Many of the real-estate companies that have gone public as real-estate investment trusts over the past year and a half are looking to buy property, particularly apartments, and bulk buyers have been willing sellers.
The growth of commercial mortgage securitization has provided bulk buyers with another option for turning over their assets.
Big buyers like Bankers Trust have discovered yet another way to get rid of bulk purchases: Have bulk sales.
Drawing from three different pools they bought from the Resolution Trust Corp., Bankers Trust has put a $90 million pool of nonperforming hotel loans on the market.
