People are cooking less but obsessing about it more.
With nearly 1,000 new cookbooks published each year, it's little wonder that cookbooks are becoming more arcane, with collections of recipes inspired by everything from Regis and Kathy Lee to bananas (from "The Banana Lover's Cookbook": banana gazpacho and banana ham loaf).
At the same time, cookbooks are getting so glossy and expensive that few would risk actually using them in the kitchen.
Even as the number of cookbooks rises, the U.S. is becoming a nation of cooking illiterates.
Each year people spend more of their food dollar in restaurants and less in grocery stores.
According to Technomic Inc., a Chicago food consulting firm, people spent 29.4% of their food dollar on restaurant meals in 1993, up from 21.7% in 1978; meanwhile, the portion of the food dollar spent in food stores fell to 50.6% from 59.3%.
Eating experts aren't surprised that people are reading more about cooking than actually cooking.
"If you trace the decline of the family dinner, you will find a direct association between that decline and the amount of high-tech equipment in the kitchen for food preparation," says George Rosenbaum, chief executive of Leo J. Shapiro & Associates, a market-research firm in Chicago.
Today's noncooks outfit their kitchens with food processors, espresso makers, rice steamers, pasta makers, woks and bread makers.
Diane Smith, a portfolio manager in New York, has acquired 16 cookbooks in the past four years.
She subscribes to Gourmet and Food & Wine magazines.
But the last time she prepared a sit-down dinner was four years ago.
"The spring of 1990," she recalls.
"It didn't come out."
In rural Pennsylvania, Tess Wathen, a clerical worker, also is an avid consumer of cookbooks, but an infrequent chef.
"I'm like a kid in a candy store," when presented with a rack of cookbooks, she says.
Despite her impressive and growing cookbook collection, Mrs. Wathen is a local legend for setting a chicken on fire in her microwave oven.
"I did everything the recipe said," she says defensively.
In the past, when Mom cooked dinner for the family every night, many kitchen libraries contained little more than "The Joy of Cooking," or "The Fannie Farmer Cookbook."
Girls learned to cook from their mothers or grandmothers, and took home-economics classes in school.
Now, says Mr. Rosenbaum, "When people finally do cook, it's such an occasion, they really want to do it right."
The accumulation of cookbooks may also represent a yearning for a sort of a life where stay-at-home mom prepared a rich stew for her grateful and loving family.
Even some editors acknowledge there are too many cookbooks.
Someday "I'm going to take a vow that I will not publish any more cookbooks; there are enough," says Fran McCullough, a senior consulting editor for Bantam Books.
That, she says, would be her "contribution" to society.
But not just yet.
Ms. McCullough recently edited a 508-page gourmet cookbook for diabetics, although she passed on one about cooking for menopause.
"The Civil War Cookbook" from Courage Books "intertwines history and cuisine for a new insight into the lives of soldiers on the battlefield . . . " The author sees the war from a foodie perspective, calling a knife and fork "a soldier's most treasured possessions."
The recipes won't impress your boss.
Flour is a key ingredient in many of the dishes, which include beaten biscuits, pork pie, sweet potato pudding and red flannel hash.
The book also contains some of the most unappealing contemporary food photography in modern cookbook publishing, including uncensored close-ups of salt pork and hardtack, the bread known to soldiers as "teeth dullers" or "worm castles."
Other recent historical cookbooks include "Cooking with Fire," by the Fairfield Historical Society, a collection of 17th-century recipes to be cooked over an open fire.
Finally, there's E.J. Brill's $85 "Garum and Salsmenta," which examines the history of two fermented fish condiments that were the most popular flavorings used in ancient Rome.
"Cooking With Regis & Kathie Lee: Quick & Easy Recipes From America's Favorite TV Personalities" from Hyperion includes such classic recipes as Phyllis Diller's oyster stew and Kathie Lee's Special Turkey Marsala.
Tip: "You can use fresh garlic instead of the garlic salt if you like."
The book contains the recipe for Regis's favorite food: "A Ritz cracker spread with a little peanut butter and then just a little bit of strawberry jam."
For hungry moguls, there's "Hollywood du Jour, Lost Recipes of Legendary Hollywood Haunts," for which Angel City Press has collected favorite recipes from closed hangouts such as the Brown Derby and Don the Beachcombers.
Abbeville Press has also published a line of books based very loosely on movies.
"The Casablanca Cookbook, Wining and Dining at Rick's" contains recipes for Here's Looking at You Kid Champagne Cocktail and Last Plane Out Lentil and Lamb Salad.
The series also features a "Gone With the Wind" cookbook (Mammy's Shrimpcakes) and "The Wizard of Oz" cookbook (Auntie Em's Crullers).
For more refined tastes, there's "Frida's Fiestas; Recipes and Reminiscences of Life with Frida Kahlo" published by Clarkson N. Potter Inc. and the latest in a series of coffee-table books with recipes inspired by or enjoyed by renowned artists.
It began with "Monet's Table" in 1990.
Look for "Renoir's Table" this fall.
"The Bad For You Cookbook" from Villard Books is a full-flavored rebellion against healthy recipes.
It follows the cardinal rule: "If it can be poached, it can be fried."
Fat-laden recipes include potatoes fried in goose fat, consomme with suet balls, potato-crusted fried chicken and mozzarella pie.
And be sure to top off the meal with doughnut pudding or pork cake, which contains 1/2 lb. of fatty salt pork, finely ground, or lard cake.
"More Back of the Box Gourmet" from Simon & Schuster includes more than 120 recipes from the backs of food packages.
Where else would you find a cookie recipe that calls for a teaspoon of Tabasco sauce as you do with Hot 'N Nutty cookies?
The book includes an entire chapter on cooking with cereals, with a recipe for apple-glazed ham loaf, calling for three cups of Kellogg's Corn Flakes in the glaze.
"Manifold Destiny.
The Only Guide to Cooking on Your Car Engine" from Villard Books, observes that "As engine cooking spreads in popularity, interstate rest areas will take on a new homey character."
The book answers such questions as "How many miles does it take to roast a chicken?
Were Jaguars really designed with veal scaloppine in mind?" and gives cooking time in miles, not minutes, i.e., Cutlass Car Supreme: distance: 40-70 miles.
The Dwight David Eisenhower pepper steak should be cooked driving across Kansas.
(Use a tire iron to crush four peppercorns.)
"Recipes for Disaster," Chronicle Books' collection of recipes by cartoonists, includes Roz Chast's recipe for Complete Jerk Chicken: "Invite ten people over for dinner.
Forget to defrost chicken."
For the more advanced, there's Ms. Chast's "World's Biggest Jerk Chicken: Buy a chicken at the butcher.
On your way home, leave it at the dry cleaner."
