Vaughn D. Bryson, abruptly ousted as Eli Lilly & Co.'s chief executive in a boardroom coup last summer, was named vice chairman of Vector Securities International Inc., an investment banking concern.
Vector, based in Deerfield, Ill., specializes in health-care and biotechnology businesses.
It was founded in 1988 by three former Kidder, Peabody & Co. executives.
Besides underwriting stock offerings and managing investment funds, Vector represents medical companies in forging deals to acquire new technologies.
It helped one client, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., acquire the crucial "polymerase chain reaction" technology that may overhaul the way hospital laboratories diagnose diseases such as AIDS and hepatitis.
Vector officials said they're hoping the industry knowledge and contacts of Mr. Bryson will be helpful in acquiring more such business, as well as merger deals in the quickly consolidating health-care field.
Mr. Bryson, 55 years old, who agreed to join the firm effective April 1, will serve on its executive committee.
"I thought being at a fast-growing entrepreneurial company would be a lot of fun," said Mr. Bryson.
"I've had 32 years of the other.
I also think there's a role for companies like Vector in facilitating alliances in health care, where we're going to see further consolidation."
Even so, tiny Vector, with its 50 employees, will be a big change for Mr. Bryson, who for 20 months ran a $6.2 billion-a-year pharmaceutical concern with 32,000 workers.
As Lilly's president and CEO, Mr. Bryson rapidly brought a collegial atmosphere to a once-authoritarian and conservative company not given to change.
(The motto of Eli Lilly III, chairman until 1968, was: "Whenever in doubt, don't do it.")
Mr. Bryson also approved numerous alliances with smaller firms, the sort Vector is seeking to arrange with other medical companies.
During his tenure as chief executive officer, earnings slipped at Indianapolis-based Lilly, although several factors contributing to the slide had been building for years.
The main reason for his firing, in the view of many Lilly executives, was that the new collegiality fostered by the popular Mr. Bryson irked his predecessor, Richard D. Wood, who then maintained the title of chairman.
Several company executives and directors say Mr. Wood, who declined comment, chafed under the changes and engineered the ouster in June.
