Talk about gallows humor.
During a particularly bleak period for the television networks in 1989, a colleague gave Howard Stringer, the president of CBS Inc.'s broadcast group, a motorized toy dinosaur.
It seemed an apt symbol.
CBS and its rivals ABC and NBC were viewed as giants lumbering toward extinction at the dawning of a dazzling new media age.
Cable and home video were siphoning off viewers at an alarming rate, and interactive media were just appearing on the horizon.
Yet today, the Big Three are hot properties again.
They have proved themselves not only viable, but thriving contenders that can hold onto both a mass audience and their approximate $9 billion share of the $25 billion annual TV advertising pie.
Their strength was evident during the Winter Olympics coverage that drew record ratings to CBS, even on nights when the women's figure-skating soap opera didn't air.
This triumph, says CBS Chairman Laurence Tisch, "proves what we've been saying all along: Free television is here to stay."
While this is no doubt true, many on Wall Street believe that within a few years all three broadcast networks will have changed hands or become part of larger media organizations.
Such a scenario is "not only possible but logical," says Jessica Reif, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co., as companies jockey for position on the so-called information superhighway.
CBS, ABC and NBC all have had conversations in the past two years about buying, selling or merging.
And though deals have been elusive, would-be partners continue to circle.
Ted Turner of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. has renewed his quest to purchase a network.
Though sources say his ambitions are being thwarted for now by his major shareholders, including Time Warner Inc., Mr. Turner has held recent talks with General Electric Co.'s NBC about buying the network, say people familiar with the discussions.
Meanwhile, now that QVC Inc. has lost the bidding for Paramount Communications Inc., QVC Chairman Barry Diller -- who started the Fox "fourth" network -- is weighing his options, and he doesn't rule out interest in one of the original three.
Paramount itself had held talks with both NBC and Capital Cities/ABC Inc. before agreeing to be acquired by Viacom Inc.
At the right price, many think Walt Disney Co. would acquire a network; speculation about a merger with CBS has been rampant, though executives at both companies dismiss it.
And some on Wall Street see a telecommunications company eventually jumping in to buy or invest in a network.
Capital Cities/ABC and NBC admit they would consider some future reconfiguration.
"We're always looking," says Capital Cities/ABC Chairman Thomas Murphy.
"We would be interested in whatever made sense for our stockholders."
But the cautious Mr. Murphy stresses he is after "good deals, not deals."
The company's just-announced 10-for-one stock split could make it easier to do an acquisition involving stock, some analysts note.
NBC President Robert C. Wright says his network is "part of a very large company that is always looking for growth."
He acknowledges that NBC has held talks with "all of the studios, all of the major programming entities" about various deals, mostly involving programming.
But he says: "We usually end up doing smaller things, rather than larger."
While declining to comment on any talks with Mr. Turner, Mr. Wright says he and the cable titan "see many things in a similar manner."
Mr. Turner "is an eager person to move ahead," but "he has a lot of diverse shareholders."
At CBS, though, Mr. Tisch -- who associates say clearly relishes the prestige of being CBS's chairman -- says he is not a seller.
Nor does he seem a likely buyer.
He says a network can increase its production capability in Hollywood merely by investment in programming, without incurring the added cost of buying a studio.
While keeping "all our options open," Mr. Tisch adds, "at the moment, we don't see a studio purchase as a really profitable venture."
The Wall Street rumor mill persists in painting CBS as the most likely network to change hands, though that could be wishful thinking by eager investment bankers.
Why the speculation, and the networks' own candid admission of various discussions, right now?
The timing owes a lot to the loosening in November of the "financial interest and syndication" rules, an arcane set of government regulations that for two decades largely kept the networks out of programming.
As a result of the November move and an earlier Federal Communications Commission ruling, the networks can own and produce as much of their prime-time schedules as they want, own stakes in shows produced by outsiders, and syndicate reruns of their shows abroad.
By November 1995 -- and perhaps as early as this summer, if a Chicago federal-court decision goes their way -- the networks will be freed to enter the U.S. syndication market as well, and will no longer be barred from merging with Hollywood studios, which have extensive syndication operations.
The networks say their ability to create and own many programs in-house will enable them to control costs better than when they are beholden to outside studio suppliers.
Already, they have vastly increased production of news programming and collectively now provide about 25% of their prime-time schedules, plus most of their daytime, sports and late-night shows.
All three networks say they can create programming themselves and don't have to turn to mergers or acquisitions if they don't want to.
"The only thing the studios bring to the creative process is money, and we've got that, too," says Mr. Murphy.
The Big Three have created a handful of popular shows, like the CBS-produced "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman."
But they also have turned out more than their share of flops on the order of ABC's "Paula Poundstone Show," which lasted only two weeks this season.
Some analysts think the networks may have little choice but to do some kind of deal with entertainment production firms.
The networks, they say, just haven't proved they can make hits as well as the studios can.
Shares of both CBS and ABC will remain discounted relative to other entertainment stocks, says Lehman Brothers Inc. analyst Raymond Katz, until the market is assured of their "ability to consistently turn out attractive entertainment product."
A network that does try to go it alone, moreover, may find it increasingly difficult to find good shows as competitors lock up the most talented producers.
Already, for example, ABC has agreed to invest up to $100 million in Brillstein-Grey Entertainment, a top comedy management and production concern with clients including Garry Shandling.
Some on Wall Street remain skeptical about the networks' strengthening competitive position, regardless of their success in the programming business.
"I didn't think the perception that they were dinosaurs was correct, and I don't think they're now as healthy as they're made out to be," says Ray Timothy, senior managing director at investment banker Furman Selz Inc. and a 35-year veteran of NBC.
For one thing, Mr. Timothy believes that the cable industry -- which now gets 23% of the 24-hour audience but only 12% of TV ad revenue -- will press to close that gap.
The investment community, he says, "lurches around like crazy" when it comes to media stocks.
Bidding is now feverish for network-affiliated TV stations, he notes, while only a few years ago station buyers couldn't be found.
Tom Wolzien, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., contends that longer term, "the trend will remain the same": a downward spiral, as the networks fight to maintain quality programming and brand image in the face of reduced revenue caused by diminishing audience shares.
Historically, the networks' strength flowed from their ironclad distribution system through station affiliates reaching 98% of U.S. homes.
Currently, 63% of U.S. homes with television subscribe to basic cable, up from 40.5% a decade ago and 23% in 1980.
Over that period, the networks' share of the prime-time viewing audience has tumbled to 61%, while viewers turn to cable 19% of the time.
Still, many in the industry believe that competition from cable has reached a plateau.
New cable channels are still proliferating, but they are now as likely to cannibalize one another as the networks.
NBC says its research shows that when presented with a choice of up to 100 channels, people actually use about eight.
The highest-rated regularly scheduled prime-time cable series is a CBS rerun, "Murder She Wrote" on USA Network.
Meanwhile, the networks' cable rivals have taken a few lumps at the hands of regulators.
In the Cable Act of 1992, cable systems were ordered to compensate broadcast stations for retransmitting their signals.
Last month, the FCC ordered another round of cuts in the fees cable systems can charge subscribers.
The collapse of Tele-Communications Inc.'s merger with regional phone giant Bell Atlantic Corp. last month also raises questions about how fast new channels and services will roll out.
And finally, even with diminished shares, the networks still have a critical mass that the fragmented cable business lacks.
Jerome Dominus, senior vice president at WPP Group Inc.'s J. Walter Thompson ad agency, has on his office wall a list of 51 new cable-channel start-ups for 1994.
"What none of them has, and what none of the existing channels has, are the promotional capabilities of a network," he says.
Only CBS, NBC and ABC, he says, can build audiences for new shows by plugging them during existing hits or "event" programming like the Olympics.
The networks are also getting a boost from cost-cutting measures, as well as from a stronger economy and rebounding TV ad spending.
CBS and Cap Cities reported record earnings from continuing operations last year, with operating income of $411 million at CBS and $778 million at Cap Cities' broadcast operations.
GE doesn't break out NBC's financial results, but company sources put NBC's 1993 operating profit at $340 million to $360 million.
The merger speculation is the latest flare-up of rumors that have swirled around Broadcast Row for years.
Yet no deals have come to fruition, for reasons unique to each network.
In December 1992, Cap Cities signaled that it was prepared to spend up to $8 billion on an acquisition, and talked to both Turner and Paramount.
A year later, having failed to come to terms, Cap Cities instead chose to buy back stock.
GE, meanwhile, came close to selling NBC to Paramount in 1992.
But it has since insisted it will remain in the business.
Mr. Wright says a deal with a studio would be unlikely, noting that the business of financing theatrical movies "doesn't really have an awful lot of fit with television."
Regulatory restrictions would probably preclude any deal with a telephone company, he says, but he stresses that that doesn't rule out some possible shared investment in program production.
Though CBS and Walt Disney have denied speculation about a merger, Disney executives acknowledge privately that they are interested in networks; however, they value them at about half what most network executives do.
Network sellers would likely demand a hefty premium over the current market, and no buyer could be sure a bidding war wouldn't erupt.
CBS has a stock-market value of about $4.9 billion, and Cap Cities/ABC (which includes publishing operations) of $10.8 billion.
GE has indicated in the past it values NBC at about $4 billion.
Rather than buy a network, Time Warner and Paramount are trying to start one.
The latter is teaming with station owner Chris-Craft Industries Inc.
But Time Warner and Paramount are in large part acting defensively -- fearing that the big three's increasing production of their own programs will hurt studio operations.
Even if the major networks' programming forays don't work out, they are hedging their bets.
They are lobbying for a regulatory change that would let them use the broadcast spectrum to provide additional services, cramming in data streams through digital compression.
Services could range from extra channels devoted to news or sports, to interactive or home-shopping services.
Already, NBC News programming is being repackaged and relayed through such outlets as the network's business cable channel CNBC, its Spanish-language news service mainly distributed in Latin America, and the European satellite service Super Channel.
"Transmitting information in video format is just beginning its golden age," says Mr. Wright.
Cap Cities, which also has extensive cable interests, has invested about $300 million in European media businesses.
And even CBS, which has stuck doggedly to broadcasting, may finally be changing its tune; Mr. Stringer indicates it is investigating new media "to decide where best our software can be directed."
Mr. Tisch, though, stresses that CBS won't stray far from what it knows best.
"Our fate is in our own hands," he says.
"If we deliver the programming, the audience will be there.
We can't blame our success or failure on anyone but ourselves."
Laura Landro contributed to this article.
