With a yelp of delight, the cross-country ski champion gazes at the nearby Olympic flame and savors his victory.
Rolling onto his back, he wriggles happily with his legs in the air.
Then he jogs triumphantly back to the athletes' tent, pausing to lift his leg along the race-course fence.
Meet Spot, winner of the 1994 Olympic pulka competition.
In a big meadow below the ski-jump stadium, Spot and a town judge named Christian Lundin beat a dozen rival pulka teams.
Spot, a German pointer, pulls a little sled carrying 25 kilograms of weights.
Behind the sled, a rope connects to a belt-hook on Mr. Lundin, who skis furiously to match Spot's pace.
Just meters away, hordes of flag-waving ski fans cheer and ring cowbells.
But they are all coming from the morning's 30-kilometer cross-country race just over the hill, featuring dogless men.
Save for a few dozen serious pulka fans, no one was there to see Spot run.
Mr. Lundin's dog may yet have his day.
Under the banner of the International Federation of Sleddog (sic) Sports, the pulka fans applied in the fall for formal recognition by the International Olympic Committee.
The IFSS wants a place in the Olympics for the traditional Scandinavian sport of pulka and for classic sled races with teams of dogs.
The organizers of the Lillehammer Games gave the sledders a nice push, making them an official part of the Olympic cultural program and granting them some superb real estate.
Along with the pulka pointers, 800 Alaskan huskies and their mushers arrived here this week, their chorus of howls audible from the Lygardsbakkene ski jump to the Hakon Hall hockey rink.
On Tuesday, the dogs descended onto the Olympic Park medal-ceremony arena to start a three-day, 500-kilometer race to the town of Roros, Norway.
Surrounded here by Olympic gold, the pulka racers and the classic mushers are salivating for international acceptance.
"We belong in the Olympic Games," says IFSS official Bob Levorsen, who traveled here from Novato, Calif.
"We're a physical, competitive sport.
We comply with the Olympic ideals much more than Tonya Harding."
The sport does have its share of feisty athletes, but they are easy to handle.
"Flink jente, flink jente," says 18-year-old Anders Hauger to his tail-wagging teammate Ninja.
"Good girl, good girl."
Wearing racing tights with a Purina logo, his face crusted with frozen spit, Mr. Hauger has just won the 5-kilometer pulka, junior division.
"It's very important you praise the dog," he says.
Pulka evolved from the Lapp practice of using a dog and a small, dinghy-shaped sled to transport things over the snow.
In his hometown of Lorenskog, south of Oslo, Mr. Hauger trains with Ninja year-round.
In the summer, Ninja pulls him up hills on a bicycle.
He also rows a boat while Ninja paddles alongside.
The sledding federation is quick to point out that dogsledding is hardly a Norwegian oddity.
Dodo Perri is here this week from Courmayeur, Italy, representing the AIM (Associazione Italiana Musher).
So is Joe Redington, age 77, of Wasilla, Alaska.
In 1973 he founded the world's most famous dogsled race, the 1,132-mile Iditarod from Anchorage to Nome.
"I've done nothing but dog-mushing since 1948," he says, sipping instant cappuccino while his huskies squeal and strain at their harness.
"I always felt it should be part of the Olympics."
The sledders' Olympic petition declares the sport has 10,396 drivers around the world, who competed in 2,935 sled races in the past two years.
There were 542 in Alaska, 289 in Sweden, 47 in Japan, and 10 in South Africa, where dogs pull carts on dry land.
Olympic officials aren't counting the sledders out.
"We recognize horse riding, which is also with animals, so why not?" says Gilbert Felli, sport director for the IOC.
Here at the Lillehammer camp, musher Thor-Atle Svortevik prepares his lead huskies Jappa and Nuno for the 500-kilometer race and argues that it will require a truly Olympian effort.
"It's not the case that I'm standing there and looking at the stars," says Mr. Svortevik, a schoolteacher from Kirkenes in far-northern Norway.
"I will lose four kilograms during this race."
A musher must often run alongside his sled, or push it uphill or ride it like a scooter, pushing off with one leg.
"Look at bobsled -- this is a lot more physical," scoffs Mr. Svortevik.
"I'm very glad for bobsleds that they're in the Olympics, but why not this?"
