Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable operator, joined forces with computer software giant Microsoft Corp. to test interactive television services.
The companies said they agreed in principle to test interactive services in TCI's cable systems in Seattle and Denver.
Microsoft, which is based near Seattle in Redmond, Wash., will provide a new operating system software for delivery of the services.
Talks between TCI and Microsoft had been going on prior to TCI's agreement to combine with Bell Atlantic Corp., which was called off last month.
For Microsoft, the agreement is the first to link it with a cable partner in a trial of interactive services.
Despite Microsoft's leading position in the computer software industry, its smaller rivals such as Oracle Corp. and Silicon Graphics Inc. already have struck deals to supply software to interactive cable trials.
The first phase of the TCI-Microsoft test will start in the fourth quarter of 1994 offering such services as video-on-demand to employees of TCI and Microsoft in Seattle.
It will test all the components that Microsoft's software will help run, including video servers, TV set-top boxes and the system's operating software.
In 1995, the second phase will expand into a marketing test of interactive TV services among TCI cable customers in the Seattle and Denver areas, up to "ten of thousands" of participants, the companies said.
The second phase will explore how consumers actually interact with the features of the service.
The two companies said they would take a "deliberate, considered approach" to make sure the system meets future cable operator requirements.
This slower, more guarded style may surface more often after the aborted linking of TCI and Bell Atlantic, said William Bluestein, an analyst with Forrester Research Inc., Cambridge, Mass.
Mr. Bluestein also noted that Time Warner Inc. this week said it would delay the launch of its full-service information network in Orlando, Fla., by several months, citing equipment delays.
"It will be quite a job to get these systems up and running," said Nathan Myhrvold, a senior vice president at Microsoft.
"It's the first time anybody's done this."
Mr. Myhrvold said that TCI and Microsoft are already involved in a trial with Pacific Gas & Electric Co. in California to test delivery of energy-information services.
Microsoft negotiated extensively with TCI, Time Warner and others to form a joint venture expected to set key software standards for the converging cable, computer and telephone company industries.
Executives concede that effort, orginally dubbed Cablesoft, is now dead.
But William Gates, Microsoft's chief executive officer, recently expressed confidence that Microsoft will emerge as a key supplier of software for the information highway.
In April of last year, Microsoft struck a deal with Intel Corp. and General Instrument Corp. to build the powerful set-top boxes for interactive TV services.
The product has yet to be selected for any market tests, but a Microsoft executive said he "would not be surprised" if the boxes show up in the TCI field tests.
TCI is also involved in an interactive movie-on-demand trial in Littleton, Colo., with U S West Inc. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
Separately, TCI announced preliminary unaudited results at its annual analyst and investor meeting in New York.
Revenue for 1993 jumped 16% to $4.15 billion, while operating cash flow climbed 14% to $1.86 billion.
The company said both revenue and operating cash flow grew because of strong subscriber growth and the consolidation of the company's equity interest in Storer Communications Inc.
TCI also told analysts it would restructure the company to make it more like a holding company, with four separate divisions -- international, programming, cable and communications, and venture capital.
Don Clark contributed to this article.
