The Clinton administration, under intense budget pressure, is considering seeking a waiver in the deficit-reduction law to pay for the new global trade pact.
Officials, however, believe they can't take that route for welfare reform.
White House aides are floating the idea of a budget waiver for the trade pact, negotiated under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, because it would cost the government an estimated $11 billion to $14 billion in reduced tariffs over five years.
Under federal law, any new legislation that would widen the deficit by reducing tax or tariff revenue must be accompanied by provisions for new revenues or spending cuts.
But Congress may vote to waive this requirement.
Officials argue that a waiver would be justified in the case of GATT because future revenue gains from increased trade would far exceed the cost in lost tariffs.
Administration officials have no intention of seeking a waiver for welfare overhaul, however, because it would be much harder to argue that such savings could be achieved.
Both the trade and welfare issues were discussed at a recent meeting in the Roosevelt Room of the White House, where officials also conferred about the cost of the administration's ambitious health-care proposal.
They decided to discuss the budget-waiver idea with congressional leaders, U.S. officials said.
Clinton advisers aren't sure Congress would approve a waiver, though.
Publicly, the White House Office of Management and Budget is distancing itself from the effort.
A spokesman at the budget office insisted, "We are not asking, or urging, that there be any kind of waiver for GATT.
The meetings that are going to be held are going to be strictly for deciding how to pay for GATT, not whether to pay for GATT."
Meanwhile, worry about cost has led the administration to pare back the evolving welfare-reform program by billions of dollars.
Among the proposals being discussed for the program are limiting Social Security disability payments for alcoholics and drug addicts, reducing fraud in the earned-income tax credit program for the working poor, and limiting grants to states for welfare recipients.
The welfare plan would force welfare recipients to work after two years in the program.
During the two years, recipients would receive considerable job-training and other services.
White House aides are considering applying the two-year limit initially to individuals 25 years old and younger.
That would bring down the cost to as little as $4 billion over five years, at least $3 billion less than a more ambitious proposal suggested earlier.
Officials say the fiscal issue is the only significant obstacle to the widely popular trade pact, which was reached in December.
If a budget waiver can't be obtained, another, more difficult possibility would be to ask lawmakers to find offsetting spending cuts.
The administration has to settle this issue soon.
It's planning to introduce the trade pact to Congress after it is signed in Marrakech, Morocco, on April 15.
In the meantime, White House lobbyists have been talking to key members of the Senate about using the annual budget resolution to alter Senate rules so that it would take only 50 votes, instead of the current 60-vote requirement, to waive the budget-law restrictions on deficit spending.
Senate Republicans are resisting the waiver.
But there is a movement among Republicans in the House, where only a simple majority vote is needed, to waive the law for the GATT agreement.
Administration officials hope Republicans will set aside their own fiscal conservatism for the cause of open trade, which they traditionally have advocated.
In addition, administration officials hope Republicans will acknowledge that it would be hard to find as much as $14 billion in spending cuts or tax increases in an election year.
The White House budget office estimates that GATT would reduce projected tariff receipts by $13.9 billion over five years.
Clinton aides claim about $3 billion of that would be offset by lower-than-projected agricultural subsidies, leaving a $10.8 billion hole to fill.
The revenue issue arose last year during the administration's campaign to win congressional approval for the North American Free Trade Agreement.
To offset the loss of duties from Nafta, the administration proposed raising taxes on air and sea passenger travel, as well as customs fees collected on railroad cars and trucks that cross the U.S. border.
When crucial Republican lawmakers in the House threatened to vote against the pact because of those tax proposals, the administration scaled them back.
The House cleared the pact Nov. 15.
Although administration officials considered seeking a budget waiver for Nafta, they didn't because that trade pact's survival was so precarious.
The GATT agreement has much wider support.
