Some business owners dream of making a killing, retiring young and then cruising or playing golf every day.
W. Berry Fowler did all that.
Then, he got bored.
Deciding that franchising was more fun than golf, he got into business all over again.
In Portland, Ore., 15 years ago, Mr. Fowler started a one-man tutoring enterprise, Sylvan Reading Achievement Center, and turned it into a national chain.
He eventually retired at age 41 to enjoy the good life.
Five years later, he abandoned leisure to work 60 to 75 hours a week building another franchise chain, this time in fitness centers for children.
"Work is a lot more fun than being retired, and it's a lot more stimulating," he says.
Mr. Fowler has astonished some people who knew him as a leading exemplar of the leisure class.
"He had a very nice lifestyle, very comfortable," says Mark Schuster, a Bellevue, Wash., real-estate executive who used to boat, golf and play cribbage with Mr. Fowler.
"I never envisioned him going back to work as hard as he is now."
Mr. Fowler has found one way to solve a difficult problem: what to do for an encore after a striking early success.
Many entrepreneurs who succeed while still young find themselves at loose ends until they can find new interests.
Until a few years ago, Mr. Fowler never had enough money to think he had any choice about whether to work.
He got off to a slow start, taking seven years to get an undergraduate degree.
Mr. Fowler says he attended five colleges and had a difficult time, requiring remedial reading lessons.
He finally graduated in 1973 with an education degree from Chapman University in Orange, Calif.
His first profession had low wages.
Mr. Fowler recalls initially earning $7,700 a year as an art and geography teacher in Anaheim, Calif.
But he had entrepreneurial flair; he had earned $16,500 in the summer of 1971 by operating art concessions at two amusement parks.
And Mr. Fowler had the idea for a company that could help children with reading problems, sparing them the difficulty that he had experienced in college.
Mr. Fowler says he was further inspired, at age 31, when his mother sent him a paperback book about millionaires.
He remembers being especially impressed by Ray Kroc, the late fast-food pioneer.
As the world knows by now, somebody else built the first McDonald's.
But it was Mr. Kroc who franchised the concept -- and became rich.
Suddenly, Mr. Fowler, whose teaching salary had risen to only about $15,000, wanted to be just like Ray Kroc.
In 1978, Mr. Fowler quit his Anaheim job, sold his house and moved to Portland, partly because costs were lower there.
"I had $14,500 after I paid off my mortgage and all my bills," he recalls.
He used the money to start his reading-center business, named Sylvan because the office was in the Sylvan Medical & Dental Building, in a neighborhood called Sylvan Hill.
Though Mr. Fowler lacked deep pockets and wasn't a recognized expert, he says he assumed that he could expand his business into a national chain.
After all, the idea made sense and nobody else seemed to be filling the role.
Mr. Fowler, who has since remarried, says his wife at the time told him that people thought his talk about a national chain was crazy.
But Mr. Fowler took on a partner, added employees and moved to the Seattle area.
The single center grew into Sylvan Learning Corp.
When KinderCare Learning Centers Inc. agreed to acquire Sylvan in April 1985, it was a profitable franchiser with 67 units in operation.
Mr. Fowler, who got two-thirds of the $5.3 million in pretax proceeds, suddenly was a wealthy man.
Though he stayed on as chairman under the new owners, Mr. Fowler jumped ship in 1987 when they decided to move the company headquarters to Montgomery, Ala.
Sylvan subsequently evolved into Sylvan Learning Systems Inc., a public company based in Columbia, Md., that oversees more than 500 units.
While Sylvan evolved, Mr. Fowler became a happy-go-lucky early retiree who thought he would never work again.
"Finally, I had some money," he says.
"I wanted to take off and have some fun."
He says he went out in a 50-foot cabin cruiser at least four days a week in nearby Puget Sound.
He played tennis often, produced works of art and enjoyed lengthy trips abroad with his wife and children.
To further remove himself from his former workaday life, Mr. Fowler in 1991 bought a house near a golf resort in Kaanapali, Hawaii, and moved there with his family.
He took up golf for the first time -- and played nearly every day, eventually scoring in the low 90s.
To his delight, he also began finding buyers for his pen-and-ink cartoon drawings.
"I was selling two or three pieces a week," at prices between $125 and $275, he recalls.
But fun as all that was, Mr. Fowler says he was getting bored.
"I thought I was going to get cerebral atrophy."
On a trip back to the Seattle area, he discovered his cure when he picked up his three-year-old daughter from a Little Gym outlet, where she had perfected her somersault.
Mr. Fowler says he was so happy with what he saw that he bought the small company, then 16 years old.
Now, at age 47, Mr. Fowler is chairman and controlling owner of Little Gym International Inc. in Kirkland, Wash.
He says he aims to build the franchiser of fitness centers for children into a chain with at least 700 units by the end of the decade.
"It's possible we could get to 1,100 by then," he says.
The company says it has sold 76 franchises so far, of which 37 are already operating.
A master licensee based in the U.S. has agreed to develop 185 Little Gym units in Japan by November 1999.
Mr. Fowler, who has brought in partners, says he currently owns only 41% of Little Gym, but retains two-thirds voting control.
Little Gym outlets offer gymnastics and other developmental programs for young children.
"I keep my nose in everybody's business because we're still in the start-up stage," Mr. Fowler says.
Though previously a money-earner, the company says it hasn't turned a profit since it stepped up its franchising, thus increasing costs.
But running a company again has reinvigorated the entrepreneur.
"My wife says my energy level is a thousand times as great when I'm working as when I'm slogging around being a retired guy," he says.
"I just can't see hanging around and being a bum again, ever."
