GE Capital Corp.'s unfriendly takeover bid for Kemper Corp. leaves no doubt the financial-services giant wants to become a major player in the booming market for mutual funds and retirement products.
GE Capital, a highly profitable unit of General Electric Co,. is a dominant force in the behind-the-scenes world of corporate banking and is the biggest nonbank-finance company in the U.S.
Now, it is coming out of the shadows to tap into the growing personal-finance market.
Kemper, a money-management, brokerage and insurance company, continued to criticize GE Capital's bid of $55 a share, or $2.2 billion, calling it "a shocking assault" that is "not in the best interest of our shareholders."
But takeover experts said GE has the upper hand in what could become a protracted battle.
GE has already indicated it would consider sweetening its bid if it obtains additional financial information from Kemper.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Kemper climbed $4.75, to $61.75 a share, after rocketing more than $16 on Monday when the offer was disclosed.
The surge indicated that investors expect GE to sweeten its bid or to be outbid by another firm.
GE edged down 37.5 cents a share, to $104.875 on the Big Board.
For GE Capital, the push into personal finance is a return to its roots as a provider of financial services, except this time it's on the other side of a household's balance sheet.
Rather than lending money to consumers to buy a GE refrigerator, which was the unit's original purpose, it's gathering assets to manage.
Experts say GE Capital has decided, as have many banks and other financial institutions, that the future of finance isn't so much lending money as managing it.
Other corporate banking giants such as Bankers Trust New York Corp. are trying to muscle into the world of personal-financial management.
GE Capital's bid for Kemper is one solution to an enviable problem -- what to do with the nearly $2 billion in annual profit that GE Capital produces.
Some of that goes to GE corporate headquarters, but GE Capital is intent on using some of it to build a personal-finance division.
Sources say that when GE Capital Chairman Gary Wendt went to Chicago nearly two months ago to meet with Kemper Chairman Davis Mathis, he had come to the realization that building a personal-finance company from the ground up would be a struggle.
But that has rarely stopped GE before; it is a voracious acquirer of companies.
It spent around $1 billion last year buying two companies that sell annuity products.
Mr. Wendt's visit came six weeks after Mellon Bank Corp. agreed to buy Dreyfus Corp. for nearly $1.9 billion.
"Kemper would be the flagship of our major thrust in the asset-management business," GE Chairman John F. Welch said in a letter to Mr. Mathis.
"We are able to commit new capital to growing asset management under the Kemper banner."
By publicly taking its takeover bid over management's head to Kemper's board and stockholders, GE Capital has made it clear it won't walk away without a fight.
Indeed, an individual close to GE Capital said the company looked at acquiring Kemper about a year ago but was wary of the company's real-estate problems.
Now Kemper has significantly cleaned up the mess, and GE Capital has become a major player in managing troubled real estate.
GE and GE Capital together manage about $75 billion in assets, including more than $13 billion in annuities managed by GNA Corp.
Adding Kemper's $70 billion would vault GE into one of the biggest money-management firms in the U.S.
But GE has had little success building up its mutual-fund business on its own.
In early January, GE announced it would market 401-K plans to corporations in a joint venture with State Street Boston Corp.
It is selling five mutual funds that had been available only to GE employees, and manages about $5.6 billion.
While Kemper manages a much larger $47.5 billion in mutual-fund assets, that figure has basically been unchanged for the past two years despite the enormous growth in mutual-fund assets.
The Kemper spokeswoman attributed the lack of growth to increased competition.
It's easy to see why GE would acquire rather than build.
The cost of adding a new account could be upward of $1,000 for a company that manages $1 billion.
But for managers who oversee $100 billion or more, the figure could drop to $25 per new account, analysts say.
"The economies of scale in the mutual-fund business are exponential," said Louis Harvey, president of Dalbar Financial Services, a Boston-based consulting firm.
"Neither one of these companies have participated in the mutual-fund boom."
In addition to boosting the mutual-fund sales, GE believes it could cut costs at the operation, where total expenses were 0.65 of a percentage point of assets under management in the first half of 1993, higher than many other fund companies.
Cutting costs by 15/100ths of a percentage point on $70 billion of assets would yield an extra $100 million in annual pretax profits, a person close to GE said.
There are also potential synergies.
In the annuity business, GNA is one of the largest third-party providers of annuity products to banks, and Kemper's Invest Financial Corp. is another leader in third-party investment sales.
There could also be synergies with GE affiliate Kidder, Peabody & Co., which is a major player in syndicating closed-end mutual funds.
Kidder, for instance, recently sold a $1 billion closed-end fund that will be managed by Alliance Capital Management.
"If completed, the addition of Kemper's asset-management and annuity operations would provide GECC with a solid platform for growth in the savings-product industry," Standard & Poor's Corp. said in confirming the company's triple-A credit rating.
The rating agency said an attempt by Kemper to maintain its independence could have a harmful effect on its balance sheet and credit rating.
It is also GE's modus operandi to buy companies at what might be considered a vulnerable stage.
After three years of cleaning up Kemper, including taking nearly $850 million in write-downs on its $2.5 billion in real-estate assets, Kemper is beginning to turn the corner.
One year after GE Capital first looked at Kemper, the portfolio appears to be in better shape and was written down to about 40% of original face value.
At the same time, GE Capital has become a major player in managing troubled real-estate holdings.
Kemper "is just emerging from a three-year battle," said Samuel Liss, a securities analyst at Salomon Brothers, who has been bullish on the stock.
"Operating earnings are becoming more visible but it's still at a vulnerable inflection point."
That's just where GE likes to buy, people who have followed the company's actions say.
Last year GE Capital swooped in and received an option to purchase GPA Group PLC just as the Irish aircraft-leasing company faced a brush with financial peril.
Aside from convincing Kemper's board to accept the offer, GE Capital could face regulatory hurdles that could delay its efforts to take over the company.
The constraints could give Kemper enough time to find another buyer, but dealmakers say it's obvious the company is now in play.
"Time is their worst enemy," said one investment banker.
"In this case, Kemper will no doubt have plenty of time to look at alternatives."
Takeover experts believe another insurance company could be an attractive "white knight," but say it could be difficult competing with GE Capital.
Banks would be an obvious candidate, but they are prohibited from underwriting insurance products.
Unlike the acquisition of industrial companies, takeovers in insurance and banking must receive approval from the proper regulatory agencies.
In this case, GE Capital needs permission from the Illinois Department of Insurance.
In previous cases such as B.A.T's $5.2 billion acquisition of Farmers Group, it took nearly one year to seek approval in many states amid opposition from Farmers.
But eventually B.A.TT won over both management and the state-regulatory boards, although it had to sweeten its bid.
GE would only need approval in Illinois, where Kemper is domiciled, lawyers say.
Arthur Dutcher, deputy director of the financial regulatory division of the Illinois Department of Insurance, said regulatory approval "is not an insurmountable task" from the regulator's perspective as long as GE Capital abides by state-insurance rules.
