The Environmental Protection Agency granted Monsanto Co. and a partner clearance to market a controversial herbicide, but it attached unprecedented requirements for post-approval oversight of the product's safety.
If the EPA's stringent requirements aren't met, the registration of the potentially big-selling herbicide will be automatically canceled.
Such provisions differ markedly from standard practice.
Typically, once new pesticides are registered, the EPA's approval can be withdrawn only after protracted and cumbersome proceedings.
The agency had been urged not to clear the product by some environmental groups, which contended approval wouldn't be in line with the EPA's drive, under administrator Carol Browner, to reduce pesticide risks.
The key compound, acetochlor, is classified as a carcinogen, or cancer-causing agent.
St. Louis, Mo.-based Monsanto plans to market the product under the name Harness Plus.
Farmers use millions of pounds of herbicides annually in order to kill weeds that would otherwise rob crops of nutrients.
Most of the current products, including Monsanto's Lasso, are classified as carcinogens, or otherwise widely thought to pose environmental and health concerns.
A primary concern is the herbicide migration into groundwater in agricultural areas.
With Harness Plus, Monsanto has contended, farmers would be able to control weeds with significantly smaller applications.
Thus, the chemical company has been in the somewhat awkward position of assuring regulators that approval of Harness Plus would help reduce the use of current herbicides -- which Monsanto stoutly maintains don't pose a risk.
Under the arrangement, Monsanto and its partner, Zeneca Ag Products of Wilmington, Del., agreed to establish and fund a complex water monitoring system in seven states.
The partners are also obligated to document that the anticipated payoff for the approval-lowered use of current herbicides -- does in fact take place.
Among other things, the companies agreed that the registration will be canceled if the use of certain other corn herbicides isn't reduced by a cumulative 66 million pounds within five years.
Monsanto took pains to say, however, that the expected herbicide-use reduction "will be a natural response from the marketplace," and that "in no way are we saying that we believe there is any unacceptable risk with previously registered products."
While acknowledging that the product had stirred opposition from some groups, EPA pesticide chief Lynn Goldman said in an interview that the registration is beneficial because it provides a full one-third reduction in the use of corn herbicides "that we feel are either as or more risky" than acetochlor.
Those earlier-approved products, she noted, aren't subject to the restrictions imposed on the new herbicide.
Ms. Goldman, director of the EPA's office of prevention, pesticides and toxic substances, stressed that "if I believed we were going to get a groundwater problem, I wouldn't have approved" the herbicide.
The automatic cancellation triggers, she said, "are there so that if the mitigation measures don't work, then we'll have a fallback."
Monsanto and Zeneca formed a partnership in 1992 to jointly seek U.S. clearance to market acetochlor.
Each company intends to market its own product, making use of acetochlor produced at Monsanto's Iowa plant.
The offerings will be distinguished from each other by the use of different chemical additives used as "safeners," which protect corn plants from herbicide damage.
Acetochlor has been produced at the plant for some time, until now only for export.
The intense final-stage negotiations with the EPA, which cleared the product in time for the financially important spring planting season, "yielded a final decision that was fair," said Robert Harness, Monsanto vice president, regulatory affairs.
He said he was impressed during the talks that "the EPA wanted to do the right thing on this."
