If you've been diligently saving for retirement, for your children's education or to reach some other long-term goal, it may be time to revise your investment assumptions.
Because of lower interest rates, many of the long-term-planning assumptions people made during the past decade are no longer valid.
"Most generals are always fighting the last war.
And that includes portfolio generals," says Laurence B. Siegel of Ibbotson Associates, a Chicago financial-research and consulting firm.
Just ask investors who expected to retire on their bond portfolios, but saw their income halved as interest rates plummeted and the bonds were called.
Or ask the people who bought cash-value life-insurance policies based on investment-return projections of 10%, 11% or even 12% -- and then faced much higher premiums as actual returns dwindled.
Peter Katt, a West Bloomfield, Mich., fee-only life-insurance adviser, recalls one client who came to him with a $6 million whole-life policy bought in 1988.
The client had been told it would take seven annual payments of $118,600 before the policy had enough cash value to pay its own premiums from dividends.
Now the insurer tells him it will take 15 years of premiums to make the policy work as planned.
The problem, says Mr. Katt, is that the client bought his policy at a time of very high fixed-income returns and didn't allow for the fact that performance could drop back to historical norms.
Indeed, history provides an important reality-check when figuring long-term plans.
After the heady gains of recent years, it's sobering to know, for example, that since 1926, long-term bonds had compound average total returns, including price changes plus income, of just 5% a year.
During the same period, long-term interest rates averaged 5.2%, while total returns on stocks averaged 10.3% a year compounded.
In other words, the people who bought an insurance policy based on the assumption of 12% fixed-income returns were thumbing their noses at history.
With a lot of luck, those policies might have met those expectations, but the odds were against it -- particularly given the long-term nature of a life-insurance policy.
Of course, it is easy to oversimplify.
Yes, on average, bonds' compound returns were 5%.
But actual returns ranged from minus 9.2% in 1967, when bondholders saw big losses, to a whopping 40.4% in 1982.
The same is true for the stock market; the 10.3% compound average includes a dismal loss of 43.3% in 1931 and a record-setting gain of 54% in 1933.
But because returns tend to revert to the mean over time, the historical averages do provide some reasonable yardsticks.
To estimate future returns, Mr. Siegel recommends using average historical returns, rather than compound averages.
That helps adjust your investment plans for the risk that returns in individual years may be a lot lower, or higher, than the average, he says.
By this measure, stocks look even more attractive.
In 68 years of performance, average annual returns on stocks have beat those of bonds by about 7.2 percentage points, Mr. Siegel says.
The market's current expectation for bond returns, as reflected in the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond, is 6.5%.
That suggests an annual return of 13.7% for stocks, he says.
The historical averages also show that long-term bonds have tended to yield 1.5 percentage points more than short-term money-market investments, while money-market returns have averaged roughly a half percentage point over inflation.
With inflation now running at about 3%, these relationships don't quite line up with today's reality.
But then, current comparisons rarely jibe with the long-term averages.
"These are simply historical numbers, and we believe that the economic relationships that caused them to occur in the past are still there," Mr. Siegel says.
The link between investment returns and inflation is a particularly important part of any investment analysis.
People often make the mistake of considering only nominal returns -- forgetting to subtract both the inflation rate (which has averaged 3.2% a year during the past 68 years) and the impact of taxes.
If you do, you'll find that a 5% return with 3% inflation is actually better than a 10% return with 8% inflation.
That's because someone paying, for example, 20% taxes on a 5% return would pay one percentage point in tax, leaving them ahead of inflation by one percentage point.
But the same tax on a 10% return would cost two percentage points in tax, leaving the investor with an 8% return -- only enough to keep pace with inflation.
For long-term planning, one approach is to calculate ahead of time how much you need to earn over inflation to achieve your goals.
Then, by looking at the historical relationships between various investments and inflation, you can figure out where you should invest.
This kind of analysis often leads people to the stock market, says Michael Stolper, a San Diego consultant who helps affluent individuals select money managers.
"Any time you make a decision that you are going to increase your net worth on an after-tax basis, it will take you into the equity market," he says.
But then you need to factor in the emotional stress.
Based on historical returns, "we all know we should have our money in small capitalization and aggressive-growth stocks," adds Mr. Stolper.
"But most of us are ill-prepared to deal with that volatility."
How you use historical data also depends on what you are trying to evaluate and where you are in the market cycle.
When pricing life-insurance policies, for example, Mr. Katt always likes to work with the most conservative numbers in projecting returns, thus minimizing the risk of coming up short.
As a result, he looks at historical returns during times when rates are rising.
When rates are falling, he uses that downward trend to project future returns.
William G. Brennan, a tax and financial adviser in Washington, describes his planning process as "looking back and forward at the same time" to come up with a working balance.
"Past performance is a reasonable indicator.
Just be prepared to adjust it as time goes by," he says.
His current assumptions?
Inflation running at 3% or 4%, a laddered portfolio of longer-term fixed income investments returning 6% to 7% and equities returning about 10%.
Another way of using history is to do a peak-to-trough comparison of any investment you are considering.
"Find out what is the worst thing that can happen to you, because it is likely to happen again," says Mr. Stolper, the San Diego consultant.
That way, he says, you'll understand the full range of possible consequences of the investment choices you're weighing.
