Lear's magazine hasn't paid writers and photographers for several months and isn't assigning any new stories, staffers say, heightening uncertainty about the future of the monthly aimed at women over 35.
Rumors have circulated for months in the publishing industry that the magazine is in trouble, but founder and owner Frances Lear continues to deny speculation that Lear's will close.
A spokeswoman for the magazine said Ms. Lear has previously stated the magazine is "in transition" to a publication "focused on the financial needs of women."
The spokeswoman insists that the writers will be paid; she said, "The checks will go out this week."
She didn't respond to questions about future issues.
Ms. Lear declined to be interviewed.
Insiders and former staffers say they find talk of a transition perplexing, saying that since her internal announcement last fall of such a shift in direction, Ms. Lear hasn't shared any specific plans with them about the change.
At the same time, Lear's editors say that free-lance writers and photographers haven't been paid since last fall and that the staff was told to use mostly "leftover" stories for the just-completed May issue.
There isn't any preparation being made for a June issue of Lear's, several editors confirmed.
"I have a list on my desk of 11 writers who haven't been paid, people I convinced to write for this magazine.
One of them alone is owed $17,000," says senior editor David France, who has been at Lear's for about 18 months.
"I spend a lot of my time trying to get the money for writers and the story changes every day; first they accounting said the checks were already out, then that they would be paid by last Monday.
Now I'm told there aren't any commitments about pay dates being made."
Photographers are beginning to complain too.
James White says he is owed $3,300 for two sets of photographs for Lear's, and last week he filed a complaint in New York's civil court against Lear Publishing Inc.
"The accounting department told me two months ago that they had just cut the check, and now they won't even return my phone calls," says Mr. White.
Editors say writers and photographers are owed more than $200,000 in all.
Although Lear's has always been a magazine with heavy staff turnover, the ranks are especially depleted right now.
Caroline Miller, who had been editor in chief for about two years, left last month to be editor of Seventeen.
Managing Editor Robert Sabat recently skipped to Interview, and the chief copy editor just left.
There has also been turmoil on the business side: a year ago, Ms. Lear fired advertising director Kimberlee Kiner, and publisher Carol Decker quit in protest after just 15 months on the job.
When Ms. Lear, 70 years old, launched her magazine in 1988 with part of the proceeds of an approximately $100 million divorce settlement from her former husband, TV producer Norman Lear, it was lauded as a timely concept for attracting aging baby boomer women and was viewed by ad buyers as a "hot book."
But since then, Lear's has been hurt by competition, especially from Mirabella, launched a year later; a prolonged advertising recession; and Ms. Lear's own self-acknowledged "volatile" personality.
Former staffers say they believe Lear's has been unprofitable every year and that Ms. Lear has invested more than $25 million in the magazine.
The magazine's spokeswoman declined to comment.
In its first year, Lear's sold 426 pages of ads in six bimonthly issues, and closed its first year with circulation of 350,000.
Now paid circulation has reached 500,000, but ad sales are hurting.
Pages declined to 438 last year from 485 in 1991.
In comparison, News Corp.'s Mirabella sold 798 pages last year and Conde Nast Publications Inc.'s Vogue magazine sold 2,566.
Lear's December issue carried 32 pages of ads, and one Lear's editor says May's just completed issue has only 25.
Some ad sales were lost, insiders say, when Lear's sharply curtailed its fashion coverage about 18 months ago, unable to compete for top fashion photographers with the likes of deep-pocketed Vogue.
Staffers say that under editor Caroline Miller, the magazine's writing and design had improved, helping to draw new subscribers if not advertisers.
But editors say once Ms. Lear turned the magazine over to Ms. Miller she became less involved and interested in it, pursuing book-writing and a new video venture.
A video is said to be nearly completed that provides financial advice to women.
"We took a beating in the recession like everybody else, but under Caroline, we were putting out a good magazine," says Larkin Warren, senior editor.
"We had a lot of reasons for optimism, but now it looks pretty murky."
Magazine experts say Lear's illustrates, among other things, how difficult it is to compete as a publisher of a single title.
"It is tough to compete with the likes of Conde Nast and Hearst, when they can provide packaged rates across a number of magazines," says magazine consultant Martin Walker.
"I think Frances' timing in starting it was very good, but there wasn't any consistency; she would interfere, then she wouldn't."
"Rumors have been flying about this magazine for at least two years, and clearly, somebody took their eye off the ball," says Roberta Garfinkle, senior vice president, director of print media for ad agency McCann Erickson.
"It's a small, niche publication and advertisers have more efficient ways to spend their money.
Uncertainty gives them just another reason to stay away."
