U.S. fighter jets shot down four Serb attack planes after they violated a NATO-enforced "no-fly zone" over Bosnia.
The shoot down -- the alliance's first military engagement in Bosnia and its first offensive action anywhere -- is unlikely to have any military effect on the conflict.
It could, however, help to shift the diplomatic balance, increasing the pressure on Bosnia's Serbs to accept a peace settlement that already would reward them overwhelmingly.
U.S. Navy Adm. Jeremy Boorda, the commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's southern flank, said the encounter, which took place over central Bosnia about 50 miles west of Sarajevo, should send a message about NATO's resolve.
"If it was a test, I think we passed," he said.
He also ordered the U.S. aircraft carrier Saratoga, whose aircraft have been enforcing the no-fly zone, to curtail a port call in Trieste, Italy, and put back to sea.
President Clinton, however, played down any suggestion that the attack was a prelude to deeper military action in Bosnia.
He told reporters that the Serb pilots were warned twice to land before they were fired on by the F-16 fighters.
"Every attempt was made, to the best of my information, to avoid this encounter," he said.
U.S. and NATO officials said the violation by six Serb Galeb attack jets, two of which escaped, had been "so blatant" that they had little choice but to act.
Since the no-fly zone first took effect in April 1993, more than a thousand violations by all sides in the conflict have been reported to the United Nations, although almost all have been by helicopters.
What made yesterday different, according to Pentagon and NATO officials, is that the planes were "fixed-wing," flying in combat formation, and refused direct orders to land.
"They were also up in the air long enough for us to get them," a senior U.S. official said.
U.S. officials said they also had "preliminary reports" that the Galebs, which are Yugoslav-made light attack jets, were trying to bomb a Bosnian Muslim munitions depot.
Adm. Boorda said the U.N. has given him preliminary reports that the jets appeared to have bombed both a warehouse and a hospital before they were downed.
U.S. officials said they were puzzled why the Bosnian Serbs lofted their attack jets for the first time in almost a year.
One explanation is that with NATO newly committed to ending the conflict, the Serbs are testing the limits of that commitment.
Last month, when confronted with a direct NATO demand to withdraw their heavy weaponry from around Sarajevo or face air strikes, the Serbs complied.
Since then, however, Serb military attacks have increased against other Bosnian towns, with no retaliation.
The next clear test of Western resolve could come as early as next week, when the U.N., with NATO military support, is committed to reopening the airport at Tuzla in northeastern Bosnia for critically needed relief supplies.
Another possible explanation is that the Serbs were trying to drive a further wedge between the NATO alliance and Russia over Bosnia.
But while Moscow strongly opposed the Sarajevo air strike ultimatum, it endorsed yesterday's attack.
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Vitaly Churkin said that "whichever side" violated the zone "should bear full responsibility for what has happened."
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic flew to Moscow last night for scheduled talks with senior Russian officials.
Vice President Al Gore told reporters that yesterday's attack "far from damaging the prospects for peace, may actually improve the prospects for peace."
U.S. officials, who have been trying to broker a preliminary peace agreement between Bosnian Croats and Muslims, said that NATO's new tougher line has already had a positive effect.
"Obviously, we're still a long way from a peace settlement," said the senior U.S. official.
"But everyone is taking us a lot more seriously these days."
A truce between Bosnia's Croats and Muslim-led government, brokered by the U.N. in recent days, has reduced the killing but not ended it.
U.S. officials are hoping to persuade the two sides to form a new confederation divided into ethnic cantons, with a weak multiethnic central state.
Such an agreement, officials said, would raise the pressure on Bosnia's Serbs, to sign on to a peace agreement.
It would also make a rump Bosnian state militarily stronger and more economically viable.
Even then, any peace agreement is expected to give Bosnia's Serbs most of the land that they have seized in two years of "ethnic cleansing."
Other analysts are skeptical of the U.S. effort.
Stephen Walker, a former State Department official who quit in protest over the U.S. policy in Bosnia, said that U.S. efforts are misdirected.
"Most of the pressure is still on the Bosnians, when the root cause of the conflict is Serbian aggression," he said.
