Oil prices, which have been in a slump, jumped yesterday as sub-zero weather continued to grip much of the Eastern seaboard.
The extreme cold caused electric utilities in Pennsylvania, Maryland, New Jersey, New York and North Carolina to reduce power to customers as demand for power escalated.
Rolling blackouts as far south as Washington, D.C., were threatened as the call on power grew.
Government offices in some of the states closed down early to reduce their draw on voltage.
And Amtrak sharply cut its train service in the area.
Some power plants were reportedly running short of the petroleum needed to run them.
Closure of a major Texaco Inc. pipeline, carrying crude from Cushing, Okla., to Midland, Texas, also caused a spike in prices.
The pipeline carries West Texas Intermediate crude oil, one of the primary crudes delivered against futures contracts traded at the New York Mercantile Exchange.
A Texaco spokesman said that the pipeline is undergoing repairs after a support tower collapsed causing a portion of the pipeline to sag.
Traders were concerned that there might not be enough crude in storage to satisfy delivery on futures contract commitments during February.
Crude oil for February delivery settled at $15.22 a barrel, up 35 cents.
Heating oil and gasoline prices rose as well.
But traders yesterday were unsure how long buying euphoria would continue.
Statistics released by the American Petroleum Institute after the market closed were greeted with mixed reaction.
The institute's numbers showed that crude inventories decreased by 6,290,000 barrels to 341.6 million barrels last week.
Gasoline stocks fell slightly as well.
But distillate, or heating oil, inventories jumped by 2,220,000 barrels to 144,970,000 barrels.
Market participants had expected heating oil stocks to fall because of the unusually cold weather.
They had also expected refinery operations to decrease.
But the institute reported that U.S. refineries' operations actually increased to 92.0% of capacity last week, up from 90.4%
Also bearish was a report from the Secretariat of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries that demand for OPEC crude during the fourth quarter of 1993 was actually 330,000 barrels a day less than anticipated.
The Secretariat also reported that the group's output in December increased to 24,730,000 barrels daily, up from 24,630,000 barrels during November.
"But news from OPEC has been taking a backseat to the weather lately," said Andy Lebow, analyst for E.D. & F. Man International Futures Inc. in New York.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Prices of wheat and corn futures contracts fell for the second consecutive day.
Wheat prices are under pressure from signs the U.S. Agriculture Department plans to trim its export subsidy budget.
Much of the wheat exported from the U.S. moves under the Export Enhancement Program.
The department compensates exporters that sell U.S. wheat at a discount to targeted nations, such as China and Russia.
Corn prices fell as commodity fund managers continued to take profits on a rally that has lasted since October.
Soybean prices settled mixed.
Analysts are following reports that a major grain merchant is arranging the import into the U.S. of 20,000 metric tons of Brazilian soybean oil.
A metric ton is 2,204.62 pounds.
The move is unusual because the U.S. is usually a major soybean exporter.
The record rain and flooding across the Midwest last year reduced both the size and quality of the U.S. soybean crop.
Brazil, meanwhile, is preparing for a large soybean harvest in a few months.
Soybeans are crushed to make oil and meal.
COFFEE: Futures prices slumped as traders skeptically viewed the export-limiting agreement of Latin American coffee producers.
At New York's Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange, coffee for March delivery was down 2.15 cents to 72.50 cents an ounce.
Latin American and African coffee-producing nations have joined forces to limit exports at times that prices are below 80 cents a pound.
But some Latin American countries, notably Brazil, have had a hard time honoring their obligations under the agreement, analysts said.
Yesterday's price drop, in part, reflected doubt among futures traders that the export-limiting agreement will last.
AMERICAN PETROLEUM INSTITUTE inventory statistics released Wednesday showed that crude oil stocks decreased by 505,000 barrels to 333,540,000 barrels last week.
Distillate, or heating oil and diesel fuel, inventories decreased by 4,773,000 barrels to 137,079,000 barrels.
Gasoline inventories rose.
In Thursday's Commodities column, the figures were misstated.
(WSJ Jan. 24, 1994)
