Here's the dark reflection of all those stock offerings that soared last year: Castle Energy, a Radnor, Pa., oil and gas company, is fast turning into a nightmare for Kidder, Peabody & Co.
And the bad dream may not be over yet for investors even though Castle Energy shares bounced up 1/4 yesterday to 10 3/8 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
The story starts with what has to be one of the worst-timed securities offerings of recent years: the Kidder-led, Nov. 24 sale of 2.8 million additional shares of Castle Energy.
Within days, the stock price of Castle Energy's 40%-owner and sole customer, Metallgesellschaft of Germany, began slumping in Frankfurt.
The German company was soon grappling with near-crippling financial problems that pushed it close to a German bankruptcy-law filing in recent days.
Meanwhile, Castle Energy shares sold in the offering have plunged 31% in just two months.
During the weekend, Metallgesellschaft agreed to a $1.9 billion rescue package with creditors, and Castle Energy shares rallied to as high as 12 1/2 yesterday before ebbing to 10 3/8.
But some traders bet Castle Energy shares will continue to fall, despite the German company's bailout package.
Even if the German company survives, it will have to cut costs.
There are "more rocky roads ahead" for Castle Energy, says analyst Ashok Vasvani of Grantchester Securities in New York.
Papers filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission last week by Metallgesellschaft say that in connection with the German company's financial-rescue plan, it "may determine to retain, restructure, dispose of" or pledge certain assets, including its Castle Energy shares.
Word of the SEC filing, dated Jan. 11, hasn't yet gotten around on Wall Street.
And some investors will probably be inclined to brush it aside, figuring the immediate crisis is past.
But it's still possible that investors will see Metallgesellschaft's holding as a big block of stock overhanging the market, weighing on the price.
While the German company hasn't decided to sell the stake yet, "there can be no assurances that it will not do so in the future," the SEC filing says.
Asked to update the filing yesterday, a New York spokesman for Metallgesellschaft said: "There's no change in that."
Meanwhile, the question remains in investors' minds: Did Kidder or Castle Energy know there was trouble afoot when they launched the public offering last November?
Kidder won't comment, saying it doesn't discuss investment-banking clients.
Other investment bankers say that Kidder probably was as surprised as investors and the German company's board, which sacked some Metallgesellschaft senior managers, including the chairman, in December for allegedly withholding information.
If litigation arises, Kidder has some protection.
Last week's SEC filing includes a letter from Metallgesellschaft's U.S. office to Kidder.
Dated Nov. 24, the letter promises that the German concern will "hold harmless and indemnify" Kidder and other underwriters from loss if there proves to be "an untrue statement or alleged untrue statement of a material fact" regarding Metallgesellschaft in the Castle Energy prospectus.
For example, Castle Energy buyers would have liked to have known what Castle Energy didn't disclose until last Friday: that the German company's financial woes could "have a material adverse effect" on Castle, which relies totally upon Metallgesellschaft.
Under a contract, Metallgesellschaft buys oil products from Castle Energy, which processes as much as 126,000 barrels a day, at much higher prices than an independent buyer would pay.
A few years ago the German company was eager to expand in the U.S. and didn't haggle too hard.
This cozy arrangement has been just fine for Castle Energy until now, but it doesn't look so hot now that Metallgesellschaft will be looking to cut costs.
Mr. Vasvani says: "My point is, I'm sure now that Metallgesellschaft has been saved, but they're going to be under tremendous scrutiny."
Every contract, particularly one as seemingly one-sided as the Castle Energy one, will be under question, he says.
"The board will do everything and anything to get out of losing propositions, and this is a losing proposition.
It makes no sense."
So what is Castle Energy stock worth if the company doesn't have its contract with Metallgesellschaft?
"Pick a number, anything from four to nine," says Mr. Vasvani.
Castle Energy's chairman and chief executive, Joseph L. Castle, couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.
In a statement Friday, however, he indicated that Castle Energy isn't sitting back and assuming its relationship with Metallgesellschaft will continue as it has.
He said his company is "exploring with various investment banking firms strategies for dealing with the MG situation and various contingencies."
It is "uncertain" whether Metallgesellschaft will honor all of its contractual obligations, although it intends to, the statement warned.
This warning was a marked change from just a month ago, when Castle Energy responded to the German company's financial problems, and a subsequent decline in Castle Energy stock, by assuring investors: "We have no reason to believe MG will not continue to honor all its obligations to Castle Energy."
Castle Energy rose 1 1/2 that day.
In fact, some analysts continue to believe that Castle Energy has a promising future after its two months of turmoil.
"It's been the `Perils of Pauline,' but it looks like everything's calmed down now," says Eric Petersen of Pennsylvania Merchant Group, who bases his optimism on the fact that Metallgesellschaft's bank creditors have agreed to the rescue package.
The only question, he says, had been whether Metallgesellschaft "would survive or not.
But I think the biggest questions are over with."
Still, small investors should keep in mind that this is still a tenuous situation for Castle Energy.
At least one prominent investor apparently has realized this.
Mutual-fund manager Michael Price held 252,000 Castle Energy shares in his $1 billion Mutual Beacon Fund as of last year, according to regulatory filings.
Mr. Price wouldn't comment yesterday, but an associate says, "We sold about three weeks ago."
Even before the Metallgesellschaft financial woes, Castle Energy was a risky bet for investors.
"It is an oddball company," says Michael Spohn, head of research at John S. Herold Inc., an oil and gas investment research firm.
"The value of the company relies on this contract with MG, and there are officers of MG on the board of this company."
The success of November's stock offering, says Mr. Spohn, "highlights that in this frothy equity market for new issues and secondary offerings, any deal will go."
