During the first wedding in "Four Weddings and a Funeral" two friends of the groom discuss the bride.
"She looks like a big meringue," says the woman friend, snidely.
Her tone surprised me.
What's wrong with meringue?
I thought.
I like the sweet inconsequentiality of a nice meringue.
In fact, if I were to convey the experience of watching "Four Weddings and a Funeral" in terms of a food, meringue would be just right.
There isn't much to it, but it is a kind of perfection, a pretty thing that offers little bursts of pleasure all the way to the end.
Then it's gone and you're hungry for something else.
The plot summary is all in the title.
This is a movie about four weddings and a funeral.
The same group of English friends goes to all of them, either as witnesses or participants (their parts change from occasion to occasion).
They appear only briefly outside these ceremonies, so the picture has the feel of a drawing-room comedy because everyone is wearing formal clothing almost all the time -- and, except for Andie MacDowell, everyone is British and upper crust, so they speak well.
The main character is Charles (Hugh Grant), a cute young man who has avoided marriage but falls in love with a serenely beautiful and of course mysterious woman (Ms. MacDowell) who seems unattainable.
Charles could have been just another annoying yuppie man locked in protracted adolescence.
But with Mr. Grant playing him, he's just adorable.
If he weren't so good-looking he'd be too adorable for a leading man, too much the cuddly chipmunk.
Richard Curtis provided the breezy, witty script for Mike Newell, the British director who is best known in this country for "Enchanted April," his lovely 1991 film about a magic spring vacation in an Italian villa.
With "Four Weddings and a Funeral" he may be on his way to developing a genre all his own, the exquisitely ephemeral.
With Steven Spielberg's Holocaust movie, "Schindler's List," making a sweep of the Oscars, it's a strange and perhaps appropriate time to be considering the fascinating documentary "The Wonderful Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl."
Ms. Riefenstahl, now a vigorous 91 years old, became the "horrible" Riefenstahl in 1934, when she directed a film about the Nazi Party rally in Nuremberg.
That movie, "Triumph of the Will," is widely accepted as the most persuasive propaganda film ever made.
It was technically brilliant, a stirring vision of Hitler and the passions he aroused.
"Triumph" was a startling political weapon, with its deification of Hitler and the Nazi Party through the shrewd manipulation of imagery.
Riefenstahl didn't tell her audience that Hitler was God.
She showed them, let them see his power for themselves (though of course the visual power was hers).
Two years later she made another stunning film for the Nazis, "Olympia," about the 1936 Berlin Olympics.
Because of these films and her association with Hitler and other Nazi officials, Riefenstahl was classified as a "sympathizer" after the war.
She was universally shunned in the filmmaking world and never worked again as a movie director.
To this day, however, she insists that she knew nothing of Nazi brutality toward the Jews at the time, and that "Triumph of the Will" contained only two messages, of "work and peace."
So why bother with this old woman, who is either a liar or delusional?
The answer to that lies in the "wonderful" part, her misguided genius.
Her life was extraordinary.
Before she became a filmmaker, when she was in her late 20s, Riefenstahl had already become a celebrity as a dancer and then as a movie actress.
She was and is fearless.
As an actress she climbed barefoot up steep rock mountain faces for her films.
Half a century later, when she was in her 70s, she began scuba diving to take underwater pictures, which she continues to do.
She had a filmmaking gift that has yet to be equaled by another woman director.
The moviemakers, who are postwar Germans, focus on her artistic genius and the question it provokes: What is the artist's responsibility to the world?
The director Ray Muller plays a cat-and-mouse game with Riefenstahl, who is in remarkably fit condition at 91 and still weirdly coquettish.
She's a tough interview because she has remained a director in spirit, used to telling other people where to stand and what to say.
She is unapologetic.
"I was never a Nazi," she declares.
"I was never anti-Semitic and I never joined the Nazi Party and I never dropped an atomic bomb.
Where does my guilt lie?"
For three hours the sparring goes on, Riefenstahl's vociferous defense of herself interrupted frequently by lengthy excerpts from her films and her own animated explanations of how she got various shots.
It is easy to believe from the way she talks about her films that she cared only about them and not about politics, as she says.
Yet this "innocence" makes her seem more monstrous, not less.
I know the really important question on the minds of American moviegoers: Is "Naked Gun 33 1/3: The Final Insult" really funny?
And that's all you need to know before you enter the theater.
VIDEO TIP: Leni Riefenstahl says she learned about the Nazi concentration camps for the first time after the war was over.
It was then, she says in the new documentary, that she regretted making "Triumph of the Will."
For the first time, she says, she looked at the glorified images of swastikas and saluting SS men from the point of view of the Nazi victims and saw how horrible they might seem.
With all that in mind, take a look at "Triumph of the Will," a wonderful and horrible film.
