An economic rebound continues to elude Madison Avenue, with agency holding companies expected to finish the year with unspectacular earnings growth, industry analysts say.
Big publicly traded advertising companies are expected to eke out respectable earnings gains.
But analysts say that much of that growth will continue to come from scorched-earth cost-cutting measures, not from new clients and ad-spending increases.
Analysts expect lackluster earnings from Interpublic Group of Cos., the New York parent of the McCann-Erickson, Lintas and Lowe Group advertising networks.
Interpublic normally delights analysts with predictable earnings growth of 12% to 14%, but analysts say that won't happen this year.
Al Gottesman, media analyst at PaineWebber, expects Interpublic to report fourth-quarter earnings of 65 cents a share, up just 5% from the previous year's quarter; for the year, Mr. Gottesman predicts $1.65 a share, representing a 10% increase from last year, when the company posted earnings of $1.50 before an accounting adjustment related to postretirement benefits.
"They're making money by saving money," Mr. Gottesman says.
"There isn't a whole lot of revenue growth."
Dean Witter analyst James Dougherty expects Interpublic's fourth-quarter earnings to rise 10% to 68 cents a share.
He predicts the company will report year-end earnings at $1.67, 11% ahead of last year.
Mr. Dougherty said soft ad spending in Europe and several account losses at Interpublic's Lintas were contributing factors.
"In a year when you're trying to wring out every last penny, it all adds up," he said.
Omnicom Group, New York parent company of agencies including BBDO, DDB Needham, and TBWA Advertising, is expected to do somewhat better.
Mr. Dougherty sees quarterly earnings of 84 cents a share, up 16% from the year-earlier quarter, and year-end results of $2.57 a share, up 17% from 1992, when the company reported earnings of $2.20 a share, before an accounting change.
(Mr. Dougherty and many other analysts follow the company's fully diluted shares).
Foote, Cone & Belding Communications, Chicago, is expected to report improved earnings in 1993.
Analysts predict the company will report fourth-quarter earnings of $1.06, up 80% from the year-earlier quarter, when the company took a charge of $3.6 million, or 33 cents a share, to revalue certain assets and liabilities.
For the year, the company is expected to report net income of $2.30 a share, up 15% from the year earlier.
Recent wins at Foote Cone's New York office, FCB/Leber Katz Partners, have helped the agency recover from a retrenching period, when it shed unprofitable operations and restructured its advertising business.
Most recently, the New York office picked up American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s giant consumer long-distance account.
WPP Group and Saatchi & Saatchi Co. PLC, both struggling to service mountains of debt, are expected to post modest results.
WPP, the owner of the Ogilvy & Mather and J. Walter Thompson agencies among others, is expected to report earnings of three cents per American depositary receipt in the second half of 1993, compared with eight cents in the second half of 1992, according to Dean Witter's Mr. Dougherty.
For the full year of 1993, he expects WPP to post eight cents per ADR, compared with five cents in 1992.
One ADR equals two fully diluted WPP shares.
Saatchi & Saatchi had been expected to post strong results at the end of 1993.
But the company has been set back by a pair of major account losses in the second half, losing Chrysler Corp. as a client when it pulled the $135 million Jeep-Eagle account from Saatchi's CME KHBB, and losing Helene Curtis Industries, when Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising resigned from the $80 million account to resolve potential client conflicts.
The losses were "a big blow to them," Mr. Dougherty observed.
"Now they're right back in the soup."
Mr. Dougherty expects Saatchi to report six-month earnings of eight cents per American depositary share in 1993, compared with a loss of two cents in the second half of 1992.
For the year, Saatchi is expected to report earnings of 16 cents per ADS, compared with eight cents in the previous year.
One ADS equals three Saatchi shares.
