Three major chemical makers had mixed results in their fourth-quarter bottom lines, but operating earnings at all three showed marked improvement from the generally weak year-earlier period.
The strengthening U.S. economy, and earlier belt-tightening efforts undertaken in response to the industry's protracted weakness, helped offset continued low prices for many commodity chemicals.
DuPont Co., the nation's biggest chemical maker, had its underlying profitability improve sharply.
Excluding nonrecurring items, earnings more than tripled to $329 million, or 48 cents a share, from the year-earlier quarter's $97 million, or 14 cents a share.
Sales inched up to $9.25 billion from $9.16 billion.
The year-earlier quarter's net income was wracked by a $327 million restructuring charge.
In the latest period, the Wilmington, Del., concern took a $144 million charge to bolster legal reserves relating to liability claims stemming from its Benlate DF fungicide.
That was partially offset, however, by the $52 million gain DuPont recorded from the sale of its Remington Arms unit and of its DuPont Canada's unit's polyethylene business.
DuPont's effort to cut operating costs, which has boosted profit margins in recent quarters, "showed most clearly" in the latest period, the company said.
Its Conoco energy unit saw operating earnings jump to $163 million from $94 million despite a decline in oil prices, largely on the strength of earlier cost-cutting moves.
But DuPont noted that there's a lag between the time oil prices fall and when the impact shows up in the company's results; if oil prices stay soft, the company said, it would expect the effects to show up in Conoco results beginning in 1994's first quarter.
The company's chemicals operation saw its operating profit increase to $76 million from $51 million, also mainly on the strength of earlier cost-cutting.
Operating profit doubled at its big fibers unit to $104 million, although pricing remains under pressure.
In Europe, where the economy's weakness has been hurting most chemical makers for more than a year, operating profit picked up from the year-earlier quarter, and the company said "we appear to be seeing at least a bottoming of the economic problems" in the region.
At Union Carbide Corp., sales fell 9.6% to $1.07 billion from $1.19 billion.
But earnings at the Danbury, Conn., company "benefited from our cost-reduction efforts, despite the continued world-wide downturn in the chemical industry," according to Chairman Robert D. Kennedy.
A charge and a gain in the latest period combined to increase earnings by $1 million; in the year-earlier quarter a host of items boosted earnings by about $7 million.
Per-share figures reflect an increase in shares outstanding to 154.8 million in the latest period from 135.3 million.
While already-soft pricing for some of its commodity chemicals, such as polyethylene, weakened further during the period, cheaper prices for petroleum-based "feedstocks," or raw materials, helped ameliorate the decline.
Interest expense fell by $10 million, or 43%, as a result of refinancing and earlier divestitures, and the company is thought to be also benefiting from increased technology-licensing fees, although Carbide doesn't make those figures available.
At Olin Corp., the latest quarter of the Stamford, Conn., chemical, defense and aerospace concern was marred by a $131.7 million charge linked to an earlier-announced effort to pare operating costs through staff cuts and consolidations.
Sales rose 8.3% to $598.4 million from $552.3 million.
Without the charge, the company said, earnings would have shown a modest increase to $9 million in the latest period from $3.4 million.
Olin's chemicals operation, however, had an operating loss of $2.8 million, compared with a break-even performance in the year-earlier period, as pricing pressure hurt profits at its chlor-alkali business.
The segment's operating deficit came despite a 19% increase in sales to $255.4 million.
Olin's metals segment and its defense and ammunition operation showed higher operating earnings despite modest sales downturns.
Antilock brakes, touted by car companies as a giant advance in auto safety technology, have not reduced the number of accidents on U.S. roads, according to a study by the Highway Loss Data Institute.
The nonprofit insurance group said there's nothing wrong with the brakes, which prevent wheels from locking during emergency braking.
Rather, many motorists don't use the antilock brakes properly, said Brian O'Neill, institute president.
He said antilock brakes should never be pumped as drivers are taught to do with conventional brakes.
Mr. O'Neill said car companies also may be overselling the advantages of antilock brakes.
For instance, many advertisements for the mechanism don't make clear that their primary advantage is on wet and slippery roads, Mr. O'Neill said.
The institute's study compared insurance losses for cars with antilock brakes and losses for the same cars without them.
"We find no reduction in claim frequencies or average amounts of insurance payments under either collision or property damage liability coverages," said Kim L. Hazelbaker, senior vice president of the institute.
Antilock brakes can prevent wheels from locking, reduce stopping distances and improve driver control during emergency braking, especially on slippery pavement.
With antilock brakes, when any wheel is about to lock, the brake pressure is reduced enough for the wheels to start rotating again.
