Apparel companies probably will report weaker-than-expected fourth-quarter earnings because of conservative retail orders of fall and Christmas merchandise.
Analysts noted that retailers cut back on their wholesale orders from clothing makers last fall as shoppers continued to spend cautiously on clothes.
They also said that spotty retail sales throughout 1993 forced apparel companies to liquidate excess inventories at lower-than-expected profit margins, which dragged down fourth-quarter earnings.
"Sales of women's apparel are still weak, and overall the fourth quarter is going to be disappointing for apparel," said Josie Esquivel, an apparel analyst at Lehman Brothers Inc. who estimates that most apparel companies will report fourth-quarter earnings lower than a year ago.
After months of steady growth, makers of T-shirts, sweats and other basic apparel experienced a sales slowdown in the fourth quarter.
"In the commodity apparel business, where everybody is making virtually the same thing and there is an oversupply of inventory, stores are going to pick the products that cost less, and that weakens margins for apparel companies," said Todd Slater, an apparel analyst at UBS Securities.
Deborah Bronston of Prudential Securities is predicting lower fourth-quarter earnings at jeanswear maker VF Corp.: about 92 cents a share, down from $1.14 a share a year ago, when the company had a nonrecurring gain of 17 cents a share.
At Fruit of the Loom Inc., analysts expect earnings to fall to about 26 cents a share from 64 cents in the 1992 fourth quarter.
And at Russell Corp., net income is expected to drop to 59 cents a share from 74 cents a year ago.
Among women's apparel makers, Liz Claiborne Inc. continues to be saddled with high inventories and is expected to report fourth-quarter net income of 15 cents to 22 cents a share, down from 63 cents.
There are some exceptions.
Taking advantage of Claiborne's weakness in the marketplace and benefiting from additional business from its new divisions, Jones Apparel Group Inc. has gained market share and increased its earnings.
Alice Ruth, an analyst at Montgomery Securities, predicts that Jones will report net income of about 28 cents a share, up from 24 cents a year ago.
Several menswear firms had a stronger fourth-quarter than in 1992.
Tailored clothing giant Hartmarx Corp. yesterday recorded fourth-quarter earnings of 29 cents a share, up from 22 cents a share, a year ago, while Nautica Enterprises Inc. reported that fourth-quarter net increased to 55 cents a share from 36 cents a year earlier.
The introduction of men's wrinkle-free cotton pants last year sparked earnings gains at Farah Inc., which reported net income of 42 cents a share in the latest quarter, up from 17 cents a share a year ago.
With about 500 in-store shops in department stores, the fast-growing Tommy Hilfiger Corp. is expected to post net income of 40 cents a share vs. 28 cents a year earlier on a higher number of shares.
Brisk sales in its retail divisions generated earnings gains at Phillips-Van Heusen Corp., which Wall Street expects to report fourth-quarter earnings of 50 cents a share, compared with 36 cents a year ago.
Industry observers don't expect demand for women's apparel to rebound in the first quarter of 1994, noting that many shoppers are still recovering from holiday spending and consumers continue to be wary about the economy.
What's more, without major new fashion trends, sales are likely to stay depressed.
When retail demand falls into a slump, "manufacturers plan conservatively and defensively and they don't produce a lot of new ideas,' says Mr. Slater of UBS Securities.
But "it's the newness that excites apparel customers and creates demand."
NAUTICA ENTERPRISES Inc., based in New York, reported that net income in its fiscal third quarter ended Nov. 30 rose to 54 cents a share from 36 cents a share a year earlier.
An article Friday about earnings estimates for apparel companies incorrectly reported that the results were for the company's fourth quarter.
(WSJ Jan. 18, 1994)
