DID TACO BELL use a spy to monitor a pesky franchisee?
This week, a federal judge decided to let a disgruntled franchisee pursue an unusual allegation in his lawsuit against the Irvine, Calif., unit of PepsiCo Inc.
The suit charged that Taco Bell had planted a spy who secretly used a hidden microphone to tape the franchisee's conversations.
Taco Bell has yet to answer the substance of the spying charges in court, though it unsuccessfully tried to dismiss them on technical grounds.
Franchisee Richard L. Cohn, who runs nine Taco Bell units in the Chicago suburbs, brought suit in Chicago in 1992 and added the spying allegation last August.
In the suit, Mr. Cohn also maintained that Taco Bell broke promises to let him open two more restaurants.
The suit charged that the franchiser decided "to drive Mr. Cohn out of the Taco Bell system" about three years ago.
The suit alleged that Taco Bell officials thought Mr. Cohn asked too many questions about its pricing and suppliers and wanted to form a dissident group of Taco Bell franchisees.
(Such a group eventually formed and Mr. Cohn joined.)
Paul K. Vickrey, an attorney for Mr. Cohn, says he aims to show that Taco Bell undermined its franchisee partly by using the alleged spy, Dirk Smith.
At Taco Bell's suggestion, Mr. Cohn hired Mr. Smith, then a Taco Bell market manager in Houston, to oversee his operations, according to the suit.
During his six-month tenure in 1991, Mr. Smith allegedly spied on his boss and reported his findings to Taco Bell officials, the suit claimed.
"Absolutely ludicrous; I never did any spying for Taco Bell whatsoever," retorts Mr. Smith, now vice president of Sizzlin' Quick Hamburgers Inc., an Austin, Texas, franchiser.
Mr. Smith says he did record conversations without Mr. Cohn's knowledge, in order to prepare a possible lawsuit against Mr. Cohn's company, RLC Enterprises Inc.
Mr. Smith never sued.
In this week's ruling, Mr. Cohn was rebuffed on an encroachment charge that had sparked his lawsuit, however.
He maintained that Taco Bell had violated a contract by planning a franchiser-owned restaurant in Vernon Hills, within two miles of Mr. Cohn's most profitable unit, in Mundelein, Ill.
According to the Cohn suit, Taco Bell ignored a so-called impact study predicting that the planned unit would cannibalize between 27% and 40% of the existing unit's sales.
Judge John A. Nordberg dismissed that charge, ruling that Taco Bell's agreements with franchisees permit encroachment.
With encroachment cases on the rise, the judge's ruling will interest many franchisers worried about how to word contracts.
Stanley J. Adelman, a Taco Bell attorney, declined to discuss the Cohn case.
Taco Bell officials didn't return phone calls seeking comment.
STATE WATCHDOGS on franchising will get to keep their jobs, after all.
An arcane issue called pre-emption has finally died at the Federal Trade Commission.
State franchise regulators, long franchisees' greatest source of protection, will keep their power -- at least for now.
Last month, the FTC ended a four-year look at whether the federal government should pre-empt state rules governing franchisers' disclosures to prospective franchisees.
The FTC presently oversees federal disclosure rules for franchisers.
But states may set their own tougher standards-and some do so.
If federal rules were pre-emptive, they alone would apply.
That prospect alarms some franchisee advocates.
"As the laws exist now, franchisees do better under the state laws.
So, federal pre-emption would not make sense," says Mario L. Herman, a Washington, D.C., lawyer for franchisees.
Nearly five years ago, Terry Calvani, then an FTC commissioner, stunned state regulators by declaring that the FTC might pre-empt their role.
Mr. Calvani, now a private attorney in Washington, says he had hoped to end a "crazy quilt" of regulations that costs franchisers plenty and makes it much harder for newcomers to enter the market.
The FTC initiated its proceeding in 1989.
Last month, agency officials said they couldn't justify pre-emption because they didn't see sufficient evidence of costly conflicts or inconsistencies among various states' rules.
Politics also played a role.
While initially vowing to work hard for pre-emption, the International Franchise Association later took a lukewarm stance.
Individuals close to the franchiser group say it feared alienating state regulators.
The IFA's spokesman on this issue couldn't be reached.
But last year, the IFA renewed its support for pre-emption in a letter to Rep. John J. LaFalce (D., N.Y.), the leading advocate of tougher franchising laws.
Mr. LaFalce has indicated he might change his opposition to pre-emption if franchisers supported his proposed curbs on them.
"Now, if there ever is to be pre-emption, it will be the result of new federal legislation," says Neil A. Simon, a Washington lawyer.
WELFARE RECIPIENTS may soon become Worldwide Refinishing franchisees.
Worldwide Refinishing Services Inc., a unit of entrepreneur Don Dwyer's Dwyer Group in Waco, Texas, says it has offered to waive franchisees' $24,200 entry costs for certain residents trying to work their way out of public-housing projects.
The company says it has already lined up five such franchisees in New York City, and plans to train them next month.
If the city lets them, the new franchisees initially would sell their services -- mostly refinishing bathtubs -- to housing projects where they now live.
Once they developed outside customers, the franchisees could move out and make room for their replacements in the projects.
"If someone wants to be off the welfare rolls and is willing to work hard, this is a vehicle for them to use," says Charles H. Wallis, executive vice president of Worldwide.
The plan is part of New York's broader effort to encourage public-housing residents to start small businesses, says Marcia Melendez, a business-development official for the city's Housing Authority.
She says the Worldwide plan should win final approval soon.
Worldwide says it aims to make similar arrangements this year in Washington, Boston and other major cities.
BRIEFS: The International Franchise Association, reflecting U.S. franchisers' rising interest in foreign markets, says it will sponsor 11 international conferences this year, up from eight in 1993. . . .
Franchising lawyers say new legislative battles over franchisee rights loom this year in California, Connecticut, Florida, Maine and Maryland.
