On Monday, former President Richard Nixon met with former Russian Vice President Alexander Rutskoi, who was released recently from prison after leading the armed parliamentary rebellion against President Boris Yeltsin last October.
Mr. Rutskoi hopes to run for president.
On Tuesday, Mr. Nixon met with Communist Party chief Gennady Zyuganov.
Yesterday, Mr. Yeltsin canceled his plans to meet with Mr. Nixon.
"He was coming here to see me," complained Mr. Yeltsin, speaking to the press during a wreath-laying ceremony at the Kremlin.
Instead, said Mr. Yeltsin, Mr. Nixon came to Russia and began looking for such "dark spots" as Messrs. Rutskoi and Zyuganov.
After this, Mr. Yeltsin added, no one in the Russian government would meet with Mr. Nixon.
"Russia is still a great country," Mr. Yeltsin said, "and just to play with it like this -- today I want this and tomorrow something else -- won't go either."
Other members of Mr. Yeltsin's government also scratched Mr. Nixon from their schedules, including Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and Defense Minister Pavel Grachev.
The Russian government also abruptly withdrew a state security car and bodyguards that had been provided for Mr. Nixon's private fact-finding visit.
Mr. Nixon wasn't available to comment.
But one of his advisers on this trip, Dmitri Simes, at a news conference yesterday described Mr. Nixon's reaction as "puzzled and disappointed."
Mr. Simes added, "The trip is not canceled.
We will continue with it."
Mr. Simes, a scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, also said he was "surprised" that Mr. Yeltsin "could not find anyone else but an 81-year-old ex-president who is his friend and Russia's friend to reassert his macho and to tell us that Russia is a great country."
Adding significance to the incident is Mr. Nixon's role as an unofficial envoy of the Clinton administration.
Before coming to Russia, Mr. Nixon briefed Mr. Clinton on his plans.
And commenting on the sudden souring of Mr. Nixon's trip, Mr. Clinton said, "I'd be interested to hear his reports when he gets back."
During a summit visit to Moscow in January, Mr. Clinton tried to avoid any similar entanglement in Russia's domestic spats by staying clear of the country's most notorious parliamentarian, Vladimir Zhirinovsky.
One advantage of Mr. Nixon's private visit was to have been that as an unofficial caller on Russia's leading politicians, he would have room to practice his old diplomatic arts, sounding out not only Mr. Yeltsin's circle, but also the extremists.
As for Mr. Nixon's interest in meeting with Mr. Zhirinovsky, an aide to Mr. Nixon said last night, "The rest of our program is uncertain at this time."
