Blissfield, Mich. -- Only one building in this serene midsize town in farm country a few miles from the Ohio state line has been anointed: that is, deemed to possess enough architectural intensity to be listed in Buildings of the United States.
Oxford University Press just started publishing this definitive study, state by state plus territories.
By the 2010s, the full set will measure eight feet long and contain nearly 100,000 descriptions of significant structures that will pinpoint exactly where and how American architecture sings.
Blissfield's honoree is a Greek Revival mansion, circa 1851, significant because so many early entrepreneurs in south-central Michigan favored that style and so few unspoiled examples survive.
This one endured because it evolved into a restaurant, located on a highway that cuts Lenawee County in two.
I took that highway across the county, testing the observations and travel-worthiness of BUS, as the Oxford series is known in the field.
I chose Lenawee because of all places yet covered in BUS -- in addition to Michigan, there's Alaska, Iowa and the District of Columbia -- it seemed especially unpretentious yet representative of American urbanism.
The owner of the restaurant emerged as I stood in his parking lot taking notes about Doric columns.
When I introduced myself and showed him the book's mere 19 listings for all of Lenawee, he was understandably miffed about what has been left out: a one-room 1870s schoolhouse moved in the 1970s to the middle of the modern high school's lawn, a plain but beloved box of a Lutheran church, a two-room railway station now used as a ticket booth for cross-county murder-mystery-train excursions.
And so it went: I followed the bare-bones but sufficient BUS maps and directions to the highlights of Lenawee, and everywhere I longed to add listings of, say, a 1920s church in soft-pink local stone, a Victorian mansion with a mysterious covered stair trailing down its back lawn, a coffee-pot-shaped coffee stand.
But no one may ever produce the ultimate documentation of Lenawee's architecture: a constantly updated virtual replica, with databases spilling construction details, life stories of past and present residents, even the sensations of breezes rattling dried soybean shells in the fields.
And you have to enjoy BUS for its very limitations, its culling of the landscape into perfect representatives of every material, form, function and region.
In place of that coffee shop, for instance, there's a far grander pickle-barrel-shaped cottage on Michigan's upper peninsula.
You also have to admire the variety of viewpoints in BUS.
A different scholar is writing each volume; format varies slightly and tone hugely.
David Gebhard and Gerald Mansheim place Iowa in a stylistic continuum: an 1881 Italianate villa was built "very late in fashion," a cornice on a 1939 Streamline Moderne cube proves "this was also the moment when the Regency Revival was strong."
Pamela Scott and Antoinette J. Lee spend needed pages on each Washington icon; and Alison K. Hoagland tells briefly but vividly of Alaskan experiences: feeling like an intruder in a Russian Orthodox monk's cell, exhilarated in a native hut with whalebone walls and a grass roof.
And Kathryn Bishop Eckert packs the Michigan text with sunny commentary: use of a concrete simulated wood called Perma-Log is thankfully "confined to Michigan"; a 1959 pedestrian mall ringed by highways has ensured that "the city has been restored to the people."
The Society of Architectural Historians dreamed up BUS, modeling it after The Buildings of England, a 46-volume tribute to a beloved adopted country written by German-born Sir Nikolaus Pevsner during three decades after World War II.
Like BUS, Pevsner's work is never objective: "a pure, noble, and generous interior" and "a directness of feeling and expression unprecedented in England" are typical Pevsnerisms.
He can show distaste, too, but always gently: "One takes a perverse pleasure in it," he writes of an awkward Victorian church, and of a modernist one he offers "apologies from the author of this volume who cannot appreciate for worship so aggressive a building."
And like BUS, The Buildings of England is omnivorous -- even though Pevsner, who died in 1983, wrote mostly about heroic religious buildings.
Other scholars have widened his work with pages on vernacular buildings such as barns and pumping stations for draining the fens.
You could argue, then, that the world's comprehensive architectural summaries are becoming a little too tolerant, all-embracing, even complacent, basically extended pats on the back for a nation's architecture.
But in a time when academics are abuzz with books titled "The End of Architecture?" and likely to dismiss the bulk of post-World-War-II construction as "the scamscapes of exopolis," BUS comes as a welcome dose of optimism.
The cumulative effect of these volumes will be incredibly heartening: scholarly proof of how much there there already is.
