SMALL-BUSINESS STRAINS show in a Chamber of Commerce policy reversal.
This week, the U.S. Chamber's board rejected mandatory employer health-care coverage after many small-company members had complained bitterly about its earlier stance favoring a mandate.
The national business group "heard from a lot of small companies in the hinterlands who read about the chamber's policy position in the newspapers," says Kathy McKimmie, an official of the Indiana Chamber of Commerce.
Adds John Polk, president of the Council of Smaller Enterprises, a chamber affiliate in Cleveland: "It's good to know the chamber listened to, and has chosen to stand up for, its members."
Some of the chamber's big-company members back the idea of requiring employers to provide health insurance, a key part of President Clinton's health-care reform plan.
Rep. John Boehner (R., Ohio) charges that the U.S. Chamber's initial support for employer mandates also developed because some Washington staff and board members wanted to be "players and work with the White House."
Mr. Boehner, a chamber member when he worked as a manufacturer's representative, says that he and more than 30 other members of Congress lobbied the board to reverse its stance.
Richard Lesher, the U.S. Chamber's president, rejects the notion that his group wanted to curry favor with the administration.
He also denies that the policy turnaround reflects a split between big corporations and the small businesses that make up 95% of the organization's membership.
Asked whether some small-firm members had threatened to quit, he responds: "We have a number of members waiting to see what the board did.
My guess is they'll be very pleased and will stay with the chamber."
Did the policy reversal reflect a victory for the chamber's small-company members?
Replies Mr. Polk in Cleveland: "We don't ask questions.
We just say `Thank you.'"
A HEALTH-CARE ALTERNATIVE may help small firms but hurt the budget.
Washington health-care lobbyists say a health-care compromise being considered by some congressional Democrats could overcome small-business objections to mandated coverage.
The plan would exempt companies with 100 or fewer workers from providing insurance.
"This is the main compromise that might make a difference in terms of small-business support," says Michael Bromberg, executive director of the Federation of American Health Systems, which represents for-profit hospitals.
Under the compromise, the government would provide tax incentives to help smaller companies' workers buy health coverage.
Midsize and larger companies would still have to pay part of their employees' costs.
But the proposal also could increase federal outlays by encouraging small companies that currently offer insurance to drop it, warns Ed Howard, executive director of the Alliance for Health Care Reform, another Washington lobbying group.
Smaller employers "would be crazy not to phase out the coverage they offer if the government provides subsidies to individual workers," he adds.
Mr. Howard offers one possible solution, exempting only companies with 10 or fewer workers.
Bennie Thayer, president of the National Association for the Self-Employed, says his group would back a plan that exempts companies with 20 or fewer employees.
Such a hybrid plan would eliminate the federal subsidies that the administration has proposed for small, low-wage employers.
Mr. Thayer contends the Clinton subsidy idea would create too much uncertainty for such businesses.
"The problem with that subsidy is when, not whether, you'd get it," he says.
SMOOTHER BANKRUPTCIES?
The Senate will consider a bill later this year that would create an experimental, stream-lined process for reorganizing a small company under the bankruptcy code.
Currently, only about 10% of small firms stay in business after they file for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the code.
The alternative process, known as Chapter 10, lets a trustee oversee the rights of creditors and provides for quicker decisions on a company's reorganization.
When a North Carolina bankruptcy judge informally adopted a similar process several years ago, the move nearly halved the time that small firms spent in his court.
But the American Bankers Association strongly dislikes the idea, arguing that it won't protect major creditors' rights to be paid in full before other obligations are met.
A BILL AIMS to help small retailers compete with mailers.
Mail-order companies could be charged state and local sales taxes on goods shipped out-of-state if Congress approves a bill proposed by Dale Bumpers (D. Ark.), chairman of the Senate's Small Business Committee.
Sen. Bumpers says the measure seeks to protect Main Street firms from the unfair competition that occurs when consumers order furniture and other items through mail-order catalogs to avoid paying local sales taxes.
The measure would exempt mail-order companies with less than $3 million in U.S. sales.
It also would allow companies to pay one standard rate if they are subject to several local tax rates within a state.
(A 1992 U.S. Supreme Court decision removed an earlier legal bar that prevented states from collecting the taxes.)
Significantly more small retailers have complained in recent years about losing sales to mail-order houses, a Small Business Committee aide says.
Ray Jones, a Long Beach, Calif., boat dealer, wrote to Sen. Bumpers to complain about losing a $240,000 sale in Janaury when a would-be buyer instead ordered a boat from an Oregon dealer to avoid $19,800 in taxes.
But the Direct Marketing Association, a New York trade group, opposes the measure, claiming that collecting the taxes would unfairly burden its mail-order house members.
SMALL TALK: The Resolution Trust Corp., the U.S. agency that sells failed thrifts, has set up new bidding procedures to help minority investors acquire failed institutions in predominantly minority neighorhoods. . . .
Small U.S. exporters get too little federal help in financing their deals, the Small Business Exporters Association contends.
In a report, it asks the U.S. Export-Import Bank to help big banks teach small ones how to work better with small exporters.
