The International Atomic Energy Agency, laying the groundwork for eventual United Nations action, gave North Korea another chance to allow full inspection of its nuclear program.
In a related action, President Clinton said the U.S. soon will send Patriot antimissile batteries to South Korea.
The president called it a "purely defensive" move that was in the interest of both the U.S. and South Korea.
In addition, the U.S. is expected soon to announce with South Korea that the two nations' joint military exercise, called "Team Spirit," will be revived.
But a Pentagon official said that to avoid damaging crops that will be planted soon in South Korea, the exercise probably won't be staged until after the fall harvest.
The nuclear agency's 35-member board of governors sent the U.N. Security Council a copy of its resolution urging North Korea to drop its resistance to full inspections.
Agency inspectors were frustrated in their recent attempt to inspect North Korean facilities to determine whether Pyongyang has diverted material to build nuclear weapons.
The U.S. has said that if the standoff over inspections continues, it will move for a Security Council resolution echoing the nuclear agency's statement.
That action probably will come next week.
The U.S. ambassador to the U.N., Madeleine Albright, also plans to invite Hans Blix, the head of the nuclear agency, to brief Security Council members in New York.
The U.S. wants to build a record of diplomatic patience to slowly bring along other nations, such as China, that aren't inclined to punish North Korea.
"It's a very careful step-by-step approach, based on a strategy of gradual escalation," said a U.S. official.
U.S. officials also are hoping that, based on North Korea's previous behavior, the action at the U.N. might be enough to get the Stalinist state to back down.
U.S. diplomats were heartened yesterday by China's abstention at the international nuclear agency's meeting, which they took to be a foreshadowing of the course that Beijing will take when the North Korea issue comes before the Security Council.
