The Federal Reserve is trying to scare inflation away.
But will it work?
That's the question economists and bond investors are pondering in the wake of the Fed's decision Friday to raise short-term interest rates for the first time in nearly five years.
Because the Fed barely nudged up the rate at which banks lend each other money, to 3.25% from 3%, there won't be any significant impact on the economy, most economists agree.
They say the Fed is waging a psychological war.
By jumping in before price inflation has even begun to accelerate, the Fed is trying to convince investors that it "isn't asleep at the wheel as some critics have been saying recently," said Robert Giordano, director of economic research at Goldman, Sachs.
Bond investors fear inflation because it means a fixed income buys less at the grocery store.
A case can be made that the Fed's pre-emptive strike will be good for bond prices.
But on Friday, investors recoiled.
The price of the benchmark 30-year bond sank 5/8 point, or $6.25 for a bond with a $1,000 value.
The yield, which moves in the opposite direction of price, rose to 6.35% from 6.31% on Thursday.
Treasurys with shorter maturities were even harder hit.
The bond-equivalent yield on the six-month bill, for example, jumped more than 0.11 percentage point to 3.47%, the highest level in nearly 14 months.
If the Fed succeeds in reducing inflation fears, long-term bond yields could drop once again, perhaps even as low as 5.5%, says Mr. Giordano.
But even he says that this move would be temporary.
More likely is that long-term yields will be little changed or perhaps slightly higher by the end of this year, says William Gross, a managing director at Pacific Investment Management of Newport Beach, Calif.
Mr. Gross is one of the nation's most closely watched and respected bond-fund managers because of the huge amount of bond assets his firm controls, over $40 billion, and his successes through bull and bear markets.
The Fed's decision to raise rates "probably signals an end to the bull-bond market of recent years," says Mr. Gross.
"This was probably the official seal that signals the good times are over," he adds.
At this stage in an economic recovery and with the Fed raising short-term interest rates, "it would be very unusual" for long-term bond yields to drop very much, says Mr. Gross.
What's more likely is that short-term rates will go up a lot and long-term rates will go up less, or change little, he says.
Long-term yields are crucial for everyone from homeowners to businesses that need to borrow.
There is little disagreement on where short-term interest rates will be going over the next year: up.
The only question is how far they will rise and how fast.
Mr. Giordano expects a rise in the so-called federal-funds rate (at which banks lend each other money) of 1/4 to 1/2 point over the next year, while Mr. Gross says the rise could be 1/2 to 3/4 point.
The federal-funds rate is what the Fed boosted Friday.
The Fed's highly unusual announcement of its intention to "increase slightly the degree of pressure on reserve positions" and boost the federal-funds rate was partly a response to investor confusion and partly a response to recent demands by members of Congress for more disclosure of Fed activity.
On Thursday, the Fed failed to inject more reserves into the banking system, as had been expected, and allowed the funds rate to rise slightly.
But it wasn't clear whether the Fed was actually tightening since the rate increase was so slight.
Friday's announcement helped clear the air.
Later in the day a Fed spokesman said that the announcement wasn't a precedent and investors shouldn't expect the Fed to continue such signalling.
Still, investors found something else to fret about Friday: how far does the Fed plan to push up rates before it's satisfied that inflationary pressures have been eliminated?
The last time the Fed started to raise interest rates was in the late-1980s, after inflation had already started to rise.
In order to make up for its tardiness in responding, the Fed had to move quickly and far.
Between March 1988 and March 1989, the monthly average of the federal-funds rate jumped more than 3.25 percentage points.
But with the Fed appearing to be ahead of the curve this time around, economists don't believe that scenario is likely to be repeated.
"The Fed is very sensitive to shifts in expectations because it needs to maintain its credibility," says Mr. Giordano.
"That had a lot to do with going ahead now" and raising rates "rather than waiting a few more months," he explains.
But investors weren't convinced that gradualism would be Alan Greenspan's plan.
According to the trading followed by GovPx Inc., which tracks the trading of Treasurys, volume reached $123 billion on Friday, the highest since GovPx started keeping track of volume in 1991.
The second-highest volume day was Thursday at $104 billion.
GovPx, owned by a group of primary dealers in the Treasury market, estimates that its numbers cover about 65% of trading volume.
"It would be too much to think that the market's response today would be in any way definitive," says John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon Brothers.
"This has to be viewed as the first step on a journey that is going to last some time," he explained.
"The Fed's task, if it is serious about reaching its goal of price stability, implies that economic growth will have to decelerate over the coming year or so to about a 2.5% annual rate as measured by the gross domestic product."
But over the next few months the economic data that will be released aren't "likely to be friendly to long-term interest rates."
Mr. Lipsky says he believes the economic data will "continue to test the Fed's resolve" to put out an inflation spark before it turns into a fire.
As a result, "over the next few months, expect to see the Fed undertaking additional tightening" measures.
The good news for investors is that "if the Fed is successful, later this year we should achieve a combination of moderating economic growth, stable inflation, tightening fiscal and monetary policy and weak economic growth abroad."
The result could be a return to lower long-term interest rates, says Mr. Lipsky, in the range of 5.5% to 6%.
Mr. Giordano also says gradualism will be the path that the Fed takes.
The situation is very different from 1988 and 1989, says Mr. Giordano, "because at that time the economy was at virtually full employment and the Fed was behind the curve in getting rates higher to restrain inflation."
But the key to allowing inflationary pressures to ease while refraining from startling the financial markets is whether the Fed is any good at playing therapist to the millions of stock and bond investors with frayed nerves.
"If the market concludes that the Federal Reserve is, in fact, a step behind inflation instead of a step ahead," long-term rates could rise sharply, says Mr. Giordano.
The Federal Reserve's move to tighten credit and to publicly state that it had done so Friday knocked down the prices of securities in the mortgage, corporate and municipal markets as well.
The policy change -- and the statement confirming it -- unnerved market players and led to chaotic trading.
The tightening came about three hours after a weaker-than-expected January employment report had squelched expectations that any policy change was imminent.
"It was hectic and extremely volatile, particularly at the long end" of Treasury securities, said Anthony Karydakis, senior financial economist at First Chicago Capital Markets.
Friday's session began amid expectations that a policy tightening was likely should the government report a large jump in monthly nonfarm payrolls for January.
But the Labor Department said nonfarm payroll employment rose just 62,000 during January, well below forecasts centering on a gain of about 200,000.
In response, the market surged as players scrambled to buy back securities they had sold Thursday.
However, those higher levels merely brought in fresh selling by traders looking to get out of long positions.
By mid-morning, the market had erased all of its early gains.
The coup de grace for the market came when the Fed announced shortly after 11 a.m. EST that it had in fact decided to push short-term rates slightly higher.
Prices plunged soon after.
Also to blame for the long-end troubles were concerns about next week's refunding auctions, as well as inflation figures scheduled to be released this week.
The three-year note slated to be auctioned tomorrow yielded 4.76% late Friday in when-issued trading, while the 10-year note to be auctioned Wednesday yielded 5.85%, and the 30-year bond yielded 6.37%.
In mortgage securities, as in some other markets, the Fed's move may have dramatically altered prospects.
A major consequence is that long-term interest rates aren't seen likely to decline much, reducing the likelihood that mortgage rates could drop enough to spur another burst of home-mortgage refinancings.
This would significantly reduce the risk of prepayments on mortgage securities.
Prepayments are going to be "slow, slow, slow," says Dale Westhoff, vice president of the mortgage-research department at Bear Stearns.
He had already been calling for a prepayment slowdown, but Friday's events led him to revise his estimates down even further.
"The probability is less that we're going to be hitting new lows in mortgage rates," so a renewed refinancing boom won't likely occur, he adds.
Municipal-bond prices dropped as much as 5/8 point.
Harris County, Texas's 5.00% coupon bonds due 2016 finished 1/2 point lower at 95 1/2 to yield 5.31%, compared with 5.27% on Thursday.
The Fed's tightening may cause some issuers to move up the pricings of their offerings, muni specialists say.
