For derivatives trader James Heinz, the pandemonium in last week's markets peaked when he tumbled out of bed at 4 a.m.
Wednesday to check quotes on a futures exchange 4,000 miles away.
In London, where Mr. Heinz's Chicago-based Marquette Partners trading group employs a staff of eight people, the price of futures contracts on the benchmark German bond had tumbled about $3,000 a contract.
"No more sleep for me," he says.
"I had to be sure my traders weren't on the wrong side of that move."
As it happened, Mr. Heinz says, his staff had done "fine," though he declines to disclose his profits.
And by Friday the world's derivatives exchanges had posted the busiest week in their history, electrified by turmoil in U.S. and foreign bond and stock markets.
It was a week dominated by fear -- of inflation; of a protracted bear trend in U.S. securities markets; of the prospect for more interest-rate tightening by the Federal Reserve; and of a rising money supply in Germany.
Nowhere are these worries more keenly felt than in markets for derivatives, or instruments whose values are derived from the prices of underlying assets such as stocks and bonds.
And with economic uncertainty still rife in global markets, derivatives trading is likely to continue at a frenetic pace this week, traders say.
"You typically get heavier volume in a bear market than in a bull market, but this has really been amazing," says Kurt Fraim, co-manager of a trading desk for Aubrey G. Lanston & Co. at the Chicago Board of Trade.
"Big investors like hedge funds and pension funds are flocking here to hedge themselves."
Derivatives have become the play of choice for many of the world's largest investors.
The attraction is the leverage they offer -- for millions of dollars in cash an investor can control billions of dollars of securities -- and their suitability in strategies aimed at hedging unexpected swings in stock prices, interest rates and currency-exchange rates.
What fascinated many traders about last week's furor was that much of it seemed to emanate from Europe, as turmoil in European bond and stock markets spilled over into U.S. markets.
"For the first time that I can remember, the overseas markets led the way," says Rob Merrilees, managing partner of G-Bar LP, a Chicago-based trading and market-making company that specializes in stock and interest-rate derivatives.
"We'd have a correction in our markets, and then London and Europe would top it, setting the tone for us the next day."
Volume surged to records on the London International Financial Futures Exchange, or Liffe, which trades contracts based on German, Italian and British bond markets.
The London exchange posted average daily volume of more than one million futures and options contracts for the week, compared with 761,000 contracts a day for the year so far and 344,000 a year earlier.
"Liffe's trading systems were driven towards maximum capacity," says Rupert Lowe, managing director of DBMG Futures & Options Ltd., a joint venture trading company of Deutsche Bank and Morgan Grenfell.
Throughout the week, traders say, the exchange was the beneficiary of a panicked rush to unload "long" positions, or wagers that European bond prices would rise, because of fears that a surging German money supply would prevent the country from cutting interest rates.
"There appeared to be a selling climax midweek when banks, fund managers and traders dumped positions," another London trader says.
Reportedly in the thick of this selling frenzy were such well-known hedge-fund investors as Michael Steinhardt, whose funds were said to have had a loss of more than $600 million.
Price volatility was so wild that the London exchange raised its "margin" requirements, or the money traders must post as good-faith deposits on their financial commitments, to bring in an additional $700 million, says David Hardy, managing director of the London Clearing House, which clears Liffe's trades.
Trading was similarly spectacular at the Chicago Board of Trade and Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the world's two biggest derivatives markets, which trade an array of contracts based on U.S. interest rates, stocks and foreign currencies.
At the CME, most of the action was in the exchange's Eurodollar futures and options contracts, which track the movement of short-term U.S. interest rates.
As interest rates rise, Eurodollar futures prices fall, and this market has been in a down trend since the Fed tightened interest rates on Feb. 4, traders say.
"Nobody wants to be long" because of the widespread fear that the Fed may move again to raise rates, says Jon Anderson, head of derivative products trading for French bank Credit Agricole.
On Friday morning, for instance, even more trepidation than usual attended the release of the Labor Department's February unemployment report.
Traders worried that a bigger-than-expected increase in non-farm payrolls would prompt the Fed to tighten rates.
Eurodollar futures prices plunged Friday morning when the payroll number did indeed come out higher than expected -- up 217,000 jobs, rather than the widely expected 139,000 -- but they rallied back later after the Fed declined to announce a rate increase.
At the Board of Trade, which offers futures contracts based on U.S. Treasury bonds and notes, trading has been surging lately on any news report or government forecast that has bearing on inflation.
Last Monday, for instance, the Chicago purchasing managers index edged lower, which bond futures traders interpreted as a clue that the National Association of Purchasing Management would also report lower prices on the following day.
But on Tuesday, the prices-paid index in the national association's February survey showed a sharp increase, renewing inflation fears and sending bond futures prices into a nose dive.
"In this case, the Chicago and the national numbers were out of sync and that played havoc with this market," Mr. Fraim says.
