Prices for a grocery cart of items, from breakfast cereal to bagels to mayonnaise, have already jumped this winter.
Bakers are paying more for flour and cooking oil.
Some economists expect food inflation this year to be between 3.3% and 3.5% -- up from 2.2% in 1993 and 1.2% in 1992.
That would be the first time in about four years that food prices exceeded the general inflation rate, which is expected to run about 3.0%.
Last year's rain-related crop disaster in the Midwest is primarily to blame for the rising prices.
The February price of corn, the nation's No. 1 crop, was the highest in a decade.
Prices of high-protein wheat, soybeans and sorghum all posted double-digit percentage increases from a year ago.
U.S. stockpiles of corn and soybeans are shriveling to their lowest levels since the 1970s, and much of the wheat cache is poor-quality stuff.
At this rate, the U.S., the world's biggest grain exporter, might even have to import crops such as corn in order to meet demand until this year's harvests.
Bountiful crops then would keep grocery prices from jumping higher in 1995.
But don't hold your breath.
This has been a hard winter, and much of the Farm Belt hasn't dried out from last year's torrential rain and record flooding.
The soil in Midwest states already is saturated, and the months just tend to get wetter during this time of year.
Even normal spring rains will trigger worse-than-usual flooding and turn fields into quagmires.
"We already know there will be problems," says S. Elwynn Taylor, a climatologist at Iowa State University.
With more than a month to go until planting season, the conventional wisdom is that grain production will rebound.
Yields in the Midwest do have a track record of recovering nicely the year after a crop disaster.
Strapped farmers currently have an incentive to plant every acre they can; corn prices are up 30% from last year and soybeans are up 16%.
An anxious Agriculture Department also is allowing farmers to plant more land involved in government programs.
In Heron Lake, Minn., Robert Ferguson intends to plant the most corn he ever has: 700 acres.
Last year, his soggy farm eked out just 15% of a normal crop.
Mr. Ferguson, who had crop insurance, barely broke even.
"A lot of guys need a good crop this year," he says.
The early line at the Chicago Board of Trade is this: U.S. corn farmers have about 80 million acres to plant.
Plug in the normally anticipated yield and out comes a bin-buster of 8.8 billion bushels, up 39% from last year's drenched crop.
That would be enough to meet projected demand of roughly eight billion bushels and leave enough to rebuild a comfortable stockpile.
And that, combined with the record soybean harvest under way in South America and the Chinese corn flooding world markets, would lull food inflation back to sleep.
But history offers little guide to yields this year.
The crop disasters from which the Midwest recovered so quickly in the past were usually droughts, which do much less damage to the soil.
Excessive rains are rare.
Last year's deluge drowned beneficial soil microbes and washed away nutrients.
Grain prices rallied long after the rains eased last year because traders were slow to grasp the extent of the damage.
Commodity traders say anything less than ideal harvests will cause problems fast.
"There is zero safety margin this year," says Joe Victor, of Allendale Inc., a Crystal Lake, Ill., commodity brokerage firm.
That means crop prices could careen wildly in the coming months on any signs of good weather and bad.
If the crop estimates slip, here's what to look for: An 8.4-billion-bushel corn crop would signal a 4% food inflation rate in 1995, figures John M. Urbanchuk, of AUS Consultants, a forecasting firm outside Philadelphia.
If it is less than eight billion bushels, stockpiles wouldn't refill and the food inflation rate would probably hit 5% by late 1995, says Donald Ratajczak, an economist at Georgia State University.
(Consumers spend about $600 billion annually on food, and though the farm represents roughly 10 cents of the retail cost of a box of corn flakes, for example, the spectacle of a crop disaster is making it easier for food companies to raise their prices.)
A 7.5-billion-bushel corn crop would push prices to a stratospheric $4 a bushel, some economists estimate, from about $2.84 in central Illinois Friday.
Such a surge would strangle exports as well as make hogs and cattle too expensive for many farmers to feed, eventually driving up meat prices.
"Things are so tight that tiny changes can cause big swings," says Paul Prentice, president of Farm Sector Economics Inc., of Colorado Springs, Colo.
"The risk," he says, echoing others, "is on the upside."
