The turmoil lately in the Dow Jones Industrial Average reminds investors that Wall Street is a two-way street.
While stocks have managed to recoup a portion of the 104 points they surrendered late last week, many professionals are still nervous.
Last week's sudden dip "showed how tender the market is," says Morgan Stanley strategist Byron Wien.
If the market were to turn south for a while, which stocks would hold up best?
There are no guarantees, but money managers say cheap stocks that pay a dividend and don't have too much debt often weather downturns pretty well.
The accompanying table, from MarketBase, a market-information firm in Needham, Mass., identifies some possible safe havens.
It also highlights some stocks that look vulnerable.
As a sign of the times, MarketBase found fewer than two dozen stocks (out of more than 2,000 non-financial companies screened) that cleared certain statistical hurdles defining possible safe havens.
Meanwhile, Katherine Hensel, a Lehman Brothers strategist, has finished a major study of which stocks hold up best in weak markets.
Cyclical stocks, the market's darlings lately, "are exactly the ones that really get killed" in downturns, she says.
Ms. Hensel says investors who expect a drop should beware of hotel, semiconductor, homebuilding and air freight stocks.
But they should consider beefing up holdings of oil, food and utility issues.
To reach these conclusions, the Lehman study reviewed nine market "corrections" since 1962, or every downturn of 5% or more that didn't precede a recession.
For her part, Ms. Hensel expects a "classic correction" of 10% to 15% in the next few months, now that the Federal Reserve has begun to raise interest rates.
The study found three main characteristics that predict how fragile a stock will be in a downturn.
The first is volatility, measured by what market professionals call "beta."
A stock with a beta of 1.00 is precisely as volatile as the overall market.
A stock with a beta of 1.5 tends to move half again as far as the market: If the market rises 10%, such a stock can be expected to climb 15% -- and vice versa.
When prices are falling, investors do better with low-beta stocks.
Second, the study found that "hot stocks," those that had the best gains in the prior year, typically fell more than most in down markets.
Third, stocks with above-average dividend yields usually withstood market slumps better.
What stocks meet those criteria today?
In the oil group, Ms. Hensel points to Imperial Oil, Pennzoil and Atlantic Richfield.
"The news is not going to get a lot worse" for oils, now that the price of oil has sunk to around $14 a barrel, she says.
Among utilities, DPL, Northeast Utilities, Central & South West and Union Electric seem secure, Ms. Hensel says.
In the food group, Lance, Universal Foods and Quaker Oats have good defensive profiles.
Drug and tobacco stocks were defensive in the past, but lately have shown higher betas and probably would be flimsy shields against a decline, she says.
Brett Brubaker, president of Abraham & Sons in Chicago, says the vulnerable list gets longer every day.
Mr. Brubaker goes both long and "short" stocks; that is, he both owns them and bets against them.
For the first time since 1987, Mr. Brubaker has more bearish short positions than bullish longs.
"I'm so short, I make Danny DeVito look like Wilt the Stilt," he says.
One stock Mr. Brubaker thinks is ripe for a fall is Chrysler.
A couple of years ago, he was one of a prescient few investment pros to buy Chrysler at $12 a share.
Yesterday, the stock closed at 59 3/4.
But the enthusiasm is "overdone," Mr. Brubaker says.
"It is as popular today as it was neglected in 1990."
Besides fundamentals, Mr. Brubaker uses stock charts.
Chrysler's chart shows today's price to be ominously similar to its 1973 and 1987 peaks.
That, he says, is a danger sign: The previous peaks were unsustainable, and this one probably will be, too.
Indeed, he says, similar analysis for the overall market shows the same frothiness.
Mr. Brubaker also thinks Airgas is too high; it closed yesterday at 24 1/4, about 1.4 times per-share sales -- or more than twice its normal multiple.
"My nose is bleeding" from the altitude, he exclaims.
His other bearish bets include Airborne Freight, R.G. Barry, Caterpillar, Clark Equipment, Echlin, Hercules, Morton International and Plygem Industries.
On the flip side, Mr. Brubaker likes stocks that "have already been sliced and diced," and in his opinion are unlikely to fall much more.
He thinks Asarco, Calgon Carbon, Katz Semiconductor and Rollins Environmental fit the bill.
Fred Gordon, editor of Plain Talk Investor, a Northbrook, Ill., newsletter, says that if he senses the market turning sour, "I'd be the most cautious on the sectors that the bull has loved the most.
That's where investors will grab the profits and run."
His "avoid" list includes semiconductors, brokerage houses, autos and auto parts, railroads, truckers, telecommunications, steels, financial services and restaurants.
For protection, Mr. Gordon says he'd "nibble at gold and oil."
He'd also consider food and supermarket stocks.
But most importantly, he'd raise cash.
Joan E. Lappin, president of Gramercy Capital in New York, suggests looking for stocks whose underlying business is improving so much that they could buck a downtrend.
Knight-Ridder, the newspaper chain, and General Motors both qualify, in her view.
Ms. Lappin doesn't expect a stock market slide soon.
But as a precaution, she says, "we've been trying to move to larger, more liquid securities, so if you feel you need the exit, there is one."
She's also avoiding banks.
"If the Fed thought it was necessary to make further rate increases," she says, "the stocks that would suffer the most would be the financial stocks."
A. Gary Shilling, who runs Thematic Investment Partners in Springfield, N.J., thinks investors can still make money in stocks of technology companies that enhance productivity, such as Motorola, Intel and Lotus Development.
But he believes a market slide is coming -- not a crash but a "Chinese water torture market" of unremitting dips.
"So many investors are new in the market," he says.
"They regard declines as a buying opportunity. . . .
I think they're going to be frustrated."
WHAT'S UP at McKesson Corp.?
The drug wholesaler's stock surged 5 1/8 in the past two days to close yesterday at 64 1/8.
And it's been climbing steadily since the beginning of the year.
Traders speculate that the San Francisco company could be up for grabs.
What makes McKesson attractive bait is PCS, its prescription-drug management business, the largest of its kind.
PCS runs prescription-drug benefit programs for about 45 million people, including employees of Chrysler, General Motors and the federal government.
Like its biggest competitor Medco, which was recently gobbled up by Merck, PCS acts as gatekeeper for the benefits plans it manages, deciding which drugs are approved for participants' use.
This makes PCS an appealing target for drug companies anxious to defend future sales-all the more so since most drugs on the market have direct substitutes.
"Whoever owns PCS can make sure his drugs are included in benefit plans and others are not," says Hemant K. Shah, a pharmaceuticals-industry analyst.
Even though PCS is still small (analysts estimate that its revenue will come in under $200 million for the fiscal year ending in March) it has been rapidly gaining new accounts.
Lawrence Marsh of Wheat, First Butcher & Singer in Richmond, Va., says PCS's margins are so high that it will generate about 20% of McKesson's operating profits, which he estimates at $350 million in the next fiscal year.
Takeover speculators, applying the lofty multiple Merck paid for Medco, say McKesson could command a bid of more than $80.
But Mr. Shah and others warn that, on a fundamental basis, McKesson already looks over-priced.
Rumored buyers include Bristol-Myers Squibb and Schering-Plough, both of which wouldn't comment.
A McKesson spokesman also declined comment, but stressed that the company has a battery of anti-takeover provisions in place.
General Motors Corp. posted a fourth-quarter profit of $1.18 billion, or $1.28 a share, reversing a year-earlier loss and finishing the year with a profit for the first time since 1989.
The fourth-quarter profit included better-than-expected results for North American auto operations, signaled strong earnings for 1994 and was generally at the high end of Wall Street expectations.
But some end-of-the-year tax complications muddied the picture, confusing some investors and analysts.
That together with disappointment that neither GM nor Ford Motor Co. produced a big earnings surprise this week led to a sell-off of auto stocks on Wall Street.
GM shares fell $1.75 to $62.50 in heavy New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Ford, which reported strong fourth-quarter results Tuesday, fell $2.50 to $66 in Big Board trading.
And shares of Chrysler Corp., which had inflated expectations for the industry by reporting a real earnings surprise a month ago, skidded $1.625 to $59.75, also in Big Board trading.
GM's results, though, underscored that a substantial turnaround is under way at what had become the world's sickest auto maker.
"Operationally, they're doing everything they said they would," observed Jack V. Kirnan, auto analyst at Salomon Bros.
"At the end of the day, it's pretty impressive."
The fourth-quarter profit includes a $189.5 million loss on the sale of the Allison Gas Turbine division and a tax benefit of about $350 million related to a rise in foreign tax credits for the period.
The increase occurred because the company underestimated the credits in the previous three quarters.
This element, together with a $444.3 million benefit related to the change in tax rates that GM said it booked in the third quarter, had some analysts questioning just how good the fourth-quarter results really were, particularly in North America.
In the year-earlier quarter, GM had a loss of $651.8 million, or $1.25 a share.
That figure included a write-down of GM's investment in National Car Rental Systems Inc. of $744.1 million, or $1.11 a share, and a gain on the sale of a stake in Daewoo Motor Co. of $165.1 million, or 25 cents a share.
Revenue rose 4.8% in the latest quarter to $37.27 billion from $35.55 billion.
In its huge North American auto operations, GM said it had a profit for the fourth quarter of about $75 million, excluding the $350 million tax benefit.
That reverses a year-earlier loss of $1.79 billion and marks the first time GM's North American vehicle unit was in the black since the second quarter of 1989, GM said.
While the North American unit was still in the red to the tune of $982 million for the full year, GM said it met its goal of breaking even in North America before interest, taxes and special charges, posting a profit of $362 million for 1993 on that basis.
For all of 1994, the company has vowed to at least break even on a netincome basis in North America.
G. Richard Wagoner Jr., GM's chief financial officer, attributed the turnaround in North America to lower marketing costs, to a sharp reduction in cut-rate vehicle sales to daily-rental fleets and to significantly lower materials costs, among other cost-cutting moves.
Sales incentives were cut to $880 a vehicle in the fourth quarter from $960 a year earlier, Mr. Wagoner said.
He added that GM made productivity improvements of more than 10% last year.
Indeed, figures disclosed by GM indicate that the improved results reflect dogged attention to business fundamentals.
World-wide vehicle production per worker in the fourth quarter rose 14% from a year ago, and results per vehicle made a $700 swing from a loss a year ago to a profit in the fourth quarter of about $340.
GM reduced average world-wide employment last year by 62,000 employees, to 705,000.
Mr. Wagoner said that in North American vehicle operations, the number of salaried employees is expected to decline this year to "the high 60,000s" from 71,000 at year end, and hourly employment is expected to decline to 245,000 to 250,000 from 262,000 at year end.
Mr. Wagoner added that GM managed to hold total health-care costs to $5.6 billion last year, about flat with the 1992 total, "for the first time in the history of mankind."
He said this reflected staff cutbacks, tighter cost controls and other measures.
Also contributing to the fourth-quarter results was a profit of $270 million from international auto operations, down sharply from the year-earlier profit of $489 million.
Mr. Wagoner said the decline was chiefly because of sharply lower earnings in recession-wracked Europe.
Wall Street analysts pointed to GM's substantially improved cash position as evidence that "the vital signs were better than expected," as Morgan Stanley's Scott Merlis put it.
GM finished the year with $9.76 billion in cash and cash equivalents on hand, up $2.5 billion from a year earlier.
At the end of 1991, GM had been down to just $4 billion.
Capital spending of $6.35 billion roughly matched depreciation and amortization.
GM improved its cash position despite applying $4.4 billion against its unfunded pension liability.
GM said the liability amounted to $22.3 billion at year end, lower than the $24 billion it had forecast.
GM also has proposed to contribute $5.5 billion of its Class E stock to the fund, which would reduce the liability to $17 billion.
Mr. Wagoner said the company is making good progress toward getting government clearances for the move.
Class E stock represents a dividend interest in earnings of GM's Electronic Data Systems Inc. unit.
Mr. Wagoner emphasized that GM needs to continue generating considerable cash as the U.S. auto market expands so that it can further reduce the pension liability and pay off debt before the next down cycle.
"We need a strong '94 and '95, and it would be nice if we could go until '97 or '98 before the next downturn," Mr. Wagoner said.
While Mr. Wagoner wouldn't disclose how much GM wants to pay into the fund this year, Wall Street analysts calculate that the company could generate enough cash to match last year's contribution.
And, if interest rates edge up, changing the assumptions behind the liability, "they could have it down to $9 billion or $10 billion by the end of the year," Mr. Kirnan of Salomon Bros. said.
Mr. Wagoner declined to forecast GM's earnings for this year.
But he indicated that mangement's goal is to push the ratio of net income to net sales (total revenue minus finance-unit revenue and certain other revenues) to 5% from last year's 2%.
Based on 1993's net sales of $125.3 billion, that would translate to full-year net income of $6.3 billion, or about $8.80 a share, when that goal is reached.
While nobody is forecasting earnings of that magnitude for 1994, Wall Street analysts are predicting profits of $5.25 to $5.50 a share.
And Mr. Kirnan, for one, sees earnings on the order of $8.50 a share by 1995.
For all of 1993, GM posted net income of $2.47 billion, or $2.13 a share, compared with a 1992 net loss of $23.5 billion, or $4.85 a share.
The 1993 results include a charge of $589 million, or 83 cents a share, for plant closings; the loss on the sale of the gas turbine unit of $189.5 million, or 27 cents a share; a charge of $143.8 million, or 20 cents a share, related to labor-contract costs; and the two tax-benefit gains.
The 1992 net loss includes a $20.88 billion charge, or $33.43 a share, related to an accounting change for employee health benefits; a special restructuring charge of $749.4 million, or 97 cents a chare; the $744.1 million write-down of National Car Rental; and the $165.1 million gain on the Daewoo sale.
