A jaguar peaceably coexists with a llama; a wolf blithely ignores a sheep; an eagle gently lands near a rabbit, leaving the fuzzy-tailed creature undisturbed.
The television spot, which could be a public service announcement for brotherhood, is actually a commercial for John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance.
The sugar-coated message: Every two years, the world's countries put aside differences and come together to compete in the Olympic Games.
"At John Hancock, it is our hope that someday this is what real life will be," the voiceover says.
Many companies use the Olympics to promote their own prowess or products.
For instance, International Business Machines' commercials tell how Olympics officials rely on IBM technology to record athletes' performance.
And there's no mistaking what's being pitched in Coca-Cola's Olympic-themed ads.
However, John Hancock and its Boston ad agency, Hill Holliday Connors Cosmopulos, decided to abandon the obvious by gambling on a simple, but attention-grabbing, soft-sell message.
David D'Alessandro, senior vice president of John Hancock Financial Services, the parent company, sees the Olympics as a marketing tool to push brand awareness, a familiar mantra on Madison Avenue.
"The Olympics represent the highest level of athletic achievement, trust and credibility," he says, symbolizing "what we sell in our business."
Still, some marketing experts question the wisdom of such a subtle ad campaign.
"The viewer is more interested in, `What's in it for me?' and this commercial doesn't answer that question," says Hal Ross, president of Mapes & Ross, a communications research company in Princeton, N.J.
"There is no real link between Hancock and the customer.
Yes, people will accept the message.
But this is a commercial that could just as easily be for Coke or any other product.
It's a nice, pleasant message.
But I'm not sure what the longterm gain for Hancock will be."
John Hancock is spending about $7 million to advertise on CBS's prime-time coverage of the Winter Olympics from Lillehammer, Norway, which began Saturday.
The 1994 Winter Olympics is the first of a four-year deal that began in July 1993.
In the contract, terms of which weren't disclosed, Hancock is the official life insurance sponsor of the Games.
A Hancock spokesman says "it is fair to assume" that the company will also buy commercial time on the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta, which will be broadcast on General Electric's NBC network.
Hancock can't promote its other financial services because it is the exclusive life insurance sponsor only.
There is no exclusive financial services sponsor, a Hancock spokesman says, because it is "too expensive."
Hancock skirted the issue by making some of its ads generic with the slogan: "Real Life.
Real Answers."
The spokesman notes, "All our services will get a bounce" out of the ads.
Although John Hancock advertised on the Olympics in past years, earlier commercials were product-oriented.
This time, while the creative approach varies, all the Hancock ads are sentimental and low-key.
In fact, three of them are devoid of any pictures.
Instead, just a name, age and occupation pop up on a black screen as a voiceover reads optimistic prose.
Example: Zoe Costello, a nine-year-old third grader, says the "coolest part" were a lot of athletes "my age" . . .
"The whole world was rooting for them . . .
It made me feel like I could do something great right now."
Other than the tone, the ads strikingly resemble those from Aetna Life & Casualty, which also feature words on an otherwise blank screen.
Whether or not the advertising works, the tie-in with the Olympics already has helped boost internal incentive programs at Hancock.
The company conducts contests, in which top-performing agents win trips to such spots as Paris, Rome and Hawaii.
Usually, about 60 agents who receive $100,000 in commissions their first year (meaning they sell about $250,000 worth of life-insurance premiums) win the trips.
This year, 120 agents qualified to make the trek to Lillehammer, Mr. D'Alessandro says.
"That's motivation."
He believes the Olympics incentive helped the company's life insurance business outpace the industry.
Hancock, citing figures from the Life Insurance Marketing and Research Association in Farmington, Conn., says its total life-insurance sales grew 14% between January and November 1993, compared with the year-earlier period, while the industry's growth rate was about 3%.
"This is a sales-push business," says Mr. D'Alessandro.
"We want our logo the bold signature of Mr. Hancock married with the Olympic rings.
Together, it makes for a potent marketing duo."
Ford Motor Co.'s Lincoln-Mercury division signed up to advertise on the Internet network via a 24-hour "Electronic Car Showroom" -- marking perhaps the first by a major marketer to reach "wired" consumers on the global computer network.
Lincoln-Mercury is setting up shop on the Electronic Newsstand, an electronic magazine-subscription service.
Browsers can choose to enter the cyber-showroom via the newsstand's main menu, said Jeffrey Dearth, chief executive of the Electronic Newsstand and president of the New Republic, a Washington magazine publisher.
Other "business information centers" are under discussion, he said, with advertisers in airlines, financial services and computers.
New Republic Inc. founded the Electronic Newsstand in July as a joint venture with Internet Co., a Cambridge, Mass., technical services company.
The service started with eight magazines, reprinting articles for users to read for free and also taking subscription orders.
Now, 60 magazines participate, and the newsstand averages 30,000 "accesses" a day, Mr. Dearth said.
Lincoln-Mercury plans to reprint catalogs and brochures, car reviews and leasing and pricing information about its models, said Kevin Holowicki, a vice president at Lincoln-Mercury's ad agency Young & Rubicam.
"It's not intrusive," Mr. Holowicki said.
"We may not be flooded with inquiries, but the ones we get will be from the right people."
Advertisers will watch closely for negative reaction from Internet users.
Mr. Dearth said he isn't expecting any.
"No one has to go in there," he said.
"It's a passive, consumer-friendly approach to advertising."
The cost to Lincoln-Mercury is $17,500 a year, he said.
Smith Barney Shearson, formed last year with the merger of Smith Barney Harris & Upham and Shearson Lehman Bros., put its estimated $20 million ad account in review, a company spokesman said, confirming reports in trade publications.
Incumbent Ogilvy & Mather, a unit of WPP Group, is defending the account, the spokesman said, less than a year after winning it following the merger.
Other agencies contacted about taking part in the review are BBDO and DDB Needham, both units of Omnicom Group; Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson; Young & Rubicam; and Saatchi & Saatchi's CME-KHBB, industry executives said.
Smith Barney Shearson is a unit of Travelers Inc., New York.
Ad Note. . . .
HEFTY: Mobil Chemical Co., a unit of Mobil Corp., moved its estimated $7 million Hefty plastic trash bags from Minneapolis agency Fallon-McElligott to Jordan, McGrath, Case & Taylor, New York, according to industry executives.
Mobil declined to comment.
