THERE ARE SEVERAL places in this newspaper where readers can find informed, intelligent reporting and analysis about the tax laws and strategies for paying lower taxes.
This isn't one of them.
I think about taxes as little as possible.
But I've spent many hours lately trying out the four most popular computer tax programs for 1993 returns.
So if you want an opinion about which of them makes it easiest to do your taxes, read on.
Here are the contenders: TurboTax by ChipSoft, at $40, and TaxCut by MECA Software, at $35, are the longtime leaders.
Personal Tax Edge by Parsons Technology, at $24, is a perennially solid, if unimaginative, performer.
And CA-Simply Tax by Computer Associates is a revised and repackaged revision of an older, minor product, being offered supposedly for free (if you consider a $9.95 handling charge to be free).
Each of these programs comes in versions for plain IBM-compatible computers running just the DOS operating system and for those running Microsoft's Windows software.
TaxCut and TurboTax also have versions for the Apple Macintosh computer.
I focused on the Windows versions, which tend to have the most complete set of features.
It's important to remember that these tax software packages are meant to help complete relatively uncomplicated tax filings, making a trying chore easier.
They fill out and print standard Internal Revenue Service and state tax forms, based on information you provide, by taking advantage of the computer's mathematical prowess.
Each offers a choice of filling out forms and related worksheets on the screen, or of answering questions in an interview format and letting the software enter the answers on the forms.
However, software isn't a substitute for a tax accountant or adviser.
The programs offer some general tax tips, but they can't help you make tricky judgments on how to treat various types of income and spending.
Indeed, they typically guarantee only that the tax returns they prepare will be mathematically accurate, not legally sound or financially clever.
THAT SAID, HERE'S a quick rundown on the four contenders.
My vote this year goes to TaxCut for Windows, which in my view does more than any other package to make paying taxes easy.
Last year, I thought TaxCut and TurboTax were fairly evenly matched, but MECA has put TaxCut ahead with a host of enhancements and design changes.
Users are greeted with a colorful series of large graphics collectively called the Navigator.
Instead of being labeled with arcane tax terms, they are labeled in plain English, i.e., "personal info" and "for self-employed."
Clicking on any of them brings up a choice of answering an interview or filling out a form.
Even if you pick the interview, you can see a live form at the bottom of the screen at all times and switch to it instantly to add numbers.
TaxCut excels at this visual presentation of data.
When you import figures from last year's return or from a personal-finance program, it lets you see them right next to the corresponding current-year entry.
The program runs crisply and prints paper forms quickly.
It even has a feature to delete itself from your computer.
My only gripes about TaxCut are that it still lacks a little summary window that constantly updates the tax you owe as you work on your return, and its state tax printouts, unlike the federal ones, aren't accepted for filing, so you have to copy them by hand onto blank state forms.
TurboTax for Windows is a perfectly fine package, but it hasn't changed much since last year.
It now has fallen behind TaxCut in ease of use, and it is slower.
CHIPSOFT HAS simplified some processes and terminology, and worked to make its state printouts acceptable for filing.
Unlike TaxCut, it provides a constantly updated summary of taxes owed.
But the only significant new feature is a deduction finder, which goes over a completed return before you file it and suggests deductions you might have missed.
Parsons' Personal Tax Edge for Windows is a solid, no-frills package that gets the job done for those needing less help.
It costs a bit less than TaxCut and TurboTax, and throws in special calculators for computing depreciation and projecting loan costs and savings growth.
CA-Simply Tax is the cheapest at $9.95, and the price is about right.
It's the weakest of the four, in my view, with confusing screen displays.
I also found it wasn't able to accept numbers longer than eight characters, counting periods and commas.
Thus, you can't enter an income of, say, 112,345.98.
You have to round it yourself before typing it in.
The two top programs this year offer CD-ROM based versions with multimedia content.
Again, I favor TaxCut's approach.
ChipSoft seemed to throw a bunch of programs onto its TurboTax platter, including a lot of IRS manuals, the J.K. Lasser tax guide and tax tips.
But they aren't well integrated, and reading the long text portions requires a lot of annoying scrolling and zooming.
In contrast, TaxCut's multimedia edition adds things directly to the main program, including spoken directions and 45 down-to-earth tax-tip video clips from Dan Caine, who wrote the program.
Now that you know what tax software to use, skim the rest of the paper to see how you might actually save some money this year.
Lord knows, I have no idea.
