"We meet in the midst of a nation brought to the verge of moral, political, and material ruin. . . .
The fruits of the toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for the few, unprecedented in the history of mankind; and the possessors of these, in turn, despise the republic and endanger liberty.
From the same prolific womb of government injustice are bred two great classes of tramps and millionaires."
This quote could have been lifted from yet another television drama disparaging the boom years of the 1980s.
In fact, it comes from the Populist Party platform adopted at the party's first convention in Omaha, Neb., on July 4, 1892.
Just as the takeover specialists of the 1980s have been condemned by managers, policy makers and the press, the so-called Robber Barons of the 19th century were similarly vilified.
But like their Populist predecessors, the "antigreed" pundits of the 1990s have missed a far larger phenomenon.
We are today in the midst of a third industrial revolution, comparable in scope to the previous two -- the first having occurred in England from the late 18th through the early 19th centuries, and the second taking place primarily in the U.S. from the mid- to the late 19th century.
Revolutions such as these lead to steadily rising productivity, dramatic reductions in labor costs and significant increases in living standards.
Many industries experience substantial excess capacity as fundamental technological, political, regulatory and economic forces radically change the global competitive environment.
The merger booms of the 1890s and the 1980s played a major role in helping industries restructure, thus speeding the adjustment to the new business environment.
While these revolutions brought prosperity, the large costs associated with the obsolescence of human and physical capital in certain industries generated substantial hardship, misunderstanding and bitterness.
In both the 19th and 20th centuries, criticism on the part of those who could not or would not adjust to modernization was followed by public policy changes that restricted the capital markets: in the 19th century, through the passage of antitrust laws restricting combinations; in the late 1980s, with the re-regulation of the credit markets, antitakeover legislation and restrictive court decisions.
These restrictions were based on specious claims about economic decline that are in complete conflict with the data now available.
The macroeconomic data for the 1980s show productivity gains that in many ways parallel those of the 19th century.
The watershed year was 1981: Total productivity growth in the manufacturing sector more than doubled after 1981, to 3.3% a year in the 1981-90 period from 1.4% a year in the 1950-81 period.
Nominal unit labor costs stopped their 17-year rise, and real unit labor costs declined 25%.
These lower labor costs came not from reduced wages or employment, but from increased productivity: Nominal and real hourly compensation increased by a total of 4.2% and 0.3% a year, respectively, over the 1981-89 period.
Manufacturing employment reached a low in 1983, but by 1989 it had experienced a small cumulative increase of 5.5%.
Meanwhile, the annual growth in labor productivity increased to 3.8% between 1981 and 1990, from 2.3% between 1950 and 1981.
A 30-year decline in capital productivity was reversed when the annual change in the productivity of capital increased to 2.03% between 1981 and 1990, from a negative 1.03% between 1950 and 1981.
During the 1980s, the real value of public firms' equity more than doubled to $3 trillion, from $1.4 trillion.
In addition, real median income increased at the rate of 1.8% a year between 1982 and 1989, reversing the 1% a year decrease that occurred from 1973 to 1982.
These gains in productivity, efficiency and welfare have been ignored by those politicians and media pundits who continue to characterize the 1980s as a "decade of greed and excess."
Particular loathing is expressed for mergers-and-acquisitions transactions, 35,000 of which occurred from 1976 to 1990, with a total value of $2.6 trillion.
The attack on M&A transactions has been centered on the high-yield (or "junk") bond market.
However, here again, the attacks on capital market instruments were ill-informed.
What has been missed here is the enormously productive impact that high-yield bonds had in opening the management of America's largest corporations to monitoring and discipline from the capital markets.
They also helped provide capital for newcomers to compete with existing firms in the product markets.
High-yield bonds opened the public capital markets to small, risky and unrated firms across the country, and made it possible for some of the country's largest firms to be taken over.
Capital market pressures such as these, while not perfect, can significantly increase efficiency by bringing about earlier adjustments and avoiding much of the waste generated when failure in the product markets forces downsizing and exit.
By exit we mean an industry shutting down its least efficient facilities to reduce excess capacity.
In industry after industry with excess capacity, managers fail to recognize that they themselves must downsize.
For example, widespread consumer acceptance of radial tires meant that world-wide tire capacity had to shrink by about 66% (because radials last three to five times longer than bias-ply tires).
Instead, companies like GenCorp (maker of General Tires) dramatically increased investment in R&D and marketing for their tire business.
Managers' attitudes in such situations were frequently equivalent to: "This is a very tough business.
We have to make major investments so that we will have a chair when the music stops."
Increased investment is hardly a socially optimal response for managers in a declining industry with excess capacity.
Even when managers do acknowledge the requirement for exit, it is often difficult for them to initiate the shutdown.
For managers implementing these decisions, shutting plants or liquidating the firm causes personal pain, creates uncertainty, and interrupts or sidetracks careers.
Rather than confronting this pain, managers generally resist such actions as long as they have the cash flow to subsidize the losing operations.
Indeed, firms with large positive cash flow will often invest in even more money-losing situations -- providing dramatic evidence of the failure of corporate internal control systems headed by boards of directors.
This is precisely where the forces of the capital markets -- the LBOs, leveraged restructurings, takeovers and venture capital firms -- did so much to rationalize investment and management decisions in the 1980s.
In fact, the restructuring strategies of LBO associations and venture capital funds provide a blueprint for managers and boards who wish to make their top-level control systems more efficient.
Both governance systems are characterized by:
-- CEOs who are seldom the chairman of the board, thus increasing the flexibility of a board to handle an inefficient CEO.
Finally, the close relationship between the LBO partners or venture fund partners and the operating companies facilitates the infusion of expertise from the board during times of crisis.
It is not unusual for a partner to join the management team, even as CEO, to help an organization through such emergencies.
Very importantly, there are market forces that operate to limit the human tendency to micromanage and thereby over-centralize management in the headquarters staff.
The era of the kind of market-enforced management discipline described above (referred to as the "control market") came to an end in late 1989 and 1990.
Intense controversy and opposition from corporate managers -- assisted by charges of fraud, the increase in default and bankruptcy rates, and insider trading prosecutions -- caused the shutdown of the control market through political, legal and regulatory means.
Leveraged buyouts and management buyouts fell to slightly more than $1 billion in 1991 from $80 billion in 1988.
In the same year, the total value of transactions fell to $96 billion from $340 billion in 1988.
The weakening of the control market as an effective influence on U.S. corporations has not ended the restructuring.
But it means that organizations have typically postponed addressing the problems they face until forced to by financial difficulties generated by the product markets.
Unfortunately, the delay means that some of these organizations will not survive -- or will survive as mere shadows of their former selves.
Mr. Jensen is a professor of business administration at Harvard Business School.
