Eo Inc., the tiny AT&T company that aimed to put little data communicators in the hands of millions, has gone back to the drawing board after selling fewer than 10,000 of its devices.
The company will soon announce a "refocus" and new investment strategy that positions its products as "smart cellular telephones," according to officials at American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Eo, Santa Clara, Calif.
An AT&T spokesman said the strategy change could include new equity partners in the company, although AT&T intends to remain the majority holder.
Eo's decision to position itself as a maker of intelligent phones underscores the problems that manufacturers, including AT&T, Apple Computer Inc. and others, are having selling the public on hand-held data communicators.
Just last week, Compaq Computer Corp. delayed its own program to bring data communicators to market because of concerns over the quality of pen-based software that allows such devices to convert handwriting to digital form.
At stake is a market with a potential value of billions of dollars as people flocking to wireless devices such as cellular phones look for ways to send a message over the same networks.
But manufacturers are still hunting for the right design, features and pricing.
Apple's Newton, which sells for about $1,000 with communications attachments, got off to a fast start but has since dwindled to about 7,500 units a month, primarily because some of its features didn't work too well.
Even so, Newton sales were a lot compared to those of Eo.
Industry experts assert that Eo has sold about 8,000 of its more expensive ($2,500) Etch-a-Sketch-sized Model 440 since last spring.
Declining to comment on Eo's sales numbers, Wink Grelis, Eo's director of customer marketing, said "We learned a lot from our 440 product . . .
A tablet-device-type of product is not something people relate to as much as communications."
Now Eo will revamp its line with a new flip-open model that has a little computer screen and a phone built into it, according to individuals who have seen prototypes.
An AT&T spokesman says the pricing will change drastically as well.
"The ballpark will be $1,000 to $1,500 range," he said.
In Eo's and AT&T's case, refocusing the sales pitch would appear to be a major defeat in their initial strategy to sell devices that allow consumers to communicate by sending each other written messages.
AT&T's Multimedia chief Robert M. Kavner once touted data communicators as the memo senders of the future, only to be trumped by former Apple Chairman John Sculley's hype-filled launch of the Apple Newton as the "personal digital assistant" of the future.
Now AT&T's Eo will have to sell its products as phones after all, with some computer smarts thrown in.
The Eo promotion followed Mr. Kavner's high-profile push of videophones at AT&T.
But the videophone has been a crashing failure with hardly any selling.
MCI Communications Corp., which announced its own videophone made by a U.K. manufacturer to rival AT&T's, never brought its phone to market in the U.S.
