The risk of kidnapping has become one of the conditions of doing business in Mexico.
Although Monday's kidnapping of the president of Grupo Financiero BanamexAccival is the most publicized in decades, security experts and executives say the problem has become so severe in Mexico that this country is now one of the most dangerous spots in Latin America.
"Mexico has been steadily growing as a problem area," says Mike Ackerman, who runs a security company in Miami that carries his name.
"It's not as bad as Colombia.
It's not as bad as Rio de Janeiro.
But it's probably third" in Latin America.
Another security expert, who asked that his name not be used, said he had tracked 145 kidnappings in Mexico just in 1993.
He said that 12 of those apparently involved ransoms of more than $1 million, with one payment totaling $2.5 million.
He said a further dozen of the cases involved ransoms of $500,000 to $1 million.
This expert said that when he began tracking Mexican kidnappings four years ago, the average ransom was less than $10,000.
Today, he says, ransoms average more than $100,000.
"The million-dollar ransoms bring up the average real fast," he says.
Victor Almeida, chief executive officer of Interceramic, a tile maker based in Chihuahua, says: "The problem is out of control.
You feel kind of desperate that you might be kidnapped.
You feel like you live in Nicaragua rather than Mexico."
The kidnapping problem has generally not received wide notice in Mexico because individuals taken have typically been little-known ranchers and farmers and have lived far from the capital.
But the business community seemed to have been roused to action by Monday's kidnapping of Alfredo Harp Helu, president of Banamex-Accival.
A group of prominent businessmen, for instance, formally called on the government to start attacking the problem.
Finance Minister Pedro Aspe said in an interview that "from a personal point of view, this is a tragedy.
Mr. Harp is one of the nicest guys and is well-liked and admired by everybody.
I hope and am confident that he will be returned safely as soon as possible."
That is very possible because, after the payment of a ransom, Mexican executives have almost always been freed unharmed.
The broader kidnapping problem will surely prove to be harder to solve.
For one thing, because the problem has been largely ignored, there aren't nearly as many professionally trained bodyguards and drivers in Mexico as in other Latin American countries.
Besides, macho Mexican executives have tended to insist that they don't need any protection.
When Mr. Harp was seized on Monday, for instance, he had only his driver with him, even though he is one of Mexico's wealthiest people and had appeared on a list discovered last year of possible kidnap targets put together by the Basque separatist group ETA.
The kidnappers had little trouble grabbing him, even though they reportedly were using just two Volkswagens to cut off Mr. Harp's Grand Marquis.
The problem is also complicated in Mexico because policemen and former policemen -- the type of men who generally act as bodyguards in most countries -- are reputed to be the kidnappers in many Mexican cases.
Partly because of the alleged involvement of the police, security experts say they don't think any of the kidnappers involved in a big-money case has ever been caught.
The security experts say that, especially with the publicity surrounding the Harp case, many wealthy Mexicans have finally begun to inquire about hiring bodyguards or specially trained drivers.
Still, because so many of Mexico's kidnappings happen in remote areas, while a rancher or farmer is driving around his property, the security experts say it will be hard to stop a determined kidnapper.
They also say wryly that the kidnappers have been getting so much practice that they are becoming good at snatching people.
So far, all the prominent targets in Mexico have been Mexican, and the experts say it's likely to stay that way for a while.
They say the Mexicans who are grabbed are typically much wealthier than any foreign executive living in Mexico.
In addition, it's much easier for kidnappers to arrange a payoff from a local source of money than from a foreign source.
