As an investment banker, I've had my share of mergers and acquisitions.
But for sheer excitement, meticulous planning, high interest and dividends of satisfaction, nothing beats mergers of the heart.
Helping people find one another and get married is my passion.
Matchmaking calls for the same talent you need to make it big on Wall Street: an appetite for research, imagination, intuition, hard work and chutzpah.
And the rewards are great too.
Where did I pick up this virus?
Way back in college, as a prank I told my shy friend Fred that one of the girls in English 101 was dying to meet him.
He shocked me by saying, "Great, set up a date."
Now I had to come up with a girl.
There were 14 in the class.
Which one would he like?
Which one might like him?
Finally I picked one, with the right personality and looks, and told her my friend had a crush on her.
She was intrigued and amused, and I introduced them that day after class.
It was spontaneous combustion.
Totally smitten with each other, they jabbered away, oblivious of me and the rest of the world.
Did I lose a friend?
No, I really gained a new one.
They're happily married and still jabbering up a storm.
I was hooked.
Marriage became my thing.
Drunk with the awesome power of matchmaking, I looked around and started to match every likely combination.
Amazingly, some of them worked.
What a rush of pleasure when it happens!
Here's the secret to matchmaking: Deep down, most singles are lonely and ready for romance, even if they don't admit it.
There are literally thousands of potential spouses out there for everyone.
The matchmaking job is to help people find each other and then let the hormones and genetic code go to work.
If you are tempted to follow in my footsteps as a personal mergers specialist, keep the following tip in mind: The great adventure of marriage often begins with a single step -- the blind date.
Alas, many singles avoid the blind date at all costs.
Oh, the agony and embarrassment!
Imagine being condemned to sharing a drink or lunch or even a whole evening with the wrong person.
I'm reminded of an old story.
There was once a very religious man who was barely able to support his sick wife and seven children.
He was pious and prayed every day.
But one day he reached the end of his patience.
"Dear God, I've been a good man all these years, and devout too.
I prayed, lit candles, helped my fellow man.
I gave to the less fortunate.
What would have been so terrible if you had helped me a little.
For years I prayed for a little good fortune.
Couldn't you have seen to it that I at least won a lottery?"
There was a great beam of light from the sky and a voice filled the room.
"Ah, Max, Max . . . couldn't you at least buy a ticket?"
The lesson: Never turn down a blind date, or you could miss your lucky ticket in the lottery of romance.
How do you fulfill the dream that so many singles have of finding their "one and only"?
That ephemeral status flowers with marriage.
The joint venture of marriage creates a bank of memories, pleasures and experiences that no one else shares with you.
It makes your spouse unique -- truly a "one and only."
A grateful grandmother, at her grandchild's wedding, once whispered in my ear, "Thank you.
For this kind of work you'll go straight to heaven when your time comes."
No corporate merger could ever match that bonus.
Mr. Fisher is president of A.D. Gilhart and Co., investment bankers.
His current book is "Haven't You Been Single Long Enough?"
(Wildcat Publishers).
