The Federal Communications Commission proposed rules that call for low-orbiting satellites to provide world-wide data and telephone service through hand-held devices.
The FCC's choice favored five of the six companies that had applied to provide the new service.
They are Iridium Inc., a Washington-based international consortium of companies led by Motorola Inc. of Schaumburg, Ill.; a unit of Cleveland-based TRW Inc.; Loral Qualcomm Satellite Services Inc., Seabrook, Md.; and Ellipsat Corp. and Constellation Communications Inc., both based in Washington, D.C.
The commission's decision was a blow to the sixth company, American Mobile Satellite Corp. of Reston, Va., which proposed using a stationary satellite for the system.
The company, which was previously awarded radio spectrum for satellite services, is owned by McCaw Cellular Coummunications Inc., General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Communications Inc., and paging giant Mtel Corp.
Commission officials compared the new system to a global cellular phone system that could reach anywhere and provide such services as disaster management and environmental monitoring as well as paging, facsimile transmission and cargo tracking.
By its action, the agency decided to use satellites that will orbit the Earth at a low altitude of about 600 miles.
Most commercial communications satellites currently in use are in fixed positions about 22,000 miles from the Earth.
The FCC will take public comments on the proposed rules until May 5, and will then issue final technical, financial and construction requirements.
The commission said it expects to license at least two systems, which would have to meet those requirements.
The proposed rules also included suggested ways of apportioning the radio spectrum for companies to offer these services.
The mobile satellite systems are expected to become part of the national information superhighway in the U.S.
The FCC said the new system, which would interconnect with land-based telephone and cellular systems, would enhance competition in current cellular telephone markets.
Commission officials also predicted they would give Americans in rural areas that aren't linked to a broad communications infrastructure access to one.
"Systems like Iridium's will bring communications to places where communications never existed before, allowing countries to leapfrog into the 21st century," said John Windolph, a spokesman for Motorola.
Although mobile satellite systems will make everything from telephone service to business communications services available in other countries, they'll require the U.S. to coordinate with other countries on what they want licensed within their borders.
