Northwest Airlines and its partner, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, cut leisure fares to Europe, the Middle East and Africa for spring, summer and some fall travel, and other big carriers indicated they would follow.
The fare cuts of as much as 30%, which also include flights to India, are unusual because they are for travel between April 1 and Oct. 31, a period when travel begins to pick up and then peaks in the summer months.
"This is awful early to do something," said a spokesman for Delta Air Lines, which has the most trans-Atlantic flights of any U.S. carrier.
Still, the Delta spokesman said the Atlanta-based airline "will make ourselves competitive" with the Northwest/KLM cuts.
Other carriers with significant business abroad echoed those comments.
In Chicago, the United Airlines unit of UAL Corp. said it would be competitive in markets where it competes with Northwest and KLM.
The American Airlines unit of AMR Corp., Fort Worth, Texas, said it, too, would be competitive with Northwest.
The Northwest fare cuts, and the inclination of others to quickly follow, show how competitive trans-Atlantic flying has become.
Indeed, these latest cuts pick up almost where previous ones left off.
Last fall, most of the carriers cut leisure fares to Europe for travel through March 15.
Northwest, the St. Paul, Minn., unit of Northwest Airlines Corp., billed the cuts as the first joint sale between it and KLM, and a chance for travelers to see "new and exciting and exotic markets at a value price."
The two airlines have said they plan more cooperative efforts and said this was an example.
Many of the routes, especially those outside Europe, require travel through KLM's hub in Amsterdam.
Northwest said the lower fares apply to 89 destinations.
Among other restrictions, the tickets require a stay over a Saturday night and aren't refundable.
Tickets for travel to India, the Middle East and Africa must be purchased by Feb. 11.
Tickets to Europe must be purchased by Feb. 28, but the airline said the "best bargains" are available on tickets bought by Feb. 11.
Among the ticket prices cited by Northwest: $638 for round-trip travel between Detroit and Paris, $758 between San Francisco and Amsterdam, $898 between Boston and Tel Aviv, and $1,258 between New York and Bombay, India.
