Lawyers are prohibited from charging clients nonrefundable fees for most kinds of work, New York's highest court said in a groundbreaking ruling.
No other state's high court has so straightforwardly prohibited the most common types of nonrefundable fees, which are prevalent in criminal and family law.
Under such fee arrangements, an attorney typically will charge a client thousands of dollars up front -- and then keep the money even if the client decides to drop the litigation the next day.
In the case before the influential New York court, attorney Edward M. Cooperman of Garden City, N.Y., took upfront retainer fees ranging from $5,000 to $15,000 in various criminal and estate cases.
The clients discharged Mr. Cooperman, but he wouldn't give back the money.
A disciplinary committee suspended him for two years, and the high court affirmed the decision.
"If special nonrefundable retainers are allowed to flourish, clients would be relegated to hostage status in an unwanted fiduciary relationship," the New York court said in a ruling that will be closely read by courts and bar associations around the country.
New York has more than 60,000 lawyers in its state bar association, and the state's rules for their conduct sometimes spill over into other states.
The New York court said its ruling can be applied retroactively.
Mr. Cooperman argued that he complied with ethics rules in existence at the time that he took the fees.
But the court responded that "the conduct of attorneys is not measured by how close to the edge of thin ice they skate."
Criminal lawyers and some bankruptcy attorneys say they use nonrefundable fees as a form of insurance, just in case clients decide they can't, or won't, pay their bills.
Matrimonial lawyers across the country say the fees protect them, because clients are apt to switch lawyers or reconcile with their spouses midway through a divorce.
Some clients even briefly hire a high-profile divorce lawyer just to prevent their spouse from retaining that attorney.
Attorneys and academics differed over the scope of yesterday's ruling.
Lester Brickman, an ethics professor at Yeshiva University in New York whose writings were cited by the court, said the ruling is momentous because it prohibits nonrefundable fees of all sorts.
"With the legal profession increasingly coming into public disdain," Prof. Brickman added, "the pressure on state supreme courts around the country to adopt the outcome that the Court of Appeals reached today will be overwhelming."
But others, including Stephen Gillers, a legal-ethics professor at New York University, said the ruling applies only to fee agreements about very specific legal services.
"If the lawyer says, `My fee is $10,000 for this appeal, and that is nonrefundable,' that is not permitted," he said.
"But if the lawyer says, `My fee is $10,000 in case of a takeover attempt, and that is nonrefundable,' that would be permitted," Prof. Gillers said, because the lawyer is being paid to be available generally -- not for any specific service.
Steven Finell, a Manhattan lawyer who wrote a brief for the high court from the New York State Bar Association, said criminal lawyers should be able to live with the court's opinion by charging a minimal initial fee supplemented by an advance for future services.
But under the ruling, this advance must be refunded if the lawyer doesn't perform the anticipated work, Mr. Finell added.
Several months ago, New York divorce lawyers were barred by the state's chief judge, Judith Kaye, from charging nonrefundable fees.
"What New York is doing is putting the family lawyers out of business.
They really are," lamented Lynne Z. GoldBikin, a Norristown, Pa., divorce lawyer and chair-elect of the American Bar Association family-law section.
Law Notes. . .
JUDICIAL CANDIDATE: Controversial Clinton judicial nominee Rosemary Barkett cleared a hurdle on the way to a likely confirmation.
The Senate Judiciary Committee approved the nomination 11-7, with the voting largely along party lines.
Judge Barkett, who would sit on the federal appeals court based in Atlanta, is the chief justice of the Florida Supreme Court.
Some Republicans have accused her of injecting her liberal political views into judicial decisions, especially in death-penalty cases.
The nomination next goes to the full Senate, which isn't expected to vote on it until next month at the earliest.
NOTED: The former Shea & Gould real-estate chairman, Charles A. Goldstein, is moving from the recently disbanded firm to Sutherland, Asbill & Brennan in New York, where he will head its real-estate department.
Going with him are partner Arnold S. Lehman and one associate.
