The Federal Trade Commission said it wants to block a hospital merger in Pueblo, Colo., on antitrust grounds, in a move that may have major implications for other hospitals' consolidation plans.
During the past 16 months, U.S. hospitals have been negotiating mergers at an unusually brisk rate.
The trend has been fueled by an industry-wide belief that mergers will help hospitals to cut costs.
Hospital executives also want to join forces in the hopes of boosting their clout in dealing with large insurers and any changes brought about by the White House push for health-care reform.
In the Pueblo case, however, the FTC contended that the merger would "substantially lessen competition" in hospital services for Pueblo County, Colo.
The proposed merger would unite the county's only two hospitals.
Mark Whitener, the acting deputy director of the FTC's bureau of competition, added: "It's our belief that this merger would cause prices to consumers to rise."
The FTC's action was quickly assailed by the American Hospital Association, a trade group that represents almost 5,000 U.S. hospitals.
The hospital group called the antitrust case "a chilling message to hospitals trying to reduce duplication of services and serve their communities more cost-efficiently."
Executives of the two hospitals involved in the proposed merger also voiced dismay over the FTC's decision.
Those hospitals are 326-bed St. Mary-Corwin Hospital and Parkview Episcopal Medical Center, a 229-bed facility.
In a joint statement, the two hospitals contended that they could face "serious financial difficulties" if the merger doesn't go through.
The hospitals added that they found the government's overall stand on health-care mergers "very confusing."
Last week, the Justice Department gave its go-ahead to a merger in a different two-hospital town, Manchester, N.H.
Meanwhile, the Clinton administration has spelled out plans for sweeping health-system reform which, in at least some respects, would concentrate power in the hands of large entities.
To pursue its antitrust case, the FTC said it will seek a preliminary injunction in Denver federal court blocking the merger.
If the FTC wins such an injunction, the hospitals said, they could either fight the case in court, decide to collaborate on a smaller scale, or abandon merger plans entirely.
Hospital antitrust specialists say they will be watching the Pueblo case closely to see if it sheds new light on two legal issues that often come up in hospital-merger cases.
One contentious issue involves the size of the market in which the hospitals compete.
The FTC staff is pressing for a narrow definition, arguing that the hospitals have a monopoly in Pueblo County.
The hospitals have argued for a broader view, contending that they may soon compete with hospitals in Denver and Colorado Springs for patients.
