The news on the economic front yesterday was so good that the bond and stock markets couldn't stand it.
In the fourth quarter of 1993, the Commerce Department says, the economy grew not at the 5.9% annual rate it originally reported but at 7.5% -- a pace that topped practically all forecasts and was the best quarterly jump in 10 years.
Consumers were buying more, corporations investing more and factories exporting more than anyone had believed.
Meanwhile, the manufacturing sector, according to a purchasing managers' survey, continued to expand in February.
Business for some companies had gotten good enough to put through some price increases, the survey indicated.
Not surprisingly, the bond market smelled inflation, and promptly took a shellacking.
Fearful that inflation would push up interest rates, which would depress the prices of fixed-income debt securities, bond prices yesterday fell a hefty 1.5 points, which translates into a $15 decline for a bond with a face value of $1,000.
For most of the day, stocks followed bonds south, the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropping by 45 points at one point before closing down 22.79 points.
Forget that great GDP growth number: Stock traders worried that if rates went up, higher yields on fixed-income securities might draw investment money out of stocks.
But for all of the bloodletting on Wall Street, the inflation picture is anything but clear.
It is murky, and therefore possibly a little more positive than yesterday's market sell-off would suggest.
"There's a lot more fear of inflation than there is inflation," says David Wyss, research director of DRI/McGraw Hill Inc.
"The purchasing managers' report has been a lousy indicator of inflation.
I see very few signs of inflationary pressure."
Other observers agree.
"It's all psychological," says Simon Nocera, director of global fixed-income research and a portfolio manager at GT Capital in San Francisco.
Yet perceptions matter, and the perception in the bond market yesterday was that the economy might be overheating.
Some traders are convinced that the headlong growth in the fourth quarter heralds continuing increases in demand for products, labor and other resources in the economy -- and that means prices will rise.
Economists, however, uniformly doubt that the torrid growth pace is lasting even into the current quarter.
Forecasts for first-quarter growth -- tempered by earthquakes in California, snow-clogged roads in much of the nation and higher taxes on the wealthy -- are in the 2.6%-to-3.7% range.
For the full year, estimates of inflation-adjusted increases in the gross domestic product, the total value of goods and services produced in the nation, range from about 3.0% to 4.0%.
That is still healthy but a far cry from the fourth-quarter pace.
"The economy has a lot of momentum right now, but definitely not 7.5% worth," says Roger Brinner, director of U.S. forecasting for DRI/McGraw Hill.
He predicts real economic growth at a 3.5% annual rate in the first quarter.
Growth in the 1993 fourth quarter, says Kurt Karl, head of macroeconomic forecasting for the WEFA Group, "borrowed strength from the 1994 first quarter.
The question is the magnitude."
Trade Patterns Much of the revision in fourth-quarter GDP was due to an improvement in merchandise-trade figures in December.
More U.S. products are being sold abroad and, as a result, net exports were revised up by $11.5 billion.
Consumer spending was also stronger than originally thought, rising at a 4.6% annual rate, vs. the 4.0% estimated earlier.
Business investment in capital equipment was stronger, too, soaring at a 24.9% annual rate.
Economists contend that the composition of that growth suggests it can't be sustained.
For one thing, Europe and Japan -- key trading partners -- are still weak economically, and analysts say the U.S. probably won't increase exports by more than 20% again in the first quarter.
Also, the foul weather that kept many consumers inside means that consumer spending isn't likely to be as robust.
And economists doubt the hefty growth rate in business investment will continue.
The labor market is also a big question mark.
Jobs increased only slightly in January, a development attributed to the weather.
The report of February's employment comes out Friday, and many expect the earthquake and snowstorms to have damped job growth again.
Some economists have revised their GDP forecasts for the year slightly upward, but most are waiting to see the jobs data.
Yesterday's purchasing managers' index offered some hope that factories continued to add jobs last month.
For the first time in nearly five years, the employment component of the index did not fall.
It registered 50%, indicating no job cuts or add-ons.
Production, orders and backlogs all rose in February, but at a lesser rate than in January, indicating the manufacturing sector has cooled a bit but is still growing.
The Commerce Department also said yesterday that construction spending declined an inflation-adjusted 1.6% in January.
The drop, involving both public and private construction, was blamed on bad weather.
Construction spending grew 2.0% in December.
So where does that leave inflation?
Unquestionably, some companies are raising prices -- and many rises, unlike in the past, are sticking.
"Pricing has surprised all of us in the chemical industry in 1994," says an executive from a major chemical company.
He says companies have been raising U.S. prices several percentage points for all major categories of chemicals, excluding caustic chemicals, and customers have accepted the increases.
Similarly, the liner-board industry gained back some lost ground by raising prices twice since last October.
The latest increase, a hefty 10%, brings the price per ton to $340.
The price of liner board, which was $410 a ton in 1989, is a good indicator of economic health because a broad array of industries use liner-board boxes for shipping.
Westvaco Corp. and Union Camp Corp., two major suppliers, say their customers have paid the new prices without much grumbling.
Economist Michael Cosgrove, editor of the Econoclast, sees all this as an inflation alarm.
"What the purchasing-managers report and other major indicators suggest is that we are in for a period of rising prices," he says.
Although he hasn't raised his 1994 inflation forecast from 3.5%, which is higher than many estimates, he believes continued pressure from producer prices could well cause consumer prices to be rising at an annual rate of 4% by year end.
But Mr. Cosgrove appears to be in the minority.
Bruce Steinberg, an economist at Merrill Lynch & Co., says few industries are likely to move close enough to capacity this year to cause production bottlenecks and significantly higher prices.
Mr. Steinberg also notes that unit labor costs, which directly affect the prices consumers pay for goods, are declining.
In testimony before a congressional committee last week, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan acknowledged that some prices are rising, but he said there is no reason to believe the U.S. is in the midst of an inflation outbreak.
"The purchasing managers' report has the markets in an uproar, which I think is inappropriate," says Donald Straszheim, also a Merrill Lynch economist.
"There is plenty of unused labor and unused capacity out there.
The fundamentals on inflation have not deteriorated."
What's more, fast-growing small companies say they still are having difficulty getting price increases to stick, according to a survey by Coopers & Lybrand released yesterday.
Nearly half of the 386 chief executives interviewed in January see this holding down their companies' growth over the next 12 months.
Notably, the pricing component of the purchasing managers' index tends to pick up pricing pressures that will occur six to eight months down the road.
More immediate measures of inflation still appear quite tame.
Overall consumer prices were unchanged in January, and the fixed weighted price index, the broadest measure of inflation, increased at only a 2.3% annual rate in the fourth quarter.
In its GDP report yesterday, the Commerce Department revised the inflation component upward only slightly.
All of this, of course, could change quickly.
For the moment, though, the Clinton administration is sticking to its inflation forecast for the year: 3.0%, fourth quarter over fourth quarter, compared with 2.8% last year.
Senior officials yesterday stressed the need to look at several months of numbers before concluding a trend of higher prices had taken hold.
But tell that to the bond market.
Most traders say they are perplexed.
They say they see little reason for investors to worry about rising inflation, though those investors are clearly quite concerned.
"Ultimately, the bearish psychology runs against the economic fundamentals," says Mr. Nocera of GT Capital.
"My fundamental view of the world hasn't changed, but the psychology of the bond markets has."
Since Feb. 3, the day before the Fed raised short-term interest rates, the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond has plunged nearly six points.
An investor who bought a bond that day and sold it yesterday would have lost more than 6% in principal.
At the same time, the yield for that bond has risen to 6.77%, the highest level since last June.
(Yields move inversely to prices because an investor receives the same coupon payment for a fixed-rate bond no matter what price he paid for the bond.)
"The market is still spooked," says Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Securities Inc.
"If you ask me if inflation is expected to be a problem this year, I'd say no."
But investors are "at least allowing for the fact that the economy is growing more quickly than most people had assumed that it would," he says.
There has been some speculation that hedge funds are partly to blame for the huge drops in the bond market recently.
That is because many of these big private investment funds borrow money in the form of short-term margin loans in order to maximize their returns.
This risky strategy worked beautifully as bond yields dropped, prices rose and short-term interest rates remained low.
But when the Fed began raising shortterm rates, the costs of carrying these loans rose, too.
Meanwhile, the value of many of the bonds that these funds had bought with the borrowed funds dropped.
The hedge funds were hit by a double whammy, and many of them now are believed to be selling bonds hand over fist.
Another culprit has been some wrong calls on Wall Street.
Some traders, including Goldman, Sachs & Co., were forecasting lower interest rates this year.
So, many of these dealers loaded up on Treasury securities in anticipation of another rally.
When rates rose, these huge inventories of Treasury bonds starting losing millions of dollars in value, and bond traders began unloading them.
As a result, "the fear factor has stayed pretty high," says John Costas, head of government bond trading at CS First Boston Corp.
In the end, bond traders are going with the flow.
More and more of them, Mr. Costas says, now expect interest rates to rise -- even though they don't see severe inflation on the horizon.
That is the psychological momentum of the market at work, the traders say.
Mr. Costas says the emerging conventional wisdom is that the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond will stabilize at about 7.25%.
Late yesterday, the 30-year bond yielded 6.78%.
What does all that mean for the average working American?
Since the Fed tightened short-term rates, the average rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage has risen to 7.55% from 7.08%, says HSH Associates of Butler, N.J., a publisher of mortgage data.
For a new home buyer who is borrowing $200,000, that translates into a $63.92 higher monthly payment.
John Bussey contributed to this article.
