A lawyer commissioned to conduct an inquiry into the scandal-ridden Vancouver Stock Exchange is recommending that the British Columbia government make sweeping changes in the way the market is regulated.
James Matkin, appointed by the provincial government last May in the wake of new scandals and death threats against a Vancouver business reporter, is proposing that the government dismantle the nine-year-old British Columbia Securities Commission.
In its place, Mr. Matkin recommends that the government establish a Securities and Exchange Board.
"The BCSC's credibility in the business community has been eroded," Mr. Matkin said in his report.
It has been, he argued, "too passive in its regulatory activity and over-occupied with the prosecution and adjudication of securities abuse."
A better system, Mr. Matkin said, is one that allows regulators themselves not only to seek out and punish those who violate rules, but to develop ways to prevent violations from occurring.
He maintained that regulatory systems that work well elsewhere in Canada may not be the answer in Vancouver.
In many ways, the proposed Securities and Exchange Board would bear more resemblance to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission than to any Canadian regulatory body.
For example, Mr. Matkin's key proposal is to separate policy-making and adjudication responsibilities at the new regulatory body.
Under his plan, administrative law judges would handle the latter, freeing members of the board to develop solutions for some of the Vancouver exchange's chronic problems -- market manipulation and insider trading, among them.
Mr. Matkin said he hopes a bifurcated system would attract new types of board members to the regulatory arena, such as lawyers, accountants and money managers, who wouldn't have the time or interest in the adjudication responsibilities, but who would be of great assistance in policy-making.
Other recommendations contained in Mr. Matkin's final report range from regulating Vancouver's notorious, freewheeling stock promoters to giving investors access to real-time reports on trading activity by corporate insiders.
Currently, about half of that data is filed very late, or not at all, Mr. Matkin said.
Mr. Matkin also proposes ensuring that brokers have the needed staff to conduct due-diligence reviews.
In addition, he wants to allow aggrieved investors to file class-action suits.
Mr. Matkin's proposals are likely to come in for a rough ride in Vancouver, where, unsurprisingly, regulators are united in their dislike of Mr. Matkin's key proposal -- the new securities board.
Frank Giustra, president of Yorkton Securities Inc., one of the largest Vancouver-based brokerage firms, said he agrees only with Mr. Matkin's listing of the problems facing regulators in Vancouver.
"But he hasn't offered a solution to those problems," Mr. Giustra said.
"Instead, he's proposing an elaborate, costly, time-consuming new regulatory structure. . . .
If that's all he's saying, we've wasted a lot of time and money."
John Woods, editor of Canada Stockwatch, a Vancouver-based newsletter, believes Mr. Matkin couldn't have solved the problems just by recommending more resources for the securities commission, as Mr. Giustra and others would have liked.
"We really need substantive changes at the top if we're ever going to convince investors that real changes are happening, not just rhetoric," Mr. Woods said.
The future of Mr. Matkin's recommendations now lies with British Columbia's socialist government.
While a 1978 report drawing similar conclusions about the need for reform fell on deaf ears, the New Democratic Party, embarrassed by negative publicity and critical of the exchange in the past, may find it difficult not to implement reforms.
