With all the ominous rumblings coming from Europe's economies, it's easy to miss this frail whisper: The recovery has begun.
After two years of recession, corporate executives and economists in Europe agree that the worst is over -- though it could be quite a while before business really picks up.
Lower interest rates and devalued currencies have boosted exports and encouraged stock markets.
The European Union Commission forecasts a 1.3% inflation-adjusted expansion among its member countries this year after a 0.4% contraction in 1993.
Inflation, meanwhile, remains surprisingly low, giving Europe's central banks plenty of room to spur their economies further in 1994.
"The lowest point has been reached and customers are coming back and speeding orders," says Willy Snaed, vice president of Belgium's Bekaert Group, a big wire maker based in Kortrijk, along the French border.
Though not expecting substantial improvement, the company says "there may be some light."
Chupa Chups, a closely held candy maker in Spain, can already taste the recovery.
After a flat 1993, it anticipates a 20% to 30% increase in its $200 million in revenue this year -- the result of the devaluation in the peseta.
"I'm relieved," says Miguel Otero, head of the company's international business.
"Overall orders are a bit improved," adds Manfred Soehnlein, head of economic research at German machinery maker Mannesmann AG, which says its production will rise 1.5% to 2.5% in 1994 after declines in 1992 and 1993.
With most new orders coming from outside of Western Europe, however, "it will take a lot of time to reach previous levels."
The U.S. economy, meanwhile, is picking up momentum even without the boost in demand for its products that would accompany a European recovery.
With U.S. manufacturers increasingly competitive in global markets, growth in Europe could only make things better.
Despite the slump, Western Europe still accounted for about one-quarter of all U.S. merchandise exports last year.
"The outlook for the U.S. hinges critically on exports," says Jerry Jasinowski, president of the National Association of Manufacturers.
Exports of all kinds now amount to 10% of total output in the U.S., small by European standards but significant.
WEFA Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., forecasting firm, predicts that the U.S. economy will grow by a respectable 3% this year, partly because it anticipates modest recoveries in Europe and in Japan.
Like the U.S. and British recoveries before it, the recovery in continental Europe won't be very satisfying initially.
With unemployment near 12%, real income flat and most economies forecast to grow at a rate of 1% or less this year, not everyone will see much evidence of recovery.
And with big structural problems hindering European industry and stretched government budgets, it could be more than a year before growth reaches respectable levels of 2% or 3%.
Says Ian McCafferty, National Westminster's European economist: "We've bottomed out in much of Europe and in the first half we'll see the restoration of confidence and the pickup of activity."
Still, he cautions, "as far as the man on the street is concerned, that's not a perceptive recovery."
There are many caveats, in fact.
Growth throughout the continent won't come near levels needed to reduce the ranks of Europe's 22 million unemployed.
And much of the good news so far has been contributed by governments' fiscal stimuli and exports rather than true improvement.
The European consumer, it seems, is still napping.
Moreover, Europe's economic restructuring has only just begun.
It could take years to overcome Europe's rigid labor markets, high production costs, heavily regulated markets, long-term unemployment and public-sector debt.
If not corrected, economists warn that the structural handicaps could stunt growth.
There's also concern that the government deficit spending used to stimulate the recovery could have the reverse effect if healthy growth doesn't follow soon.
At the EU summit in Brussels last month , European leaders agreed to increase annual spending on infrastructure projects to 20 billion European Currency Units ($22.6 billion) from an already budgeted 12 billion ECUs to help create jobs.
But in Belgium and Italy, where government debt exceeds 100% of GDP, interest payments already eat up about a quarter and a third, respectively, of the governments' budgets.
Higher exports aren't enough by themselves to spark recovery.
Though shipments are rising, the benefits are limited because Western European countries do more than two-thirds of their export trading with each other.
But while few doubt these factors will slow the growth, there's an equal amount of confidence that the economies are growing.
Economists and governments have forecast growth for virtually every country in Europe in 1994.
Even Germany, the largest economy in Europe and the worst hit by the recession, may finally be recovering, albeit slower than many other countries.
Western Germany could show a modest 0.5% improvement, some economists say.
The government's independent Council of Economic Advisers, perhaps weighing the impact of new taxes this year, forecasts zero growth after a contraction of 1.9% in 1993.
GDP in both the second and third-quarters showed 0.5% real growth from the preceding quarter.
Eastern Germany's economy could show about 7% GDP growth this year after expanding by 6.3% in 1993.
The good news from Germany is that annual inflation is seen settling to around 3% from a 1993 average of 3.5%, despite continued high government spending for German unity.
The Federation of German Industry's business climate indicator has shown several months of improvement.
Says economist Siegfried Utzig: "We see more and more positive aspects in the economic situation."
After shrinking by 1% in 1993, France's GDP should rise 1% in 1994.
Inventories have been falling and the French housing market has shown some life.
Countries that broke from the European monetary system and devalued their currencies are expected to see export-driven growth exceeding that of their neighbors.
The EU Commission expects the U.K.'s economy to expand by 2.5%.
The London Business School's Center for Economic Forecasting says Italy's economy could grow by 2.5% in 1994 after slipping 0.1% last year, while National Westminster sees Spain's economy growing at 1.4% after a 1.2% contraction.
