Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. has been the subject of a Securities and Exchange Commission probe since last May, according to the company's general counsel.
The investigation centers on the licensing agreements signed by Spectrum, Manhasset, N.Y., with numerous manufacturers, including American Telephone & Telegraph Co., and public statements by Spectrum officials about the value of those pacts, said Spectrum general counsel Christopher P. Franco.
His comments contrasted sharply with those made earlier yesterday by the wireless data company's chairman, John Sculley, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.
Mr. Sculley's remarks ran on the Dow Jones News Service.
Yesterday Spectrum shares plunged $1 to $6.3125 on the Nasdaq Stock Market after a CNBC report by columnist Dan Dorfman of rumors that Mr. Sculley would resign and that Spectrum was the subject of an SEC investigation.
In the interview, Mr. Sculley called the report "bizarre."
The former Apple Computer Inc. chairman said he had no plans to quit his job and that Spectrum was not the subject of an SEC investigation.
"Somebody gave Dan Dorfman a bum steer," he said.
Later a company spokesman reiterated Mr. Sculley's statements insisting "there are no probes going on" at Spectrum.
But Mr. Franco called The Wall Street Journal last night asking for a "clarification" and explaining that Mr. Sculley said he had been "misquoted" about there being no investigation.
When pressed, the lawyer said the SEC has been investigating Spectrum since May 1993.
The probe stems from the wild ride Spectrum's stock took last spring.
The shares skyrocketed after it touted a patent-licensing deal with AT&T and Spectrum President Peter Caserta said the deal would be worth "hundreds of millions of dollars" in new business.
The stock later plunged when AT&T disavowed the projection.
Mr. Franco said there was no legal requirement to disclose the investigation since the SEC investigators had defined it as a "confidential, non-public inquiry."
Mr. Sculley joined Spectrum in October, after leaving the struggling Apple.
Spectrum has patents that could apply to a potentially huge market, such as laptop computers and "personal communicators," which use wireless networks.
Spectrum in November agreed to settle a class-action lawsuit filed by shareholders who charged Spectrum with inflating claims about its deal with AT&T. Spectrum agreed to pay the shareholders $1.5 million in cash and issue 750,000 warrants to buy Spectrum stock at or above market prices.
