Sega Enterprises Ltd. and MCA Inc. are planning to build a new entertainment attraction as part of MCA's Universal Studios Hollywood complex in Southern California, according to individuals close to the situation.
The two companies have commissioned architects and designers to build an attraction that will combine Sega's expertise in high-tech arcade games with MCA's movie and television themes.
People familiar with the plan say construction could begin as early as this year in Universal City, Calif., where MCA operates a theme park, an 18-screen movie theater, a music amphitheater and a retail complex called "CityWalk."
The cost of the new complex was said to be perhaps $20 million.
The partnership is Sega's most serious attempt yet to move up from its lucrative video-arcade business into the competitive U.S. market for larger entertainment attractions.
While the Tokyo-based videogame maker has talked about competing with the Walt Disney Co., Disney has looked at such midsized complexes and has so far decided they don't make much economic sense.
At the same time, the Sega-MCA alliance highlights the potential conflicts emerging as hardware, software, and entertainment companies come together to create new forms of interactive "multimedia" entertainment.
MCA's parent, Osaka-based consumer-electronics giant Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., competes against Sega in the home video-game market through its tie-up with 3DO Co.
Sega, MCA, and Matsushita all declined comment on the new project.
Sega, which derives nearly half its revenue from arcade operations and sales of arcade games, operates a string of upscale video arcades in Japan, and has recently started exporting the concept to the U.S.
To Sega, however, that business merely laid the groundwork for so-called "high-tech" theme parks that blend amusement-park rides with "virtual-reality" video-game technology.
Sega plans to open a prototype high-tech park in Osaka in March, with a full-blown version park to follow in Yokohama in July.
Using the Universal City, Calif., site as a showcase, Sega and MCA intend to build a prototype of an attraction that blends the companies' different approaches to entertainment.
Unlike Sega's planned high-tech parks in Japan, the new complex likely will include not just eight-player flight simulation and race-car games and other virtual-reality attractions, but games and rides employing MCA's movie-making expertise and perhaps even themes culled from its movies and television shows.
MCA's Universal Pictures unit produced "Jurassic Park," "E.T., the Extra-Terrestrial" and the "Back to the Future" series.
The cost of the 30,000-square-foot to 50,000-square-foot complex would be well below the billions spent by MCA and Disney for giant theme parks, but considerably more than the estimated $5.5 million spent to build "VirtuaLand," Sega's souped-up arcade for the new Luxor resort in Las Vegas.
It's also much less than the seven billion yen (roughly $65 million) Sega estimates its Yokohama high-tech park will cost.
Discussions took place between Sega President Hayao Nakayama and MCA Executive Vice President Skip Paul, the head of MCA's interactive-multimedia effort, at last month's Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, say individuals.
The Sega-Matsushita competition isn't thought to be a problem, these people say.
The new complex is an MCA project, and "location-based" entertainment isn't related to the living-room wars between Sega, Matsushita and Nintendo Co.
