The European Union said it would analyze economic effects of a Swiss highway ban on foreign trucks crossing the Alps, forcing them to be put on trains when the measure takes effect in 10 years.
In a Swiss referendum last weekend, 52% of voters unexpectedly approved the initiative, backed by environmental groups.
It could have far-reaching effects on European transport policy.
Proponents hailed the vote as a signal that European governments must focus on rail and road combinations, reducing air and noise pollution.
Truck traffic in the Swiss Alps has increased to 2,500 vehicles daily from 80 in 1980, and is forecast to expand to 6,000 by the end of this decade.
Switzerland is building an Alps rail axis for at least $10.3 billion to increase freight capacity.
The Swiss government, which opposed the initiative, fears EU retaliation.
The Swiss Alps route is the quickest link between Northern and Southern Europe.
Switzerland already has strict truck traffic rules, such as weight, night and Sunday curbs.
Through traffic is the most sensitive Swiss-EU issue.
The advertising sector in Britain may get an untraditional boost -- from the Church of England.
The country's official faith has been faulted for being out of touch with its congregations, which have been shrinking for decades.
So the church is preparing to deliver its message as though it were a consumer product.
Church advisers, noting no ethical ban, recommended ad campaigns as a "creative, effective, appropriate, even amusing" way to reach more people.
President Vaclav Havel and Jewish groups assailed the Czech Parliament's rejection of a bill to return all property confiscated by Nazi Germany and former Czechoslovak governments.
Critics blamed an amendment stipulating that expropriated property held by the state be returned to Jews but that municipal or private entities provide financial compensation but keep properties.
Nazi occupiers confiscated Jewish property starting in 1939.
Restitution laws apply from 1948.
Angola slashed the value of its currency 29% in a bid to win foreign credits and quell growing tension in the southern African nation.
The government devalued the new kwanza to 17,836 from 12,640 to the U.S. dollar.
Further devaluations are to follow until the state exchange rate matches the commerce-controlling black market rate, now 120,000 to the dollar.
The moves are part of a radical economic package, including price reforms and pay raises.
Inflation is running at 1,200% a year in Angola, its finances hurt by civil war.
The Lebanese government will accept bids from contractors world-wide from next Monday through May 13 for first-stage reconstruction of Beirut's commercial center, ravaged in the 1975-90 civil war.
The work on roads, utilities and communications, to be completed by 1999, could cost $550 million.
In the overall $1.85 billion plan, covering 400 acres, Lebanon hopes to restore the capital's status as the Mideast financial hub by the year 2018.
An economic cooperation plan between South Korea and China would increase two-way trade more than sixfold to $56 billion by the year 2001, Seoul officials said.
At a Beijing summit next month, South Korea intends to offer investment and joint-venture projects, such as passenger planes, auto parts and electronic telephone-exchange systems, and Korean exports for nuclear energy plants and other businesses.
Technology cooperation could cover high-definition television.
The two countries established diplomatic ties in August 1992.
China is Korea's third-largest trading partner after the U.S. and Japan.
To strengthen Russia's embryonic banking system, the central bank ordered minimum-capital requirements starting March 1.
The rules could shrink the sector and help deal with an expected increase in bankruptcies as tighter monetary policy and market reforms take hold.
To get a license, banks initially must have ruble-eqivalent capital of 1 million European currency units, or $1.1 million, a minimum that will increase to 5 million ECUs by 1999.
Under current rules, a bank can be set up with capital of just $63,500.
Russia has 2,000 commercial banks and most aren't expected to make the cut.
Only about 100 now meet the new standards.
Many companies set up banks, which depend on these firms for funds, leaving depositors at risk in company failures, which so far have been few.
Separately, tax arrears as of Feb. 1 totaled $2.8 billion, or 12% of last year's total collections, Russia's tax agency said, citing widespread tax evasion amid crisis levels of debts between companies.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Britain's Office of Fair Trading opened an inquiry into increasingly popular prepaid funerals to determine whether any rules are needed to ensure delivery of services under contracts that can be decades old. . . .
Jeanne Calment, believed to be the world's oldest woman, turned 119 in a retirement home in Arles, France.
She gave up her two cigarettes a day two years ago but eats chocolate every evening.
