U.S. Shoe Corp., grappling with "inefficiencies" in its organization, said it is cutting 700 jobs, or 1.8% of its work force, and taking a related charge that will reduce fiscal fourth-quarter earnings.
The move is U.S. Shoe's biggest single job cut since major management changes began early last year.
In June, the Cincinnati-based apparel, shoe and optical retailer eliminated 100 jobs, primarily in its apparel unit, and now employs 40,000.
The new cuts are companywide.
Retail analysts and consultants said the plan, which includes consolidating management layers and centralizing operations, is long overdue.
Several questioned whether it goes far enough to revive a company whose earnings have eroded as its women's apparel and footwear stores have fallen behind the times.
"It really doesn't address the core problem, which is not enough customers and not enough merchandise being sold," said Kurt Barnard, president of Barnard's Retail Consulting Group, New York.
"There's a lack of excitement in terms of fashions and an inability to sweep customers off their feet and into their stores."
Robert M. Burton, a spokesman for U.S. Shoe, said the company acknowledges these concerns and "has addressed the product issue aggressively the past year by hiring people with proven backgrounds in these areas."
Analysts expect U.S. Shoe to post a profit, albeit a small one, in the quarter ending Jan. 29.
In the year-ago fourth quarter, the company posted net income of $832,000, or two cents a share, reflecting losses in its footwear unit.
Sales were $688.2 million.
A spokesman for U.S. Shoe said the reorganization is expected to save more than $25 million in the next fiscal year and more than $25 million the following year.
The company is overhauling its retail footwear business, which had three autonomous units, Banister, Cincinnati Shoe and Easy Spirit, and now will have two -- a combined Banister Cincinnati Shoe unit and Easy Spirit.
The company also has eliminated the jobs of the three top Banister executives, including the unit's president, "to create additional efficiencies."
In women's apparel, the company is changing the way it manages mall stores, designating a single manager for all stores within a given mall instead of having managers for each store.
Moreover, district and regional managers will cover all stores -- such as Casual Corner, Petite Sophisticate, August Max Woman and Capezio -- within a geographic region.
Under the current system, one manager might handle Casual Corner for a given region and another would oversee the region's Petite Sophisticates.
Consultants noted that specialty retailers like U.S. Shoe and Limited Inc. are struggling with declining mall traffic and the mounting strength of discount and department stores in apparel and footwear.
"This is a very first step and it's very much belated for a company like U.S. Shoe," said George Rosenbaum, chief executive of Leo J. Shapiro & Associates, Chicago.
"It's a survival move, because if they don't take the cost cut they're going to be priced out of the business."
Mr. Burton, the U.S. Shoe spokesman, said, "These pressures require companies like ours to be more specialized and nichedriven.
We need our own private-label brand that will be recognized by the customer."
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading, U.S. Shoe shares fell 25 cents to $13.875.
