In a sharp blow to lenders, a federal appeals court has invalidated Environmental Protection Agency rules that protected banks and savings institutions from having to pay for cleanups at hazardous-waste sites.
The lawsuit involved a challenge by chemical manufacturers and the state of Michigan to EPA rules enacted in 1992 that purported to clarify an exemption for banks and other lenders within the federal Superfund law.
As written, the law shields lenders who have secured interests in hazardous-waste sites, but who aren't involved in actively managing the sites.
These lenders typically hold the property as collateral, or have become owners as a result of having foreclosed on mortgages.
Beginning in 1990, however, a number of federal courts began expanding the grounds upon which lenders could be sued under the law.
That prompted the EPA, under pressure from the banking industry, to issue its rules emphasizing that lenders were, indeed, broadly protected.
But the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington last Friday said the agency had gone too far.
"Under these circumstances, it cannot be argued that Congress intended EPA, one of many potential plaintiffs, to have authority to, by regulation, define liability for a class of potential defendants," the court held.
"It is a huge setback for lenders.
It brings us back to the day of complete uncertainty in terms of when actions could create Superfund liability," said Peter S. Clark, a partner with the Philadelphia firm of Duane, Morris & Heckscher, which represents lenders in such situations.
An EPA spokeswoman said the agency was reviewing the case, and declined to comment.
Banks say they are being unfairly targeted as defendants in such cases because they have deep pockets, and that in most cases they have had little or no involvement in the conditions that created pollution.
At the same time, states and others charged with cleaning up such sites, including potential co-defendants, say lenders bear some responsibility because they benefit from having a financial interest in the property and are often in a position to control the overall affairs of their clients.
"This rule would have encouraged banks to foreclose on contaminated sites or facilities and then operate them with little or no fear that they would be held liable for the contamination or dangers it posed," Frank Kelley, Michigan's attorney general, said in a prepared statement.
Moreover, banks have been sued fairly selectively under the law, according to Theodore L. Garrett, a lawyer at the Washington firm of Covington & Burling, who represented the Chemical Manufacturers Association in the case.
In one instance he cites, a lender was said to have directly caused the pollution when it contracted for the removal of some equipment from a site.
A pending Clinton administration proposal to reauthorize funding for the federal Superfund program includes a provision that would give the EPA the authority that the appeals court said it currently lacks.
But bankers and some other interests are concerned about possible delays in enacting the plan, forcing them to rely indefinitely on a haphazard array of court cases for guidance.
"Confusion is rampant," said Tom Greco, associate general counsel of the American Bankers Association, who predicted that the court ruling would probably reduce banks' willingness to lend to manufacturers and other industrial concerns.
"We really need to have some kind of legislative fix," he added.
(Chemical Manufacturers Association vs. Environmental Protection Agency, No. 92-1314)
