SmithKline Beecham PLC reported higher fourth-quarter pretax profit and held out prospects of continued strong growth this year, despite an imminent management reshuffle and potentially dire U.S. patent expiration of its anti-ulcer drug Tagamet.
Jan Leschly, the intense Dane who is poised to become chief executive officer at the end of April, suggested that sales of four new products, which more than doubled in 1993, could spurt a further 30% this year and offset what he termed "the dilemma we have with Tagamet."
Mr. Leschly ruled out across-the-board cuts of thousands of employees in the foreseeable future, but he said, "Where market operations demand that we step in and reduce our work force or manufacturing sites, we'll do it."
The Anglo-American health-care giant said fourth-quarter pretax profit climbed 9% to #328 million ($486.3 million) from #301 million a year earlier, as sales surged 18% to #1.66 billion from #1.41 billion.
Excluding one-time items, pretax profit in the latest quarter climbed a robust 21%, the company said.
For the full year, pretax profit increased 12% to #1.22 billion and sales 23% to #6.04 billion.
The weaker British pound exaggerated the rate of sales growth; measured in constant currencies, sales rose 10% both in the latest quarter and the full year, the company said.
However because of SmithKline's policy of hedging currency exposure, profit was less affected by exchange-rate swings.
Reflecting last year's profit growth, and virtual elimination of the company's once-massive debt, SmithKline directors approved a 24% increase in the full-year dividend to 10.9 pence a share.
SmithKline's American depositary shares fell 12.5 cents, or 0.4%, to close at $30.125 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
Sales of four new products launched in the past three years -- antidepressant Seroxat, antiarthritic drug Relafen, hepatitis A vaccine Havrix and Kytril, a medicine to prevent nausea in cancer-chemotherapy patients -- more than doubled to #463 million and now account for 13% of total drug-division sales.
