CS First Boston Corp. said it hired Xavier A. Rolet, executive director in charge of European equity trading at Goldman Sachs International, to be managing director and co-head of its world-wide European equities operations.
"It's a great coup for CSFB, a big loss for Goldman.
He's a star -- a very, very competent professional," said a senior executive at another big U.S. investment bank.
"If you told me he was retiring, I'd be far happier."
"Xavier is a person of extraordinary ability and integrity," said Steven Klein, manager of international equity trading at Twentieth Century Fund in Kansas City, Mo.
"He has broad experience combined with a very impressive intellect."
By year end, Mr. Rolet will assume total responsibility for CS First Boston's European equity trading, distribution and research effort.
Until then, he will work with Alfred G. Jackson, a 14-year CS First Boston veteran, who recently moved to London to help restructure the firm's equity units following a major reorganization of CS First Boston.
Mr. Jackson is scheduled to return to the U.S., where he will continue in his current capacity as head of the firm's global stock distribution.
Competitors and clients said that Goldman, Sachs & Co., the parent, didn't want to lose 34-year-old Mr. Rolet, and tried hard to keep him.
"He's made a big contribution," conceded Robert Steel, a partner and co-head of Goldman Sachs' equities division in London.
"I hope the new role works out for him, as much as I would any competitor."
Nonetheless, Mr. Steel said: "We have a very strong and talented bench; Xavier's responsibilities will be assumed by the existing European equity trading team."
Considered a powerhouse in bonds, underwriting and derivatives, CS First Boston is regarded as a second-tier firm in international equity trading and distribution, but one striving hard to get into the front ranks.
Surveys by consultants Greenwich Associates list Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch & Co. as the two premier international equity firms, according to traders who have seen the assessments.
In December, CS First Boston reorganized its European equity business as part of a companywide restructuring that began two months earlier.
Until being brought under one roof in December, CS First Boston's equity units throughout Europe didn't interact well and often competed with one another.
Since then, clients say the firm is better organized and has hired some top equity talent.
"Hiring someone like Xavier is an indication they are willing to go after the very best people they can to compete with the Goldmans," said one head equity trader.
James G. Gantsoudes, head of global equities at CS First Boston in New York, conceded: "We have a lot of work to do."
But he added: "Clearly, the opportunity to hire Xavier Rolet is intended to make our trading even better."
Explaining Mr. Rolet's decision to leave Goldman and join CS First Boston, Mr. Gantsoudes said: "A lot of things are going to happen in Europe; he recognized the franchise we were building and signed up for that."
However, friends of Mr. Rolet said that the Frenchman believed that Goldman should have made him a partner last year, and he was disappointed at having been passed over.
Mr. Rolet was unavailable for comment.
He is the latest in a series of high-profile departures from Goldman Sachs, a firm that has long prided itself on having far less annual turnover in senior executives than most other Wall Street firms.
For example, two top economists -- David Morrison, a partner, and Jeremy Hale -- resigned from Goldman's London unit late last year and joined Tiger Management, a U.S. hedge fund.
Two days ago, Michael Sherwood, Goldman's former head of bond syndication in London, was hired back by the firm after resigning four weeks earlier to join a Swiss bank.
Goldman has been hit by other problems as well.
The firm recently lost as much as $125 million by betting wrongly on the direction of currencies and Japanese and European bonds.
