Get ready for round two of MiniDisc vs. the Digital Compact Cassette.
In its biggest marketing offensive in years, Sony Corp. will kick off a multimillion-dollar campaign next month aimed at boosting sales of its newly redesigned MiniDisc player.
The media blitz will include coupons redeemable for free Sony MiniDiscs, extensive magazine advertising and a giveaway program tied to Rolling Stone magazine.
The campaign will highlight six new portable, home and auto MiniDisc models, ranging in price from $549.95 for a portable Walkman Player to $1,299.95 for a four-disk, in-car changer.
The MiniDisc was introduced in the U.S. in late 1992 as a portable, digital machine that recorded on as well as played 2.5-inch compact disks.
At about the same time, archrival Philips Electronics NV launched its own line of Digital Compact Cassette players, a recordable cassette device that Philips says provides compact disk-quality sound.
Each wants to be the successor to today's audiocassette.
So far, sales of both have been modest.
The electronics industry sold about 50,000 MiniDiscs in the U.S. in the first 12 months, while an estimated 30,000 Digital Compact Cassette players were purchased in the U.S. during the same period.
"Sony still hasn't yet satisfactorily explained why consumers should buy their players, while the Philips player is too expensive," says Paul Gluckman, managing editor of Audio Week, a trade publication.
Mr. Gluckman adds that only about 35,000 compact disk players were sold in the first year after being introduced in 1983, indicating it is too early to determine the success or failure of the two new competing technologies.
Mr. Gluckman notes that a consumer can purchase a decent playback-only cassette tape player for $30 to $100.
By comparison, he says, the Philips portable playback-only digital compact cassette player lists for $549.
"Philips is positioning their player as a long-term replacement for existing music cassettes, but consumers are accustomed to commodity-priced personal portable players," says Mr. Gluckman.
"Philips has a long way to go before they reach the economies of scale which will enable them to lower their prices to make this a more palatable product for the masses."
Although music retailers have balked at stocking many MiniDisc titles, citing space limitations, Sony executives remain convinced that their player will become a huge seller in the U.S. and have created a three-pronged marketing offensive designed to double industry sales to 100,000 units in 1994.
In a costly promotion set to start April 1 and continue through Dec. 31, shoppers who purchase a new Sony playback-only MiniDisc will receive coupons entitling them to up to $300 of Sony MiniDisc recordings at retailers across the country.
The coupons -- known as Sony Mini Money -- can be redeemed through March 31, 1995, for recordings by such performers as Bruce Springsteen, Pearl Jam and Alice in Chains.
There are an estimated 350 MiniDisc titles available in this country, of which Sony provides more than 200.
Later this spring, Sony will begin a series of ads in such publications as Stereo Review, Audio, Rolling Stone, Spin, Premiere and Men's Journal.
"We're going to explain why consumers should consider the MiniDisc as a replacement for their cassette players," says Marty Homlish, senior vice president of audio products at Sony Electronics Inc., the U.S. consumer electronics arm of Sony Corp.
Much of the advertising will zero in on the ease of finding a particular track with a disk, and the fact that disks won't stretch or pull out of shape as tape sometimes does.
The print campaign will run through December.
Sony is also betting on a special giveaway program.
In early summer, 1.1 million subscribers to Rolling Stone will receive a MiniDisc sampler attached to the front of their magazines.
To encourage recipients to take these samplers to retail stores and listen, Sony has encoded certain disks with messages that identify owners as winners of prizes ranging from MiniDisc players to a 1995 Ford Mustang.
For its part, Philips will introduce a second generation of smaller, lightweight Digital Compact Cassette models later this year, including its first portable recording unit.
Although Philips declined to discuss its future marketing plans, a spokesman says that when its portable digital compact cassette player was introduced last September, Philips launched a major campaign that involved advertising, store promotion and demonstrations by factory representatives at electronic and music stores.
"Our advantage is that consumers can play their old cassettes on our machines," says Gerry Wirtz, senior manager of world-wide software/hardware relations for Philips Consumer Electronics, based in Eindhoven, the Netherlands.
"Worldwide, there are one billion cassette players in use.
They aren't going to disappear tomorrow."
Banana Republic, a unit of Gap Inc., is starting a test of television advertising in Chicago tonight during the telecast of the Academy Awards show.
The effort marks the first time Banana Republic has advertised on television, said Peter Arnell, whose agency, Arnell Group, New York, created the spots.
"In all the clutter and craziness, they're a peaceful moment," he said.
Each commercial in the three-week test features a single product, such as a white shirt.
To the sound of tranquil soul music, subtitles instruct viewers to "initiate conversations," "fall in love" and -- in one case -- "wear white shirts."
National magazine ads and in-store posters have the same theme.
Ad Notes. . . .
FINALISTS: Grand Metropolitan's Carillon Importers named three finalists in the pitch for Stolichnaya vodka.
They are Mullen Advertising, of Wenham, Mass., and New York agencies Gigante Vaz & Partners and Margeotes Fertitta & Weiss.
WHO'S NEWS: Art D'Angelo was named executive vice president and chief financial officer of Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi PLC.
Mr. D'Angelo, 42 years old, was previously president and chief executive officer of Saatchi & Saatchi Holdings, which oversaw major Saatchi subsidiary acquisitions and dispositions in the U.S., and was involved in recent negotiations to assimilate McCaffrey & McCall, a former Saatchi agency, into BSB.
