Most hearth fires are appealing because of their warmth and beauty.
Michael Milner's is distinctive because of its age.
As it crackles in the hearth of the Saltersgate Inn, a pub in Britain's Yorkshire, it looks like any fire started yesterday.
But this flame is said to be 198 years old.
"I can't say I actually saw them start it," concedes Mr. Milner.
But it was blazing when he bought the inn last summer, and elderly natives of the surrounding moors swear they've never seen it out.
Now, controversy is raging around the old flame.
The problem is cost.
With its original fuel -- peat from the moors -- protected by national wildlife laws, Mr. Milner must feed it expensive coal and wood.
To keep it stoked day and night, he says, he spends around #150 ($223.44) a month.
So he believes that the Yorkshire and Humberside Tourist Board -- whose brochures tout the fire -- should help keep it burning.
"Can't do it," responds Julie Taylor, a Tourist Board press officer.
If the agency fed his fire, she says, then the railway museum might demand help buying an old caboose.
Soon, all of the agency's 450 attractions would want assistance.
As for the fire's inclusion in tourist brochures, she hints that anyone not thankful for publicity could be deprived of it.
That threat hasn't kept Mr. Milner from grousing to the media.
Even this strategy nearly backfired, though, when a TV reporter -- eager for a ratings splash -- threatened to douse the flame on-air.
As a sort of scorched-earth policy, Mr. Milner himself talks of letting the flame die.
But however much that might hurt other local businesses, he concedes it would devastate the inn.
It sits eight miles from town, and "the fire is what brings people out," he says.
Legend has it that the igniter of the flame stoked it night and day to keep anyone from snooping under the hearth, where he had buried a murder victim.
"If the fire goes out, the legend goes, the victim's ghost will come out and destroy the whole inn," says Mr. Milner.
Once, a pub wall collapsed after the fire was allowed to decline to a single ember, he says.
But the prospect of a ghost destroying the Saltersgate doesn't worry Ms. Taylor, who says the region offers plenty of other haunts.
"In York, there are quite a few inns and hotels with ghosts," she says.
