If the modernist painter Mario Sironi has been somewhat neglected, there is a reason, some people would say -- a very good reason.
The problem is that Sironi, who started out his career with the aggressively modern futurists, never abandoned Fascist politics.
While other artists and intellectuals distanced themselves, Sironi continued to place his talent at the service of the regime right through the 1930s.
True, much of his best work -- the melancholy urban landscapes that seem to smell of loneliness and air pollution -- involved a formal aesthetic quest in which politics was secondary.
But what about the wall murals he created to decorate the new Fascist public architecture, the sharp vignettes and flattering illustrations he supplied to party publications?
The fact is Sironi was a believer, and that was something the critics, some of whom identified him as a genuine 20th-century master, might have wished to gloss over but couldn't.
This was the sort of problem that Social Democratic and Green officials in the German city of Darmstadt had in mind in December when they canceled a planned Sironi exhibit there on the grounds it could foment neo-Nazism.
Their concerns were valid, but, paradoxically, anyone who takes them seriously should see the important Sironi retrospective at Rome's Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna at least through Sunday.
Italy, it seems, has decided to face this brooding, problematic figure in all his contradictions, and the resulting show is one of the best arguments I can imagine for full disclosure when it comes to artists and 20th-century politics.
The 400 paintings, drawings, illustrations and theatrical sketches cover every area of Sironi's prolific and extremely varied output between 1904, when he was 19, and 1961, when he died.
Some commentators have said too much is included.
I feel the opposite: The mixture of the painterly and the topical (the political cartoons and magazine covers) puts the paintings in a visual historical context that spans most of the first half of the century and provides a far more direct commentary than blocks of art-historical text on the wall.
The show begins well before World War I sowed the chaos that brought Mussolini to power.
Although Sironi's domestic circle was comfortable, haunting portraits of a sister, a brother, his mother and of himself produced during a period of youthful crisis between 1905 and 1910 reflect a melancholy note that persisted through his lifetime.
It may partially explain why this committed artist of the regime often failed to provide the prescribed images of Fascist uplift.
His heavy-limbed shepherds and sailors vaguely celebrating the common man have an air of mute, archaic sadness that isn't very inspiring.
Cubist experiments led those figures even further from the ideal man and woman.
Indeed, some contemporaries hated his art; the fanatical party boss Roberto Farinacci once drove Mussolini to fire Sironi from his job as art critic of the party paper Popolo D'Italia.
At the time, Il Duce, who loved Sironi's sharp anti-Bolshevik cartoons, deplored his painting: "those horrible figures with huge hands and feet, those twisted eyes that torture common sense and Italian art."
In fact, some Italian critics have tried to rescue Sironi by noting that much of his work falls squarely in the camp the Nazis designated as Degenerate Art.
That may be true, but it doesn't absolve him of his ambiguities: There's no getting around the fact the man was drawn to fascism's promise of a rigorous new order, no matter how uneasy the painter was with the regime's public face of bombast and triumph.
Yet it is interesting that, by emphasizing Sironi's ambiguities to the hilt, this show succeeds in deflating any cult role for the artist like that feared by the politicians in Darmstadt.
How do you slot the painter of the mural "Corporatist Italy" when he is also the painter of those sooty industrial landscapes with cranes and smokestacks that rival De Chirico's in their mysterious composition?
And what do his fine paintings have to do with that terribly conventional, saccharine portrait of Margherita Sarfatti, the great intellectual muse of the Fascists, and those craven cover drawings for Mussolini's political review, Gerarchia?
An astonishing 1937 work, from Fiat Co.'s archives, is titled simply "Large Panel With Trucks."
In saturnine hues of maroon and brown the artist depicts a convoy of Fiat trucks, loaded with what first appear to be lumps of coal but are actually the closely packed helmeted heads of soldiers.
Above this purgatory, in another sort of purgatory up where heaven should be, the Roman legions that so inspired Mussolini float like abandoned balloons.
Perhaps Sironi's most interesting period is postfascism, when his dark disenchantment emerged to the full.
His grim, fatalistic canvases of the early '40s reflect fascism's decline and downfall.
In the stunning "Statue Lying on the Ground" (1942-1944), a white figure that could be either flesh or stone lies toppled, the head buried in darkness at the back of the composition in a pose of defeat and humiliation.
If this show has proved a popular success, it is not for the reasons feared by the Darmstadt Greens and Social Democrats.
With Italian politics in maximum flux, it is more the left of the political spectrum, not the burgeoning ultraright, that seems most interested in looking at Sironi.
Apparently Italy's neo-Fascists, now styling themselves as "conservatives," no longer feel strong ties with this difficult and contradictory artist, leaving the old anti-Fascist left to study Sironi with a mixture of curiosity and caution.
Ms. Randall is a writer in Rome.
