The cry is already going up from Civil War preservationists: Say it ain't so, Jody Powell.
Mr. Powell, who was Jimmy Carter's press secretary and who now heads his own public-relations firm here, is a Civil War buff.
He boasts that nine of his ancestors wore the butternut and gray in the nation's bloodiest war.
He volunteered his services in 1988 in the fight to save the Bull Run battlefield (it's called Manassas in Virginia) from being overwhelmed by a huge shopping mall.
Now Mr. Powell has signed on with Walt Disney Co. as a public-relations consultant for what many preservationists see as an even bigger threat to the battlefield: the proposed $750 million Disney's America theme park.
The planned Disney site, 30 miles from downtown Washington in little Haymarket, Va., is four miles from the battlefield.
Disney's America "is an insult to Virginia," says 72-year-old Annie Snyder, the grand marshal of Bull Run preservation and a longtime friend and comrade-in-arms of Mr. Powell.
"It's the most historic ground in the most historic state in America.
They will destroy our battlefield."
She deeply regrets that Mr. Powell has signed on with her enemies, but she won't criticize him personally.
She says she figures he and his firm, Powell Tate, need the business.
Still, she and her colleagues remember the Jody Powell who stood with them when they defeated plans to build that shopping mall on Stuart's Hill, where Robert E. Lee "sent General James Longstreet and the II Corps crashing into the unsuspecting left flank of the Union Army" in the second battle of Bull Run and where, today, "you can still see it, feel it; that blood-soaked, valor-hallowed piece of Virginia countryside where the entire Union tottered on the brink of destruction."
Those are the words of Mr. Powell; he wrote them in a passionate essay in the July/August 1988 issue of National Parks magazine.
In that same essay, Mr. Powell asked this rhetorical question: "What is the purpose of preserving a historical scene if the area is then intruded upon by adjacent development?"
Mr. Powell, 50 years old, says he thought "long and hard" before taking on Disney's America as a client.
"I looked at the map, and at Manassas especially.
This Disney park is not going to be adjacent to the battlefield.
It's four miles away.
You won't see it, hear it or smell it.
That's a big difference from that shopping mall, which was smack on the battlefield.
They would have bulldozed soldiers' bones for the shopping mall."
Mr. Powell argues that Disney's America, if it is built, will encourage more visitors to look at the battlefield, "and I think that's a plus.
If you go to all this effort to preserve a battlefield, you can't be opposed to more people coming to see it."
Mr. Powell also argues that, unlike the battle of the shopping mall, the preservationists now have the cash and the expertise to wage a vigorous fight against Disney.
Last time, the opposition consisted mostly of Annie Snyder and a few volunteers like himself.
Now the opposition is being spearheaded by the Piedmont Environmental Council in Warrenton, founded 22 years ago with the help of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
It has already raised $400,000 from several big contributors, some of them with connections to the Pittsburgh-based Mellon fortune.
Charles Whitehouse, chairman of the council's board, has written supporters, many of them large estate owners in the area, that "we are in the fight of our lives here with Disney," and predicted he would need $1 million before it was over.
The council already has hired its own high-powered P.R. firm, Widmeyer Group Inc., and a big-time law firm, Williams & Connolly, both of Washington, to help.
Mr. Powell says he feels good about the fact that his old friends "have put together a well-financed operation this time."
More broadly, Mr. Powell contends that economic development was heading for Manassas anyway, and that preservationists simply can't always oppose it.
"Disney," he says, "convinced me that they understood all these concerns and that they wanted to establish partnerships and working relationships with responsible people.
Some of my old friends tell me, `Powell, you're a fool, it won't work out that way,' but so far it's worked out fine.
And I think the company that put together the Hall of Presidents and Epcot Center can do things that are historically accurate and serious."
Mr. Powell has done his bit to put some of these partnerships together.
The other day, he took a group of Disney executives headed by the park manager, Mark Pacala, to Fredericksburg to meet with Wilson Greene, president of the Association for the Preservation of Civil War Battle Sites, a land trust.
They had a nice talk, and the upshot was that Mr. Greene signed on as a Disney consultant.
Mr. Greene won't say how much Disney offered to pay his group, but he suggests that it will be substantial and that the Disney money will be used to buy up battlefield land that is under threat elsewhere.
"We wouldn't do it for free," he says.
Mr. Greene insists that he and his organization haven't sold out to Disney.
"We intend to champion the concerns we have about this project," he insists.
Mrs. Snyder isn't buying that for a minute.
"I blew my top," she says.
And so she sent a "Dear Will" fax to Mr. Greene.
"I fail to understand," she said, "why APCWS would be willing to endanger Manassas and other nearby existing battlefields" to raise money to preserve other battlefields.
She says Mr. Greene and his organization will be disappointed: "They won't get 'substantial' money from Disney, for Disney just isn't in the habit of giving away money."
The Disney organizers have taken on a number of other consultants.
Disney's America announced earlier this week that it has hired Columbia University historian Eric Foner to help the Disney designers create the park.
Mr. Foner, who is at England's Oxford University for the full college year, earlier helped design the Hall of Presidents show at Walt Disney World in Florida.
The Disney people tried to hire Civil War historian Shelby Foote too, but he declined.
"Historical popularization is an easy thing to defend," he says.
"But I didn't want to have anything to do with it."
Mr. Foote was the star narrator in "The Civil War" series filmed by Ken Burns for the Public Broadcasting System.
Jody Powell's voice was heard in that series, too.
He played Stonewall Jackson.
