Every generation invests a lot of itself in the music that attends its coming of age.
It's something shared and valued, and its creators become its chief trustees.
This is why in the twilight of most every important music career a performer is called upon to re-create the defining works of his youth.
By an interesting coincidence, we currently have on CD two such testaments by the beginning and end of jazz trumpet, Louis Armstrong and Miles Davis.
Mention Armstrong to the true believer and expect to hear sonnets about the old Hot Fives and Hot Sevens of the 1920s.
What you probably won't hear much about are the 43 re-creations from this period Armstrong undertook for Decca 30 years later (now 36 years ago).
This is because re-creations are not generally esteemed by true believers.
They find their epiphanies in volatile originality, not settled maturity.
These '50s re-creations now have been assembled along with other material of varying quality in "The Complete Decca Studio Recordings of Louis Armstrong and the All Stars" (Mosaic Records; order directly at 203-327-7111).
And for the most part they are so magnificent I am inclined to recommend them over the originals, especially to younger listeners curious about what made Armstrong special.
I should warn you, this is real blasphemy I'm perpetrating here.
But I stand on experience.
When I was in my midteens these were the sides that really drew me into the Armstrong oeuvre.
The main reason was I could hear the music the way my adolescent ears were accustomed to hearing it, which was in high fidelity.
This may seem a picky prejudice, and I'm well over it now.
But let's be frank; sound is always prejudicial where music is concerned.
And that opaque curtain of period technology, with its muffled, toylike textures, is a compulsory component of the early jazz aesthetic.
If one isn't used to it, it can make otherwise wonderful music seem small and cartoonish.
There's nothing cartoonish about this music, though.
Armstrong, who was 56 at the time, was in superb shape for the sessions.
His attack, intonation and signature vibrato were almost wholly intact.
And he seemed to have a ferocious appetite for the old tunes.
In terms of his playing, most of these re-creations compare well with the originals, and several are arguably superior, though no attempt was made to Xerox the old New Orleans ensembles.
Edmond Hall's clarinet and Barrett Deems's drums make these "new" Hot Fives/Sevens swing in a way the originals rarely did, but with no less heat.
Armstrong reached his peak in the early '30s, transfiguring Tin Pan Alley tidbits into majestic arias.
"When You're Smiling," "Sunny Side of the Street" and others were essentially set solo pieces then, as they remain here, but gorgeously captured for the ages.
They don't replace the originals; they add a time dimension to them.
Part of Armstrong's revolution was to unleash an arms race of virtuosity that would drive jazz for 30 years and culminate in bebop.
Part of Miles Davis's revolution was to end that race by showing that jazz was more than high notes and fast tempos.
Between 1949 and 1960 his collaborations with arranger Gil Evans caught the laconic spirit of a time.
In the '70s, though, Davis disowned his past with finality and spent the rest of his years chasing a youthful audience with jazz-rock.
Most of his core fans gave up hope for him as a serious artist.
Imagine their shock when Quincy Jones lured him to the Montreux Jazz Festival in July 1991 to play the repertoire he had abandoned 30 years before.
Was it Jones's pleadings that brought Davis back, some wondered, or his promise to produce a commercial album for Davis in return?
Whatever it was, the question was soon moot.
Davis died less than three months later and there would be no more albums.
So "Miles & Quincy: Live at Montreux" (Warner Brothers), which just won a Grammy, brings a sad but satisfying symmetry to Davis's musical life.
You can almost smell the incense burn as "Boplicity" brings his exile from himself to an end.
Then on to the first seven pieces from "Miles Ahead," four tunes from "Porgy and Bess" and two from "Sketches of Spain."
Jones conducts with a cunning ear for any impurities of color or tempo.
Only "Summertime" is slightly accelerated, and that's to the good.
Davis amends his old solos freely within the bounds of the material, as one would hope.
But we no longer wonder what he'll do next: We simply want him to do it again.
Though his open horn sounds lovely, he favors the mute.
Is he playing as well as ever?
It doesn't make any difference really.
His stoical lyricism never drew on flashy virtuosity.
It was a style he could grow old with in comfort.
"Rules of the Road" (Pablo) is not a re-creation, but it is a reunion, and a good one for Anita O'Day and Buddy Bregman, who conducted some of the singer's best albums of the '50s.
Her voice has since acquired that two-pack-a-day quality that comes with the jazz life, and it doesn't serve her any too well navigating a few pockets of subtle pitch.
But it's a solid performance nevertheless.
And Bregman has given her a first-rate band, fine arrangements and the best production values she's seen in many a year.
In a different kind of revival, Jo Stafford (who hasn't recorded in 20 years, and isn't about to) and her husband Paul Weston have been quietly sneaking her old Columbia albums back into the market via CDs on their own label.
One of them, "Jo + Jazz" (Corinthian, Box 6296, Beverly Hills, CA 90212), is a neglected classic of jazz singing.
Her voice and intonation are more than a match for the heady company she keeps, which includes Johnny Hodges and Ben Webster.
Every critic loves to find a lost gem.
This is one of mine.
Another fine job of resuscitation is "The Complete CBS Buck Clayton Jam Sessions" (Mosaic).
Made at a time when the world was still gaga over the wonders of the LP, some of these pieces mosey along for nearly 30 minutes.
But with each of eight or nine soloists getting no more than two choruses, the music is actually a lot more compact and paced than one soloist trying to sustain 20 choruses.
Coleman Hawkins, Billy Kyle, Urbie Green, Ruby Braff and especially Clayton and Jo Jones play to perfection.
And the engineering still stands as a model of how jazz should be recorded.
That and the spirit of Basie are the binding elements of this wonderful body of work.
Mr. McDonough is a music writer in Chicago.
