The television networks think they've found a way to hold onto viewers: Treat shows like packaged goods, and bombard consumers with promotional announcements for them.
Advertisers, however, don't like the company.
Non-programming clutter is on the rise, and the culprits are the broadcast and cable networks themselves.
They're jamming every possible moment with promotions for their shows, says a new study paid for by the Association of National Advertisers and the American Association of Advertising Agencies.
Moreover, Matt Miller, director of member services of the ANA, says the networks aren't decreasing the number of commercials to make way for more promotional announcements.
Instead, he says, the shows themselves are growing slightly shorter.
The study, conducted by Competitive Media Reporting and Media Watch, shows that each broadcast network clocked in with an increase in commercials and promotions in one week studied last November compared with the corresponding week in November 1992.
Only Fox, a unit of News Corp., had fewer promotions.
November is one of four so-called sweeps months, when local ad rates are determined through A.C. Nielsen ratings.
While commercial clutter is annoying to the casual couch potato, it is particularly irksome to Madison Avenue.
Advertisers pay on average $110,000 for a half-minute spot during the 1993-94 prime time season; thus, ad executives register displeasure with anything that may lessen the impact of their own expensive messages.
The clutter issue is a real dilemma.
On one hand, networks say they must increase commercial-inventory or raise already steep rates.
On the other hand, advertisers feel that too many programming invasions occur now.
"The more commercials that are hitting the consumer's brain and eyes, the less effective the advertising is," says Jon Mandel, senior vice president at Grey Advertising.
"We beat up the networks and say, `Please don't run so many promotions.'
It's not how long the promos are either.
It's the quantity."
Adds Steve Grubbs, a senior vice president at Omnicom Group's BBDO: "The networks are eating their young.
They're turning off viewers, and that isn't in anyone's interest."
How bad has it become?
This week, for example, WNYW, the Fox-owned station in New York, "shrank" the closing credits during "Melrose Place" so that half the screen could be occupied by the anchorman of the local news to promote the upcoming newscast.
Then, a second promotion, for Fox's hit "Married . . .
With Children," appeared in the lower righthand corner of the screen showing the "Melrose Place" credits.
"The increasing number of promos is troubling, especially since the networks can control that fate," says Betsy Frank, a senior vice president of Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising.
CBS, the No. 1 network in household prime time ratings, obviously feels it has a lot to promote, including its relatively new "Late Show with David Letterman."
During one hour in prime time last November, CBS ran 13 minutes and 53 seconds of so-called non-programming material, of which four minutes and two seconds were promotional announcements and credits.
(The balance of the time went to paid advertising and public service announcements.)
That compares with November 1992, when the network broadcast 13 minutes and 24 seconds of non-programming material, three minutes and 37 seconds of which were promos.
Capital Cities/ABC ran four minutes and two seconds of promotional announcements in a one-hour period that included 13 minutes and 24 seconds of non-programming material.
General Electric's NBC network broadcast three minutes and 44 seconds of its own promotional announcements during an hour of 13 minutes and 43 seconds of non-programming material.
An ABC spokesman, who said the network has been under the same internal guidelines for the past 18 months, declined further comment.
A CBS spokeswoman said the network's executives were traveling yesterday to the Winter Olympics and couldn't be reached for comment.
A spokeswoman at NBC said the network sometimes receives "short shows" from the studios, and, "The first thing we reach for to fill the time is a network promo."
Fox couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Miller says one startling example was CBS, which stretched the length between prime time shows to a numbing six minutes one evening -- once credits, ads and promotional announcements concluded.
Some closing credits of series weren't lumped into the dubious category of nonprogramming: Shows such as "Home Improvement" on ABC, and NBC's "Empty Nest" and "Nurses" actually continue the show (or include outtakes) into the credits.
"We rewarded those situations," says Mr. Miller.
"Anything that keeps the viewer interested and keeps the individual from channel-surfing isn't considered clutter."
Madison Avenue has grown increasingly concerned over the ease at which viewers can tune out once a commercial pops up.
Many viewers, armed with remote control, can easily zap through intrusive ads and announcements.
And there are more programming alternatives than ever, including videocassettes and cable.
Cable, however, is no longer a haven for the weary.
In fact, of 16 cable networks reviewed by the study, all aired more non-programming units than any broadcast network -- and most of it was product advertising.
ESPN, the all-sports network, was the lowest with 13 minutes 28 seconds, four seconds more than ABC.
The amounts steadily increase through MTV (14 minutes 32 seconds), CNBC (15 minutes 5 seconds) to the most cluttered network, Discovery (17 minutes 20 seconds).
Daytime continues to be the most cluttered period on broadcast television, with CBS leading the charge.
The network had 19 minutes 26 seconds of ads and promotional announcements, compared with 18 minutes 34 seconds on ABC, and 18 minutes 12 seconds on NBC.
(Fox doesn't air programs during the day.)
Mr. Miller says the ANA plans to contact the broadcast and cable networks "to try and talk with them" about the clutter situation.
But, he adds, "It isn't easy to talk to them.
Advertisers still line up with money to buy time on the shows."
Eggland's Best settled deceptive advertising charges by agreeing to stop making claims that its eggs are superior to other eggs because they don't raise consumers' blood cholesterol levels.
The Federal Trade Commission had charged Eggland's, based in King of Prussia, Pa., with falsely claiming that studies proved consumers following a low-fat diet could also eat 12 Eggland's eggs per week without increasing their cholesterol levels.
The FTC cited ads, created by the Ayer ad agency in New York, that said Eggland's eggs "won't increase your serum cholesterol."
Another ad claimed, "In clinical tests in a low-fat diet, even 12 a week caused no increase in serum cholesterol."
Robert Fuhrman, Eggland's president, said the ads state that Eggland's eggs have about the same amount of cholesterol as other eggs, even though they have a different effect on blood cholesterol levels.
"If we say people can eat the eggs and they won't raise their cholesterol, some of them jump to the conclusion that these are lower-cholesterol eggs," he said.
The company plans to continue referring to the cholesterol studies in its ads, Mr. Fuhrman said.
Those studies compared people on a low-fat diet who either ate Eggland's eggs or ate no eggs at all.
Under the settlement, however, Eggland's must disclose in ads the cholesterol content of its eggs and state it as a percentage of the maximum daily amount recommended by the Food and Drug Administration.
The company also has agreed to put a disclaimer on packages: "There are no studies showing that these eggs are different from other eggs in their effect on serum cholesterol."
The Center for Science in the Public Interest, a Washington consumer advocacy group, said the settlement doesn't go far enough because the FTC didn't apply the same standards adopted by the FDA for health claims on food labels.
Ad Notes. . .
MIDOL: Ayer, New York, which lost Sterling Winthrop's big Bayer aspirin account last week, lost the last of that client's business.
Sterling moved the estimated $4 million Midol menstrual pain reliever account to Ammirati & Puris, New York.
Ammirati already handles the Phillips' laxative account.
Sterling is a unit of Eastman Kodak Co.
REVIEW: Lenox Inc., the china and crystal unit of Brown-Forman Corp., said it has started a review of its ad account.
Billings couldn't be determined.
Lenox's current agency, Foote, Cone & Belding Communications' FCB/Leber Katz Partners, won't participate, the client said.
KEDS: Stride Rite Corp. said it invited six agencies to pitch its $20 million account, including two Boston shops: Hill Holliday Connors Cosmopulos and Arnold Fortuna Lawner & Cabot, and four New York agencies: Omnicom Group's BBDO, D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, Kirshenbaum & Bond, and WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather.
A decision is expected in March.
