Speculation over when the Federal Reserve is going to tighten monetary policy by raising short-term interest rates sent a shudder through all the major bond markets.
Most affected by the skittishness were short-term U.S. interest rates, which soared.
The bond-equivalent yield of the three-month Treasury bill, for example, rose 0.07 percentage point to 3.19%, the highest since the end of November.
The yield of other short-term Treasury securities also rose sharply.
Meanwhile, the yield of the benchmark 30-year bond rose to 6.31% from 6.28% on Wednesday.
Its price, which moves in the opposite direction of its yield, dropped more than 3/8 point, or more than $3.75 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 99 4/32.
With many recent reports suggesting that the U.S. economy is gaining strength, talk of when the Fed would raise interest rates has been a popular sport in recent weeks.
That's because it is widely believed the Fed will want to make a pre-emptive strike against inflationary pressures created by a growing economy by raising short-term interest rates before rising prices become a problem.
This week such speculation has gained more attention.
On Monday, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan spoke before the Joint Economic Committee of Congress and said the Federal Reserve Board would boost short-term rates "at some time" though he didn't say when.
Yesterday's jump in yields was sparked by the Fed's failure to intervene in the markets, as was expected.
Early yesterday, the Federal Funds rate -- the rate at which banks lend each other money -- was trading at 1/8 percentage point above its 3% target.
Analysts had expected the Fed would correct this by making a routine, technical addition of reserves to the banking system.
The Fed controls shortterm rates by managing the level of reserves in the system.
When the Fed's New York open-market desk failed to add reserves during its usual intervention period, traders surmised the desk was willing to let the Fed Funds rate trade above its target.
Many economists believe the Fed's next move will be to tighten policy by raising the target to 3.25%, but there is little consensus on when that will occur.
Economists were generally less willing to see a Fed tightening in the inaction than traders.
By failing to add reserves, the Fed was "tipping its hand" that it plans to tighten monetary policy, said David Jones, economist at Aubrey Lanston.
Mr. Jones was one of few economists who said the inaction was a clear sign, though some did say the move was "suspicious."
"They tipped their hand today with an unmistakable signal that they were in the process of moving to a tighter policy stance that will officially be signaled tomorrow," Mr. Jones said.
Other economists said it would make no sense for the Federal Reserve to act on the first day of its two-day Federal Open Market Committee policy-making meeting -- which started yesterday -- and before January employment data, which will be reported today.
"I don't think today's lack of action indicates anything," said Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Securities.
In his view, if the Federal Reserve was going to tighten, it would have given the market a clear signal, perhaps by draining reserves from the system.
On the first day of the Fed's Federal Open Market Committee meeting, the members typically discuss long-term monetary targets and longer-term economic targets, said Mr. Jones.
On the second day, the members usually set the Fed's stance toward monetary policy, he explained.
According to Louis Crandall, chief economist at R.H. Wrightson & Associates, a firm that provides analysis of Treasury activities, the Fed's decision not to add reserves when the Fed Funds rate was 1/8 percentage point above its target was unusual.
He said that it was common for the Fed to ignore a 1/16 percentage point gap but not a 1/8 point gap.
The Fed last raised short-term interest rates nearly five years ago.
Since then the Fed has been cutting interest rates.
It's been over a year since the last cut, which occurred in December 1992.
According to Mr. Crandall, the Fed didn't have to add much in reserves.
Perhaps, he suggested, the Fed was saving its shots for when it needs them.
In other words, "there was the risk that the Fed could have overdone it and been faced with the need" to reduce reserves to make up for it, he said.
"That would have been even more misleading," said Mr. Crandall, and could have had a "disruptive" effect on the market.
For his part, Mr. Crandall said he was surprised by how the market reacted to the Fed's decision against adding reserves.
The need to add some reserves "wasn't such an obvious thing that they had to come in and do it today," he said.
Mr. Fine said that when the Fed moves to tighten, it will make its intentions much more obvious.
"This Fed under Alan Greenspan has usually been rather definitive in nature," he said.
If they want to tighten, "they will come in and hit you over the head."
Mr. Fine said that when the Fed does tighten it will move the Federal Funds rate up 1/2 percentage point, not just 1/4 percentage point, to make it very clear to the bond markets that a shift has occurred.
Some economists speculated that by refraining from action this session, the Fed has a clearer hand to state policy one way or the other today after the January employment report is released.
The Fed Funds rate was at 3.0625% late yesterday.
In the flurry of Thursday's activity, some economists and traders were reminding participants of what some referred to as the "Thanksgiving Day massacre," or a day during Thanksgiving week 1989 when traders misinterpreted a Fed decision to add reserves as a sign that it was cutting the Fed Funds rate.
In when-issued trading, the three-year note to be sold by the government next week was yielding 4.65%, the 10-year note was yielding 5.76% and the 30-year bond was yielding 6.32%.
Late yesterday, the Fed reported that its widely watched M2, a measure of money supply, dropped $1 billion for the week ended Jan. 24.
That puts the M2 growth rate at 2.4%, compared with the fourthquarter base of 1993, which is within the Fed's target range of 1% to 5%.
M2 includes currency, checking accounts, money-market funds and certificates of deposit smaller than $100,000.
Yesterday, the Treasury sold $16.51 billion of one-year bills at an average discount rate of 3.59% for a bond equivalent yield of 3.74%.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
The bills are dated Feb. 10 and mature Feb. 9, 1995.
Corporate-bond market focused on domestic issues for the first time this week amid new issues from Apple Computer Inc., Connecticut Light & Power Co., Hertz Corp. and SunTrust Banks Inc.
In trading, meanwhile, junk bonds were ending unchanged.
However, the sector saw active dealings, and prices had been up 1/4 to 1/2 point earlier in the day.
In contrast, activity was light in the investment-grade area, as prices eased and spreads -- or the margin between yields of corporate and Treasury bonds -- narrowed slightly.
Wednesday's global-note offering by the People's Republic of China traded down in the secondary market.
China's 6.5% coupon notes maturing in 2004 dropped 0.525 point, or $5.25 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 98.891.
The yield rose to 6.653% from 6.582%.
Global notes are securities designed to be easily bought and sold in the world's major markets.
Proceeds from the global notes will be used to fund project finance in areas such as energy, transportation and communication, Jin Renqing, China's vice minister of finance, said.
The official spoke at a news conference in New York at Merrill Lynch, which was lead underwriter for the debt offering.
Also in the news conference, Winthrop Smith Jr., executive vice president of Merrill Lynch and chairman of Merrill Lynch International, said the global offering attracted more than 100 world-wide institutions, in addition to individual investors.
Of Merrill's sales, Mr. Smith said, 60% of the bonds was sold in the U.S., 20% in Europe and 20% in Asia.
In the U.S., Apple Computer sold $300 million of 10-year, 6.5% coupon notes, priced at 99.925 to yield 6.51%.
Rated Baa1 by Moody's Investors Service and single-A-minus by Standard & Poor's, the issue was sold through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.
Municipal bonds were caught up in the sales that undercut Treasurys, and they were generally 1/8 to 1/2 point lower at the close.
In the new-offering sector, muni issuers sold more than $900 million of debt despite the price decline that drove up yields.
This session's issues included the Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric Co.'s $332 million 1994 Series A and B power supply system bonds.
They were priced by a Bear, Stearns group and given yields that range from 2.4% in July 1994 to 5.28% in 2017.
There wasn't a repricing despite the market's condition.
The New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's newly freed to trade 5.00% bonds due 2024 were quoted at 95 3/8 in late trading, yielding 5.3%.
When those bonds initially came to the market Tuesday, they were priced at 95 3/4 and had a 5.28% yield.
Munis fell with Treasurys this session amid concerns about Fed tightening.
Mortgage-securities prices ended down as much as 9/32, but they outperformed Treasurys, prompting some doubt about the extent of dealer demand for collateral to create Remics.
The real estate mortgage investment conduit deal flow hasn't yet been choked off, however, as one sizable new issue and increases of two offerings outstanding were announced for a total of $2.7 billion new securities.
But the longer mortgage securities outpace Treasurys, the more expensive mortgage securities look relative to their government-securities counterparts.
And with the Treasury about to sell its quarterly refunding package next week, for a total of $40 billion new securities, chances are that the mortgage market could remain relatively buoyant.
Primary Remic market activity Wednesday was highlighted by a $1.549 billion Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. series Gold 1695 deal, which was collateralized with the agency's Gold 30year 7s and underwritten by Kidder Peabody.
Freddie Mac's series Gold 1686, backed by Gold 30-year 7.5s, was boosted to $1.3 billion from the original $300 million amount by Lehman Brothers.
And the Federal National Mortgage Association's series 1994-22, backed by 7.5%-backed Strips Trust 254, was increased to $335 million from $200 million by Greenwich Capital Markets.
There was little net market movement after news of a 59,000 jobless-claims rise, a 1.2% December factory-orders gain or the flat Mortgage Bankers Association's weekly refinancing index.
