As you frantically spray wiper fluid on your snow-caked windshield and crank your car's heater to maximum hot, you have an epiphany: Electric vehicles?
In the Northeast?
Come on.
Batteries just don't hold up in the cold -- and heat and wipers would sap them further.
A group of Northeastern states and Washington, D.C., has recently asked the Environmental Protection Agency for permission to copy California's program for fighting vehicle emissions, a plan that includes a mandate for the sale of electric vehicles.
As the region awaits clearance, auto makers have begun to ponder how to make electrics feasible in freezing weather.
Short trips, frequent rechargings and plenty of insulation will have to become part of the driving experience, industry experts say, if electric cars are ever to become all-season vehicles.
And to be tolerable in cold temperatures, some will have to be less than emission-free.
In California, for example, where roughly 40,000 zero-emission vehicles are required to be sold in 1998, auto makers lobbied and won a waiver from California's Air Resources Board last year that allows them to sell electric vehicles with fuel-fired heaters -- tiny engines that would burn gasoline or diesel fuel for the sole purpose of heating the vehicle's cabin.
While cars with these heaters wouldn't be emission-free, their emissions would be minuscule.
"It was a bow to reality," says a spokesman for the Air Resources Board, adding that the agency agreed to the tiny engines on the condition that their operation be limited to temperatures below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
General Motors Corp. says its electric-driven two-seater, the Impact, was built with California's temperate climate in mind.
"We did not want to take on the additional complexity of low ambient conditions, particularly in the Northeast," says Bruce Zemke, an engineer on the Impact.
As a result, the car is heated by a heat pump, which works much like an air conditioner in reverse; it pumps hot air in and blows cold air out.
While efficient, it isn't very effective when temperatures drop below freezing.
On a recent test drive in Troy, Mich., frigid weather kept the car's windows fogged, in spite of the pump.
Ford Motor Co. has been experimenting with a toaster-oven-type heating system for its electric car, the Ecostar.
It has a "resistive" heater that blows air over electrically heated wires.
Stronger than the heat pump, Ford's heater tends to require more energy, Ford says, and so steals juice that could otherwise be used to drive the vehicle.
In fact, in any electric vehicle, using headlights, wipers, radio or defrost saps the battery and shortens the driving range -- which in normal conditions is about 100 miles -- between charges.
In the winter, "you just don't hop into your vehicle and plan to drive 100 miles," says Bob Batson, who builds, drives and sells electric vehicles in Maynard, Mass.
He says he keeps his winter treks down to 50 miles or less unless he can recharge his battery along the way.
In fact, charging of the batteries becomes critical during freezes because most batteries, such as those composed of lead and acid, tend to lose half their energy-storage capacity in very cold weather.
Recharging ensures that batteries don't freeze, a costly mishap that renders a battery useless.
True believers in electrics, however, remain hopeful, pointing toward advanced forms of batteries, such as those made of nickel and cadmium, that have shown greater promise for performance in the cold.
But until costs come down, the electric vehicle driver will need a different kind of mindset for the cold weather, Mr. Batson says.
"It's sort of like sailing," he says.
"You've got to plan a little more."
