GTE Corp., racing to slim down fast for the multimedia age, announced a $1.8 billion pretax charge to restructure and cut 17,000 jobs, or 13% of its work force.
The company said the charge should hurt fourth-quarter results by about $1.2 billion, or $1.22 a share, which will trigger a net loss.
GTE earned $417 million, or 44 cents a share, in the 1992 fourth quarter, and the company said that without the charge, earnings would have met analysts' expectations of about 62 cents a share.
As part of the plan, GTE said it would meld its Spacenet satellite communications operations with its Government Systems unit.
The reported pretax charges should include a $340 million write-down to account for lower revenue in the satellite unit.
"In our industry, you can only compete if you have a competitive cost structure," Charles R. Lee, GTE's chairman, said in an interview.
"Otherwise, the company is going to blow up."
The streamlining, which includes about 12,500 hourly workers and 4,500 management and salaried employees, is the Stamford, Conn., company's latest effort to bury its image as the chubby compadre of the slimmer regional Bell phone companies.
Such companies as Pacific Telesis Group and Nynex Corp. have announced similar plans to scale back staff as they prepare for competition from cable and other carriers in their markets.
GTE said the three-year streamlining plan will save $1 billion a year as the company seeks to transform itself into a svelte, low-priced carrier of voice, data and entertainment services.
GTE operates a nationwide system of local phone companies, with 17 million phone lines, and has the nation's second-largest cellular phone company.
Today many of GTE's service areas are rural.
This larger geographical dispersion has traditionally required GTE to employ more workers than the seven Baby Bells (42 workers per 10,000 phone lines for GTE, compared with an average of 37 workers for the Bells).
But GTE has been "re-engineering" itself, replacing employees with faster, more efficient computerized maintenance equipment.
The new cuts announced yesterday will trim 23% of GTE's 73,000 local phone workers, on top of 28,000 job cuts the company has made since 1988.
GTE employs 130,000 people world-wide in local phone, cellular, international and satellite-communication services.
While Mr. Lee said GTE was still trying to determine how best to carry out the new work-force reductions, he noted that in past cutbacks 98% of the workers who left GTE did so either voluntarily or through normal attrition.
A spokesman later said the "majority of cuts will be mostly involuntary separations."
GTE's chief union wasn't pleased.
The Communications Workers of America said GTE's plan was "yet another example of a highly profitable company eliminating . . . the people who built the company and created its technology to further enhance the bottom line."
The union called on "the White House and Congress to look closely" at job creation and employment stability as "the competitive rules for multimedia communications" are rewritten.
"The new cuts should bring GTE into the low 30s in terms of workers per 10,000 phone lines, making GTE competitive with the Baby Bells," said analyst Jack B. Grubman of PaineWebber Inc.
"This will improve GTE's productivity by 20% over three years."
A GTE spokesman said it currently takes 12 hours and eight workers to resolve a routine repair problem.
Under the new process that uses advanced network diagnostic systems, a single worker could resolve customers' phone-line complaints in 70% of cases.
The biggest part of the charge, about $1.3 billion, will cover closing facilities, writing off outdated equipment and severing employees.
That includes $680 million in equipment write-offs, as GTE upgrades to new gear and network software, and $160 million for consolidating facilities and operations.
Customer centers will be cut to 11 from 171, billing centers will be reduced to one from five, and network-management sites will be cut to one from 19.
About $410 million will cover layoffs, and an additional $50 million will be applied to retraining, GTE said.
At Spacenet, revenues have been declining steadily because of competition from high-capacity terrestrial transmission networks.
To cut its losses, GTE decided it was better to join the unit with Government Systems, since the two businesses were already intimately involved, a spokesman said.
"They already share some customers, some technologies, and many times they bid together on service contracts," he said.
The remaining $160 million in charges will cover real-estate assets that GTE is abandoning as it streamlines, a spokesman added.
GTE shares fell 25 cents, or 0.7%, to close at $34.625 a share in composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday.
Recently, Mr. Lee said GTE would amass multimedia assets, as it prepares to offer customers video and data services through its phone lines.
Part of this plan may include seeking partners or acquisitions in cable and entertainment programming, he said.
Yesterday he made it clear that GTE is still in the hunt.
"We'll deliver video dial-tone services to up to seven million homes in six or seven years," Mr. Lee said.
"We're having discussions with all the key people in the industry . . . about alliances, partnerships, combinations.
Nothing is ruled out."
Separately, a federal judge in Los Angeles ruled that GTE's former Sylvania lighting unit, now owned by a unit of Germany's Siemens AG, must pay almost $7 million in damages for price discrimination.
The suit filed in U.S. District Court charged GTE-Sylvania with providing lighting products to certain key distributors at prices below published price lists and with offering secret rebates.
The complaint was filed by Charles Von Der Ahe, a former lighting distributor, who claimed that GTE-Sylvania ran a price-discrimination scheme.
GTE-Sylvania responded that it was matching prices offered to customers by competitors.
A spokesman at Siemens, citing a confidentiality agreement between his company and GTE, declined to say whether GTE or Siemens's Osram unit, which now owns Sylvania, is liable for the damages.
He did say Osram will appeal the ruling.
