R.H. Macy & Co. unveiled the outline of its reorganization proposal to creditors yesterday and was greeted coldly by two powerful creditors, Fidelity Investments and unwanted suitor Federated Department Stores Inc.
Because Fidelity owns sufficient debt to block any Macy overhaul it doesn't like, Macy's outline is likely to be only the first step in lengthy negotiations.
Also, Federated shows no sign of going away quietly even though Macy proposed to pay off its claim in full.
"We are not scared off," said one person close to Cincinnati-based Federated, which has been seeking to merge with Macy since early January.
Macy said creditors would get cash and securities valued at $3.6 billion under its plan.
Macy also proposed to distribute $500 million of securities in July 1997, if the company meets optimistic projections of how its new stock performs.
Federated executives declined to comment because all the parties were obliged to sign a confidentiality agreement before being allowed into yesterday's closed-door meeting with Macy creditors.
Federated said only that it is studying Macy's plan and mapping out its next steps.
The New York retailer has been in Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law proceedings since January 1992.
Under Macy's plan, the company would cut its debt to $2 billion from the $6 billion currently owed to creditors.
Until recently, Blackstone Group, which has been advising Macy, had urged the retailer to wind up with about $1.2 billion in debt.
The provisions of yesterday's proposal reflect a compromise reached by the Macy board Tuesday, which Macy hopes will increase its plan's appeal to creditors.
Creditors will have to vote on a plan of reorganization before the company can emerge from bankruptcy-law protection, which it expects to do in January 1995.
"To us, January 1995 is an expedited negotiation," said Myron E. Ullman III, chairman of Macy, in an interview following the 80-minute closed-door session.
Some creditors emerged from the meeting sounding relieved about Macy's proposal.
"I was expecting to be beaten over the head," said Charles Leeds of Omega Advisers, a hedge fund that owns about $40 million of Macy senior subordinated bonds.
"I thought it was very constructive and a good starting point," he said.
Bondholders as a group would get about 23 cents on the dollar.
However, the senior bonds that are due in 1998 could do far better.
In trading yesterday, those bonds closed at 49 cents on the dollar, or $490 for every $1,000 face amount of bonds, up five points.
The bonds due in 2001 closed at 18, and the zero coupon bonds due in 2006 closed unchanged at 4 1/2.
The proposal already has drawn fire from Macy's powerful senior creditor, Boston's Fidelity Investments.
That is because senior bank creditors, who are owed $1.5 billion, would receive little interest on their claims.
In particular, Fidelity, which owns a portion of three bank claims, would receive about 105 cents on the dollar.
Though Fidelity paid about 70 cents on the dollar for its position, its annualized returns won't be impressive because the debt was bought some time ago.
Fidelity said yesterday that "the plan of reorganization was not the one which Fidelity had negotiated and agreed to with the plan-of-reorganization team from Macy," but it would continue to work with mediator Cyrus R. Vance.
