Let's face it.
After more than a year of ignoring their closets, Americans are looking pretty shabby.
As the economy has crept out of recession, consumers have opened their wallets for cars, televisions and other "durable" goods.
But now, for the first time in a long while, consumers are about to turn their attention to apparel purchases, some investors believe.
And that could mean big gains are just around the corner for clothing retailers' stocks.
"We think the apparel-retail stocks could surge on the first signs of a healthy sales recovery," said Steve Kernkraut, an analyst with Bear Stearns in comments to clients this week.
That signal could come in March, when, barring disastrous weather, retailers are expected to begin showing strong sales compared with last year.
Mr. Kernkraut thinks apparel sales for March will be up 7% to 8%, compared with declines of 2% to 3% last March.
Other analysts have aired similar views in recent days, including Dan Barry, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, who thinks apparel retailers will begin reporting surprisingly good sales this year.
Retail stocks have already begun their move.
Yesterday, for example, Nordstrom rose 2 7/8 to 39 3/4.
The gain reflected a strong earnings report this week and recommendations yesterday from Merrill's Mr. Barry as well as Goldman Sachs, which boosted the stock to "moderate outperform" from "market performer."
J.C. Penney rose to 55 3/8, up 1 5/8.
Federated Department Stores added 1/4 to 23 1/2.
"I know sales comparisons in March will be good, and I know how these analysts think," says Ken Pearlman, a former analyst himself who now runs his own New York investment firm, Sharevest Capital Management.
In recent weeks, he has added to positions in Gap, AnnTaylor and Charming Shoppes.
Optimism about apparel retailers signals a big change of heart on Wall Street, where the group has been unpopular for more than a year.
Once enamored of shopping, the theory went, consumers of the 1990s had become so interested in bargains that they resigned themselves to a well-worn wardrobe, shunning all those time-consuming expeditions to the mall.
The problem with that theory is that clothes eventually wear out.
And, across America, seams are beginning to split and buttons are falling off, says Peter Schaeffer, a partner with Johnson Redbook, a retail research firm.
"People will live with that for a certain amount of time, but eventually they act," Mr. Schaeffer says.
He thinks March will be strong but the real pickup in sales will come in the third and fourth quarters.
His reasoning: certain penny-pinching shoppers feel they get better value in winter clothes, which are more substantial.
Shopping may no longer be the favorite national pastime it was in the 1980s, but dismal apparel sales last year were probably just an aberration, the result of poor fashion trends and an atypically slow economic recovery, says Bear Stearns's Mr. Kernkraut.
Adds Kent Simons, co-manager of Neuberger & Berman's Guardian Fund: "The grunge look didn't sell well in Bloomingdales."
Mr. Simons says he is "looking at" buying some retail stocks.
When apparel sales begin to recover, says Mr. Kernkraut, stocks such as Limited and Charming Shoppes, for example, could surge 50% from their current levels.
Others, notably Gap, Federated and J.C. Penney, could jump 25%, he says.
It's hard to argue that the stocks are pricey.
Limited is currently selling at only about 14 times estimates for 1994 earnings.
"We think that's very inexpensive," says Mr. Kernkraut.
Federated, meanwhile, is selling at 13 times this year's earnings estimates.
"It should sell for 16 times 1994 estimates," he says.
He adds that Gap is currently selling at a multiple of 20 times his 1994 estimates; that's below its earnings-growth rate of 25%.
Nordstrom is a good way to play any upturn, Merrill's Mr. Barry believes, because it's devoted to apparel rather than general merchandise.
The stock also offers a chance to bet on a California turnaround, he says.
Analysts think the trend toward improved apparel sales will build steam as the year wears on.
But, says Mr. Pearlman, fleet-footed investors will do best.
"Within the first three weeks of realizing that sales are improving, you get the most upside," he says.
