The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, beset with complaints over its handling of computer software patents, today begins a series of hearings aimed at quieting critics and gaining a helping hand from industry.
Software makers have carped for years about the patent office's penchant for granting overly broad patents for what seem to people in the industry to be obvious coding techniques.
An award of a basic multimedia patent last year to Compton's New Media, a subsidiary of Tribune Publishing, galvanized critics, whose outcry forced a re-examination of the award.
The controversy prompted the patent office to call for public hearings on how it can improve its process of evaluating and granting patents on software, which the government estimates is the basis for a $36 billion industry.
Many programmers insist an overhaul is much needed, arguing that the patent office risks stifling innovation by granting exclusive ownership to ordinary techniques.
They say that the process of applying for a software patent is too time-consuming and expensive and that examiners are ill-prepared for tackling the question of novelty when it comes to as young and rapidly changing field as software.
Critics are split over remedies.
At the hearings -- set for two days in San Jose, Calif., this week and two days in Arlington, Va., next month -- some people will call for an end to awarding software patents altogether.
"The patent system is a disaster for software" because it makes the creation of large programs increasingly difficult, said Richard Stallman, a programmer in Cambridge, Mass.
"It makes developing software like walking through a minefield."
Mr. Stallman and others argue that there was plenty of innovation in software prior to the early 1980s, when the government began to award patents for software inventions.
Reforming the process, Mr. Stallman said, "doesn't address the real problems."
Reformers, however, appear to hold the upper hand.
Software underpins so many electronic products and services today that large companies seem to want every possible weapon against rivals.
But defenders of software patents agree that the awards process needs to be revamped.
One starting point might be to end the veil of secrecy that covers all pending patent applications.
"In periods of rapid change, the secrecy works against us because it invites opportunism," says Joseph Clark, chief executive of Videodiscovery Inc., a closely held Seattle company.
Mr. Clark suggests that the patent office notify the software industry prior to a patent award and invite offers of evidence of "prior art," which is the evidence that patent examiners rely on to decide whether an invention is sufficiently novel.
Bolstering the supply of prior art is much-needed, many say.
"The art that's available for examiners may not be as complete in software as in other fields," said Thomas L. Giannetti, a patent attorney in New York.
"They don't have the hundreds of commercial software packages that are widely available."
The industry is prepared to offer the patent office technical help, in hopes of seeing more narrow and conservative patent awards.
"We are hoping the industry can work with the patent and trademark office to improve the expertise of the patent examiners and create an adequate database of prior art and to generally streamline and make less expensive the process of patent applications," said William Neukom, vice president of law and corporate for Microsoft Corp., the largest software maker in the U.S.
