Novell Inc. said it is talking with several big computer makers about selling "source licenses" to its Unix computer program in a move that could bring the company more than $100 million.
Novell currently receives royalties on licenses of the source code of Unix, which the company acquired last year from American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
Unix is a program that controls the basic operations of high-powered desktop computers and comes loaded on them.
Unlike other operating programs, such as those sold by Microsoft Corp., the core code comprising Unix can be licensed by computer companies, which then are free to modify Unix.
"We are quite anxious to make these deals" because it will help such big backers of Unix as Sun Microsystems Inc., Hewlett-Packard Co. and International Business Machines Corp. "enlarge the market for Unix," said Ray Noorda, chief executive officer of Provo, Utah-based Novell.
Proceeds from the sale of licenses could exceed half of a normal year's profit for Novell.
However, analysts worry that the effort to sell licenses reflects Novell's inability to sell a single Unix package that is acceptable to all its major customers.
"Novell is really getting a payback on some of its nearly $400 million acquisition of Unix Systems Labs," said David Card, an analyst at International Data Corp.
Mr. Noorda disputed this view, saying Novell isn't having difficulties setting the agenda for Unix.
He said that buying a license would require a sizable "up-front" payment, but that it was a boon for those Unix customers that no longer wanted to pay royalties on an annual basis.
Besides, buyers of the Unix source code would gain wider latitude to put their own stamp on the program, he said.
People familiar with Novell's Unix business said that the highest-volume resellers of Unix pay about $25 on every computer they sell.
In Sun's case, this would mean payments of less than $10 million a year.
Low-volume licensees might pay $100 a copy.
Altogether, Novell's yearly licensing revenue from Unix is in the range of $100 million, but only a fraction of that comes from the computer makers to which Novell is offering the up-front arrangement.
The sale of licenses, the first of which Mr. Noorda said could be completed within two months, comes at a time when Unix is battling to repel an attempt by Microsoft to move in on its following.
Last July, Microsoft introduced an operating program called Windows NT, which shares many features with Unix but also runs software written for most personal computers, which Unix doesn't.
Mr. Noorda conceded that the sale of licenses might further fragment Unix, whose acceptance has been slowed in the past by the proliferation of different versions.
But he argued that this was unlikely to happen if Unix supporters hewed to a standard that ultimately will make it possible for the same application to run on many varieties of Unix.
An executive at Sun Microsystems, who confirmed that negotiations were under way, said that Sun was attracted to the prospect of saving money in the long run by buying a license.
The deal also could pave the way for Sun to offer someday an entirely home-grown operating program that has no ties to Unix other than its ability to run familiar Unix applications.
Already, Unix licensees such as Sun often don't rely on much code from Novell, but they still need access to the trade name Unix and to be able to legally represent the Unix conventions.
A spokesman for H-P confirmed that it was in talks with Novell, but declined to comment further.
