Nearly half of all instructors who do remedial work with disadvantaged children are untrained aides, a study by the International Reading Association found.
More than 80% of these aides have only high-school diplomas, yet they teach an average of 31 students each day, according to the report.
One-fifth of the aides do their jobs without regular supervision from licensed teachers, it said.
"Where the poverty of schools is greatest, the number of aides is highest," said Richard Long, the association's lobbyist, who argued that the most disadvantaged children need the best instruction available.
The association, a nonprofit group of reading teachers, wants the Clinton administration to help train teachers' aides by establishing a certification program, similar to one used by Head Start preschool programs.
Training with classes on learning, child development and reading instruction would cost about $950 a person, or $57.9 million for all 65,000 aides, Mr. Long estimated.
The Education Department has proposed that Congress set aside money for aides' and teachers' professional development when it reauthorizes the Chapter 1 program for disadvantaged children.
Congress will consider the Chapter 1 legislation later this year.
The Chapter 1 program has been receiving $7 billion annually, and is expected to get an increase of about $700 million a year.
During the last decade, financially strapped schools have been hiring aides at more than twice the pace they hire teachers.
By using aides, they can reduce pupil-teacher ratios at half the cost of adding additional teachers.
But the association report said there is no evidence that aides have a positive effect on children's learning.
Some studies show that aides can be counterproductive, fostering children's dependency by the way they teach.
Aides are more likely than teachers to simply answer children's questions, rather than show students how to figure out answers for themselves, Mr. Long said.
Aides also are more likely to teach reading through workbook exercises than through discussing texts, even though such exercises have been shown to have less educational value, Mr. Long added.
