Tyson Foods Inc., the nation's biggest poultry company, made an unsolicited bid to acquire WLR Foods Inc., a chicken and turkey processor, for $30 a share, or $329 million.
The bid, which Tyson announced after the Nasdaq Stock Market closed yesterday, represents a 57% premium over the $19 closing for WLR's stock.
In a letter to WLR's board, Tyson's chairman, Don Tyson, said the Springdale, Ark., chicken company would prefer an all-cash deal but would consider negotiating a stock-and-cash transaction.
WLR, based in Hinton, Va., issued a statement last night saying its board would evaluate the Tyson proposal.
But the statement added that the directors believe "that the long-term best interests of WLR and its shareholders would be best served by WLR remaining independent."
John Flora, WLR's counsel, said he couldn't elaborate on the statement.
In his letter to WLR's board, Mr. Tyson asked for an answer by Feb. 4, after which he said the acquisition proposal would expire.
The letter indicated that Tyson was going public with its offer only after being rebuffed in an attempt to meet with WLR's board.
"Tyson doesn't take no for an answer very easily," said Napoleon Overton, an analyst at Morgan Keegan, citing the company's successful battle to acquire rival Holly Farms Corp. for $1.29 billion in 1989.
An acquisition of WLR by Tyson would sharply accelerate Tyson's already ambitious expansion.
This month the company, which also has interests in beef, pork and seafood, said it will build four chicken processing plants.
Combined with some moves announced last year, Tyson's internal expansion plans alone will cost about $400 million and increase its chicken processing capacity by 30%.
Tyson's announcement yesterday didn't say how it would finance an acquisition of WLR.
Tyson officials couldn't be reached for comment last night.
WLR is the nation's eighth-largest poultry processor and one of the top three U.S. turkey processors, according to Tyson.
Like its suitor, WLR sells fresh, frozen and cooked chicken and turkey products to retail outlets, restaurants and other institutional customers.
In fiscal 1993, ended July 3, WLR earned $14.6 million on sales of $616.7 million.
In its fiscal year, ended Oct. 2, Tyson earned $180.3 million on sales of $4.7 billion.
