Michigan voters overwhelmingly approved a school finance reform package, but it is unclear how the change will improve either school quality or educational funding.
Michigan voters on Tuesday approved higher sales taxes and cigarette taxes to foot much of the $10.2 billion bill to finance the state's public schools, shifting much of the burden from the property-tax base as the primary revenue source.
The plan also redistributes the pool of funds among school districts.
Effective May 1, Michigan residents will see the sales tax rise to 6% from 4% -- marginally higher than the national average.
The state income tax decreases to 4.4% from 4.6%, the cigarette tax increases by 50 cents a pack, to 75 cents, and the property-tax rate on most homes is reduced to six mills on primary homes and to 24 mills on all other property.
The statewide average formerly was 35 mills, including all property.
A mill equals $1 for every $1,000 of a property's value for tax purposes.
Businessess will have to pay more for purchased goods through the higher sales tax.
But the state's corporate tax levy remained unchanged at 2.35%.
"Although this is still not the complete answer to equitable, adequate and stable funding of the schools in our state, it does provide the best option at this time," said David L. Snead, Detroit Public Schools' general superintendent.
For some districts, it will be a windfall.
For others, it will be like being robbed.
At least 40 Michigan school districts are expected to ask voters this fall to pay higher millages to cover expected revenue shortfalls.
And even though the plan passed overwhelmingly, voters and polls indicated many voted for it only because they felt they had no other choice or didn't understand the issue.
Michigan's Republican Gov. John Engler put only the sales-tax and cigarette-tax package before voters, and campaigned mightily for it.
If that measure had been defeated, a package based on higher income taxes would have automatically gone into effect.
Michigan voters had five times rejected ballot proposals seeking to raise the sales tax.
The move to overhaul school financing stems from Gov. Engler's pledge as a candidate in 1990 to lower property taxes.
"A lot of people voted out of the threat that one was bad and the other was worse," said David Littmann, chief economist for Detroit-based Comerica Bank.
"We'll have to wait and see what people really thought in November," he said, when Mr. Engler stands for re-election.
Its still unclear what efforts will be made to substantially improve the quality of Michigan's schools.
In the past decade, Mr. Littmann noted, per capita pupil spending in Michigan has more than doubled the rate of inflation.
However, student performance hasn't kept pace with spending levels.
"It leaves us wondering what, if anything, has changed," he added.
