News Corp. said it agreed to sell the Boston Herald to Patrick J. Purcell, the longtime publisher of the Herald who also serves as publisher of the New York Post.
Rupert Murdoch, News Corp.'s chairman and chief executive officer, cited Federal Communications Commission cross-ownership rules for the expected sale.
News Corp. had said last fall it might sell the tabloid, which has a daily circulation of 321,715, when it retained its option to buy WFXT-TV Channel 25, a Fox Inc. affiliate here.
Drew Marcus, an analyst with Alex. Brown & Sons, said the move continues a shift from print to electronic media by News Corp.
"It's much more important strategically for the company to own a Boston television station than a newspaper," he said, especially in the wake of News Corp.'s Fox unit winning the rights to National Football League broadcasts.
"With the NFL deal, and the profits it will bring to the local affiliate stations, it makes sense for them to own as many major-market stations as possible."
Terms of the sale weren't disclosed.
A Herald editor put the price at about $15 million, partly financed by News Corp., but this couldn't be confirmed.
Mr. Purcell, who also had backing from Bank of Boston Corp. for the purchase, asserted that the paper has been "running close to break-even for the past few years."
He said that while the Herald's circulation has slipped in recent years from a peak of 365,000 in 1988, "as the region's economy rebounds, as I think it's poised to do, circulation will grow again."
He said he expects to cut costs and has "some ideas on how to bring in new advertising revenue."
The Herald competes for readers and advertisers with the larger Boston Globe -- now owned by New York Times Co. -- which has a daily circulation of 507,647 and dominates local advertising with more than 80% of the market, by some estimates.
The two papers are often-bitter competitors, with the Herald's screaming headlines and politically conservative views contrasting with the Globe's more comprehensive regional and national coverage and liberal editorial page.
The Globe's Sunday edition towers over the Sunday Herald, with circulation of 814,036 copies, compared with 213,985 for the Herald.
