THESE DAYS, it seems everybody wants to be a multimedia star.
Lawyers, like others in the business of selling professional services, are rushing to market themselves to the telecommunications, computer and entertainment industries.
Trouble is, nobody agrees what it really means to be a multimedia lawyer.
Or an interactive law firm.
Or whether there is such a thing as practicing on the information superhighway.
Some law firms touting their multimedia experts simply mean they represent software companies in patent disputes.
Other law firms do regulatory and lobbying work for cable companies.
And a few even try to draw distinctions between information-superhighway lawyers, who handle telecommunications work, and multimedia lawyers, who make deals between high-tech and entertainment companies.
Mostly though, law firms seem to apply these voguish labels to whatever shape their practice happens to be taking at the moment.
Manatt, Phelps & Phillips of Los Angeles, whose clients include movie stars and studios, brought in seven intellectual-property lawyers from another firm in August and immediately issued a news release trumpeting Manatt's entrance into the "interactive and multimedia arena."
That arena, explains entertainment partner Joseph Horacek, is where Hollywood's "highest levels of talent" meet computer executives.
"I have called a number of large independent production companies or studios, trying to educate them as between the two worlds," Mr. Horacek says.
The firm has yet to complete a single multimedia deal, but Mr. Horacek says more than a dozen are in the works.
Several other Los Angeles-based firms have recently merged their entertainment and intellectual-property departments.
A FEW firms readily admit they're trying to lure clients into uncharted legal territory.
In promotional materials boasting about its corporate and trademark-law work on behalf of a maker of computer software for hospitals, New York's Proskauer, Rose, Goetz & Mendelsohn said it is entering the "precedent-less field of the so-called information superhighway."
Partner Carole Handler, of the firm's Los Angeles office, says the firm within a month will establish a practice group made up of its attorneys in the "high-tech, information superhighway area."
For the 650-lawyer San Francisco firm Pillsbury, Madison & Sutro, multimedia doesn't include an entertainment component per se but instead seems to mean more frequent meetings between members of the firm's intellectual property and telecommunications departments.
The firm's 15-member "media team," formed six months ago, also includes antitrust and tax partners.
"We're pulling together niches of our practice areas . . . to market our multimedia experience and meet existing clients' demands," says Mary Cranston, head of Pillsbury's telecommunications practice.
The media team is doing corporate work for units of Pacific Telesis Group, a longstanding client of Pillsbury's, and has handled patent matters for computer companies.
At a time when glamorous media deals like Viacom Inc.'s just-completed battle for Paramount Communications Inc. are all the rage, no major law firm wants to be left behind.
Like soft-drink makers who put the same old stuff in new cans, law firms in many instances are simply repackaging traditional legal functions such as licensing and corporate finance.
"This type of legal work has existed for a while," concedes John Valva, public-relations spokesman for the San Francisco law firm Farella, Braun & Martel.
"It's just that all of a sudden, multimedia is what it's called."
But the head of Farella's new "multimedia practice group," partner Bruce Maximov, says that, "It's not enough just to enhance your legal skills."
Lawyers in his group have attended university courses on such subjects as how to design video games, he says.
Chicago's 450-lawyer Winston & Strawn formed its multimedia practice group six months ago.
Loren Wittner, partner in charge of marketing, says the firm is following in the footsteps of major accounting firms, which have organized themselves along client-industry lines.
But Jon Klemens, of the legal consulting firm Altman Weil Pensa Inc., says that creating multidisciplinary teams may cause friction over which traditional department is really controlling the client's legal work.
THE HYPE has many lawyers carping about their competitors' claims.
"Everybody has a slide in their presentation that says `information superhighway' or `multimedia.'
Then they mention three clients, and no one's ever heard of them," says Hank Barry, partner in charge of a 22-attorney "technology practice group" at the San Francisco law firm Cooley, Godward, Castro, Huddleson & Tatum.
As a young lawyer, Mr. Barry worked on movie deals at a New York law firm.
Now his clients are Silicon Valley start-up companies.
"I think there are probably only 10 lawyers in the country who can legitimately say they've done major-league entertainment work and major-league high-tech work," says Mr. Barry, who numbers himself among them.
He represented Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. two years ago in its high-profile deal with 3DO Co., a Mountain View, Calif., maker of interactive games and equipment, but says he hasn't been involved in any multimedia transactions valued at more than $10 million.
What the brouhaha may boil down to is an attempt by big firms, especially those that had lost market share to small intellectual-property boutiques, to regain clients by claiming to offer them one-stop shopping.
Clients, however, may not be completely convinced.
Hal Kruth, vice president of law and business development at Kaleida Labs Inc., a Mountain View software company, says he "can go to a patent lawyer and hook them up with a very good corporate lawyer at another firm and say, `Look, I want you guys to work together.'"
Mr. Kruth says he isn't taken in by trendy titles.
When he wants to hire a law firm, he looks for a strong record in a particular area of the law.
"There's no such thing as multimedia law," he says.
"What there is, is intellectual-property law, corporate law, and contract work akin to entertainment-industry stuff. . . .
It's still the same basic legal skills."
-- Margin by which Austria's Anton Sailer, "The Blitz from Kitz," won the men's giant slalom at the 1956 Cortina Games: 6.2 seconds.
Gale Research, Detroit
