Tokyo stocks ended a volatile session Wednesday with a 1.7% gain, the bourse's sixth climb in a row.
But London prices tumbled 1.2%, partly on British unemployment data that hurt the interest-rate outlook.
And Frankfurt shares ended broadly lower as investors began sniffing for better deals in other European markets, where profit-taking was prevalent.
Across Asia, shares continued to be battered, attributed to speculative investors' growing anxieties following a stellar 1993, rather than to any sudden change in the region's corporate outlook.
Hong Kong stocks plummeted 4%, as the market's slump continued for a second day.
Equities slid 2.3% in Manila, 3.7% in Singapore, 6.4% in Kuala Lumpur and 7.3% in Bangkok.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 112.71, down 0.20, reflecting increases in markets in the Americas and declines in European and Asia/Pacific markets.
Fishing stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 74.46, up 3.33, or 4.7%, with Nippon Suisan Kaisha Ltd. of Japan posting a 7.7% gain in its local currency.
Plantation stocks trailed again, at 238.02 down 34.31, or 13%, with Batu Kawan Bhd. of Malaysia sliding 15% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 41.81 points Tuesday, surged 308.63 to 18793.88, as a burst of arbitrage buying to take advantage of oversold positions in the final half-hour sparked a late rally.
The Nikkei's finish, near the day's peaks, was the highest level since Nov. 4.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei index fell 145.22 points to close the morning session at 18648.66.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 410 million shares, down from 441.2 million shares a day earlier.
Advancing issues outpaced decliners 792-234.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which slipped 0.45 point Tuesday, gained 10.59 to 1511.43.
The climb, overcoming two sharp drops during the session, came after the Tokyo market shook off some worries about delays on Japanese government political-reform measures.
Sentiment also was supported by news reports that the government will push to use public funds to buy land in an effort to increase liquidity in the stagnant real-estate market, and that it may propose a bigger-than-expected income tax cut to help the economy recover.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index tumbled 41.8 points to 3372.0, which also was the intraday low.
The FT 30-stock index plunged 30.6 points, or 1.2%, to 2574.2.
Volume was 808.9 million shares, compared with 882.8 million shares a day earlier.
The British employment figures, which showed that the number of jobless shrank markedly more than expected last month, suggested that a lending-rate cut will be delayed.
Some bears even believed that rates have bottomed and that the next rate move will be up.
But others said favorable inflation and European rate reductions in coming months will allow Britain to reduce its rates.
Yesterday, a few large sell orders guided by computer programs from British funds triggered the rout, with prices dropping sharply across the spectrum.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index dropped 19.57 points to 2209.18, near the day's lows, on light volume.
The market opened strongly, but a lack of buyers and worries related to German corporate activity pushed prices broadly lower.
German mutual funds have been holding back on committing cash to Frankfurt shares recently, ahead of several coming stockrights issues, and foreign investors were taking closer looks at the London and Paris markets.
In Paris, shares retreated across the board in fairly active trading, as investors took profits following the market's recent record-breaking advance, while poor corporate earnings prospects depressed sentiment.
In Amsterdam, stocks skidded 1.3% on profit-taking inspired by lower prices on other bourses; losses were recorded in all sectors, with food and beverage companies and publishers hit hard in the sell-off.
In Milan, equities finished flat to slightly lower as profits were grabbed following the previous day's advance.
In Madrid and Stockholm, both of which posted record highs the previous day, prices fell as profits were snagged, a factor that also dragged stocks down in Zurich and left prices mixed in Brussels.
In Mexico City, stocks rallied from intraday lows to end slightly higher, after President Carlos Salinas promised a unilateral cease-fire with rebels in Chiapas and pardons for those who lay down their weapons.
The insurgents didn't reply, which spurred a late sell-off in some stocks.
The market also found support from an unexpected drop in Mexican interest rates.
In Hong Kong, stocks dived as overseas fund managers continued to liquidate holdings.
The benchmark index skidded 5.8% in the past two sessions after a 3.3% rebound Monday from the reversal of a rally that began last September.
Stocks also were battered Wednesday by speculation that Hong Kong banks will tighten mortgage policies further because of spiraling residential property prices.
Property stocks took the worst beating, losing 5% and leading the market down.
Commercial and industrial issues sank 4.4% and utilities lost 4.1%.
Banks were hurt the least, even with their 1.9% decline.
The market also was pressured by Sino-U.S. trade talks on textiles.
In Singapore, shares were knocked down in turbulent dealings from the opening bell, and at one point the market had collapsed 6.2%.
Institutional and retail investors sold issues across the board.
Jitters continued because of interest-rate fears, as well as warnings that the market was overheated.
Selling by funds toppled blue chips, and smaller stocks were bashed even worse, as some selling was forced by margin calls for issues bought on credit.
In Kuala Lumpur, the plunge in active trading deepened losses from the previous day's 5.9% slide, though stocks did bounce up to recover from intraday lows, helped by blue chips and buying by several government-controlled institutional investors; the Malaysian market has taken a 19% drubbing since last Thursday.
And in Bangkok, the market's tumble was across the board, as every subindex declined.
In Manila, the market corrected for the fourth straight session on continued profittaking.
In Sydney, stocks declined as investors took profits in a consolidation ahead of next month's posting of corporate earnings results.
In Taipei, shares eased, affected by tightened liquidity and Taiwan's worst drought in four decades.
In Seoul, the main index rose, but the broader market weakened as declining issues outnumbered gaining issues. calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
