Since the beginning of this month, consumers and investors have had a new way of measuring whether they are buying from a healthy life-insurance company.
But finding the information isn't easy.
Called the "risk-based capital ratio," it measures how much capital an insurance company has to support the riskiness of its investments and operations.
The trouble is, although the figures for the country's 2,005 life-insurance companies are available to anyone knowledgeable enough to weed through the public record, state regulators have forbidden companies themselves from disclosing the data.
They fear insurance agents will exploit these capital-adequacy numbers to make a sale, and that the public will misunderstand them.
Regulators have also warned rating agencies -- traditionally the sources of information on insurance-company strength -- not to publish the results.
A.M. Best Co. and Standard & Poor's Corp. say they will honor the request, but other agencies say they are inclined to ignore the warning.
"I think we probably will publish the numbers, but I want to get a clearer reading of the situation," said Chester Murray, insurance director of Moody's Investors Service Inc.
Fortunately for consumers, some consulting firms are releasing the numbers, and media outlets plan to publish them.
Results for the 20 largest companies, compiled by the Hartford, Conn., firm of Townsend & Schupp, accompany this story.
"The primary value to consumers is to identify companies that are inadequately capitalized," says Joseph Belth, editor of the Insurance Forum, a newsletter in Elletsville, Ind.
Adds Martin Weiss, president of Weiss Research Inc., a rating agency in West Palm Beach, Fla.: "We feel these numbers are extremely important.
It's unfortunate that the regulators have shrouded these numbers in secrecy."
Risk-based capital ratios are intended to act as an early-warning device for regulators to spot companies in financial trouble.
They also give regulators more authority to take action against troubled companies.
The calculations are based on dividing a company's capital by the minimum amount that regulators regard as necessary to support its business.
State-insurance departments can ask companies that fall below 125% to provide them with more information.
States can take over companies that fall below 50%.
States must seize companies falling below 35%.
None of the 20 largest insurers is subject to regulator action.
For instance, Prudential Insurance Co. of America, the country's largest insurer, had a ratio of 188.4% for year-end 1993.
Equitable Cos.' flagship unit, Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S., comes in at 125.4%.
Although that figure is lower than the other big companies shown in the chart, the unit still has significantly more capital than the minimum level at which regulators would take it over.
In a statement, Equitable said another measure of capital adequacy -- capital divided by liabilities -- puts the company in the top 10% of the industry in terms of financial strength.
Equitable also pointed out that it has raised $1.4 billion in capital during the past two years.
The company added that a subsidiary that accounts for 80% of its new sales and half its premium income, Equitable Variable Life Insurance Co., is even better capitalized.
Figures on file with state-insurance departments show a ratio of 205% for the unit.
Insurance experts say the information is meaningful even in cases where insurers exceed their minimum requirements.
"If I were a regulator, I would take a hard look at the companies in their states that fall in the bottom 10%," said Frederick Townsend, president of Townsend & Schupp.
Where the ratios fail is in helping consumers distinguish between good companies.
Although the arguably overcapitalized State Farm Life, a unit of State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., of Bloomington, Ill., scores more than 600%, insurance analysts say consumers shouldn't choose State Farm solely on that basis.
Milwaukee-based Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Co., scores less than half as high as State Farm, but is given the highest financial strength ratings by the rating agencies.
In addition to looking at financial results, the ratings agencies base their scores on interviews with company officials.
The formula was developed last year by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, a group led by Terrence Lennon, a former New York deputy insurance superintendent who is now a senior vice president with Met Life.
During its development, insurance companies tried to keep the results secret.
Regulators disagreed, but they nevertheless agreed to a rule forbidding companies and agents from using the information for marketing purposes.
This week, the American Council of Life Insurance, the life-insurance industry's largest trade group, tried again to supress the information.
The group asked the commissioners' group for permission for companies to report the figure only when it falls below 125%.
"The industry feels this should not be used for rating companies," said Gene Grabowski, spokesman for the American Council of Life Insurance.
"They are only one measure of a company and should be put in context.
We're certainly not trying to sweep anything under the rug."
He said the industry worries that some companies and some agents might improperly use the figures.
Mr. Belth is a fervent advocate of disclosing the figures, but he believes the industry's concern is valid.
"Some smaller companies that don't even have ratings have higher ratios than those of the industry giants," he said.
"They will advertise it to demonstrate how strong they are.
But they aren't."
The 20 largest U.S. life-insurance companies, listed alphabetically, and their year-end 1993 capital adequacy (as measured by their adjusted capital as a percentage of their required risk-based capital level).
Note: Companies falling below 50% can be taken over by state regulators.
