Eastman Kodak Co.'s new chief executive officer, George Fisher, ending more than a year of speculation, said the company's copier division "is not for sale."
The business, a poor performer for years, is expected to report profit for 1993, the company said.
The unit comprises about one-third of Kodak's information-systems division, which in 1992 posted an operating loss of $151 million, which includes a $123 million deduction for restructuring costs.
Mr. Fisher's internal endorsement of the business, which he personally relayed to the copier-sales staff last week, surprised analysts.
Since he took over on Dec. 1, the former Motorola Inc. executive has been silent about his plans for Kodak's various businesses.
"There's been an impression that copiers have improved," said analyst Jack Kelly with Goldman Sachs.
But competitor Xerox Corp. continues to give Kodak trouble, he added.
"I'm just surprised Fisher made a statement so early in the game."
Kodak's copier division hopes Mr. Fisher's backing will help boost sales with customers, some of whom have worried about whether Kodak in Rochester, N.Y., would be around to service equipment.
"The major impact of this is credibility with our customers," said Ed Greco, vice president and general manager of office imaging, the division controlling copy products.
"This is commitment from the corporation."
In Mr. Greco's office still hangs a color picture of Kodak's office-imaging building with a computerized "Not for Sale" sign out front.
Similar signs -- intended to spark a "survival mode" -- papered the division last year when the fight to save copiers heightened after former Kodak Chairman and CEO Kay Whitmore said the company would sell or spin off parts of a major business.
Although Kodak's chemical division, which was spun off Jan. 1 , was the intended divestiture, speculation continued that the copier division "was on the block," Mr. Greco said.
The business has been helped by cost cutting and inventory reductions.
In addition, Kodak's alliance with copier giant Canon Inc.'s Canon Copiers U.S.A., which began in July 1992, has increasingly boosted sales, Mr. Greco said.
