If high-tech meant hot stock in the '80s, privatization seems to be the mantra of investing in the '90s.
Last week the S.G. Warburg group and Kleinwort Benson Group PLC said they may together raise more than #1 billion ($1.5 billion) in the U.K. to invest in European companies going private.
Guinness Flight, which is 80%-owned by Guinness Mahon, a unit of Bank of Yokohama, launches its global privatization unit trust, or mutual fund, Feb. 14.
CS Holding AG's CS First Boston unit wants to raise $200 million for Eastern European stock markets, Fidelity Investments plans a global privatization mutual fund in March and the Framlington Group PLC's Russian Investment Fund raised $15 million more than expected when it closed in December 1993.
Privatization "is very sexy" now, says one investment professional.
"Don't ask why."
Other market professionals say it has a lot to do with the success of British privatization programs under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the '80s.
Most of the funds announced so far are aimed at U.K. investors who watched shares of companies such as British Telecommunications PLC and British Airways PLC outperform the U.K. market once they were wrested from the hands of the state.
"We did a study in our prospectus," says Lough Callahan, director of Mercury Asset Management PLC, which has initially raised #325 million ($485 million) for the Warburg investment trust called Mercury European Privatization Trust.
"Over the last year, the privatized companies went up by 52% as compared to the FT-100 index of 25%."
Adds Mark Howdle, equity strategist at J.P. Morgan, "Everybody who is half aware knows what a good thing the British privatizations were in the '80s."
Andrew Couch, fund manager at Guinness Flight, says he was stunned to learn last summer that shares of privatized British companies rose nearly twice as fast as the overall U.K. market during the last 10 years.
"The area is red-hot," he says.
Of course, no one knows whether a simple change of ownership will make a slew of state-owned companies in France, Italy, Spain, Germany and even Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic more efficient, more profitable and thus, more valuable.
Currency risks will add an element absent from U.K. privatizations.
But the fact that Western European governments expect to sell about $190 billion worth of stock in state-owned companies will certainly test the market.
J.P. Morgan & Co. expects another $100 billion in Western deals yet to be announced.
Such numbers dwarf the money raised thus far.
But there's hope that all this new equity will indeed be soaked up by buyers.
Mr. Couch points out that companies undergoing privatization tend to be asset-rich with strong balance sheets and near-monopolies in their market.
He hopes to raise #30 million to #40 million.
Kleinwort Benson says it initially expected to raise only about #40 million when it started out last December.
The offer was oversubscribed to the tune of #880 million, with both institutions and retail customers expressing interest.
Simon White, managing director of Kleinwort Benson Investment Trusts, says institutional clients find buying stock in foreign companies bothersome because of administration processes as well as allocation limits placed by countries on purchases by foreign entities.
The trust sells a fixed number of shares to be later traded on the London Stock Exchange, eliminating much of the hassle.
"Applying for our fund gave them two bites of the cherry," says Mr. White.
It also, of course, lets fund managers tap into privatization mania, earning fees of something less than 1% annually of the funds' assets.
Harder to explain is the success of the Framlington Russian fund.
That fund has the backing of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Finance, which invested $16.6 million, and of the International Finance Corp., an arm of the World Bank, which invested $8 million.
It originally sought a total of $50 million, but heavy demand from U.S. institutional investors brought the total to $65 million.
Unlike the other funds, however, the Framlington fund is fundamentally a venture capital vehicle.
A closed-end fund with a 10-year life organized under the laws of Luxembourg, investors were required to put up a minimum of $100,000.
The fund will invest in Russian companies with the ability to earn hard currency.
Investments are expected to be held for a minimum of five years.
CCF Asset Management Russia, a Russian company incorporated by Framlington, is acting as investment advisers, employing eight Russians as analysts in Moscow.
Russia is too risky for U.K. funds targeting ordinary people.
Mr. Couch says his fund will avoid Eastern Europe altogether for the first few years, focusing instead on Western Europe, Southeast Asia and Australasia as well as Turkey, Greece, Portugal and South America.
"Some of the emerging markets are traveling on hope," he says.
