Philips Electronics NV said it swung to a fourth-quarter profit of 512 million guilders ($267.6 million), or 1.57 guilders (82 cents) a share, from a year-earlier loss of 1 billion guilders, or 3.24 guilders a share.
Sales edged up 1.6% in the quarter to 17.45 billion guilders from 17.17 billion guilders.
It was the second consecutive profitable quarter for Philips, and confirmed market assessments that the Dutch consumer-electronics giant is at last recovering from three rocky years of intermittent losses.
But the turnaround came largely because of a painful cost-cutting program, called Operation Centurion, in which Philips shed most of its computer, defense and public-telecommunications divisions, sold unwanted real estate, tightened financial controls, slashed jobs at its core consumer-electronics business, and trimmed its corporate bureaucracy.
The company also announced that its former management board chairman, Wisse Dekker, has decided to step down as head of the board of supervisors.
He will be suceeded by Floris Maljers, outgoing management board chairman at Unilever NV, the Anglo-Dutch consumer-products group, and a current member of Philips supervisory board.
For the year, Philips posted a profit of 1.97 billion guilders, reversing a loss of 900 million guilders a year earlier.
Sales rose 0.5% to 58.83 billion guilders.
The company also declared its first annual dividend since the 2 guilders paid for 1989.
It will distribute 0.50 guilder a share to stockholders for 1993.
Philips said its 1993 earnings were buoyed by a number of factors that included a substantial narrowing of the losses at the consumer-electronics division as well as a substantial drop in annual debt-service costs.
Philips said its earnings last year totaled 6.15 guilders a share compared with the net loss per share of 2.91 guilders in 1992.
Pretax financing costs plunged to 1.04 billion guilders last year from 1.78 billion guilders a year earlier.
That decline was due to falling interest rates and by the company's paydown and restructuring of its huge mountain of debt.
The last time Philips posted an annual profit was for 1991.
The big improvement in Philips operations in 1993 came from the struggling consumer-electronics division, which trimmed its annual pretax operating loss to 73 million guilders last year from the gaping 553 million guilder deficit in 1992.
Sales were relatively flat at 21.34 billion guilders in consumer electronics compared with the year-earlier 21.59 billion guilders.
But the company stressed that the modest loss last year in consumer electronics remains "unsatisfactory" due to ongoing stagnation in markets and cut-throat competition from low-cost producing countries.
Philips also announced it is reorganizing the consumer-electronics lines "in order to be more responsive to changes in the market and to bring greater focus to user satisfaction and cost effectiveness."
It said a new product division, called "Sound and Vision" has been formed to house the company's audio-video products and systems operations.
The car-systems and business-electronics lines will operate as a separate business.
Philips last year got a major boost from its other consumer-product lines, especially from its London-based PolyGram recording and filmed entertainment subsidiary.
The unit earlier this week announced that 1993 earnings grew more than 20%.
The consumer-products division, which includes PolyGram, boosted sales by 7% last year to 11.1 billion guilders, with operating earnings rising to 1.05 billion guilders from 935 million guilders.
