When a movie was made of Junichiro Tanizaki's exotic novel "The Key," it was titled "Odd Obsession."
For once, the filmmakers had it right.
Obsession possessed Tanizaki's imagination.
In book after book he described in elegant detail, and sometimes amazing variety, relationships between the adored and the adoring.
"Quicksand" (Knopf, 224 pages, $22) and two novellas, "The Reed Cutter" and "Captain Shigemoto's Mother" (Knopf, 180 pages, $22), are the last of Tanizaki's major fictions to be translated into English.
All three could be titled "Odd Obsessions."
In "Quicksand," a leisured young wife falls under the spell of a beautiful woman she meets at an art class.
Sonoko Kakiuchi narrates the story of her obsession, half aware of her folly, half making excuses for herself.
For Mitsuko Tokumitsu, the object of Sonoko's desire, the thrill is in being loved and making her lovers submit.
Once she tells Sonoko: "I'd much rather be worshiped by someone of my own sex.
It's natural for a man to look at a woman and think she's beautiful, but when I realize I can have another woman infatuated with me, I ask myself if I'm really that beautiful.
It makes me blissfully happy."
Obsession is never far removed from the thought of death in Tanizaki.
Sonoko and Mitsuko haven't been meeting secretly for very long before Sonoko is exclaiming: "Such a beautiful body!
I could kill you!"
To which Mitsuko responds: "Go ahead and kill me!
I want you to!"
Time has not been kind to dialogue like this, or to the emotions that Tanizaki sought to capture.
The story progresses to a document sealed in blood, two successive love triangles with Mitsuko at their apex, and finally to the total submission of not only Sonoko, but also her husband, to the will of the enchantress.
In the U.S. in 1994, I'm afraid that Sonoko and Mitsuko seem not passionate, nor depraved, nor sensual, but only laughable.
Tanizaki, who died in 1965, set the novel in 1928 Osaka and published it serially from 1928 through 1930.
His was a far different world.
Yet, in one respect, our world is similar.
When, in the novel, a vengeful maid tells the Sonoko-Mitsuko story to the press, scandal sheets have a field day.
They piously declare, of course, that the story serves a useful purpose in "exposing the sordid vices of the leisure class."
Tanizaki, one of Japan's most prized novelists of this century, is probably best known in the U.S. for "Some Prefer Nettles" and "The Makioka Sisters."
His prose is reportedly extremely hard to translate, but you couldn't tell that from either Howard Hibbett's work on "Quicksand" or Anthony H. Chambers's rendering of the novellas.
Tanizaki often set his tales in the distant past.
"The Reed Cutter" is a contemporary tale, but suffused with the literature of earlier times.
A man begins a solitary walk brooding on a 14th-century historical narrative.
The riverine landscape he passes was the setting for great historical events, and his mind is so alive to the past that he almost hears the voices of the long-dead nobles.
The landscape, the past, his own approaching old age all impress upon him the observation of a 12th-century poet-priest that "what never changes in any age is the wretchedness of humanity."
He finds a spot among some reeds that gives him the view he has come for -- of the moon and the river.
He drinks sake and writes in his notebook.
Out of the reeds comes another man, with another bottle of sake.
The stranger offers a story.
It is the tale of his father's life; how his father fell desperately in love with a married woman, worshiped her from afar and then was tempted closer and closer by the woman basking in his adoration.
Tanizaki gives his story a fairy-tale timelessness that makes it the best of these three newly translated works.
At its end, the storyteller disappears, leaving the listener to wonder whether he has been listening to a ghost.
"Captain Shigemoto's Mother" is set in 10th-century Kyoto and combines sexual obsession with another major Tanizaki theme, a man's love for his mother.
Once again, the adoring men revolve around a great beauty.
Here, though, the woman is a totally passive creature portrayed only as an image in men's eyes.
She marries a man more than 50 years her senior.
He dotes on her and takes enormous pride in having fathered a child while in his 70s.
Not surprisingly, the woman is less ecstatic with her situation.
She takes as an occasional lover one of the leading poet-amorists of the day, and he, in turn, lavishly describes her beauty to one of the great noblemen of the time.
English readers without a strong liking for translated old Chinese and Japanese poetry are likely to grow impatient as Tanizaki leisurely establishes his story's momentum, but at its center he creates a quite wonderful cruel banquet scene in which the great noble plays on the old husband's drunkenness, folly and sense of social inferiority to take away his wife.
The old husband and young son are left to battle with grief for the rest of their lives, obsessed by the absent woman.
Tanizaki's widow remarked that "Captain Shigemoto's Mother" was her favorite among her husband's works.
They must have had an interesting marriage.
