President Clinton's talk about infrastructure resonates with parents, who are spending a record amount of money so their children can build bridges, highways and railroads with Lego blocks, Erector sets, Lincoln Logs and Tinker Toys.
Sales of construction toys grew an estimated 15% last year, outpacing the toy industry overall, which grew at less than 5%.
The sales figures will be announced today in New York at the opening of the American International Toy Fair.
Much of the buzz at the show will be about new offerings in the action-figure category, which has had big hits recently like the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers.
But while the Power Rangers are still very popular, construction toys have shown strong, steady growth as schools and parents have bought them for their educational value.
Recognition from researchers of the importance of such "manipulative" toys in early development is fueling the growth, as are savvy promotions.
Touching and organizing objects is widely thought to help in understanding the abstractions of mathematics and science, especially in the early years.
Linda Kahrs, president of Tout About Toys Inc., in Foster City, Calif., which sells teaching aids to schools, says "manipulatives have become the mainstay of my business."
Her company has grown from one product sold from her car in 1985 to an office/warehouse distributing several hundred toys today.
"The classroom has become a subtle advertisement for the product," says Ms. Kahrs.
"I have parents asking me all the time where they can get product.
`Your local toy store,' I often say."
Lego, which has a Danish parent, will unveil at Toy Fair plans to take an educational exhibit of its blocks to museums in the U.S. and Canada over the next several years.
Nearly 100 museums are interested.
"We're booked through 1997," says John Dion, the exhibit's manager.
Construction toys accounted for $350 million in 1993 sales, about $200 million less than action figures.
But analysts expect big growth in play building.
Lego, the category's leader, sold $250 million of its plastic blocks in 1993 and expects double-digit sales growth this year, a feat it has achieved for the last six years.
Meccano Inc., a unit of French-based Meccano SA, is predicting sales of two million Erector sets this year, double last year's volume.
And Connector Set Toy Co., a newcomer based in Hatfield, Pa., that makes K'Nex, hit $25 million in sales in 1993, its first year on the market, and also expects sales to double this year.
Big U.S. toy makers have tended to give short shrift to the category, despite signs of room for growth.
Joel Glickman, managing partner of Connector Set, shopped K'Nex around three years ago.
"I had the honor of being turned down by all of the majors in the industry," he says.
Stephane Treppoz, Meccano's U.S. chief, figures that construction toys represent only 3% of toy sales here, compared with 6% to 8% in other developed nations.
The Lego museum exhibit is designed to let children test seismic and robotic principles.
Visitors can build homes and skyscrapers on a shaking table that simulates earthquakes of varying intensities.
"Kids can build to withstand a major California rumble," says Mr. Dion.
"Or they can construct to make the building crash with the loudest noise."
Construction-toy companies also have more traditional marketing plans.
Meccano will double its TV advertising budget this year.
And Lego will take a page from U.S. toy makers, spinning more fantasy around its new products, which include new blocks and shapes to build flying saucers, robots and a tropical-island Legoland.
Meccano's Mr. Treppoz says that "kids don't have to badger parents to get them a construction toy" as they do with video games.
That may be so.
But diverting the attention of children away from more traditional toys won't be easy.
All eyes at Toy Fair will be on the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, a line of figurines made by Bandai America Inc. that can be transformed from robots to other forms and objects.
Power Rangers were in short supply last year.
Hoping to cash in on the craze, toy makers large and small have lined up an array of imitators.
Bandai has been told by retailers to expect Power Ranger sales of up to $350 million in 1994, says Peter Dang, a Bandai America vice president.
Last year dinosaurs were also hot, in part due to the film "Jurassic Park."
At the Hong Kong Toy Fair last month, "I saw a lot of dinosaurs change in an instant to convertible robots," reports Mr. Dang.
Hasbro Inc., the biggest toy maker and leading action figure maker, will unveil a slew of new entries, including a Mortal Kombat line based on the graphically violent video game by Acclaim Entertainment Inc.
Mattel Inc. will come out with a Flintstones Action Figure line tied to the TV cartoon.
In all, more than 40 action figures will be shown at the fair, exceeding last year's record of 36, estimates Jim Silver, publisher of Toy Book, a trade publication.
"The only thing I haven't seen yet is a Tonya Harding action figure," Mr. Silver says.
For girls, Mattel has more versions of Barbie, who is now in her 35th year.
Yielding a bit to criticism of the doll's appearance, Mattel is putting flatter feet on some Barbies, though her bust remains unchanged.
Meanwhile, Tyco Toys Inc. will bring out Growing Up Kathy, a baby doll that grows breasts and turns into a shapely teenager when her arms are lifted.
For preschoolers Mattel has a line of toys tied to Walt Disney's animated feature "The Lion King," to premiere in June.
Other toy makers are also expected to introduce jungle-animal toys.
After retail shortages curbed sales at Christmas, one of the biggest challenges for toy makers this year will be correctly guessing the new hits and making sufficient quantities.
The failure to anticipate and buy enough was part of the reason for the somewhat tepid 5% growth of last year, which followed a roaring 12% gain in 1992.
