Barneys New York took the unusual step of releasing earnings and an internal sales forecast, rebutting industry speculation that the trend-setting retailer is in financial straits after a period of nationwide expansion.
Barneys, which is owned by the Pressman family, said its earnings for the five months ended Jan. 2 more than doubled to $5.9 million from $2.8 million a year earlier.
Sales for the period jumped 70% to $150 million.
Barneys said earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for the period rose 86% to $16 million.
The figures for the five months include about four months of results from a large store opened last year on New York's Madison Avenue.
Barneys sales from stores open at least one year, a key retailing indicator, were up 14% for the five-month period, a gain of the same size as the same-store sales increase for the full fiscal year ended July 31, 1993.
Barneys said it expects same-store sales for this fiscal year, ending July 30, to show the same gain.
"The whole industry will be relieved the numbers are positive," said Gary Wassner, president of Hilldun Corp., a factoring company that finances a number of young designers.
Though much smaller than industry giants such as Federated Department Stores Inc., Barneys is closely watched because of its expansion into upscale retailing sites and its history of supporting and introducing fashion designers who have become stars.
Barneys has grown quickly in recent years to operate 17 U.S. stores.
Its three latest high-profile stores in Chicago, New York and Beverly Hills, Calif., (opening March 5) were created with the help of equity partner Isetan Co., a Japanese conglomerate the Pressman family linked up with in 1988.
After Barneys last fall opened its Madison Avenue store -- whose total cost, the Pressmans said yesterday, was $185 million -- the family was dogged by reports that it was slow in paying several of its vendors and that it was less than forthcoming in supplying factors and retail credit executives with financial information.
Robert Pressman, co-president of Barneys, said the company was making financial information public yesterday for the first time because "we realized we need to communicate more, and we have reached a size where we are very public right now."
Barneys chalked up its earlier strained relationship with some suppliers -- Barneys has 7,400 vendors -- to internal problems.
"Changes in how we do our business and the communication of that to our vendors weren't adequate," said Charles Bunstine II, Barneys chief operating officer.
"We have worked to fix it."
Barneys said only a small number of very vocal vendors were affected by late payments.
Hilldun was owed more than $350,000 for goods shipped to Barneys in the second half of last year, and has since been paid in full, Mr. Wassner said.
But Gene Pressman, the other Barneys co-president, is still irked by reports that have labeled Barneys as difficult to work with and a company that takes advantage of smaller designers.
"We probably didn't do a great job of communicating," he said, "but we are one of the only friends young designers have left."
