Man, says Gunnar Breivik, must exist in a state of balance between risk and safety.
Pure risk leads to self-destruction.
Pure safety leads to stagnation.
In between lies survival and progress.
Mr. Breivik is Norway's leading philosopher of sport.
Just now the particular man he is pondering is Espen Bredesen, sailing far above his head at 90 kilometers an hour at the Lysgardsbakkene Ski Jumping arena.
Under a cold blue sky, the packed stadium roars and waves a sea of flags.
The young Norwegian jumper touches down with an astonishing 135.5-meter jump.
Mr. Breivik thumps his thighs with delight and resumes his train of thought:
"In Norway we have two attitudes towards risk and safety.
The first Norwegians must have been high sensation-seekers, because no one else would have settled here.
We have a very big coastline, very dangerous cold water, a lot of storms. . . .
But then we have the inland tradition, where farmers work as the year repeats itself in cycles, and you must plan what you have to do."
There aren't many other seminars on the ontology of risk under way here at the Olympics.
But the practice of sports philosophy takes Mr. Breivik to surprising places.
He teaches in the social science department of the Norwegian University of Sport in Oslo, and studies the subject first-hand using white-water raft, rock-wall and parachute.
"My philosophy is you should take more risks as you grow older, because you have less to lose," explains the 50-year-old scholar.
Last fall he traveled to Fort Worth, Texas, for the annual meeting of the Philosophic Society for the Study of Sport, to deliver a paper called "Some Comments on the Epistemology of Movement."
Its thesis: Motion is a more natural state for man than rest.
He quoted his mentor, the great Norwegian sports philosopher and mountaineer Arne Naess, who was asked at age 70 why he had continued to climb.
"Why have you stopped?"
Mr. Naess rejoined.
Mr. Breivik made his point in Fort Worth by striding vigorously about the seminar room as he lectured.
"It is more natural and better to walk while thinking and discussing deep matters," he declared, citing the Greek peripatetic school and Nietzsche's seminal hikes in the Alps.
He has also written extensively about what drives athletes to take performance-enhancing drugs, and the role of "Lombardian and Machiavellian preference structures."
(That's Vince and Niccolo, for you sports-philosophy fans who joined the game late.)
Ski jumping has always been a fruitful subspecialty for Mr. Breivik, a rawboned Max Von Sydow look-alike with an unruly shock of blond hair.
As a boy he thrilled to the Olympic gold-medal jumps of his countrymen Arnfinn Bergmann and Toralf Engan.
Today his university students include Norway's greatest modern jumper, Mr. Bredesen.
Last summer Mr. Breivik led a group of colleagues to a camp in the woods where the Norwegian jumping team was training by parachuting out of an airplane.
Mr. Breivik's team monitored the jumpers' breathing, heart rate and psychological state and came to some unexpected findings about fear and flying.
The researchers expected to find that the best jumpers stay cool under pressure: steady breathing, low respiration, little fear.
In fact, the coolest jumpers were flops.
"They use a lot of energy to suppress their fear, and that gives them less energy for task-oriented behavior," Mr. Breivik concluded.
On this morning, the philosopher has risen early to watch ski jumping in its least theoretical manifestation.
At his country cottage in Sjusjoen, he straps on his cross-country skis and traverses a 15-kilometer trail to Lillehammer.
At the jump arena, he downs a thick sandwich and a thermos of coffee and finds his seat.
He soberly surveys the crowd -- sold out for one of Norway's most feverishly popular sports events -- and is thrilled to spot his childhood heroes Messrs. Bergmann and Engan standing together in the VIP section.
Up in the air, he also spots his student Mr. Bredesen, floating in a practice jump.
To Mr. Breivik, his talented student offers a paradigm of the ideal risk/safety relationship.
"Pure sensation-seekers score high on mild psychopathy.
They want to reach their goals no matter what, and they have low scores on empathy," he says.
But the 26-year-old Mr. Bredesen has a counter-balancing control and stability.
The jumper lands beautifully and thrusts his arms in the air.
The pleasure of ski jumping arises, Mr. Breivik believes, from the same source as other human pleasures: our need for contrast.
Food tastes best after we're hungry; fire feels warmest after we're freezing.
Standing on the ground feels most comfortable after we're plunging insanely through the air at breakneck speeds.
Back in Oslo, Mr. Breivik has propounded his ideas about risk in some unusual ways.
He made a stir at a sports conference by publicly declaring that Norway has too few childhood accidents.
He saw that as a sign that Norwegian kids spend too much time watching TV and not enough time experiencing the rigors of nature.
The Norwegian health department called him afterward and told him to keep his theories to himself.
Mr. Breivik is also lobbying Norway's transportation department to build special arenas for risk-hungry teenagers to drive recklessly.
That way, they can fulfill their sensation-seeking needs without endangering innocent drivers, he argues.
At the ski-jump arena, Mr. Bredesen has executed two flawless and utterly safe leaps.
But German Jens Weissflog, who seems to ignite a booster engine in midair, claims the gold.
Mr. Breivik thinks his student will be content with the silver.
"He is a happy person," he says.
"He has found a sport that makes it possible to fly through the air."
And with that the philosopher picks up his skis and heads home.
