The White House is ready to break the gridlock over the chairmanship of the National Labor Relations Board.
Administration and congressional sources said the White House will nominate Washington management lawyer Charles Cohen to the board, a move that would prod Republicans into releasing their hold on the confirmation of Stanford University law Prof. William Gould IV as chairman.
The announcement of Mr. Cohen's nomination is expected as early as today.
It would come just two days after the White House named John Truesdale, NLRB executive secretary, to the board as an interim appointment, a step that restored a quorum to the panel.
The five-member board had been unable to hear cases for more than a month, since the panel dwindled to two members.
In June, President Clinton nominated Prof. Gould to join the board and then said he planned to tap him as chairman.
The nomination was quickly confirmed by the Senate Labor Committee, but it was then blocked from a floor vote by Republicans worried about Prof. Gould's pro-union writings.
Republicans also demanded that the open post be filled with a pro-management lawyer.
Traditionally, no more than three members of the NLRB have been from a single political party.
Since the White House has filled its slate of Democrats, the remaining open seat must go to a Republican or independent.
Republicans led by Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, the committee's ranking minority member, sent a string of names to the White House, seeking someone to represent management views.
Prof. Gould, for his part, has vowed to examine all cases straight down the middle.
The Republicans also wouldn't allow action on the nominations of Philadelphia lawyer Margaret Browning to join the board, or on House labor counsel Fred Feinstein to be general counsel.
The nomination of Mr. Cohen, a partner at the Washington firm of Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, would break the logjam.
The paperwork on Mr. Cohen is expected to take several weeks to complete, and then all the nominees would be confirmed in a block.
Mr. Cohen, 48 years old, worked at the board from 1971 to 1979, eventually reaching the post of deputy regional attorney in Philadelphia.
He then joined the law firm Vedder, Price, Kaufman, Kammholz & Day before going to Ogletree in 1990.
He couldn't be reached to comment on the expected nomination.
