Prudential Securities Inc. has told federal regulators that 2,065 of its securities trades in December alone were made by improperly licensed brokers, people familiar with the matter said.
But Prudential said this represents just 0.1% of the 1.8 million trades the brokerage firm made during December, that its problem is no worse than at other major brokerage firms, and that the brokers in question didn't receive commissions for the trades.
"Nobody got paid," Hardwick Simmons, Prudential Securities president and chief executive officer, said in an interview.
Prudential said the "vast majority" of the "bad" trades involved brokers without proper state licensing, as opposed to brokers operating without their proper securities registrations.
Mr. Simmons said Prudential has taken several steps to correct the problem.
"We had been lax, but it's been fixed," he asserted.
Prudential's disclosure to regulators -- including the Securities and Exchange Commission and major stock exchanges -- was prompted by a story in this newspaper last month that spelled out how a number of Prudential brokers were selling mutual funds and stocks without proper licenses.
As reported, federal regulators are examining the extent of the unlicensed-broker problem at Prudential as part of a broad criminal investigation of the firm's limited-partnership scandal.
The brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America had briefly paid employees who sold a wrap-fee program of funds without proper investment-advisory licenses, according to an August 1993 internal memo.
But the number of these wrap-fee trades executed by improperly licensed salespeople had declined to 80 in January from 570 at one point last year, Mr. Simmons said.
In an internal memo dated yesterday , Prudential estimated that about 80% of the bad trades, or "exceptions," "were actually executed by brokers with proper state licenses."
Most violations involved brokers who recently joined Prudential from other brokerage firms, the memo said.
"Of the remaining 20%, the common unlicensed exceptions resulted from a client's moving to another state; failure to timely renew licenses; and trades executed while registration applications were pending," the memo said.
Extrapolating the findings, Prudential estimated there were about 400 licensing violations at the firm.
"In essence, of the total population of domestic commissionable trades, 1.8 million, an infinitesimal amount . . . were executed without the proper state licensing," the memo said.
Industrywide, the problem of unlicensed brokers doesn't appear to be widespread.
Regulators estimate that unlicensed brokers represent roughly 0.1% of all brokers doing business in the U.S.
But even if Prudential's problem is no worse than its rivals', the issue for the firm nevertheless is nettlesome because of its highly publicized partnership woes and investigation.
Indeed, any improper trades could lead to further litigation by investors against Prudential.
Investors can bring a legal action against a brokerage firm seeking a trade rescission from between two and six years from the time of an alleged violation, depending on the state.
And some states have a tolling provision, meaning that investors can bring an action after discovering the basis of rescission, regardless of when the trade was made.
Prudential's bad trades are printed on a "Daily Exceptions Report"; typically, these violations reports include bad trades by between five and 15 brokers, people familiar with Prudential said.
When the bad trades pop up, the brokers involved typically aren't paid, though the trade is allowed to go through, the people say.
Then Prudential takes steps to register the broker properly.
For its part, Prudential said it hasn't informed the investors who made the trades with improperly licensed brokers.
And it added that it hasn't offered to rescind the transactions because the trades weren't unauthorized.
"One alternative is to block the trade," a Prudential spokesman said.
"It's something we're looking at, but we haven't really made up our minds," the spokesman added.
"We're looking at the best way to handle this."
Choosing not to rescind trades, however, could spell legal trouble, some regulators said.
"What you are doing in essence is guaranteeing the profitability of that trade" for several years, said Wayne Klein, Idaho's securities chief.
"If the investment goes up, the client is "not going to complain, but if it goes down, they'll look for some excuse" to file a claim, he said.
The unlicensed broker problem is a sensitive issue for states, partly because it means they're not getting paid sufficient registration fees.
The states were part of a task force investigating the partnership practices of Prudential, including an October settlement in which Prudential agreed to set up a $330 million reparations fund for allegedly defrauding investors who bought $8.15 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.
