Gibson Greetings Inc. said it incurred a $3 million loss as a result of "unauthorized" interest-rate swaps and has hired outside counsel to investigate.
The Cincinnati-based greeting-card and wrapping-paper company said the transactions involved "aggressive forms of derivatives," resulting in increased levels of exposure.
Derivatives are instruments whose values are derived from the prices of underlying assets.
In the case of interest-rate swaps, a derivative is designed to allow its holder to hedge against interest-rate fluctuations.
Gibson said it has conducted an internal investigation and adjusted its portfolio of interest-rate swaps.
However, at the request of its outside directors, it has hired a Cincinnati law firm to conduct a "thorough" independent investigation of the unauthorized interest-rate swaps.
The $3 million loss -- the result of shifting into more conservative swaps -- will be offset by a $2 million deferred gain from earlier interest-rate swaps, said Gibson's chief financial officer, William L. Flaherty.
Mr. Flaherty, who was named chief financial officer in mid-November, said the transactions in question were undertaken by company employees during the past six months, both before and after he joined the company.
"The swaps were not authorized by me as the new vice president of finance and CFO," Mr. Flaherty said.
"There were three swaps which were continually rolled over into more aggressive forms of derivatives and ultimately they were rolled into two swaps.
These were the two which we have now changed."
Mr. Flaherty said Gibson will pay $3 million to a bank to "unwind" the aggressive swaps into less risky ones which mature in June and August 1995 and have a current market exposure of about $14.5 million.
The old swaps had no cap on exposure.
The new ones cap exposure at $24.5 million.
Gibson has been participating in the derivatives market for about 1 1/2 years in an effort to hedge the interest rate it pays as rates were falling.
The transactions involved swapping fixed for floating rates, Mr. Flaherty said, declining to discuss the specific kinds of swaps that were used.
"The experience initially was positive," he said.
But when short-term rates bottomed out in late 1993, the company moved into more aggressive swaps.
It found itself with "increased negative exposure" when rates rose early this year, he said.
"We have little further appetite for additional derivatives because of the risk profile.
We'd like to manage our way out of these," Mr. Flaherty said.
"To the extent we do any further hedging, it would be using straightfoward contracts."
He added that the problem "is a onetime situation which is not reflective of the health of the company's underlying operations."
In 1993, Gibson had net income of $25.9 million, or $1.61 a share, on revenue of $547 million.
