China reduced state employees' workweek to 44 hours from 48, starting March 1, and ordered eight-hour shifts, giving most workers Saturday afternoons off.
Though this was said to mark the first such reduction since the Communist government took over in 1949, China's official workweek still is one of the world's longest, rooted in socialist management linking national prestige to steady production growth.
Most industrialized countries have cut their workweeks to 40 hours or less, seeking lower labor costs without layoffs to cope with lower demand amid recessions.
Chinese workers had complained that the 48-hour workweek not only didn't improve productivity at unprofitable state enterprises but hurt morale.
Separately, China has opened a nuclear plant 30 miles from Hong Kong in Shenzhen, where a second 900-megawatt reactor is to start commercial production in midyear.
The country's only other nuclear plant, in coastal Zhejiang province, has been in trial operation for two years.
The government aims to have nuclear power supply 5% of China's electricity needs by the year 2020.
The Philippines delayed until the end of this month increasing prices of oil products, denounced by politicians, business and labor.
President Fidel Ramos caved in to protests, including bombings and a national strike threat.
The increases of as much as 28% are aimed at reducing a chronic budget deficit amid tax-collection problems and congressional reluctance to pass new taxes.
The oil pricing levy didn't need legislative approval and offered easy collection.
Alternatives will be studied, such as boosting the oil levy's relative effect on higher-income groups, cutting the budget or speeding privatizations.
Brazilian auto makers in January assembled 106,600 vehicles, a record for the month and a 40% jump from a year earlier.
The sector also recaptured 10th place in world production in 1993 from No. 12 in 1992.
Brazilian business traditionally slows in January, the height of the summer vacation season in the Southern Hemisphere.
Yet domestic auto sales in January soared 46% to 83,900 units, continuing a boom since assemblers, parts makers, distributors and governments agreed last year on lower profit margins and taxes.
Moldova and Russia signed a pact on economic cooperation for this year.
The trade accord calls for Moldova to pay world-market prices for Russian oil and natural gas.
Moldova and other former Soviet republics last year paid below-market prices for Russian energy supplies, yet Moldova has run up a $32 million debt to Moscow for natural gas.
Under the pact, Russia plans to buy farm products and nonferrous metals from Moldova, which will mainly import fuels from Russia.
The South Korean government will propose legal revisions to liberalize foreign investment in infrastructure projects, such as roads and ports.
The legislation wouldn't allow overseas investors management rights in public-works deals, and it would limit them to joining domestic groups or buying stakes.
But the proposal also calls for tax and other incentives to ensure returns on investment.
The government hopes to improve the nation's infrastructure inadequacies, blamed as an obstacle to faster economic growth.
Argentina seeks to make stocks and fixed-income securities subject to the luxury tax, an official said.
Planned legislation would cut to 0.5% from 1% the tax rate on nonessential goods but apply it to assets such as equities, second homes, planes and boats valued at more than $101,000.
The proposal wouldn't apply to companies, investment funds or foreign investors.
It would triple luxury-tax revenue to $354 million next year from $113 million last year.
Argentina's tax system has been faulted for relying heavily on consumer levies that burden lower-income people.
Britain, which prohibits tobacco advertising on radio and television, decided against imposing a blanket ban.
But the Health Ministry said it would open negotiations with the tobacco industry on strengthening a voluntary ad agreement in an effort to cut smoking among youths.
"The government has reviewed the evidence thoroughly and found little to support the argument that a statutory ban would have a dramatic effect on further reducing smoking," the ministry said.
To head off any legislation to widen the radio and TV ad ban, tobacco companies have agreed they won't advertise in movie theaters and outdoors near schools.
But doctors, lobbying groups and the state-financed Health Advisory Council sought a total ban on advertising tobacco products, citing premature deaths in the U.K. from smoking-related diseases.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
French fishermen voted to extend their nine-day strike for three days to press for more relief from foreign imports.
In an apparent appeasement move, French customs agents blocked 50 tons of fish shipments. . . .
Though Britain has a cremation rate of 70%, its urban cemeteries are either full or close to it.
So London cemetery officials proposed that after 75 years, remains in graves without links to living relatives be put in smaller containers and reburied deeper, allowing new burials above them.
