Once in a while, Joanne Carle gets through the day without a single cigarette -- but never without a stick of gum.
So many restaurants and public areas ban smoking that the 39-year-old New Yorker finds herself chewing more and more gum.
"The more you have it, the more you want it," says Ms. Carle, an executive assistant for a public-relations firm.
"Before, it was just a breath freshener.
Now, it's a must."
People like Ms. Carle are helping to drive up sales of chewing gum, which is no longer merely a flavorful treat.
Increasingly, gum is being marketed as an alternative to smoking and brushing teeth.
Chewing gum sales in supermarkets, drugstores and mass-merchandise outlets rose a surprisingly strong 6.1% in the 12 weeks ended Dec. 5, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
Chewing-gum makers say they're optimistic that the healthy growth will continue.
"People who are chewing regularly are chewing more than ever," says Becky Kotrba, senior manager of market research for Warner-Lambert Co.'s American Chicle group, which markets the Dentyne and Trident brands.
That's a change, she says, in "a category that has otherwise been stagnant."
Teenagers have traditionally been the most avid consumers of gum, but these days it's the baby boomers who are really chewing away.
A Warner-Lambert survey conducted among gum chewers -- those who have chewed at least a stick of gum in the past month -- shows that consumers between 35 and 49 chewed an average of 15.6 sticks of gum a week in 1993, nearly 30% more than a year ago.
The biggest consumers of chewing gum, who are between 12 and 17, chewed a weekly average of 21.6 pieces in 1993, 12% more than a year ago.
Chewing gum has long been viewed as an alternative to smoking.
It's hardly surprising, therefore, that gum is most popular, according to InfoScan, in Salt Lake City -- an area dominated by Mormons who shun smoking and drinking.
Salt Lake City is followed by Grand Rapids, Mich., and Denver.
Areas where gum is least popular: Cleveland, Philadelphia and Boston.
Marketers are concentrating more than ever on pitching gum as an alternative.
Wrigley Jr. Co., which controls nearly half the U.S. chewing gum market, aggressively advertises its brands as a product "for those times when smoking has to be tabled."
"Whether people are smoking or giving up smoking or not giving up smoking, there are more and more situations where you're prohibited from smoking," says Chris Perille, a company spokesman.
Meanwhile, Warner-Lambert, Wrigley's main competitor, advertises gum as a way to remove food residue from one's mouth.
Trident sugarless gum "actually helps fight cavities when you chew it after meals," says a recent television commercial-provided, says a disclaimer, it's after meals containing starches and sugars.
Encouraged by the strong gum market, LifeSavers Co., which markets Care*free gum, says it's gearing up to introduce a series of new entries.
The company has seen dollar sales drop, after heavily discounting Care*free sugarless gums.
But after its January rollout of Stick*Free, a sugarless gum that promises not to stick to most dental work, the company says it has other products on the way.
This year, "you're going to find a very high level of activity," says Jet Hollander, category director of gum and breath-freshening products for LifeSavers, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.
Of course, children and teens remain a huge market, and new novelty gums are contributing greatly to the total gum market, analysts say.
Warner-Lambert's new Cinn*a*burst gum, sprinkled with "flavor crystals," woos teenagers by declaring it "may not be suitable for adults."
And Finland-based Huhtamaki Oy's Leaf Inc. tests the timid with new Busted!, a multicolored pack of 10 bubblegum balls that includes three fiery-hot surprises.
I take my foot off the brakes and start down "Gearbox Hill," a steep, muddy track that looks more suitable for mountain goats than motor vehicles.
The Land Rover rumbles easily down the bumpy ruts like a train on rails.
Suddenly, the huge four-wheel-drive vehicle begins veering off the track as my instructor yells, "Steer straight!"
Despite my best efforts to do exactly that, the Land Rover continues to drift sideways on the steep hillside until it violently clouts a tree, which somehow bounces the vehicle back on the track.
"Well done," the instructor proclaims.
"Well done!"
This is driving school the Land Rover way.
Here in the rugged hills surrounding Eastnor Castle, about 100 miles west of London, Land Rover teaches people the fine points of driving their off-road vehicles off the road.
Although sport-utility vehicles like the Land Rover are one of the hottest segments of the global auto market, most owners rarely drive them anywhere but on paved roads.
Take Martin and Diana Wheeler of Bouldre, England, two fellow classmates.
They have owned a Land Rover Defender 110 since 1991, using it for towing trailers that carry the goats they raise.
How often have they taken their Land Rover off road?
"Just once," confides Mrs. Wheeler.
"We got stuck."
None of this dampens the spirits of Land Rover, which for years has been teaching drivers at Eastnor how to climb and descend hills that look like ski slopes, how to cross water using the bow wave and how to use the vehicle's powerful winch to pull it out of binds.
Land Rover is part of Britain's Rover Group, which was acquired recently by Bayerische Motoren Werke AG.
In addition to Eastnor, Land Rover also runs a one-day driving school near its factory in Solihull, England.
Students are taught how to descend a clifflike mound of dirt, how to climb stairs and even how to smoothly cross railroad ties.
(The strategy is to drive so fast the vehicle skims the top of the ties.)
In the U.S., Land Rover holds a series of week-long driving schools each summer.
Participants pay $4,500 to learn to climb rock faces with up to 45-degree gradients or the proper angle (45 degrees) to cross a ditch to keep three of the four wheels on the ground.
Land Rover sold only 4,907 vehicles in the U.S. last year, but the quirky British vehicle has nevertheless become a status symbol for the rich and famous.
Michael Jackson owns one; so do Dustin Hoffman and Jack Nicholson.
Americans rarely buy the rugged Defender that's popular with farmers and utility companies in England.
Instead, they buy the Range Rover, which starts at $47,000 and is loaded with leather seats, compact-disk players and even special air suspension that actually lowers the vehicle so it's easier to climb in and out.
Next month, Land Rover introduces a third vehicle in the U.S., the Discovery, which will cost less than $30,000 and is designed to compete directly with the Ford Explorer and Jeep Grand Cherokee.
The Land Rover was conceived after World War II by Maurice Wilks of the Rover Car Co., who thought he could improve on the American army jeep.
Mr. Wilks devised a rugged vehicle with a steel chassis and aluminum body panels that, in modified form, is still sold today as the Defender.
For many years, more than 80% of Land Rovers were sold to Third World countries with bad roads.
As many of these countries plunged into political and economic chaos in the 1970s, Land Rover began trying to sell the more luxurious Range Rover to affluent buyers.
On the first morning of class, the 11 people taking the course climb aboard a convoy of Discoverys and Range Rovers and head off into the woods surrounding Eastnor.
Each vehicle includes one professional Land Rover instructor such as Paul Lloyd, who recently spent two weeks in Siberia teaching local police how to drive the 70 Land Rovers they had bought.
The group starts off slowly.
Drivers are taught the basics of how to drive an off-road vehicle on a slippery surface.
The brakes are little use in mud, since they just put the vehicle into a slide.
Instead, the class is taught to descend hills in the lowest gear, using engine compression for braking.
The basic principle is to power up hills in second or third gear and to creep down them in first gear.
As we pick up confidence, we are soon navigating our vehicles up and down seemingly impassable logging roads that would pass for streams in some places.
The impeccably polite instructors demonstrate how to create a bow wave to keep the engine compartment dry when crossing water.
The key is hitting water at a good, even pace and maintaining momentum.
The difficult part about Eastnor isn't the steep hills but the slippery clay soil that can suddenly turn a Land Rover into a two-ton toboggan.
If you don't keep your steering wheel straight, the vehicle can suddenly pop out the ruts and spring off to one side.
That's what happens to me on Gearbox Hill, creating my near catastrophe.
Afterward, my instructor gets out and inspects the vehicle, which appears unscathed.
The same can't be said for one of my classmates in the vehicle, who has a bruised calf.
No amount of money buys a smooth ride when an off-road vehicle goes off road.
By early afternoon, the group has had enough off-roading.
Off it goes to Eastnor Castle, for a gargantuan lunch hosted by Maj. Benjamin Hervey-Bathurst, a ruddy retired war hero with a big white moustache who pours wine for the students.
After a tour of the castle, it's back to the hotel for coffee, drinks and another huge meal.
By the end of the day, Land Rover's formula for this class is clear: three hours of driving and 10 hours of eating, drinking or chatting.
Ian Mulingani, Land Rover's promotions manager, says Land Rover will conduct more rigorous driving sessions for those who want it, but most drivers don't want that much work.
"The customers will bottom out before the vehicle does," he says.
At the end of the weekend, the students return to their vehicles and their real-life existences: One is a factory owner; another is a physics professor; a third a computer analyst.
Anne Hayward, an office manager from Thorndon, England, says she will feel a lot more confident driving her new Defender around because of her off-road experience.
But after spending two days at Eastnor, she says there's no way she would take her Defender off road and get it banged up and dirty.
"It seems a shame to put a new one through that," she says.
