Whittle Communications L.P. said it will spend an additional $200 million to launch the first interactive medical news network for the nation's physicians, but the company is still in negotiations with major drug companies to sponsor the system.
Whittle will launch a larger and more sophisticated network than the company had been using in a yearlong test completed this month.
The greatly expanded Medical News Network could represent a new financial strain for the Knoxville, Tenn., company, which has had to scale back or redesign other major projects recently.
The medical network has been a hit with many doctors, who can have the computer-based system installed free of charge on their office desks.
The network allows doctors to view a daily medical news program, order drug samples, request information from companies by fax or mail, and view accredited continuing medical education programs and news specials.
But advertisers have been hard to lure.
At this point, sponsorship commitments don't cover the full cost of the launch.
For their financial commitments, drug companies can run ads during newscasts and be exclusive sponsor on the system for a day.
Sponsoring drug companies are listed on the computer's keypad, so physicians can make direct requests with the touch of a button.
The network is connected to doctor's offices by satellite and telephone lines.
Whittle said yesterday at a news conference that it will begin to roll out the network nationally in October and that it intends to put it on the desks of 50,000 physicians by July 1996.
The network will be expanded this fall to reach managedcare and corporate-benefit executives with specialized programming.
Whittle has put the network through three years of research and a $100 million, one-year test in 5,000 doctor's offices.
There had been speculation that Whittle, creator of a number of ambitious media properties in recent years, would have to scuttle Medical News Network for lack of advertising support from major drug companies.
Top drug makers supported the test, but several of them, such as Ciba-Geigy Ltd.'s Ciba-Geigy Corp. unit and Merck & Co., faced their own budget constraints and shifting marketing plans and backed out of Whittle's expensive national launch.
Still, Christopher Whittle, the company's chairman and founder, said yesterday the national launch will take place regardless of the level of advertising support.
So far, Mr. Whittle said, three major drug advertisers, who he declined to name, will provide $147 million to sponsor Medical News Network in its first two years.
He said Whittle is continuing negotiations with five other pharmaceutical companies to support the launch.
"Having $147 million feels good," he said.
"We are highly confident we will have enough in sponsorship revenues.
This is a huge demand in industry for this."
Whittle executives called it unlikely the five drug companies wouldn't sign up for the network.
But sponsorship revenue is still short of the $200 million needed to finance the expansion of the network in the next two years.
Mr. Whittle said 80% of the start-up money will come from internal cash flow.
The company expects to raise the remaining 20% in late 1995 through a public stock offering, private debt financing or by bringing in a "strategic partner" to back the network.
Mr. Whittle isn't expected to tap his existing partners, which include Time Warner Inc., which holds 37% of Whittle Communications, or Philips Electronics NV and Associated Newspaper Holdings Ltd., which hold 25% and 24.6%, respectively.
