Whether or not it happens now or later, a 10% or 15% downdraft in stock prices these days could have a sizable impact on the health of the economy -- much more so than even the 23% market crash in 1987, economists say.
The reason?
Far more household wealth -- whether savings or pension-fund money -- is tied up in the market today.
A drop in stock prices would probably make investors feel proportionately poorer, particularly the many neophyte stock-pickers who have flooded into equities in recent months.
That, in turn, could lead to a reflexive, and sharp, curtailment in spending.
And if spending drops, watch the economy sag.
"A stock market correction of 10% to 15% would knock one percentage point off our current estimate of 3% economic growth for this year," says Irwin Kellner, chief economist at Chemical Bank.
"It would turn around a rise of 2.5% in consumer spending to no change from last year."
And that is to say nothing of how it could damage corporate spending, which lately has been buoyed by the ease of raising capital in the highflying equity markets.
Call it the reverse-wealth effect, particularly for people whose companies have given them the responsibility for investing their own retirement funds -- and who are using the opportunity to jump wholesale into stocks.
"A hit to their financial assets creates a more negative mood toward spending," says Susan Sterne, an economist who specializes in consumer behavior.
That would probably be especially so for many of the 77 million baby boomers buying all those mutual funds today.
"Study after study shows baby boomers don't feel they are saving enough for retirement," she says.
The Federal Reserve estimates that American households had 9.5% of their assets invested in corporate equities at the end of 1986, and 8.7% at the end of 1987.
By the end of 1993, that figure had jumped to 13.4%.
Notably, the Fed numbers don't include investments in mutual funds, which lately have soared to $693 billion at the end of 1993 from $181 billion at the end of 1987.
Sindlinger & Co., a consumer-polling firm, estimates 61 million individuals own stocks or stock mutual funds today, nine million more than in 1987.
After three decades when households consistently were net sellers of stocks, they have become steady buyers in the 1990s.
It is the lack of experience of many of those investors that has economists worried.
Unfamiliarity with the market could first lead to too risky an investment, and then to too severe a reaction if the market buckles.
In a recent study of 401k plan participants, John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. found that half of the respondents think that stocks are held in money-market funds, and only 26% think the best time to buy bonds is when interest rates are expected to decrease (and prices rise).
Fully 51% said they don't know enough about the markets to properly manage their retirement savings.
But many of the market's newcomers know exactly what they would do if stocks tumble.
"You feel more secure when you have a nest egg to fall back on," says Rose Hiter, an administrative assistant with Tellabs Operations Inc., an Illinois telecommunications company.
Ms. Hiter moved $15,000 of her 401k pension plan assets into stock mutual funds in the middle of last year, and it is now worth about $20,000.
Like many investors, she says that if that value declined, she would curtail her spending.
There is plenty of precedence for that sort of reaction.
Following major stock-price declines in the 1950s and 1960s, investors often canceled vacation plans, put off home renovations and saved more.
Downturns in the market in 1953 and 1957 were blamed for holding back auto sales for much of the decade, and economic malaise in the 1970s began, in part, when the bear walked Wall Street in 1969.
The percentage of household wealth in equities at the end of 1968, exclusive of mutual funds, had soared to 26%.
After the 1987 market crash, the economy paused, but quickly picked up steam, in part because consumer spending had been robust before the collapse and the average individual's exposure to the market was lower.
The Fed also pumped money into the economy.
Today, however, the spending momentum is not as strong, and the economy -- last quarter's surge notwithstanding -- is still lifting itself out of a recession.
Higher taxes this year for some will shave the willingness to spend.
And the value of real estate, which is the average individual's largest asset, still hasn't recovered from the plunge in property values in the early 1990s.
Many people still feel house poor.
A drop in stock prices therefore has a greater likelihood of severely shaking the stock-investor pool.
The resulting ripples might well be felt far and wide.
