Once the digital future is upon us, its designers predict, the home-video business will hit the skids.
Movie-theater attendance, they add, will also plunge.
And why not?
Americans will have fantastic entertainment systems in their living rooms, with movie-theater-quality sound and screens that fill an entire wall, they say.
New movies will have their premieres on pay-per-view, and everyone will order up old ones on demand.
Just push a button, and "The Silence of the Lambs" will begin.
The only question seems to be who will make the popcorn.
This scenario has home-video retailers and movie-theater executives on the defensive.
They say it doesn't make sense, or at least is overblown.
But they are also moving to protect themselves against it.
Theater owners argue that people will always love going out to the movies, that no in-home theater system will be able to duplicate that "shared communal experience."
They note that while admissions have dropped in the past few years, boxoffice revenues are at record levels -- though that's partly because they have nudged up prices.
"Movie theaters are not going to crash on the information superhighway," says Bill Kartozian, president of the National Association of Theater Owners in Los Angeles.
High Value The home-video industry says it, too, has a bright future.
Some 57 million people visit video stores each week, and they enjoy the experience, the serendipity of coming across an unexpected title that strikes their fancy, retailers say.
They cite a study by the Conference Board, a business-research group in New York, showing that home video is perceived to be the No. 2 value in America, second only to chicken.
"People would rather have value before convenience," says Dawn Wiener, president of the Video Software Dealers Association, Westlake Village, Calif.
Not everyone is so sure.
Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of Walt Disney Studios, said recently that video-on-demand will succeed because going to the video store is a bother and "they don't have what you want 70% of the time."
The president of Sony Corp.'s Columbia TriStar Home Video subsidiary recently left to take a job at Ameritech Corp., one of the Baby Bells investing heavily in new delivery systems.
And although Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. denies it, Wall Street analysts say the plans of the nation's largest home-video rental chain to merge with cable operator and programmer Viacom Inc. represent a clever exit strategy from what may be a dying business.
While home-video retailers and exhibitors say the predictions of their death are premature, they aren't sitting idly by.
Led by Blockbuster, retailers are scrambling to diversify so they are positioned more like "entertainment stores," offering CD-ROM, music and video-game titles as well as videocassettes.
Theater chains are making plans to close down the smallscreen multiplexes they put up in the 1970s, replacing them with state-of-the-art theater complexes they hope will make going out even more special.
The home-video business will be a formidable fortress to bust.
Its revenue totaled $13.2 billion last year, according to Paul Kagan Associates Inc., a research firm in Carmel, Calif.
Moreover, many films get as much as 45% of their total revenue from home video.
As a result, studio executives are in a tricky position: They can't turn their backs on the huge revenue coming from video retailers, and yet they are eager to find out just how much they can make by releasing movies through an electronic delivery service.
Today, video stores must turn away potential renters of a hit like "Demolition Man" during its first days or weeks in the store because it's economically feasible for the retailer to purchase only a limited number of copies.
But with video-on-demand, studios in theory will be able to offer an infinite inventory; anyone who will pay the price can watch a movie from its first day of release.
No one knows for sure how big that audience will be.
Video retailers say the big problem with video-on-demand is that while it may be great for selling hit movies, it will do little to sell films that misfire at the box office.
Nobody will think to order up "Cabin Boy" while sitting in a recliner at home, but a consumer shopping at Blockbuster for a stack of movies for the weekend might pick it up, along with "Sleepless in Seattle" and "Cliffhanger."
Because video stores buy copies of the bombs as well as the hits, home video for years has been Hollywood's financial safety net.
"There will probably be a lot of tip-toeing around rather than jumping in with both feet because no one will want to kill the goose that laid the golden egg," says Eric Doctorow, president of Paramount Pictures' domestic home-video unit in Los Angeles.
Mr. Doctorow is in the Hollywood camp that says video retailers and the promised electronic delivery systems can coexist.
"Instead of thinking that the pie is one size and will get smaller as more people come to feed at it, I think you could also build a scenario that the pie will expand," he says.
Indeed, that's what happened with theaters and the rental industry, which Hollywood initially viewed as a threat to moviegoing.
The cost to consumers may be the most critical wild card.
In some of the current video-on-demand tests, customers simply push buttons to call up movies they want to watch and then get a bill in the mail at the end of the month.
Video retailers say many consumers won't embrace that.
"You'd be giving your teenage children the opportunity to watch whatever they want any time of day and night and run up a bill that you probably can't afford," says Ms. Wiener of the video dealers association.
Some video-industry officials say one reason for home video's success is that people don't realize how much they spend on it.
"When you go to a video store, you pull $3 out of your wallet and you're done.
You don't realize it, but at the end of the month you may have spent $150," one industry official says.
"With video-on-demand you're going to get a bill, and some people are going to freak out."
From their firsthand dealings with customers, video retailers say, they know most people will want to keep going to stores to browse before renting.
Brad Burnside, owner of the small Video Adventure chain in Evanston, Ill., says a few of his customers not long ago expressed interest in home delivery of cassettes.
Mr. Burnside put some students at Northwestern University's graduate business school on the case to find out how much more people would be willing to pay, among other things.
But the students found that while some customers said they liked the concept, they also said they would never use it.
They wouldn't know what to rent without being in the store to see what's available.
Mr. Burnside's latest attempt to draw consumers is a computer program customers can tap into in the store for rental suggestions based on how much they have reported enjoying other movies.
"Customers rely on our employees, but they tend to be much more honest with a computer," he says.
Because the store caters to film buffs by specializing in classics and foreign films, he says, nobody comes in and says, "I hate `Citizen Kane.'"
The key to coexistence may well be in the scheduling of the various revenue "windows" that every film goes through.
After their run in theaters, films typically follow this sequence: home video; pay-per-view; pay-TV services like HBO or Showtime; then basic cable; and finally free TV.
Where electronic delivery will fit in has yet to be determined, but the video industry promises a fight if it is scheduled before the home-video window.
Studios already are experimenting with the different windows.
Paramount late last year tried lengthening the amount of time between the home-video and pay-per-view releases for three big films, including "Indecent Proposal" and "The Firm."
With the longer home-video window, it found video retailers were willing to buy more cassettes of each film.
Paramount reported that it had estimated it would sell about 1.2 million combined copies of the three titles, generating $73 million.
Instead, it sold more than 1.5 million units for $92 million.
The additional $19 million in revenue dwarfed the $3 million Paramount expected to generate from pay-per-view markets for the three films combined.
Once the new age takes off, it could prove far more damaging to movie theaters than to home video.
Last year, Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's biggest cable operator, and Carolco Pictures Inc. announced a deal in which TCI plans to show four "event" movies on pay-per-view before the films play in theaters.
Exhibitors panicked about the impact on their revenues.
Carolco, despite serious financial troubles, is the maker of huge box-office hits including "Terminator 2: Judgment Day."
Though the major studios say they don't plan to experiment with pay-per-view premieres, industry executives acknowledge that they will closely monitor Carolco's plan.
TCI hasn't announced what the first movie will be under the pact or when it might air, but number crunchers in Hollywood already are dreaming of huge revenues.
If just two million households pay $25 each for a new film, the initial revenue could cover the film's cost.
A pay-per-view premiere of, say, a "Terminator 3" could make box-office revenue pale in comparison.
That kind of money might be hard for studios to ignore.
Theater owners also are concerned about the threat posed by competition from other out-of-home entertainment options, such as concerts, sports bars and virtual-reality arcades.
Combined with the high-tech options in living rooms, consumers will have higher-quality entertainment alternatives in and out of the home.
That has theaters scrambling to upgrade.
Some exhibitors say the buying and construction binge they went on in the 1970s is now proving a costly mistake.
Most of the theaters built then were tiny two-, four- and six-screen multiplexes that moviegoers now find unacceptable, because they are too small and run down.
Complexes with 24 or more screens are popping up and are credited with helping to draw so-called infrequent moviegoers back to theaters in the past year.
In big cities, many ticket buyers now think the movie theater is as important as the movie itself.
Theater chains say the country is "overscreened," but add that 50% or more of the theaters in the nation are dilapidated and should be replaced with modern complexes occupying much more space.
AMC Entertainment Inc., the creator of the multiplex, has more than 1,620 screens in 240 theater complexes; it plans to have 3,000 screens in perhaps 150 complexes by the end of the decade.
Some multiplexes, in former department-store mall space, could have as many as 30 screens.
AMC, based in Kansas City, Mo., hopes to increase attendance per screen at those mutliplexes.
The chain now brings in about 66,000 people per screen annually.
But Philip Singleton, AMC's senior vice president and chief operating officer, says he wants theaters with 15 to 20 screens to have attendance of 80,000 to 100,000 per screen annually.
The new complexes will have more steeply risered auditoriums, high-back seats and big screens in every theater.
"When you leave your house, we're going to offer an experience so deluxe that the price of admission is worth it just to visit the facility," says Barrie Loeks, chairman of Loews Theatres in New York.
"That may be a little bit of a stretch, but you get a little of that feeling when you go to old movie palaces."
She adds: "We can't compete successfully with the inhome market if it's a hassle going out."
Loews, a unit of Sony Corp., is also embarking on a capital-intensive theater-improvement program.
One Loews complex under construction in New York City will be the first multiplex to include a giant-screen Imax theater like the ones at science centers and museums.
There will be nine traditional auditoriums, including a main "premiere house" theater with a fancy ceiling, full balcony and showy curtain.
Loews also plans a similar complex in San Francisco, which will mark the first theater the chain has opened west of Texas.
Bigger multiplexes, however, present a host of service challenges for chains.
Exhibitors know consumers won't put up with waiting in long lines at a 30-screen theater.
AMC is exploring the possibility of a single ticket that offers admission to the movie along with popcorn, soda and other concessions.
But fancy theaters and better service can't carry too much of an additional ticket price, exhibitors realize.
"One of the theories is they'll come no matter what you charge," AMC's Mr. Singleton says.
"That may be true if you have a `Jurassic Park' every Friday.
But when you've got a `Geronimo'?
I'm not sure."
A handful of chains plan to experiment with interactive theaters, though many executives already are predicting they will be a passing fad.
One company in the business, New York-based Interfilm Inc., has signed up chains to pay $85,000 to install "pistol grips" that moviegoers use to vote on the plot at various points in a film.
Its second film, "Ride for Your Life," will run on about 50 screens this spring.
Starring TV's Batman, Adam West, and Betty Buckley, it is about a race between two bicycle messengers in New York City.
Though the film lasts only 20 minutes in any one version, it comes with two hours of material.
Scenes are pulled out and shown based on the votes of the audience.
William Franzblau, Interfilm's chief operating officer, says the company plans to release one film a quarter, spending no more than $1 million apiece on production.
A test more than a year ago showed that some die-hard audience members will stay and watch the film three or four times to "play out" the movie's various plots.
"Not only is the moviegoer interacting with the screen, but there's also an interaction among the patrons as they lobby each other to vote a particular way," Mr. Franzblau says.
"An Interfilm theater isn't a quiet theater."
Mr. King is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau.
