For the first time in two years, General Motors Corp. has launched a new corporate advertising campaign that highlights humility and "enthusiasm for the customer" in lieu of new products.
But the self-effacing tone of the ads could leave some consumers puzzling whether GM has really fixed its problems.
One print ad starts out: "We blew a deadline, ticked everyone off, cost the company a bundle and we did the right thing."
Pictured is Jim Perkins, GM's vice president in charge of its Chevrolet division.
Mr. Perkins is quoted as saying he delayed the launch of a "flagship" model because of production glitches.
Mr. Perkins concludes: "When we know we've got it right, we'll bring out the car."
GM has been working hard over the past couple years to convince car buyers that it really has improved the quality of its vehicles, and dropped its old, arrogant attitudes toward customers.
"There's a new spirit at GM, if you will," a GM spokesman said.
"We've seen tremendous change at GM, and we want to tell the story through people and experiences we've had over the past couple of years."
The ad campaign, created by N.W. Ayer, comes as GM is preparing to launch two new vehicles that are key to its push to regain a bigger share of the highly profitable, but intensely competitive, midsize sedan and sport utility vehicle markets.
GM did delay the launch of its midsize Chevrolet Lumina sedan -- the car Mr. Perkins appears to be referring to -- in response to complaints from consumers about the car's design.
GM also has delayed the launch of the Chevrolet S-10 Blazer sport utility by two months to resolve potential quality problems.
Another GM ad strikes a similar chord.
"There isn't a person on this planet who needs to drive a GM vehicle in order to live."
The ad concludes that GM has to build something "so right for your customers, they can't imagine living without it."
The new ad campaign is GM's first major effort to broadcast a corporate image since President John F. Smith Jr. was installed in November 1992 as chief executive officer.
GM's last image campaign, which had the tagline: "Putting Quality on the Road," did nothing to stop GM's market slide.
In the new campaign, "we're speaking with candor as a way to create credibility," said Phil Guarascio, GM's head of marketing and advertising.
The print ads are scheduled to run through the end of the year, but aren't scheduled to appear on television.
Mr. Guarascio said the company has been working about a year on a new corporate ad campaign, and is operating on a "relatively modest" budget.
