Japan's mammoth trade surplus widened in February, but economists say the news may not be as politically troublesome for Tokyo as it first seems.
For February, Japan's global trade surplus totaled $10.91 billion, 3.3% more than the year-earlier surplus of $10.57 billion.
The imbalance, however, was smaller than the $11 billion or more that many private economists had forecast.
Moreover, Japan's politically sensitive surplus with the U.S. -- the most vocal critic of Japanese trade policies -- shrank for the first time in nine months.
The trade imbalance with the U.S. narrowed 0.9% to $4.34 billion mostly because of a 15% jump in Japanese imports of U.S. goods.
The performance was paced by a 24% increase in semiconductor imports, a nearly 10% surge for food products and a strong performance for airplanes.
Economists say the Clinton administration's backing of a weak dollar and strong yen policy has made it cheaper for Japanese consumers to buy foreign goods.
"Japanese imports are soaring," said Michael Hartnett, an economist at Schroders Securities.
"And that is exactly what the U.S. wants."
Japan's trade surplus with the U.S. accounts for roughly 40% of its total global surplus.
But economists warned that the decrease in the trade imbalance with the U.S. provides little evidence that Japan's overall trade surplus is going to decrease anytime soon.
Indeed, Japan's surplus with the booming economies of Asia is growing sharply because of strong demand for Japanese goods, particularly construction equipment and plant machinery.
Japan's surplus with Asia in February reached $4.7 billion, up nearly 11% from a year earlier.
And while Japan's imports may be growing quickly, they are still overwhelmed by the level of products shipped by the Japanese export machine.
Japan imported $18.6 billion worth of goods during February, a 7% increase on the year.
But Japan's exports totaled $29.5 billion in February, up 5.6% from a year earlier.
Many economists say a drastic narrowing of the global surplus will require a turnaround in Japan's slumping economy.
Recent increases in imports notwithstanding, "domestic demand is still too weak to bring about a sharp surplus reduction," said Satoshi Shimamoto, senior economist at MMS International, a market-research firm.
Still, the narrower trade imbalance with the U.S. is the latest good news on the trade front, after policymakers successfully resolved a dispute over U.S. access to Japan's cellular-telephone market.
The developments have Japan's stock market at a six-month high, and foreign-exchange traders have bid yen lower against the dollar by a full yen over the past two days.
Recent news suggests that a long-awaited economic recovery may finally be brewing.
After a steady drumbeat of grim economic news over the past two years, agencies have released a few upbeat statistics in recent weeks showing factory output edging higher and strong housing starts.
Meanwhile, Japan's Economic Planning Agency said that machinery orders in January rose 3.3% from a year earlier.
