The International Monetary Fund and Russia agreed to a series of budget-balancing measures, paving the way for an important $1.5 billion loan.
The agreement came after a long evening meeting between Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus yesterday and followed several weeks of negotiations, during which IMF representatives scrutinized the Russian government's proposed budget for 1994.
Those talks sometimes stalled over IMF concerns that the government would be unable to stick to budgetary restraints and revenue-raising goals.
The draft budget calls for a deficit of 62.4 trillion rubles ($36 billion) or 9% of gross domestic product.
It is more stringent than many expected and is still likely to meet resistance in the lower house of parliament, or State Duma.
Many industrial and agricultural lobbies are crying for more subsidies, saying that existing government obligations haven't been met.
"We believe the measures the government intends to submit to parliament . . . are reasonable" and in line with Russia's commitment to lower inflation, Mr. Camdessus said.
Monthly inflation fell to 9.9% in February from 22% in January.
The agreement is a vote of confidence in Russia's commitment to economic reforms.
That commitment has been under doubt in recent months, as key reformers left the government and the president seemed to be leaning toward greater state control over the economy.
"It is a significant breakthrough," said a Western diplomat.
"It sets a good stage for confidence, which is what they need right now."
Within the week, the government and the IMF will complete the writing of a memorandum that will describe the "thrust and detail" of Russian economic policy for the rest of the year, Mr. Camdessus said.
"All the basic strategic issues are ready," he said.
"No major difficulties remain to be solved."
The next step will be for the government to promulgate executive orders and legislation that put the budget approval process in motion.
Once done, the IMF will release the $1.5 billion loan.
The funds are intended to help Russia ease its balance of payments crisis while providing a cushion of hard-currency reserves to help purchase critical imports.
It will also set the stage for negotiations on a several billion dollar standby loan.
Mr. Camdessus said those talks would probably begin this summer and would rely greatly on the formulation of the 1995 budget, as well as Russia's performance in adhering to 1994 budget goals.
