U.S. Surgical Corp. said it expects to be profitable this year as a result of cutting costs and raising $200 million from issuing new securities.
But the Norwalk, Conn., maker of surgical equipment said concerns about its financial condition have hurt sales in the current quarter and in last year's fourth period as some customers became worried about the company's viability.
"We really think this is our last bad quarter," Leon C. Hirsch, chairman and chief executive officer, told analysts and reporters at a meeting yesterday after the stock market closed.
"We are financially viable.
We have financial flexibility.
We are here to stay."
But he acknowledged that Johnson & Johnson's Ethicon unit, the company's chief rival, had continued to make inroads into U.S. Surgical's market share by capitalizing on worries about the company's future.
He didn't quantify the impact but said: "If I were a hospital administrator worried about a company going out of business, I don't think I'd want to do business with them."
Mr. Hirsch repeated previous forecasts that the company would post a loss in the current quarter.
But he said the impact of its previously announced restructuring, which he said would reduce annual costs by $155 million, will begin to take full effect on Friday and result in a profit for the second quarter.
Analysts said the company's financial moves were positive but they weren't optimistic about its near-term prospects for returning to significant growth.
"They need to get the sales engine going again," said Kurt Kruger, analyst at Hambrecht & Quist.
"That isn't happening."
The company confirmed that it issued $200 million of convertible preferred stock, bearing an annual dividend of 9.76%, to raise its new equity.
Mr. Hirsch said the preferred stock was priced at 110% of the current market price of common stock, or about $22.50.
When converted, at the company's option after three years, or in any event after four years, it will add 8.9 million common shares to the company's current 56 million shares outstanding.
It will convert to 0.953 share of common for each share of preferred unless the common stock is trading below $21.50 at the time of conversion, in which case the conversion will be a full share of common.
Yesterday, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, U.S. Surgical common closed at $18.375, off 50 cents, on volume of 568,100 shares.
Mr. Hirsch characterized a description of the preferred issue in the Heard on the Street column in this newspaper last Friday as "a total distortion of the facts."
The column called the yield "mouth-watering" for big investors while it undermined the value of common shares.
Mr. Hirsch acknowledged the yield is much higher than most similar preferred issues, but argued that the premium for big investors is offset by pricing it above the current market value of common shares.
The company is using all the proceeds to reduce long-term debt to about $300 million.
With the transaction, Mr. Hirsch said the company is in compliance with "all of its banking and insurance agreements" and has unused borrowing capacity of $100 million.
Completion of the restructuring program, Mr. Hirsch said, means that the company'a break-even point is "a little over $900 million" in annual sales.
Above that, the company will be profitable and cash flow will be positive, he said.
Sales in 1993 totaled $1.04 billion.
He said first-quarter sales are expected to be between $221 million and $226 million, about even with the prior three quarters.
He said he expects sales to improve during the next three quarters.
Mr. Hirsch also said the company signed a three-year contract to supply Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. with endoscopic and surgical stapling products.
Ethicon has a similar contract with the big hospital company, which Mr. Hirsch said buys a total of $40 million of such equipment annually.
He wouldn't say how much of that business U.S. Surgical expects to get.
