My personal trust and admiration for Prime Minister Hosokawa has only increased, and for the government, because of political reform, because Japan exercised leadership in the Uruguay Round, because of the initiatives on construction and rice, because of the fight for tax reform and stimulus, because of the deregulation effort.
I think that Japan is moving in the right direction.
It could be, but I think they {the Japanese} would have to think long and hard about it.
-- MR. CLINTON YESTERDAY, REFUSING TO RULE OUT A U.S.-JAPAN TRADE WAR
Let's see: On the one hand, the President as statesman sensibly says he wants to support the first truly reformist government in recent Japanese history.
On the other hand, the president as domestic pol rattles his saber over "sanctions" and even a "trade war."
We hope Mr. Clinton understands that the latter could undermine the goals of the former, with more risks to the U.S.-Japan relationship than appear on the surface.
We suppose it's always possible that there is some devious Machiavellian strategy at work here, though we have a hard time seeing it.
For one thing, the administration's foremost Machiavelli has been preoccupied with health care.
Moreover, if Mr. Clinton's goal was to force Japan's hand through outside pressure, it seems to have backfired.
Prime Minister Hosokawa has seen his popularity soar for rejecting U.S. ultimatums.
More likely, Mr. Clinton and his aides have trapped themselves into a political and diplomatic box canyon.
They marched into office vowing to "get tough" with Japan, a line that goes down well in Democratic Party and certain corporate circles.
Last summer they hyped (at hype-meister David Gergen's urging) a "framework agreement" that was supposed to be a sea change in trade policy.
In the meantime, Japan's entire world changed, but the oblivious Clintonites still march into the canyon wall.
The logic of the new Clinton policy was based on the premise of the so-called "revisionists" (such as James Fallows and White House chief economist Laura Tyson) that Japan never changes.
But of course Japan has now undergone a dramatic, if far from complete, perestroika.
As Peter Drucker observes, Japan Inc. is dead or at least dying.
U.S. industries that were going to be wiped out by Japan (semiconducters) are now ascendant.
And Japan's economy, supposedly invincible, has been mired in an extended slump.
More important, the political culture that was the basis for Japanese mercantilism has also been turned upside down.
Mr. Hosokawa and his unsteady coalition of reformers have had to manage more "change" than Mr. Clinton has even contemplated.
The prime minister has already broken the gerrymander that produced the "rotten boroughs" that supported Japan's corrupt nexis of politics and business.
Isn't this what the U.S. wants?
Mr. Clinton's words show he understands some of this, but his actions suggest he'll knock Mr. Hosokawa around even as he praises him (Mr. Prime Minister, let us introduce you to Roy Vagelos).
One bruited possibility is to further hammer the dollar against the yen, a primitive form of mercantilism that will only make it more difficult for Japan's export industries to recover.
Then there's the old standby of imposing "sanctions" (read: border taxes) to punish American consumers because the Japanese punish theirs.
This despite the fact that even the Japan-bashing American automakers are reporting record profits.
And all because the Japanese don't want to agree to "quantitative and qualitative indicators" for judging trade flows.
Mr. Clinton's trade rep, Mickey Kantor, insists these aren't "numerical targets," but whatever you call them they sure look like managed trade.
We'd also add, by the way, the more subtle slights of protocol that the Clinton Administration seems to be practicing against Japan.
We noticed that Hillary Rodham Clinton didn't think it important enough to be in town to escort the wife of Japan's prime minister during last week's summit.
She apparently couldn't delay her Olympic TV exposure by even a couple of days.
The Japanese noticed, too.
Beyond any trade fight, the broader danger here is that the U.S.-Japan relationship will fray at a delicate time.
With a nuclear North Korea lobbing test missiles at Tokyo, and with China on the rise, the last thing America needs is a Japan that decides it can't trust American friendship.
Yet Mr. Clinton's policy is likely to encourage an anti-American nationalism that has emerged in Japanese politics in the past.
It's true (as we've been saying for years) that Japan's bureaucrats still have too much power.
But that won't change because Bill Clinton demands it.
Japan's political economy is changing because the Japanese people are forcing it to.
Why get in the way?
