Right now all investors seem to care about is which way interest rates are headed.
But a few pros are bracing for what they think might be the next market crisis: any new turmoil in Russia.
Russian upheaval could rock most U.S. stocks but help a select few.
The U.S. unequivocally backs Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
But there's no assurance his regime will survive.
If Vladimir Zhirinovsky or some other anti-U.S. militant captured power -- or Russia fell into civil war -- U.S. stocks would shudder.
Mr. Zhirinovsky was waiting outside the Russian prison gates last week when two Yeltsin enemies -- Ruslan Khasbulatov and Alexander Rutskoi -- were released from prison over Mr. Yeltsin's objections.
"The release of the coup plotters is very important," says David Shulman, investment strategist for Salomon Brothers.
"This means there is no penalty for making a run against Yeltsin."
"I wish we the U.S. had put more aid into Russia," says David Dreman, a managing director at Dreman Value Management in Jersey City, N.J.
"The worst thing that can happen is we have to start rearming."
Still, a few investments would probably be helped if Russian politics take a drastic turn.
Money managers and analysts point to aluminum companies, defense contractors, gold miners and oil producers as possible beneficiaries.
ALUMINUM STOCKS: Several money managers say stocks such as Aluminum Co. of America, Reynolds Metals and Cyprus Amax Minerals would benefit from anything that disrupts Russian exports of aluminum.
The country has been exporting a lot of the metal, and the swelling supply has depressed world prices.
"Aluminum is a `put' on Russia," says Mr. Shulman, meaning that aluminum stocks will rise if Russia sinks into anarchy.
DEFENSE STOCKS: Many portfolio managers think defense stocks such as Lockheed, Raytheon, E-Systems and Loral would rise if Russia started looking more threatening.
In the United Kingdom, stocks such as General Electric (known as GEC, and no relation to the U.S. company), Westland, Racal Electronics and VSEL Consortium would get a boost, says Fiona MacRae, a money manager with Scottish Widows Investment Management in Edinburgh, Scotland.
(She thinks such a boost would be short-lived, however.)
But skeptics say it would take a lot to reverse the downtrend in U.S. defense spending.
"We have in place a long-term defense shrinkage.
It started under George Bush and was only slightly interrupted by the Gulf War," says David Blitzer, chief economist for Standard & Poor's.
GOLD: Gold prices could jump not only because Russia is a supplier but also because the metal's price often jumps in response to global political crises.
OIL: "I would look pretty carefully at oil stocks" if the Russian situation deteriorates, says Mr. Blitzer.
"If Russian oil exports were perceived as slowing down, prices would probably creep up, and crude producers would benefit."
OTHER COMMODITIES: Russia is also a supplier of fertilizer, metals and other commodities.
Inco, which mines nickel and copper, and Agricultural Minerals, a fertilizer company, might get a boost from lessened competition, muses Robert Stovall, a New York money manager.
But things wouldn't necessarily work out that way.
"The conventional view is that you're going to see commodity prices go to the moon" if Russia convulses, says William Wilby, a money manager with Oppenheimer Management.
"Maybe you get just the opposite.
Commodities are the one thing they have to fall back on to earn foreign exchange."
Byron Wien, strategist at Morgan Stanley, sees it this way: A moderate crisis might result in increased Russian exports of commodities.
But a severe crisis would lead to fewer Russian exports and higher prices.
For every group that might be helped by a crisis in Russia, there are more groups that could be hurt.
Vulnerable investments, professionals say, include stocks in countries close to Russia, interest-sensitive stocks and international consumer-goods stocks.
NEIGHBORING MARKETS: Ms. MacRae of Scottish Widows says a change in power in the Kremlin could shake up emerging markets like Turkey, which sits on Russia's border.
Mutual funds that invest in Turkey were red-hot performers in 1993.
Based on past Russian scares, she says European stock markets will probably plunge quickly but recover within days or weeks.
So a change in the Kremlin, she says, would present a buying opportunity.
She thinks it fairly likely that Mr. Yeltsin will fall out of power this year.
"I think Russia will move to the right wing, but I don't think it will be the lunatic fringe," she says.
INTEREST-SENSITIVE STOCKS: Banks and other interest-sensitive stocks such as insurance companies and utilities might take a hit.
More defense spending would endanger the efforts at reducing the U.S. budget deficit; that, in turn, could push interest rates upward.
CONSUMER-GOODS STOCKS: The turmoil "might hit some of the consumer stocks, especially ones that are trading with the Soviets, such as RJR Nabisco, Philip Morris and Unilever," says Mr. Dreman.
Others mention McDonald's and PepsiCo.
True, Russian ventures are only a drop in the bucket to these behemoths.
But several money managers believe the prospect for massive future sales in Russia (as well as China) has helped sustain these stocks.
Lessen that possibility, they say, and some air will come out of the stocks.
Overall, a Russian crisis would probably be bad news for most U.S. stocks and bonds.
Today's stock valuations are "based on an assumption that we live in a peaceful world," Mr. Shulman says.
Dissenting from that view is Edward Kerschner, strategist at PaineWebber, who thinks Russia makes little difference to U.S. markets.
"We've been through the Gorbachev coup, we've been through the burning of the Russian White House," says Mr. Kerschner.
"The normal background of Russia is chaos."
Even a civil war in Russia, Mr. Kerschner says, would be "a better choice than a strong enemy."
And the direct impact on U.S. companies would be minimal, he says.
Few U.S. companies do much business in Russia, and most that do are giants; to them a Russian write-off would be small potatoes.
Scott Black, president of Delphi Management in Boston, doubts Mr. Yeltsin will be overthrown.
"Zhirinovsky is regarded as a clown" in Russia, he says.
"Zhirinovsky wants to take back Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania," not to mention Alaska.
This tough-guy stance fueled Mr. Zhirinovsky's strong showing in the December election, but Mr. Black says it was a protest vote: People who voted for the ultranationalist didn't truly expect him to win.
In the unlikely event that Mr. Zhirinovsky does gain power, Mr. Black says, "the implications for the stock market would be terrible."
The U.S. market would decline across the board and Germany and France would have "major sell-offs."
SHORT LIVED: Morgan Stanley's new "short squeeze" options contract may go down as one of the shortest-lived Wall Street inventions in history.
After unveiling the product to clients Monday, Morgan Stanley apparently shelved the idea yesterday after short-sellers, many of which are clients, raised the roof and began threatening to move their business elsewhere.
Short-sellers are professional bears who bet against stocks; the Morgan Stanley product was to have allowed institutions to bet on a rise in a basket of stocks that the shorts were betting against.
A Morgan Stanley spokeswoman declined to confirm or deny that the firm yanked the product.
"We are evaluating market demand," she said.
"And the fact is, there have been no trades in this basket idea."
But traders say other Wall Street firms were swamped with calls from miffed short-sellers interested in moving their business from Morgan Stanley.
IN YESTERDAY'S Heard on the Street column, Alumax Inc. should have been listed among aluminum stocks that might benefit from turmoil in Russia, and Cyprus Amax Minerals Co. shouldn't have been.
Alumax, containing the aluminum operations of Amax Inc., was spun off from Amax in November as a prelude to the merger that created Cyprus Amax Minerals.
