INVENTORIES SHRINK but manufacturers remain nervous about stockpiling.
Some companies say they are walking a tightrope between stocks and demand.
Union Camp in New Jersey admits it would "feel more comfortable" if it rebuilt depleted box inventories -- but materials are tight and it doesn't think recent strong orders will continue.
Auto makers, as usual, are building cars now for spring sales, but they aren't going overboard.
At year's end, GM had an 80-day supply of cars and trucks, a bit above the industry norm of 60 to 70 days, but a far cry from the 1980s when GM often carried 100 days' worth of cars.
The nation's purchasing agents said December inventories declined more steeply than the previous month.
Magnetek Inc., a Los Angeles maker of electrical equipment, for one, is still whittling.
"It doesn't take very much to tip the economy back the other way," says a spokesman.
Morgan Stanley economist Stephen Roach says attempts to create just-in-time inventory may curb, but not kill, cyclical rebuilding of stocks.
Stone Container Corp. in Chicago says business is "excellent" while inventories are "low to adequate."
TAX FOR ART'S SAKE?
Gifts of art may get anticipatory IRS rulings.
Every year, the IRS dukes it out with donors it believes overstated the value of art gifts.
(Some $74 million in adjustments were sought by the IRS in 1992.)
But a new directive from the 1993 tax-bill committee may change that.
The IRS is studying the feasibility of advance valuation, or ruling on a gift's value before a piece of art is given.
"This would definitely be breaking new ground as far as rulings go," says an IRS spokesman.
The IRS report, which will deal with questions such as user fees for rulings, minimum values and neutral appraisers, is due by August.
If the concept flies, it may be a "win situation" for all, says New York attorney Robert Persky.
While some small gifts may be discouraged, big donors are likely to "mix and match" pieces to accumulate a desired deduction; accountants won't get yelled at, and the IRS won't have to fight for adjustments, says Mr. Persky.
LOOT AND LEAVE, a ploy that fed the S&L crisis, may find new pickings.
Insurance portfolios, underfunded pensions and HUD-backed mortgages could be ripe areas of financial "looting," say two professors at the University of California, Berkeley.
Key elements for such looting are big sums of money with some government guarantee -- real or implied.
A paper on the economic underworld of bankruptcy-for-profit by professors Paul Romer and George Akerlof of Berkeley is being published this week by the Brookings Institution, based in Washington.
Simply put, a looter buys a firm rich in current financial assets in a business where future liabilities are tough to pin down -- like health insurance.
The owner then reaps the cash through dividends, salaries or inside deals while skewing accounting so regulators don't pounce, leaving a shell to deal with liabilities.
With health care in transition, insurance firms may be more willing to sell out and clients may be more likely to buy marginal interim coverage.
"It's very easy to hide bankruptcy" with accounting tricks, says Dr. Romer.
GETTING GATT got easier now that the Commerce Department's National Technical Information Service markets copies via computer.
The report was scarce in the U.S. because the original printing last month in Geneva was curtailed when presses broke.
A GAMING THINK TANK is planned as part of the new National Indian Gaming Institute at the College of the Menominee Nation in Keshena, Wis.
The institute, funded partly by gaming dollars, aims to strengthen the Indian gaming industry.
COMPANY SPONSORSHIP spending in 1994 could rise 15% to $4.25 billion, says the International Events Group in Chicago.
Sponsorship of sports is likely to dominate as in 1993 when events like the Olympics and World Cup '94 boosted spending.
MAKING WAVES on the low and high ends, overall boat sales are still becalmed.
"Personal watercraft" -- the sit-on, not in, craft that look more like dolphins than dinghies -- and new jetboats with built-in engines probably will be "the hot trend" in 1994, says Jill Krutick of Salomon Brothers.
Overall, she sees only "modest improvement" in boat sales.
An industry leader, Canadian Bombardier Inc.'s Sea-Doo Watercraft unit takes advantage of a strong currency to cut U.S. retail prices by about 5% on models that run from $4,500 to $6,300.
The move is a bid to vex Japanese competitors.
Unit sales of personal watercraft rose 35% in 1993 while sales of big cruisers fell 5%.
But John Owens, editor of Boating Magazine, says the repeal of the luxury tax is rekindling interest in big boats.
In New Jersey, Viking Yacht says orders are rising for its vessels, which average $750,000.
So, Viking recently hired 85 more workers, bringing its force to 400 -- up from a low of 60 in 1991, but below 1990's 1,500 workers.
If the winter boat shows go well, Viking says it may add another production line and 100 workers in the spring.
BRIEFS: A show proposed for the Golf Channel about designing, building and grooming top courses is called "Making the Grade" . . .
Mid-Continent Agencies Inc., a Chicago bill collector, says a West Coast veterinarian who was behind in bills blamed a rowdy German shepherd who got loose one night and ate the office checkbook.
