The way the tourism bureau in China's Hubei Province figures it, nothing brings in the Nikon and Bermuda-shorts crowd like the promise of environmental degradation -- in this case, the world's largest hydroelectric project.
When Premier Li Peng last year gave final approval for construction of the Three Gorges Dam, which will all but completely submerge the fabled Three Gorges along the Yangtze River, tourism picked up nicely.
Demand is so "overheated" that Hubei recently has struggled to keep up, says Tourism Bureau Marketing Director Cai, who declines to provide his full name during a telephone interview.
Mr. Cai says that 260,000 people hopped on boats to pass through the towering peaks of the Three Gorges in 1993, straining local hotel and transport capacity.
That's up from 235,000 visitors in 1992, as the proposal for the dam project wound its way through committees of the National People's Congress, and 190,000 in 1991, when it seemed as though Mother Nature's canyons might entertain tourists indefinitely.
From Mr. Cai's vantage point, there's no need to rush.
Hubei will still have plenty to offer foreign guests well into the 21st century, he says.
"It's just a bunch of rumors spread by foreign newspapers that the Three Gorges will be destroyed," Mr. Cai says.
He adds a clarification: "Only part will be destroyed.
Our government is extremely aware of the need to protect China's national beauty."
Besides, Mr. Cai submits, "the dam will be one of the best scenic spots in China, like the Great Wall."
And what's more, he continues, "Many people will come from all over the world to view such an achievement."
(In the meantime, China is relocating as many as 1.3 million people from the land that will be inundated by the project.)
Hubei Province is publishing a special tribute to the Three Gorges via its Hong Kong advertising agency next month.
It has also increased the number of first-class tour slots to attract more foreigners, who already make up the bulk of the visitors.
"We've got about 15 years until the dam is complete," Mr. Cai concludes, "so we hope many more people will come to see."
