Austria, Finland and Sweden each agreed with the European Union on terms for joining the 12-member trade bloc.
Talks with Norway were suspended for a week because of an impasse on fishing rights.
To move closer to a unified Europe and expand its power on the world stage, the EU has set a Jan. 1 target to admit the four wealthy countries as members, the first new ones since Spain and Portugal joined in 1986.
The membership accords require ratification in referendums in each of the candidate nations.
Finland overcame problems about competition with some of its products, Sweden resolved the issue of finances, and the EU compromised on Austria's restrictions on truck traffic on its Alpine roads.
Adding the four states would expand the EU to 375 million people, a market larger than the new trade bloc of the U.S., Canada and Mexico.
But the EU is moving beyond trade under a unification treaty that calls for a common foreign policy and a single currency by 1999.
Russia plans to sell off as many industrial giants as possible before privatization vouchers expire June 30.
The government has put more than 8,500 state-owned companies into private hands since the program began more than two years ago.
But 100 auctions in the past year have attracted only about 70% of the vouchers Russians received to bid on shares in midsize and big enterprises.
Among about 50 firms coming up for auction are four big energy companies.
When the voucher phase ends, the focus will shift to encourage investment, especially foreign participation, in privatized firms and their restructuring.
To attract travelers who are bypassing Egypt because of attacks by militant Muslims, the Egyptian Museum in Cairo reopened a display of royal mummies that have been stored since 1980.
The 11 mummies, about 3,500 years old, include Ramses II, who ruled Egypt for 67 years, and queens of pharaohs.
Mummification, a ritual burial practice, began with ancient Egyptians who believed in an afterlife.
In this life, militants seeking to make Egypt an Islamic state have attacked commerce, and tourism, a key source of revenue, has dropped 70% since 1992.
GEORGIA TO ENTER C.I.S.
Legislators in Georgia approved its entry into the Commonwealth of Independent States, a loose alliance of former Soviet republics dominated by Russia.
The issue was divisive in Georgia, where many people blame Russians for much of the violence involving ethnic separatists, the social turmoil and the economic hardship that have plagued the southern republic since it became independent in 1991.
Aside from the three Baltic republics that left the U.S.S.R. before it collapsed, Moldova is the only former Soviet state that hasn't joined the C.I.S.
Some members have defense and trade agreements, but attempts to forge a tighter union have failed.
After two years of sluggishness, real estate prices in the Paris region stabilized at end of 1993, a French notaries group said.
Prices in the second half slipped 0.9% from the first six months, braking from a 5.8% drop in the first half.
The value of deals edged up 0.8% last year, recovering with a 3% second-half increase after a 1% drop in the first half.
The sector's woes since 1991 have hurt banks, insurers and contractors, but executives believe the slump may have bottomed out.
After a Philippine government study found that some blood for transfusions contained syphilis, hepatitis B and possibly HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, Health Secretary Juan Flavier called for legislation to ban Filipinos from selling their blood.
Doctors said as much as 70% of blood supplies in hospitals and commercial blood banks came from mostly poor people for a fee.
Mr. Flavier also urged requiring hospitals to use only blood from volunteer donors for transfusions.
The study found that about 4% of blood samples from state and private blood banks were infected.
The Danish parliament passed legislation that loosens curbs on shopping hours.
The issue is filtering through Europe, eager to stimulate sagging economies.
Stores in Denmark now must close by 6 p.m. on most weekdays, and may operate Saturdays only in the morning, except on the first weekend each month.
The new law allows staying open until 8 p.m. weekdays and 5 p.m. two Saturdays a month.
The measure also simplifies rules that allowed longer hours for a few shops, such as gas stations, tobacconists, bakeries and florists.
These retailers now may sell a larger range of goods, though restrictions still apply to alcoholic beverage sales.
And small shops outside cities may open on Sundays to sell necessities.
As a concession to trade unions, which traditionally oppose eased curbs, the law provides for a special complaints commission to consider any alleged abuses.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Coal miners in Russia held a one-day warning strike at 239 of the country's 299 pits to press union demands for government subsidies and payments owed to the industry. . . .
Vietnam last year produced 60,000 tons of cashews, becoming the world's third-largest producer of the nuts, after India and Brazil.
Vietnamese enterprises processed 6,000 tons of cashews for export, a 400% jump from a year earlier.
