Your two opposing viewpoint editorial features on Edwards Deming ("A Lasting Legacy for Managers," Jan. 31) show the basic controversy that application of his principles continues to provoke.
As Richard Gordon indicates, Deming's thinking provides workers and managers with a focus, a constancy of purpose, among other things.
Yet as William G. Lee points out, the Deming approach often has a dogmatic side that can frustrate innovative, creative activities within a firm.
Deming's ideas perhaps can more usefully be analyzed within the context of the demands placed on the firm by competitive markets -- which seldom is done by his supporters.
Firms under competitive pressures invariably need to engage in radical (entrepreneurial) change in order to create value and survive.
Entrepreneurship within organizations often, unavoidably, alters business practices in fundamental ways and therefore threatens incremental quality improvement efforts of Total Quality Management.
Similarly, in the eyes of the innovator, cautious process improvement efforts often slow or destroy the incentives for useful, radical change.
Who's right?
Both are, I believe.
Managers will always struggle with this fundamental tension between radical innovation and process improvement if they are doing their jobs well.
No simple rules can provide a once-and-for-all solution in a dynamic economy.
No rhetorical glibness can eliminate the fact that "creative destruction" within the firm often disables Deming-styled efforts.
Deming's ideas -- as well as entrepreneurial views of management -- have much greater power when subordinated to a vision of the firm's purpose as creating value within a competitive marketplace.
Douglas A. Houston
Lawrence, Kan.
Strange as it seems, I appreciated both paired pieces, which focused on both the dangers of taking any management theory, including Edwards Deming's, too literally and without reality adaptation, while affirming the powerful organization transformation contributions of Deming's brand of total quality.
My own personal, perhaps less traditional, Deming memory: I approached Dr. Deming during one of his challenging and inspiring four-day workshops and, person-to-person, asked him how he saw diversity workplace initiatives in the context of a business's quality transformation.
"I don't know that much about race and gender issues," he said, "All I will tell you is that any organization that excludes or underutilizes its human talent because of race, gender or national origin, simply undermines its ability to optimize its system."
David P. Tulin
