American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Lotus Development Corp. announced a joint venture intended to bring a new class of computer-information service to businesses and eventually to consumers.
The service, to be called AT&T Network Notes, will be run by AT&T and built around Lotus Notes, a hot-selling piece of software that is designed for group use rather than by individuals.
It lets users confer on line, browse information in text or video form, and can be designed to carry out sales transactions.
Talks leading up to yesterday's announcement have generated much enthusiasm on Wall Street.
Investors have envisaged broad possible uses for the new service, which would go well beyond the features available on current on-line computer services, such as Prodigy and CompuServe.
Indeed, some companies could use the system to compete with these services in such areas as home shopping.
But it is initially more likely to be used by companies to let employees collaborate electronically and share data such as text and video with partners, customers and suppliers.
No pricing was announced for the service.
The two companies have grand expectations.
Alex Mandl, an AT&T executive vice president, said the new service will be tested later this year and widely available next year, and should eventually reach "thousands and perhaps millions of our customers."
Investors cheered the agreement.
Lotus shares jumped following the announcement to close at $85.50, up $5.75, in heavy Nasdaq trading.
The stock has gained $25.50 since the talks with AT&T were disclosed last month, largely because they focused attention on Notes, which has a clear lead over competing software makers in the fast-growing field of networked computers.
While Notes remains a relatively small product for Lotus, rising last year to about 10% of total revenue of $981 million, sales are expected to more than double this year.
The venture will focus first on businesses, providing such services as communications with salespeople in the field and creating electronic networks of suppliers.
But Terence Quinn, an analyst at Furman Selz, said, "this has huge implications" for retailing and consumers because it will make on-line shopping services easier to build and use.
Jim P. Manzi, Lotus's chief executive, called the planned service the "business Internet," referring to the global network already widely used by individuals, students and government.
He said the company's Notes software was uniquely suited to create such a network because of its security and information-sharing capability.
Lotus said it plans to develop a "client" or low-cost desktop version of Notes to connect with AT&T Notes services.
It will also benefit from the venture by receiving a share of revenue generated by the service.
Executives wouldn't discuss details of the agreement.
People familiar with negotiations between the companies said that Lotus's share of certain fees would be as high as 12.5%, but this couldn't be confirmed.
Mr. Quinn, the analyst, said any such recurring revenue stream "dramatically changes the financial model of Lotus" from a seller of packaged software to a service provider.
The agreement with AT&T gives Notes a much higher profile and lengthens Lotus's lead over prospective competitors, especially Microsoft Corp., said Paul Johnson, an analyst with First Boston Corp.
"Almost anything they {Microsoft} introduce in this market now is too little, too late," he said.
"Lotus's lead is long and getting longer."
Microsoft has said it plans to include some basic Notes features in a new release of its Windows operating software due by year end and include more-advanced features in other forthcoming products.
Industry insiders said Microsoft pushed hard to sideline the AT&T-Lotus agreement.
But AT&T's Mr. Mandl said yesterday he "isn't aware of any such efforts" and Microsoft has previously denied it.
Rick Sherlund, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co., said he thought expectations for the agreement "have become somewhat overblown."
While he said Lotus stood to benefit from the revenue-sharing aspect of the deal, he expected no revenue this year from it and only a modest contribution in 1995.
He also said stiff competition is likely down the road.
"This will be just one lane of the highway."
