Ford Motor Co. is shaking up its marketing, sales and customer service operations by naming a new head to its Lincoln-Mercury division and creating a new vice presidency to oversee its customer satisfaction unit.
Lee Miskowski, 61 years old, said he is retiring as vice president and general manager of Ford's Lincoln-Mercury division on April 1.
His successor, Keith Magee, is faced with the challenge of making the division more attractive to younger buyers, strengthening Mercury's brand identity and regaining Lincoln's prestige as a luxury marque.
Mr. Magee, 47, is vice president of international financing operations at Ford Motor Credit Co.
He assumes his duties on Feb. 1, when Mr. Miskowski begins a special assignment.
Ford also named Tom Wagner, formerly vice president and general manager of Ford Customer Service, to the newly created position of vice president of customer communication and satisfaction.
He will be responsible for the Ford customer service division, marketing and sales operations systems and communications and marketing research.
Ronald E. Goldsberry, 51, general sales and marketing manager of Ford customer service division, replaces Mr. Wagner as vice president and general manager of the customer service division.
"This new position recognizes that satisfying its customers is Ford's No. 1 objective," said Alexander J. Trotman, Ford's chairman and chief executive officer.
"The pursuit of totally satisfied customers permeates virtually every aspect of our business.
And we're seeking to bring even more focus to our efforts."
Mr. Wagner, 55, will report to Robert Rewey, who continues as Ford's group vice president for marketing and sales operations.
In other changes, Basil Coughlan, 53, retires as vice president of North American marketing plans and operations to pursue personal interests.
He is succeeded by James G. O'Connor, 50, formerly president and chief executive officer of Ford of Canada.
Succeeding Mr. O'Connor is Mark W. Hutchins, 48, formerly Ford's executive director of marketing strategies.
