MEXICO MOURNED Colosio, whose assassination touched off a political crisis.
The slaying of the ruling party's presidential candidate, who was favored to win August elections, was an added blow to a government rocked by a peasant revolt and the kidnapping of a prominent businessman.
A spokesman strongly denied there had been any discussion about a new candidate or about President Salinas possibly postponing the election.
A provision in the constitution excludes many possible candidates, and others are flawed.
Police said a man detained after the Tijuana slaying has confessed, but gave no indication of his motive.
His gun was originally purchased in the U.S.
CLINTON PRESENTED his Whitewater defense in a televised news conference.
The president calmly argued that there was nothing improper about his conduct in the real-estate investment, and said he would release tax returns going back to 1977 to prove his point.
Earlier, GOP Rep. Leach charged that federal officials tried to cover up evidence suggesting the Clintons' investment had benefited from savings-and-loan fraud.
Clinton said he knew nothing about the charges.
Clinton conceded that an aide had overestimated by $22,200 the size of the loss he and Hillary Rodham Clinton incurred on their Whitewater investment.
Israeli and PLO negotiators said they were close to an accord on Palestinian security in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, raising hopes that stalled peace talks may soon resume.
Meanwhile, at least 41 people were injured as Palestinians fought Israeli troops in protests over an Israeli siege of a Hamas hideout in Hebron this week.
The U.S. pullout from Somalia is set to be completed today.
The final 120 Army troops are to fly out of Mogadishu and 1,100 Marines are to follow by ship.
U.N. negotiators pressured leaders of Somalia's warring factions to agree to a reconciliation meeting next month, but diplomats were pessimistic about prospects for ending clan fighting.
De Klerk said South Africa could take steps, which may include sending in troops, to ensure fair voting next month in the Zulu homeland of KwaZulu.
De Klerk spoke following a meeting with Mandela on KwaZulu.
South Africa has already seized two of the apartheid-era black homelands that resisted taking part in the first all-race vote.
The House passed a bill tightening disclosure requirements for lobbyists and curtailing the gifts, meals, entertainment and trips they provide lawmakers.
The big margin of victory in the 315-110 vote surprised supporters.
The measure now goes to a conference with the Senate, which passed its own bill last year.
U.S. forces in Korea may be reinforced if the U.N. imposes sanctions on North Korea, Defense Secretary Perry said.
A Pentagon official said earlier the U.S. commander in Korea was preparing recommendations.
Meanwhile, North Korean resistance to nuclear inspections is making South Korea more hawkish.
A gas pipeline exploded in northern New Jersey, destroying eight apartment buildings and sending 2,000 people fleeing.
Police said a woman died of a heart attack following the blast early yesterday, and 58 people were hurt.
Fifty remained unaccounted for yesterday afternoon, but police said no missing-person reports had been filed.
The Senate defeated a proposal that would have made Medicare bear the brunt of proposed new budget cuts totaling $26 billion over five years.
The 63-35 vote means the Pentagon and Clinton's domestic initiatives may be squeezed.
But Democrats warned the Medicare cuts would hurt health-care reform prospects.
Bosnian Serbs rejected a U.S. plan calling for them to join with Muslims and Croats in a Bosnian federation, saying they would try to unite with Serbia.
Separately, U.N. officials said Serb forces who hijacked a convoy of aid supplies near Maglaj Wednesday forced U.N. truck drivers to walk across a field they had been told was mined.
Thousands in Burundi fled the capital as ethnic fighting intensified amid reports of a coup by the Tutsi-dominated military.
Military and government officials denied the reports.
As many as 1,000 people, mostly members of the majority Hutu tribe, have died in fighting over the past several days.
