41.7 hours, the longest since America was pumping out ships and planes for the war effort.
Extra overtime isn't uncommon for a short period after a recession.
But this recovery is different: The longer workweek, at least in some measure, may be here to stay, helping keep the unemployment rate stubbornly high for some time to come.
During the early months of a recovery, when orders increase, cautious employers traditionally loaded up workers with overtime, rather than risk the expense of hiring full-time employees.
Then, after the recovery took hold, they throttled back on overtime, adding more workers and shortening the average number of hours a person spent on the job each week.
That should have happened this time, too: The workweek should have started declining shortly after the current recovery began in April 1991.
Instead, average weekly overtime surged one more hour to 4.4 hours by the end of 1993.
"The fundamentals have evidently changed from where they were five or 10 years ago," says Paul C. Bishop, a senior economist at WEFA Group, a forecasting firm based in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
"There appears to be something much deeper going on here in terms of when firms do their hiring."
It's called benefits.
The rising expense of benefits is driving employers to wait till the last possible moment to hire new workers.
Since 1987 alone, the cost of benefits for manufacturing workers has risen 42%, while wages have climbed 24%.
The cost of health benefits has been the biggest culprit, jumping 78% in the same period.
Employers expect that to get even worse under the Clinton health plan.
"Given that we spent three years bringing down our cost structure, we aren't going to turn around and reverse that real quick by giving out benefits left and right," says Ken Goldstein, a Conference Board economist.
Many employers, labor leaders and economists believe overtime has simply become one more tool in a company's fight against major costs such as benefits.
Mr. Bishop of WEFA Group says he expected overtime to peak at about 3.7 to 4 hours during this recovery.
Not so.
"We are searching for the new {peak} right now," he says.
His guess: Overtime in manufacturing may continue to climb to 4.5 or 4.6 hours per week.
(This phenomenon is quite different in the service sector, which makes up the bulk of the economy.
There, employers tend to add part-timers to fill production gaps, thus actually shortening the average workweek.)
Of course not everyone believes that the longer workweek will stay that way.
"The jury is still out," says Larry Katz, chief economist at the Labor Department.
The on-again, off-again nature of this recovery has spooked employers into holding back from substituting new hires for overtime.
But he believes that's just temporary.
Give employers a few more months of solid growth under their belts, he says, and they may begin behaving the way they have in past recoveries -- adding to payrolls.
Indeed, some economists believe the long workweek is a very good sign that hiring is about to rapidly pick up.
One reason that might happen: Lots of workers are getting tired of the new, marathon hours.
Take Alva Lewis, for example.
A millwright at a General Motors Corp. plant in Ohio, he jumped at the chance to earn overtime pay last year, and ended up taking only three days off in all of 1993.
But he's less inclined to work that hard again this year.
"A lot of us are getting tired of it," he says.
"I have a boat on Lake Erie and I only got into it one time last year."
But for every Alva Lewis there's also an A.J. Lawls.
For eight months last year, Mr. Lawls earned overtime -- and he liked it.
When Ford Motor Co. cut out the overtime, "We were kind of disappointed," he says.
"Most of us feel it was extra money in our pockets."
He says that if he were offered overtime again, he would grab it.
Thus, whatever hiring that is done in the near-term will probably be done at the margins, argues Leo Troy, a labor economist at Rutgers University.
"Businesses will be forced to hire new people, but it will be as small an increase as possible," he predicts.
"There won't be a sharp drop in work hours."
Organized labor doesn't like that, of course.
It's fine that there's more work to do, but unions naturally prefer spreading it over more workers.
One reason there hasn't been greater hiring, labor leaders say, is that the overtime rate -- the penalty to employers -- is too low.
When the federal government mandated in 1938 that employers pay workers time-and-a-half for any hour worked past 40, the move was intended to help prevent the sort of substitution of overtime for new hires that's going on now.
But with the cost of benefits themselves now equal to 50% of the wages of manufacturing workers, a 50% overtime penalty doesn't seem nearly as onerous as in the mid-1960s, when the cost of benefits equaled less than 25% of wages.
To discourage the use of overtime, says John Zalusky, head of the office of wages and industrial relations for the AFL-CIO, "We'd like double time or triple time" instead of time-and-a-half.
But that isn't likely to happen soon.
What, then, might cause a notable drop in the length of the workweek?
That's easy, asserts Gordon Richards, economist for the National Association of Manufacturers: the next recession.
The first thing employers do in a downturn is slash overtime.
