The Japanese auto maker had looked at its minority stake in Rover as a foot in the door of "fortress Europe," whose perceived barriers to trade have worried Honda executives.
Now, with the door slammed unexpectedly on its toes, Honda can either abandon that strategy or remain a reluctant player in a new partnership it didn't seek.
Indeed, the new partners are to some extent rivals.
While Honda and BMW don't compete head-on throughout their product lines, the German car maker is one of the few foreign car makers that has managed to crack the Japanese market, selling more than 25,000 units here last year.
BMW fills a small but lucrative niche in Japan for top-flight European cars, while Honda and other Japanese volume-car producers have been hurting in Japan's recession.
"BMW is one of our competitors," said a Honda spokesman.
"And a competitor holding an 80% share in a Honda affiliate is not a natural situation."
While the transaction, announced Monday, between BMW and Rover -- which is a unit of British Aerospace PLC -- is a setback for Honda, it isn't a disaster.
Analysts say Honda has its own foothold in the European market with a separate auto factory in Britain.
Moreover, analysts say the BMW investment in Rover won't hurt Honda's bottom line.
"Other than hurt pride, we see no lasting effect on Honda's business" caused by BMW's purchase, said Jonathan Dobson, an automobile industry analyst at Jardine Fleming Securities.
His analysis is simple: If it hangs on to its Rover stake, Honda will still be the 20% owner of relatively buoyant Rover.
Indeed, analysts say Rover may soon be turning a considerable profit for its owners, thanks in large part to Honda's technical assistance.
Moreover, Honda paid about 140 million ($211.1 million) for its 20% stake.
That stake is now valued at roughly 200 million, based on the 800 million BMW is paying for the remaining 80%.
Still, the BMW purchase will force Honda to re-examine several of its operating assumptions for Europe.
Business hasn't been good for Honda lately.
A strong yen has eaten into revenue from the U.S. and an economic downturn in Japan has eroded profit at home.
In the fiscal first half Honda's consolidated net income dropped 63% to 9.3 billion yen ($85.7 million).
Many analysts say that depleted coffers are the main reason Honda turned down an option for it to acquire a majority interest in Rover.
Honda likely "was unwilling to take more of Rover because it didn't want to spend the money given the hard times it is experiencing in Japan and the U.S.," said Jardine Fleming's Mr. Dobson.
Honda says it declined to buy more of Rover because it wanted to preserve the company's British character.
Moreover, a spokesman said Tuesday that Honda hasn't decided on any course of action; he indicated the company expects to have talks with BMW executives before deciding its strategy.
Even if Honda decides to back out of its 20% holding, cooperation between Rover and Honda's European unit is likely to continue for at least the short term.
Since 1979, when Honda first entered a licensing agreement with Rover, the ties between the two companies have grown increasingly close with several technological and parts-sharing agreements.
Many Rovers come equipped with Honda engines.
Besides giving Rover technological assistance, Honda has begun integrating operations between Rover and its own plant in the U.K.
"The relationship involves more than just the shareholding aspect," said the Honda spokesman.
"It must continue for a while."
Separately, British Industry Minister Tim Sainsbury sought to reassure Japanese investors in the U.K. in the wake of the BMW-Rover deal.
"I would like to reassure any Japanese investors that as far as this country is concerned we will continue to welcome Japanese investment," he said, expressing sympathy for Honda.
"Their partner has gone off with somebody else and I can understand their reaction."
