Dell Computer Corp. is tiptoeing back into the notebook-computer business.
The mail-order personal computer vendor is expected today to announce that it will begin selling a family of five notebook PCs made by rival AST Research Inc., Irvine, Calif.
The machines, which Dell will market under the name Latitude, are the first notebooks to be sold by Dell since the one-time highflier scrapped its notebook business last spring amid a spate of embarrassing product snafus.
Though the company has spent the past year building up a notebook development team and fixing the internal processes that lead to the debacle, it has missed out on a market that has since become the hottest in computing.
Notebook sales currently account for about 20% of sales at most of Dell's competitors, and, because they are priced higher than desktop PCs, comprise an even bigger chunk of profits.
While analysts praise Dell for getting back into the business, they question why it took so long for the company to announce that it essentially is reselling somebody else's technology.
"The point is that they're a clear notch behind," said Kimball Brown, a technology analyst at Dataquest Inc. in San Jose, Calif.
"It's a start."
Dell officials say their primary goal with the new notebooks is to get back into the race.
They say the machines, based on AST's Bravo family, are solid products with proven track records that could help improve a profit margin that has wilted in the past year.
"This is meat and potatoes," said Eric Harslem, a Dell senior vice president.
"It may not have the most panache, but we will sell a lot of them."
Dell also is portraying the Latitude machines, which are priced from about $1,700, as part of a larger development cycle that will produce technology ringers for Dell later this year.
Company executives say they are working on more advanced machines, for release beginning this summer, that will include wireless communications and specialized software intended to set the company apart from the competition.
Those products, along with a tiny "subnotebook" computer also under development, both will be bought from other vendors, like AST, as well as manufactured by Dell itself.
"As well as Dell does in this category is as well as Dell will do as a company," said John Medica, a former Apple Computer Inc. product manager hired last year to rescue the Dell notebook business.
"We've got to regain our credibility."
Analysts say Dell is walking a marketing tightrope: It has got to convince people to buy the Latitude machines even as it promises better things to come.
"They screwed up, and everybody knows it," said Richard Zwetchkenbaum, an analyst at International Data Corp. in Framingham, Mass.
"They're not going to come out and win the game in one fell swoop.
What they're coming out with is a decent product."
Indeed, even Michael Dell, the company's founder and chairman, said it is too early to declare the company fully recovered.
"One product doesn't say Dell has succeeded in the notebook business," Mr. Dell said.
"But it's a start.
You've got to start somewhere."
