The economy's recent strengthening seems to be putting Americans in a much better mood, but economists still doubt the growth in the last part of the year will continue so strongly throughout 1994.
The latest sign that the year finished with a bang was a Federal Reserve report Friday that industrial production rose 0.7% in December.
The rise, driven by high production at auto plants, was the seventh in a row, and it followed a 0.9% gain in November.
For the year, industrial production was up 4.2%, compared with a 2.3% rise in 1992 and a 1.8% decline in 1991.
Such good economic news apparently is affecting people's attitudes.
The University of Michigan's index on consumer sentiment shot up to a healthy 95.8 in early January from 88.2 in December, according to market participants who have seen the report.
Consumer expectations, one component of the index, jumped to 87.6 from 78.8, while the outlook on current conditions pressed ahead to 108.6, up from 102.9.
The Michigan index is available only to private subscribers.
"Consumers have more widely recognized the improvement in the economy during the fourth quarter, especially in employment," said Richard Curtin, director of the Michigan survey.
"The January figure is no longer holiday cheer," said Fabian Linden, executive director of the Conference Board's consumer research center, which conducts its own study on confidence levels.
"This is the real McCoy."
As long as the economy continues to create a moderate number of new jobs and inflation remains flat, consumers will remain hopeful, Mr. Linden said.
According to the Federal Reserve report, production of consumer durable goods excluding autos rose 1.4%.
But nondurables, such as paper products and gasoline, declined 0.2%.
"The big question is the sustainability of this growth rate into the first quarter," said Doug Handler, an economist with Dun & Bradstreet.
"I think the auto-production cycle has run its course."
Government economists are optimistic.
Robert Rubin, chairman of the National Economic Council, said the "pieces are falling into place for a robust economy for a long, long, long time."
The Fed said capacity utilization, which economists consider an indicator of future inflation, jumped 0.5 percentage point to 83.5% last month.
The advance followed a 0.7-percentage-point rise in November.
But economists think the rise doesn't indicate a threat of inflation because many factories have become extremely automated and are able to handle big increases in production without bottlenecks.
There also is still a lot of excess capacity at factories overseas, reflecting a sluggish world-wide economy.
But there are signs that tight capacity in some industries may be causing price pressures.
Spurred by growing demand and tighter plant capacity, prices of industrial raw materials are on the rise.
Georgia-Pacific Corp., for instance, suddenly is finding itself with crimped capacity for the production of pulp for paper.
So, after three years of depressed prices, it finally raised prices on Jan. 1 -- by 10%.
Moreover, "We're now thinking about another price increase, probably for 10% as well, in a few months," says Clint Kennedy, a group vice president.
"The prospects for that one sticking are equally good," he added, noting that the supply-demand balance has tilted in Georgia-Pacific's favor.
Overall, though, economists feel that inflation is well-behaved.
Referring to the Fed's figures on capacity utilization, Mr. Handler said, "This is not the report that will send the Fed over the threshold" to raise interest rates.
Separately, the Commerce Department reported manufacturers' inventories rose 0.6% in November, while sales increased 1.1% during the month.
The strong sales figures helped push the inventory-to-sales ratio, which measures how many months it would take to deplete stockpiles at the current sales pace, down to 1.44 from 1.45 in October.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here is a summary of the Federal Reserve Board's report on industrial production in December.
The figures are seasonally adjusted. the 1987 average.
