Cambridge Technology Partners Inc., citing an increase in business, said it's comfortable with analysts' expectations that it will report fourth-quarter net income of $1 million, or seven cents a share, on revenue of $9.8 million.
In the year-earlier quarter, the company had net income of $521,000, or four cents a share, on revenue of $5.9 million.
Cambridge Technology, a consulting firm that custom designs software applications for clients, said its customer base is increasing as more companies switch from mainframe computer systems to less expensive client-server systems.
"The entire world is going in this direction," James K. Sims, chief executive and president, said in an interview.
"Billions of dollars are being spent in an old world of technology that doesn't solve problems.
Companies are losing money and laying off people because the technology isn't working for them.
But the industry is changing.
With the transition, our clients need help," he said.
Cambridge Technology holds workshops for customers to find out from employees what applications they want a new computer system to provide, such as better customer service, billing or order-management options.
Cambridge Technology then designs a computer system around those specific applications.
The company, which has nine offices in the U.S. and four in Europe, said it has designed systems for 120 companies.
Cambridge Technology said its growth was partly due to the fact that it agrees to set its prices on various services upfront, while many competitors don't.
It also promises to complete projects in a given time frame, typically six to eight months, compared with an industry average of two to three years.
For 1993, Cambridge Technology Partners said it's comfortable with analysts' expectations of net income of $4.3 million, or 34 cents to 35 cents a share, on revenue of $32 million.
Results will include a $1.2 million gain for accounting changes.
In 1992, the company had net income of $1.3 million, or 11 cents a share, on revenue of $19.2 million.
