At the Republican Senate lunch on Tuesday, Mississippi conservative Trent Lott held up a copy of the liberal New Republic magazine.
You ought to know the man you're voting on, he exhorted, waving a cover story critical of Strobe Talbott.
Then Arizona's John McCain rose to speak, followed by Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, Pennsylvania's Arlen Specter and a parade that culminated later in 31 Republicans voting against President Clinton's nominee to be deputy secretary of state.
Democrats held solid after White House lobbying, so Mr. Talbott was confirmed, but Mr. Clinton shouldn't gloat.
The vote was another sign of his narrow political margin to conduct foreign policy.
Strobe Talbott isn't just any striped-pants diplomat, after all.
The former Time writer is the president's Oxford buddy, his baby-boom alter ego and foreign-policy guru expected to be the next secretary of state.
Given the clout of F.O.B.s in this administration, Mr. Talbott is widely assumed to be de facto foreign minister already.
By tattooing him, Republicans were making the political equivalent of their 1977 statement against Paul Warnke, Jimmy Carter's arms-control negotiator.
The nub of the GOP attack concerned Mr. Clinton's Russia policy, which Mr. Talbott has been running.
Bob Dole, who can detect vulnerability like a great white shark, told the Senate that "over the past few months Russia has been casting silent vetoes over U.S. foreign policy options."
Mr. Talbott "is the leading advocate within the administration for yielding to Russia's wishes," Mr. Dole said, explaining his nyet.
This week's news that the Yeltsin government was running an alleged CIA spy gives this GOP attack a political echo, as do events like the Russian Parliament's pardon of coup plotters.
Meanwhile, policy wonks can chew on Zbigniew Brzezinski's broadside in next week's Foreign Affairs.
Mr. Clinton's Russia strategy, writes the last Democratic realist, "is flawed in its assumptions, focused on the wrong strategic goal and dangerous" in its likely result.
In short, Mr. Clinton is close to losing the bipartisan support that has prevailed toward Russia since the Cold War ended.
This would be too bad, because there are good realist arguments for the U.S.-Russian partnership that Mr. Talbott is seeking.
For example, Fred Ikle, a strategist under Ronald Reagan, argues that a U.S.-Russian military partnership remains in America's national interest, especially to cope with inevitable regional threats.
"Imagine a confrontation with North Korea," Mr. Ikle says, "and what happens if Russia is basically on our side, or if it's not."
Both Dick Cheney and Les Aspin liked Mr. Ikle's idea to expand Pentagon ties with the Russian military, the part of Russian society most wary of Western intentions.
Unfortunately, Mr. Ikle isn't an F.O.B.
So instead of the hard-headed logic of national interest, Mr. Clinton seems motivated more by the Russian romanticism that has long been one of Mr. Talbott's trademarks.
As Pat Glynn, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute who agrees with Mr. Ikle, puts it, "Strobe Talbott has had one foreign-policy concept in his life -- be nice to the Russians.
It was a terrible idea during the Cold War.
It's a better idea now."
During the Cold War that meant he identified more with Soviet fears about U.S. intentions than with the reality of Soviet ambitions.
And looking back now, it's hard to think of a single Talbott judgment about the Soviet Union that didn't prove wrong -- his opposition to deploying NATO missiles in 1982, scorn for SDI, a love affair with Mikhail Gorbachev.
Mr. Talbott's record has been better since 1991, especially when backing Boris Yeltsin was an easy call.
But he was surprised by the rise of Mad Vlad Zhirinovsky, and flummoxed by the failures of economic reform.
(He doesn't seem to know much economics at all.)
Mr. Talbott has also seemed eager to explain away Russian interventions in Georgia and other former Soviet states on the Russian perimeter.
The U.S. can't do much about these anyway, but this year there might be a Russia-Ukraine showdown, or meddling in the Baltics.
Is Mr. Talbott enough of a realist to make clear to the Russians where the U.S. will draw the line?
Mr. Clinton (pace Mr. Talbott) has also put only the best possible light on Boris Yeltsin's intervention last weekend in the Balkan war.
Maybe this will turn out to be right, but it's also possible that pro-Serb nationalism at home is inducing Mr. Yeltsin to back a Greater Serbia.
In any event, it's striking that while Mr. Clinton preaches that the U.S. shouldn't act "unilaterally," without NATO or United Nations cover, he barely objects when Russia does.
George Bush's foreign policy was often attacked, fairly I thought, for sacrificing American idealism to Realpolitik.
But the problem with Mr. Clinton is that his policy hasn't seemed realistic enough.
Republicans sense this, which is why they're attacking his Russian policy.
Mr. Clinton is going to have to toughen that policy in order to save it.
