New federal regulations that will double the number of workers required to be tested for drug and alcohol use on the job pose both challenges and opportunities for the $500 million drug-testing industry.
The initial push for testing in the mid-1980s -- prompted by several fatal train and subway accidents -- drew many new companies into the testing business.
But the field didn't turn out to be quite the bonanza many had hoped for.
"Many labs that got into the market got caught two ways," explains Dr. Ian Macdonald, the Reagan administration's drug-policy czar from 1987 to 1989: Testing didn't become as widespread as expected, and price competition forced many smaller companies to bail out.
But by increasing the number of workers to be tested, and by possibly expanding the types of tests permitted, the new rules -- mandated by the Transportation Department -- are once again drawing new competitors into the field, as well as offering lucrative new opportunities to the bigger players.
For the first time, the government is requiring both random alcohol and drug testing each year of 25% of transportation workers in such safety-sensitive jobs as trucking, aviation, railroads and pipelines.
Before, only random drug testing was required.
The new rules also impose both drug and alcohol testing for the first time on mass-transit workers, and expand drug testing to intrastate truckers and bus drivers.
Some 7.5 million workers are expected to be tested each year under the new rules, up from 3.5 million before.
In addition, testing is on the rise generally as more companies test job applicants and employees; in 1993, 85% of 630 companies surveyed by the American Management Association reported drug-testing programs, up from 75% a year earlier, including 73% of manufacturers and 66% of financial-service companies.
The number of companies with drug-testing programs has nearly tripled since 1987.
Final rules covering transportation companies take effect Jan. 1, 1995, for larger companies, generally with 50 or more employees, in safety-sensitive work and a year later for smaller companies.
The tests apply to a wide range of jobs, from drivers of school buses and trucks for mom-and-pop businesses to airline pilots and attendants.
The DOT also is considering expanding the types of alcohol-screening equipment that it permits.
The department now allows only breath tests for alcohol, using machines whose accuracy has widely been upheld by the courts.
But companies seeking a wider choice of less-expensive, smaller and easier-to-use screening equipment have persuaded regulators to consider approving other devices such as saliva tests.
Expanded test procedures could give a boost to companies such as tiny Enzymatics Inc., Horsham, Pa., which has developed a saliva test for alcohol, while also benefiting some of its huge competitors.
SmithKline Beecham Clinical Laboratories, a unit of SmithKline Beecham PLC of London, and Roche Biomedical Laboratories Inc., a unit of Switzerland's Roche Holding AG, dominate the drug-testing market, each with a 20% share.
Others include Metpath, a unit of Corning Inc., of Corning, N.Y., and National Health Laboratories Inc., of La Jolla, Calif.
The bigger companies share the drug-testing market with scores of others -- nearly 90 companies are approved by the government for drug testing, many of them privately held.
Gearing up for new business, SmithKline, Collegeville, Pa., plans to launch this month a new urine-collection device that takes two samples at once, reflecting a new rule that permits workers to get a second opinion elsewhere if the first sample turns up positive for drugs.
Smaller companies also are scrambling as regulators consider expanding the types of screening tests.
Enzymatics, for instance, is hustling to convince regulators that its saliva-based test is a much less expensive and quicker -- but equally accurate-method for alcohol testing.
"We're putting all our eggs into that basket," Chris Zalesky, vice president of operations, says.
But makers of other simpler devices may be disappointed.
Drug Screening Systems Inc., Blackwood, N.J., a maker of a simple onsite test for drugs that is the size of an index card, failed to convince regulators that its test for drug abuse is accurate enough to gain approval.
"We don't want to falsely identify employees," says a DOT lawyer.
Companies with regulated pipelines and trucks such as Shell Oil Co., Royal Dutch/Shell Group's U.S. subsidiary, will step up testing under the new rules.
Shell has been testing workers since 1986, largely among workers in safety-sensitive and environmentally sensitive areas such as refineries, chemical plants and pipeline projects.
Like school districts and bus companies across the country, Shell will have to equip itself with sophisticated breath-testing machines to meet the new alcohol-testing rules.
Only five companies -- four of them privately held -- currently make equipment that meets DOT standards.
"Availability of equipment is going to be a real issue," says Dexter Gordon, president of Drug Intervention Services of America Inc., a privately held Houston concern that coordinates drug testing for companies.
Another small company, U.S. Alcohol Testing of America Inc. says it expects revenue to "significantly improve," beginning with its fiscal second quarter ending Sept. 30, from new orders for breath-testing machines.
The Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., company, the only publicly traded company with an approved breath-testing device, is a relative newcomer to the field, behind privately held leaders CMI Inc., a unit of MPD Inc., Owensboro, Ky., and Intoximeters Inc., St. Louis, which expects the new business to at least triple its sales.
The simplest machines measure alcohol levels in a person's breath and print the results.
The most sophisticated ones have computer memories and on-line reporting capabilities and can automatically phone an employer if a reading is positive.
Other companies with approved breath-testing devices are National Draeger Inc. of Pittsburgh, a unit of Germany's Draegerwerk AG, and National Patent Analytical Systems Inc. of Mansfield, Ohio.
SmithKline and Roche estimate the new rules will add about $125 million in revenue by 1995 to the current $500 million annual market for tests among some 20 million U.S. workers.
