The Chinese government is cracking down on the manufacture of bootlegged CDs.
At the same time, it's looking the other way.
Two gray-uniformed administrative police showed up in the narrow lanes of Dong Fang market last week, emptied shelf after shelf of compact disks into cardboard boxes, loaded them into a white van and whisked them away.
But the recent raid, like one earlier this year in Shenzhen just north of Hong Kong, won't make much of a dent in a mushrooming counterfeit compact-disk trade.
That's because many of the factories that produce CDs in China are run by local governments or businesses with strong national political ties.
There's a big global market for pirated CDs.
In 1992, pirated recordings accounted for an estimated $2.1 billion of nearly $31 billion in global recorded music sales worldwide.
China will probably soon be the biggest source of pirated CDs in the world, and with China's trade routes around the globe, they could spread to markets from Africa to North America.
Most of China's counterfeits are currently bound for southeast Asia, but a shipment of Chinese-made fakes was just intercepted on its way to Argentina.
Fakes in China are generally easy to spot from the typographical errors on their packaging.
A Madonna CD found in a market near Guangzhou lists "Fevet" and "Like a Prauer," instead of "Fever" and "Like a Prayer."
The illegally produced disks sell for the equivalent of $2 each in south China; shops buy them for less than half that.
The quality of the recordings is usually high.
The machines that produce CDs -- relatively small, high-tech machines that could fit into a hotel room -- are simply transferring digital signals from legitimate recordings and then embossing them onto fake CDs.
The process is much the same as a computer storing information on a disk.
The recent crackdowns are part of an effort by the government to improve China's international trade status.
Last month, Zhu Rongji, China's vice premier, told U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen that China would enforce international copyright laws and try to curb rampant violations of international property rights.
The pledge may enhance China's chances of joining the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
But enforcement will be difficult.
"Local governments protect local enterprises," says Cheng Ching Ming, a former recording executive from Shanghai who is now the chief China representative for the International Federation of Phonographic Industries, or IFPI.
The group, which includes most of the world's major record companies, is so concerned about piracy in China that it has opened offices in Guangzhou, Shanghai and Beijing to monitor the situation.
"The factories can't oppose the central government openly," Mr. Cheng says, "but if they have connections they will continue to do business."
And many do have connections.
One maker of CDs and laser disks in Shenzhen, diplomats say, is run by the son of a general in the People's Liberation Army.
The businessman's wife, they say, is the niece of Prime Minister Li Peng.
There wasn't any reply at the factory's switchboard late last week.
Moreover, the stakes in the illegal disk business are high.
At least 30 factories collectively capable of producing up to 80 million CDs a year are now operating in China, which has a market for about three million CDs.
Some of the factories make legitimate CDs, either for the Chinese recording industry or for other Asian markets.
But the excess capacity is huge, and each CD-making machine costs about $1 million to buy, the IFPI says.
So the pressure is on to make disks.
Even when CD factories agree to abide by international laws, they don't necessarily do it.
Wingsung Audio-Video Productions Co., a CD maker housed in a dusty gray building in a newly urban area south of Guangzhou, has promised the federation that it won't pirate CDs.
"They know the future" is with legitimate products, says Jeff Yi, a legal adviser to the industry group.
But at a nearby electronics market -- a mammoth marketplace where thousands of boxes containing tens of millions of dollars in stereos and televisions are on sale -- CD stores sell counterfeit disks that dealers say come from Wingsung.
Many Asian countries have had a hard time enforcing laws against counterfeits.
But some of those places -- Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan -- have become manufacturing centers for legitimately licensed products, negating the advantage of producing knockoffs.
Now China has emerged as one of the biggest markets for fake products.
Copies of foreign-made clothing, computer parts and CDs are all popular.
Chinese companies even pirate domestic products: Zhang Jinfun, director of Qingdao Third Pharmaceutical Co., complains that copies of his company's successful blood-pressure medicine have turned up everywhere in China.
But with the central government's endorsement of stronger intellectual property-rights protection, companies with legitimate licenses are finding they can get some government help.
The raids in Guangdong Province may have been triggered by the phonographic federation, though the group's Mr. Yi says monitoring CD factories, not shutting down street vendors, is a better solution.
The global federation also is getting help from China's legal system.
Last year, China set up an Intellectual Property Rights Tribunal in Beijing.
Right now, according to federation regional director, J.C. Giouw, a Shanghai court is considering cases against CD factories in nearby Hangzhou and Suzhou.
A ruling in the federation's favor would tighten the national policing of other counterfeiters.
