More people have been going to the movies in recent years than the industry itself thought, according to a new study.
The report, executives feel, dampens fears that movie-theater business will plummet after the nation gets wired with much-touted 500-channel cable systems.
The study was produced jointly by the Motion Picture Association of America and the National Association of Theater Owners, and was released at the theater group's convention here.
The report also concluded that the average ticket price has been overstated in recent years, something that has blurred the perceived "value" of going to the movies, the group said.
The average ticket price in 1993 was $4.14, almost 20% less than the $5.15 the MPAA had previously calculated, the new report says.
Each year, the MPAA has released figures on such things as admissions and ticket prices, based on government data gathered from about 800 theaters.
But the MPAA and the theater group joined together nine months ago and hired accounting firm Ernst & Young, because the groups believed average ticket prices weren't as high as the government suggested.
Ernst & Young derived its results after surveying more than 14,000 theater screens.
The survey, which restates data back to 1989, shows that admissions in 1993 were 1.24 billion, or about 200 million higher than the one billion that the MPAA previously had calculated.
Ernst & Young, however, still found the trend of flat or declining admissions from 1989 to 1992; thanks to "Jurassic Park," admissions last year were up 6% from 1992.
Under the new survey, the MPAA and the theater group now say admissions in the past five years haven't fallen below what they called "the psychologically important one billion mark."
The previous data showed that admissions fell below one billion in 1991 and 1992.
"We're out to deflate the notion that this is a declining business or even a stagnant one," said William Kartozian, president of the theater group.
He said the overall message is an important one to spread on "both Wall Street and Main Street" that the theater business is "a growing one" that offers unparalleled value.
It's not growing by much.
Jack Valenti, president and chief executive officer of the MPAA, said that total box-office sales were a record $5.15 billion last year, up nearly 6% from 1992.
The real growth for studios is coming from the home-video and international markets.
But Mr. Valenti said the fact that the exhibition business is holding its own while other markets expand rapidly is noteworthy.
"When you stop to think about the attractive competition of going out to the movies, it's staggering," Mr. Valenti said.
Mr. Kartozian didn't seem bothered by the fact that the new average ticket-price numbers, unlike the old ones, show a decline every year since 1990; that year, the average ticket price was $4.23, according to the new survey.
"That would be a concern if it continues," he said, but he added that he thought the recession was a factor, causing moviegoers to shift consciously to off-priced showtimes, such as bargain matinees.
