Twenty-seven years ago, this panhandle town's ambitions seemed as limitless as the treeless plains it occupies.
Enshrined in a page-one story by this newspaper as a paragon of economic-development prowess, Hereford had just capped a blitzkrieg campaign to attract new companies by landing a new, $23 million beet-sugar refinery.
Population had soared 40% in five years, to 12,568, and jobs were up by 600.
"Light planes shuttle in and out of the local airstrip, bringing engineers, developers and eager Easterners with money to spend," the article observed, quoting a local cattle feedlot operator saying: "I never thought we'd have to turn away capital, but it's come to that."
But these days, the airport is mostly quiet, and spendthrift Easterners are a rare commodity.
The downtown, which we said "throbs with new vitality," now has its share of empty storefronts, and new jobs are scarce.
As if that wasn't enough, Hereford appears on the verge of losing one of its cultural treasures, the National Cowgirl Hall of Fame and Western Heritage Center, for lack of visitors.
"For a while, they were going to conquer the world -- it was unbelievable," says Tom Patterson, president of the Amarillo Chamber of Commerce.
But now, he adds, the town has "kind of hit a flat spot."
In some ways, it's a spot in which much of rural Texas finds itself.
With oil prices in the tank, and agriculture a dwindling part of the economy, small towns throughout the state are grappling with job losses and an aging, declining population.
In the panhandle, jobs grew at a minuscule 0.1% annual rate between 1982 and 1992, a period when Texas employment as a whole grew 1.5%.
But amid this gloomy outlook, some people still view Hereford as a paragon of sorts.
Although it hasn't attracted any major businesses in years, some homegrown operations have thrived.
And, while population fell slightly during the last census, Hereford still has about 10% more people than it did in 1970.
"Much of rural Texas, as much of rural America, is in a state of decline, and if Hereford has been able to hold its own, it has been successful," says Greg Taylor, a rural sociologist at Texas A&M University.
For Hereford, holding its own has meant focusing inward, rather than chasing every business-relocation prospect that comes along -- a game that's increasingly competitive and tough to win.
To be sure, business leaders still spend time at trade shows and the like, courting companies in California and the East Coast.
But the effort is minimal, made in concert with other panhandle towns as part of a general campaign to boost the region's image.
Instead, "the majority of our growth in the last few years has come from within," says F. Michael Carr, executive vice president of the Deaf Smith County Chamber of Commerce, based here.
For instance, when Tenneco Inc.'s J.I. Case unit approached a local manufacturer, Poarch Brothers Inc., about making a new implement for a cotton harvester, Hereford Industrial Foundation Inc. swung into action.
The nonprofit organization funded construction of a $250,000 building, which it leased to Poarch for the new business, adding 25 jobs.
Likewise, when Imperial Holly Corp. announced it was considering an $11.7 million expansion to its beet-sugar refinery, the county overcame its longtime aversion to tax breaks, and granted the company a five-year tax abatement.
But perhaps the most telling example of homegrown growth can be found at Hereford Bi-Products Inc., a thriving -- if pungent -- company on the edge of town.
Founded 25 years ago by Garth Merrick, the operation initially consisted of two employees and two pickup trucks.
Their service: picking up dead cows at feedlots and selling off the parts.
Today, Hereford Bi-Products -- whose slogan is, "Your Local Used Cow Dealer" -- is the biggest such company in Texas.
The 500-employee enterprise has also branched off into pet treats -- it sells the bones and rawhide tails and ears of cows through pet stores -- and into dry pet food.
And it has begun shipping products to Japan and the Philippines.
Still, there are some people who miss the old days, when the community was involved in sexier pursuits, such as a letter-writing campaign to pursuade Congress to change sugar-beet quotas and make a local refinery possible.
That was also about the time the local chamber of commerce sponsored the creation of the National Cowgirl Hall of Fame, a museum to honor women of the West -- and, it was hoped, fuel a bustling tourist trade.
But Hereford's isolation -- it's 50 miles to Amarillo, the nearest big town -- made it tough to attract visitors.
So now, the institution may move someplace more populous.
"We just don't get enough money through the front door," says Margaret Formby, president.
"We're off the beaten path."
The King Stumbles: Even mighty Austin strikes out occasionally.
When computer maker Packard Bell Electronics Inc. said it was moving its service and support center -- as well as about 500 jobs -- to the Salt Lake City area from Chatsworth, Calif., it noted that Austin was one of the sites considered during the four-month search.
Packard Bell declined to say why Austin lost.
But the city apparently didn't even make the short list.
"We are not aware Packard Bell was looking at Austin at all," says Angelos Angelou, head of economic development for the Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce.
