As the first half of Super Bowl XXVIII concluded with the Buffalo Bills leading the Dallas Cowboys 13-6, Rick Boyko, senior vice president and executive creative director at WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather, snickered and said, "This is one of the first Super Bowls where the game is beating the commercials."
Mr. Boyko, ensconced in a penthouse at Manhattan's Royalton Hotel with other advertising executives, wasn't alone in that candid assessment.
The consensus of the executives during the 3 1/4 hour game -- which ended with Dallas sending Buffalo to its fourth straight Super Bowl defeat -- was that the commercial breaks produced more losers than winners.
The Super Bowl party at the Royalton, hosted by the Fallon McElligott agency, was hardly scientific, but advertisers also fared poorly in a more scientific study.
Creative Marketing Consultants, a market-research firm in Southfield, Mich., telephoned 373 Super Bowl viewers nationwide following the game to gauge how memorable each ad was.
With one exception, a vast majority of those responding to the questions couldn't recall the products being advertised.
Even the exception, Anheuser-Busch's Bud Bowl VI -- won by Bud Light, incidentally -- didn't fare all that well.
Only 54% of the surveyed viewers recalled the ads.
"That's a dismal showing, considering the Bud Bowl has been around for so long, and the name of the product is seen throughout the commercials," says Rod Smith, a partner with Creative Marketing.
The Bud Bowl varied its format only slightly this year.
Eagle-eyed viewers may have noticed some cross-promotion for Anheuser-Busch: When a replay was seen during the Bud Bowl, it was sponsored by Eagle Snacks, a unit of Anheuser-Busch.
Another Anheuser-Busch product, Bud Ice Draft, which had four 15-second spots in the game, performed even worse than the Bud Bowl: Only 5% of those surveyed recalled the product.
McDonald's registered 16%; Nike only 23%, even with the hoopla of its ads featuring actor Steve Martin that aren't scheduled to be broadcast again; Alamo Rent A Car, with a couple that ages and raises a family while on the road, only 4%.
Such findings can't be good news to advertisers who each year spend millions to produce commercials they hope will dazzle the viewers, in part, by breaking through the clutter.
During the Super Bowl broadcast on General Electric's NBC, there were 56 30-second spots, each selling for a record $900,000.
According to A.C. Nielsen figures supplied by NBC, the Super Bowl was watched by 45.4% of U.S. homes with TV sets, or about 134.8 million viewers.
That's a slight increase from last year, when the big game was watched by 45.1% of U.S. homes with TV sets.
PepsiCo's Pepsi ads received a 35% recall score, higher than most advertisers, but not very impressive given the $5.4 million it spent on commercials for the flagship brand alone.
One Pepsi spot received warm laughter and kudos from the ad agency executives eating lasagna and Caesar salad at the Royalton.
That commercial was the Woodstock reunion.
Maybe the executives saw a bit of themselves in the commercial, which had former-hippies-turned-business-executives returning in BMWs to the site of the rock music festival.
Wavy Lay's ad from Pepsi's Frito-Lay division was considered a winner by Mr. Smith.
In his company's survey, 38% recalled the product and the spot, which featured a widely publicized appearance by former Vice President Dan Quayle.
Mr. Smith says that score was unusually strong in light of the fact that Wavy Lay's is a new, relatively unknown product and had only one commercial in the Super Bowl.
Several stylish and sexy black and white ads from Norwegian Cruise Lines drew enthusiastic responses from the Royalton Gang, but with a puny 3% recall from Creative Marketing, they barely registered with other viewers.
Despite a teaser campaign earlier this month from Chrysler for its Neon models, only 10% of those surveyed recalled the Neon commercials during the Super Bowl.
And they drew a ho-hum reaction from those invited by Fallon.
Each ad ended with the word "Hi" above the impish looking Neon.
Maybe Chrysler should learn that cars that talk may make for a television series -- "My Mother the Car" or "Knight Rider" -- but never a commercial.
Or at least have the car make pithy comments.
A Chrysler spokesman says the company is pleased with the ads, however.
It conducted a three-city experiment in which a total of 689 viewers could ask for more information about the Neon.
The auto maker reports that 59% wanted additional information sent.
It seemed as if some Super Bowl commercials should be as retired as Joe Namath, the former New York Jets quarterback who flipped the game-opening toss Sunday.
For instance, the McDonald's spot of a shooting contest between Larry Bird and Michael Jordan was clever the first year, amusing the second, but bordering on annoying and tired on Sunday.
The Bud Bowl shouldn't have gotten to Bud Bowl II.
And please, Seven-Up, Isuzu, Lipton and Goodyear, if you're going to advertise on the Super Bowl, come with something special.
Finally, a parting comment that should worry some on Madison Avenue.
Mr. Smith of Creative Marketing says the best time to survey viewers is immediately following the game.
"There is tremendous dropoff in viewer recall of commercials even after one day."
Nine hundred thousand dollars for that?
Interpublic Group of Cos., the New York holding company, discussed a possible acquisition of Ammirati & Puris, New York, but the talks weren't serious, both parties said.
A front-page story in yesterday's Advertising Age reported "preliminary discussions" related to a possible purchase of closely held Ammirati & Puris by Interpublic Group.
The magazine said that under such a scenario, the Ammirati agency would continue as a separate unit, "most likely" reporting through Interpublic's Lowe Group.
Interpublic's chairman, Philip Geier, said executives at the two companies have discussed the possibility casually, but said no deal is in the works.
"People have lunch all the time," he said.
"There's nothing going on."
Martin Puris, chief executive officer and president of Ammirati, said in a prepared statement, "While we are always interested in listening to proposals, there is no reason for us to want to tinker with the agency's highly effective formula for success."
Industry executives were surprised to learn that the Ammirati agency would entertain the idea of a parent company.
Ammirati bought itself back from Omnicom Group in 1990, after Omnicom's 1989 purchase of Ammirati's then-parent, British-based Boase Massimi Pollitt.
Ad Notes. . . .
REVIEWS: FMR Corp.'s Fidelity Investments said it is holding a "contractually mandated" review of its $15 million to $20 million corporate ad account.
A spokeswoman declined to elaborate.
Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson was the last agency on the account, which has been inactive recently. . . .
Staples Inc., the Framingham, Mass., office-supply chain, said it is seeking an agency to handle creative duties on a broadcast and print assignment.
"We don't have an agency of record, and we don't want one," said Phyllis Wasserman, vice president of advertising.
Staples spends $15 million to $20 million annually, according to Adweek magazine.
