The Clinton administration has dropped a plan to sell quota rights for textile imports as a way of paying for the recently negotiated world trade pact, because the plan would violate the pact.
Officials said the U.S. trade representative's office conducted a legal analysis of the plan and found that it violated specific provisions of the trade accord, negotiated under auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in December.
Bilateral agreements, negotitated by the U.S. and textile exporters under an international pact called the Multi-Fibre Agreement, also bar the plan.
The rejection of the textile plan, which officials floated as an option early this month, leaves the administration without any clear way to make up a budget shortage of $13.9 billion over five years.
That's the amount the White House budget office estimates the GATT accord would reduce projected tariff receipts.
The deficit-reduction law requires new revenues, or spending cuts, to offset legislation that would widen the deficit.
Surmounting the budget hurdle has proved extraordinarily difficult and has held up administration plans to push quickly for GATT approval, before opposition in Congress could form.
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor told a congressional committee yesterday that if Congress didn't approve the accord this year, the U.S. could be "criticized internationally because we held up the implementation" of the new trade regime.
Some Clinton officials favor asking Congress for a budget waiver, which would require 60 votes in the Senate.
But it's far from clear that the Republican minority would go along.
Missouri Sen. John Danforth and other Republicans have criticized the GATT accord for allowing governments to heavily subsidize commercial research.
By setting up an auction for the rights, the textile plan would have overhauled the current system of allocating import quotas.
In the past, private economists estimated that selling U.S. textile and apparel quotas could generate as much as $6 billion a year.
White House economists asked trade officials to explore the idea.
But under rules governing textile trade, the administration's legal analysis found, only exporters are allowed to sell quota rights.
That's part of an implicit deal between importing nations, such as the U.S., and exporting nations, which are developing countries largely.
Exporting nations agree to limit their shipments in the expectation that they will be able to raise more money by selling export licenses to textile companies.
