Nicolas Hayek sits in his office on the edge of this mountain town, recounting recent visits by top auto-industry executives.
"I'm not saying they were on their knees, pleading, `Please, Hayek, take us,'" he says, waving a half-smoked cigar.
"But they came."
A few days after Daimler-Benz AG's Mercedes-Benz unit agreed to manufacture his vision -- the Swatchmobile, first car ever named after a wristwatch -- Mr. Hayek wants it known he had other lookers.
John Smith, president of General Motors Corp., had lunch here late last year.
And in a letter that Mr. Hayek proudly produces, the chief executive of another U.S. auto maker invited him to Detroit to discuss the Swatchmobile.
Provocatively, Mr. Hayek says he might welcome the inclusion of a third, preferably American, partner in the auto venture -- although he concedes that Mercedes probably wouldn't agree.
So why all the high-powered curiosity?
If Mr. Hayek's track record is any guide, it is just possible that the venture could roll out an automobile so irresistible its factories couldn't meet demand.
Owners would be joining clubs expressly to talk about the car and collectors would be stowing it, confident of rapid appreciation.
All of that has happened, of course, with Mr. Hayek's one other product, the Swatch.
The colorful timepiece with the plastic band and low price (average $40) has had sales of more than 100 million units since its 1983 debut, has become a collector's item and has attracted numerous Swatch fanatics, many of whom own dozens.
So far, there isn't even one Swatchmobile.
Only today are Mercedes officials and Mr. Hayek unveiling a prototype at the Mercedes-Benz Museum in Stuttgart, Germany.
And they are showing only its design (a two-seater that is expected to come in snappy colors); not until the Olympics in Atlanta in 1996 does Mr. Hayek expect to have a car that observers could test drive, and even then it wouldn't hit the market for months.
But don't expect Mr. Hayek, a self-described 65-year-old child, to stick with the here and now.
"A chief executive has to believe in Santa Claus," he says.
Yes, Virginia, the willingness of many international auto executives to share, or at least consider sharing, Mr. Hayek's belief has a lot to do with Swatch.
Every maker of consumer products dreams of a gizmo that drives people wild, and in recent years there have been few better examples of that than Swatch.
But interest in the Swatchmobile also has a lot to do with the celebrity of Mr. Hayek.
Known as the savior of Switzerland's legendary watch industry, he is so visible here and throughout Europe that he recently instructed his staff to stop clipping every article written about him.
"There were too many," he says.
And herein lies what observers call the biggest question about the Swatchmobile: Are its supporters intoxicated by Mr. Hayek's extraordinary gift for promotion?
"He is sometimes given to overoptimism," warns Stan Zuin, an analyst here with Darier, Hentsch & Cie.
Indeed, not a few profess to see some exaggeration in the most compelling chapter of the Hayek story: his role in the success of Swatch and, therefore, in the revival of the Swiss watch industry.
In the early 1980s, Switzerland's two largest watch companies were posting heavy losses because Japanese firms, using quartz technology developed and abandoned by the Swiss, had revolutionized the market with inexpensive automatic watches.
Even well-heeled consumers were buying Seikos instead of luxury Swiss windups such as Blancpains or Omegas.
Seeking help, creditors of the companies called on Mr. Hayek.
Since founding a consulting firm in Zurich in 1953, he had become known for attacking waste and mismanagement in the Swiss National Railroads, the Swiss army, the state radio and television networks and more.
A short, overweight native of Beirut, Lebanon, he has often mocked his own appearance while boasting of his brilliance.
His style stands out among a people he calls "very stiff."
To centralize management and save costs, he ordered a merger of the two watch companies, then led a consortium of investors who bought a 51% stake in the new concern for 151 million Swiss francs (about $100 million at the time).
Today, flush with profits, the company, called Swiss Corp. for Microelectronics and Watchmaking Industries, or SMH, has a market value of about eight billion Swiss francs ($4 billion).
The Swiss watchmaking industry, whose share of the world market had dropped to less than 15% in 1983 from over 40% in the mid-1970s, has since risen to more than 50%, largely on the strength of the Swatch.
Mr. Hayek concedes that the turnaround is mainly attributable to a watch that company technicians developed before his arrival.
In a search for thinness and lightness, they reduced by half the number of parts and built them into a plastic casing, even devising a way to build the watch on an assembly line.
But according to Mr. Hayek, the exercise was purely academic, because company officials believed a low-priced watch would damage the reputation of Swiss watchmaking.
He says they intended to sell the concept to another maker until he intervened, insisting that the company cater to the low-end market as well.
"If someone buys a watch from you when he's 16 and it works well, he's going to buy one of your better watches when he's older," Mr. Hayek says.
But Ernst Thomke, an engineer and former company executive who helped create the watch, says the assembly, distribution and marketing of Swatch -- as well as its name, a shortening of "Swiss watch" -- were in place when Mr. Hayek arrived.
"He had the sense to see its potential, and he got behind it," says Mr. Thomke.
"But the initial success of Swatch had nothing to do with him."
Whatever the case, with its zippy colors, strength and affordable price, the Swatch became a fashion item.
And the face in front of its cult following was Mr. Hayek's.
He publicly smashed the watch against walls and dunked it in aquariums to show its durability.
After the stock-market crash in 1987, he published advertisements inviting down-and-out investors to trade their Rolexes for Swatches.
In the style of Swatch fans, he began wearing multiple watches on his wrists.
Article after article -- his clipping department had collected 15,000 by 1987 -- referred to him as the developer of the Swatch.
By last year, SMH's earnings had risen to the equivalent of about $307 million on sales of $1.99 billion.
In 1983, the company had reported a loss of $83 million on sales of $699 million.
As profits rose, so did Mr. Hayek's reputation as a miracle worker.
He did little to discourage the impression of SMH as a one-man show.
The 1992 annual report, for instance, features six photographs of the chairman and chief executive officer, and his letter to shareholders begins not with any talk of profits but with the announcement that he was "nominated as Man of the Year 1991" here in remote Biel.
"This claiming all the credit is bull -- , and it's why I left" a couple of years ago, says Mr. Thomke, the engineer.
Still, no one disputes that Mr. Hayek deserves sole credit for the Swatchmobile concept.
Calling cars an item, like watches, to which consumers become emotionally attached, he says he is a genius at exploiting that vulnerability.
Mr. Hayek says the Swatchmobile will combine the three most important features of the watch: affordability, durability and stylishness.
The car will cost well under $10,000, he says, and be less than 10 feet long.
"It will hold two people and a case of beer or mineral water," says Mr. Hayek.
And in addition to performing well, he claims the Swatchmobile will address the biggest fear about a small car: accidents.
"This car will have the crash security of a Mercedes," he says.
At the moment, though, the company's latest prototype looks as if it already has been in a collision.
Taken apart and put back together numerous times, the car sits misshapenly in the garage of an unmarked building near here.
Taking a visitor down to the garage for a demonstration, Daniel Ryhiner, an engineer, climbs in and stares at the dashboard.
After consulting with a nearby mechanic about the meaning of a particular red light, he punches the gas pedal and the car moves forward with the silence of a bulb lighting up.
"It's electric," Mr. Ryhiner explains with a grin.
Out on the street, though, the electrical system works up to a scream as the car accelerates.
"We're working on the noise," Mr. Ryhiner says, as he switches on the car's gasoline-powered engine.
Mr. Hayek predicts that the joint venture eventually will sell 500,000 cars annually in the U.S. and a million a year world-wide.
Not everyone is so optimistic.
Mr. Hayek once tried selling clothes, bags and other items bearing the Swatch name, only to drop the project for lack of sales.
And sales of Swatch telephones, pagers and sunglasses often haven't met expectations.
"He hasn't enjoyed the same success with his nonwatch Swatch products," says Martin Newson, who follows the company from London for Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Moreover, there is the question of whether a marriage with Mercedes can work.
A partnership with Volkswagen AG fell apart early last year.
And though Mr. Hayek claims he made that call because of a disagreement over concept, Volkswagen officials say they determined the project wouldn't turn a sufficient profit.
While there is a risk that the freewheeling Mr. Hayek might clash with the formal style of Daimler-Benz officials, Mr. Hayek concedes that he needs the partnership for the Mercedes distribution system, if not its manufacturing facilities.
"I couldn't sell even a small car out of a jewelry store," he says.
Already, Michael Heseltine, president of Britain's Board of Trade, has asked Mr. Hayek to consider Britain as a production base for the Swatchmobile.
The financial terms of the joint venture aren't known.
But analysts say it is a tribute to the power of the Swatch brand that Mercedes officials have agreed to the partnership.
These analysts say the arrangement offers Mercedes the best of both worlds: a chance -- without lowering the Mercedes name -- to reach consumers who can't afford its traditional cars.
Mercedes officials made the decision at a board meeting last week.
Analysts say the decision is in keeping with Mercedes's new strategy of broadening its appeal beyond the luxury market.
Mercedes announced recently that it will build a small city car, starting in 1997.
On the other hand, analysts say both companies are putting accepted brand names at risk.
"If a wheel falls off the Swatchmobile," it could hurt watch sales and Mercedes sales, notes one analyst.
Although Mr. Hayek says the car will succeed on low price and a with-it image, his own engineer, Mr. Ryhiner, says those features alone won't do it: "There are too many small cars on the market already."
Mr. Ryhiner, a former official of Switzerland's environmental protection agency, says the only unique selling point of the car will be its environmental friendliness.
When operating on electricity it will emit virtually no pollutants, and when operating on gasoline it will be able to go exceptional distances on a gallon of gas, thanks in part to an engine that weighs one-tenth of any existing engine with equal power.
Still, considering how slowly solar products and other "green" ideas have taken off, he says, "Mr. Hayek has a masterful public-relations and marketing challenge ahead of him."
