High in his skybox here at Bud Walton Arena, poultry tycoon Don Tyson recently entertained Patricia Jensen, an Agriculture Department official from Washington, at an Arkansas-Vanderbilt basketball game.
Ms. Jensen is in line to become assistant secretary in charge of meat and poultry inspection.
But this day she was the one under inspection by Mr. Tyson, Mr. Chicken himself, a longtime Clinton friend and campaign bankroller.
"Very definitely," she says, "I had the feeling of being looked over."
Few corporations in America have stronger personal ties to Bill Clinton than Arkansas-based Tyson Foods Inc., and few have fared better in their dealings with his Agriculture Department.
Over the past year, an Agriculture Department blitz against unsanitary slaughterhouse practices has bypassed chicken processors, and thus Tyson's 66 plants, altogether.
This has meatpackers and others complaining about selective enforcement.
The department also has sided with the Tyson-dominated Arkansas Poultry Federation in a court fight over a California labeling law.
And while it has imposed a "zero tolerance" fecal-matter policy on meatpackers, it has yet to do the same for poultry, despite high rates of salmonella and other bacteria on chicken and turkey.
In fact, Agricultural Department officials say they were working on a similar sanitary policy for poultry last year when they were ordered by Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy to drop the initiative.
Last week, bowing to growing pressure from critics, Mr. Espy decided to seek public comment on a sanitary proposal for poultry.
But consumer advocates dismiss the proposal as a stalling tactic and an invitation for court challenges, among other things.
"There's no legal excuse for not just outlawing feces on poultry," asserts Thomas Devine, attorney for the Government Accountability Project, a Washington-based group for whistle-blowers.
"This rule proposal is so tentative, so weak, it's a phony reform.
It's another example of Tyson's clout."
Mr. Espy acknowledges meeting with Tyson lobbyists "all the time."
Among other things, Tyson in January feted the secretary at a Dallas Cowboys-New York Giants football game.
But Mr. Espy strongly denies giving Tyson any undue breaks, noting that he also confers often with representatives of consumer and labor groups.
"I'm very open," he says.
His aides say the secretary has focused more on meat than poultry issues so far mostly because of last year's food-poisoning outbreak from E. coli-tainted ground beef in the West, and they assert that the department has made more food-safety improvements in the past 12 months than were made in the previous 12 years of Republican administrations.
Archie Schaffer, a Tyson spokesman, also denies that the company has gotten any breaks from the Agriculture Department.
"Rumors of Tyson's influence are greatly exaggerated," he says.
"We talk to people at the USDA; we have USDA people come here to visit us.
But that hasn't translated into any special favors."
Still, the Tyson-Clinton connection stands out even in a department long faulted for a tendency to accommodate agribusiness interests.
James Blair, Tyson's general counsel, and his wife, Diane, a political scientist, are old friends of Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton, and slept at the White House the night of the Clinton inauguration.
Tyson has long been represented by the Rose Law Firm, Mrs. Clinton's former firm.
Don Tyson, meanwhile, has been a loyal Clinton backer for years, flying him around Arkansas on Tyson aircraft and picking up the tab for many meals, including a dinner party last year at Nora, a trendy Washington restaurant.
Mr. Tyson's company obtained nearly $8 million in state tax breaks for plant expansions during the 1980s, while state regulators under then-Gov.
Clinton took a relaxed attitude toward water pollution from Tyson's plants and contract growers, local environmentalists say.
Mr. Clinton received campaign contributions from Tyson executives and family members, including $22,000 for his presidential campaign in 1991 and 1992; they also donated an additional $12,000 to Democratic Party organizations.
Mr. Tyson, who declined to be interviewed for this article, and other Tyson executives also contributed $4,000 to the failed Mississippi congressional bid of Mr. Espy's brother, Henry, last year, while the Tyson Foods political action committee chipped in an additional $2,000.
Even in personnel matters, critics contend, the Clinton administration seems mindful of Tyson's interests.
Early last year, for example, pressure from White House officials and members of the Arkansas congressional delegation induced Mr. Espy to abandon a reorganization plan that would have given Ellen Haas, strongwilled consumer advocate, control of meat and poultry inspection as well as consumer programs.
Instead, she got the job of assistant secretary for food and consumer services.
While she declined to comment publicly, several friends of Ms. Haas say she told them she believes telephone calls from Tyson to the White House scotched her chances of getting the proposed bigger job.
But Mr. Espy says he dropped the plan because of industry opposition to its particulars.
"Ellen had nothing to do with it," he says.
When it comes to surprise inspections, the Agriculture Department has given most of the poultry industry a pass.
Last spring, in the wake of the ground-beef contamination case, a team of roving federal inspectors descended unannounced on 90 cattle slaughterhouses and shut down 30 temporarily.
But there has been no similar crackdown on chicken processors, despite the fact that salmonella, campylobacter and other bacteria cause millions of food-poisoning cases and thousands of deaths annually, as compared with 20,000 cases of E. coli poisoning, only some of which are fatal.
Mr. Espy's aides note, though, that agriculture inspectors did launch a round of surprise inspections at several turkey plants.
(Tyson doesn't own any turkey plants.)
Some see the dispute over the California labeling law as another example of Tyson clout.
The department allows poultry frozen at zero degrees Fahrenheit to be labeled "fresh," while the state of California sets the limit at 25 degrees.
The Arkansas Poultry Federation and two other trade groups have sued in federal court to block enforcement of the state limit, which would create distribution problems for processors in Arkansas and other Broiler Belt states; the Agriculture Department has intervened on their side, arguing in a brief that federal regulation pre-empts more stringent state law.
Carol Kellerman, an attorney for a group of California poultry processors, charges that the department had previously ignored "fresh" labeling laws in other states.
Tyson's Mr. Schaffer, though, contends that political clout really lies with the California processors, who are trying to keep competitors out of their lucrative market.
As proof, he cites a recent directive by Mr. Espy to re-examine the department's fresh-labeling policy.
Ms. Kellerman counters: "There isn't any serious re-evaluation going on."
Most vexing to consumer advocates and meatpackers is Mr. Espy's "zero-tolerance" fecal-contamination policy.
A year ago, department officials were working on such a policy for the poultry industry.
It would have sharply tightened requirements to trim off, rather than wash off, badly contaminated flesh, wings or legs.
But the officials say that they were told by Mr. Espy's office to drop the proposal and that an Espy aide ordered them to turn over all evidence of their work, including information in computers.
They also say the department's food-safety spokesman was ousted after telling a reporter that zero-tolerance soon would be extended to poultry.
The department says the spokesman was removed for unrelated reasons.
The department still hasn't worked out the details of the poultry proposal Mr. Espy announced last week.
But congressional aides and consumer groups who have been briefed on the proposal say it will emphasize washing over trimming.
"You can't carve poultry," Mr. Espy says, noting that a bird without a wing or leg "is not very appealing."
