Walt Disney Co., movie maker and theme-park operator, is betting there's gold to be mined on Broadway.
And it may already have found traces.
Its $10 million-plus stage production of "Beauty and the Beast," set to open April 18 at the Palace Theater, drew $250,000 in ticket sales the day the box office opened last month in New York, and advance sales remain robust.
Ticket prices for the production range from $20 for a rear balcony seat at Wednesday matinees all the way up to $65.
The show, which will use much of the same music as Disney's animated movie version, stars stage and TV actress Susan Egan as Belle, Broadway veteran Terrence Mann as the Beast and TV actor Tom Bosley as Belle's father.
Disney believes Broadway stage versions of its animated films might be a significant new profit center: Big hits such as "Cats," executives speculate, easily return $150 million to $200 million in profit, similar to what a blockbuster movie like "Pretty Woman" can deliver.
And Disney believes the stage versions could bolster the long-term values of its animated features, which drive the earnings of some of its consumer products and theme park businesses.
Few investments are riskier than Broadway shows: They cost millions to produce, and most fail.
While other studios have invested in Broadway shows, none has tried to make it a long-term stand-alone business, as Disney is trying to do.
It even has agreed to spend $29 million to refurbish and reopen the historic New Amsterdam theater on 42nd Street near Broadway to house future shows.
Disney executives are optimistic about "Beauty and the Beast" partly because the show got nightly standing ovations during a six-week tryout in Houston late last year.
"I'll be shocked and disappointed if I'm wrong, but I've been wrong before," says Michael Eisner, Disney's chairman and chief executive.
Success or failure will depend on how many people will pay $65 for orchestra seats to watch a musical that they paid $7.50 to see in a movie theater two years ago -- and probably have at home on videocassette.
Disney believes that won't be a problem, reasoning that the musical isn't simply a stage version of the movie.
For one thing, it's a longer story that includes some songs cut from the film.
"There was a watershed moment in which the creators of the show needed the freedom to walk away from the movie," recalls Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of Walt Disney Studios.
He says the creators "reinvented" the story and came up with a musical that sports "breathtaking" costumes and special effects.
If there's any concern, it's how Disney will be greeted by critics, audiences and Broadway powerbrokers.
"We're not doing `Nicholas Nickleby,'" Mr. Katzenberg warns, referring to a favorite of critics and upscale audiences some years ago.
"I hope people don't have expectations that we're going to do anything other than strive to bring what it is that Disney represents to this new venture."
Disney is playing the Broadway game by its own rules.
For example, although Disney is adhering to union regulations, many of those hired to stage the show aren't getting the same potentially lucrative profit-sharing deals they might get in other big-budget Broadway musicals.
Disney says this is so it can recoup its investment more quickly, but adds that the show's creative team was well compensated upfront.
If the show is a hit, the company won't have to share as much of the profits.
Because many of the people involved in the show are young and inexperienced, they haven't resisted such arrangements.
It's the first Broadway show for Robert Jess Roth, the 31-year-old director, who made his name directing 20-minute Disney theme-park revues.
The musical's choreographer and scenic designer have similar credits.
"Do I wish we were all going to make more money?
Yeah," Mr. Roth says.
"Do I care really?
I'm doing this because it's an opportunity of a lifetime."
Industry executives speculate that the musical's weekly operating costs will be around $400,000, allowing Disney to recoup its investment in about a year if the show plays to full houses.
Unlike other musicals with many backers, "Beauty and the Beast" 's sole producer is Disney.
Disney is also doing other things differently: Disney executives showed up at preproduction meetings with storyboards typically used in movies that mapped out how they envisioned each scene.
Messrs. Eisner and Katzenberg have been intensely involved in staging the musical.
Mr. Roth remembers a rehearsal in which Mr. Eisner insisted a particular scene be rewritten and restaged.
"And I could be totally wrong," Mr. Roth remembers Mr. Eisner saying at the end of the exchange.
Mr. Katzenberg frequently would hand Mr. Roth pages of notes.
Mr. Roth says: "It has definitely been a collaboration, but I've been the director."
Mr. Katzenberg puts it this way: Mr. Roth and producer Robert McTyre "have been the quarterbacks and we've been the coaches on the sideline."
Disney originally planned to hold previews for seven weeks -- instead of the typical three to four weeks -- which would keep the show from critics longer than usual.
Disney this week moved up the opening from April 27, cutting previews to just under six weeks.
Interest in the musical has been lively.
On Jan. 31, the day the box office opened in New York, Disney sold more than $250,000 in tickets; since then, advance sales have continued to be robust.
Ticket prices will range from $20 for a rear balcony seat at Wednesday matinees to $65.
Broadway-show tour directors are betting the show could set records on the road.
"If Cincinnati is a one-week town for `Tommy,' I think it could easily be a three-week town for `Beauty and the Beast,'" says Jeffrey Seller, vice president of the Booking Office Inc. in New York.
And Disney continues with its plans to redo the New Amsterdam theater.
"That will be the home of our second show, whatever that might be, and our third and our fourth . . . and maybe by that time, our first three will be playing all over the world," Mr. Eisner says.
Mr. Katzenberg adds that regardless of the reception for "Beauty," "we're committed to coming back."
