The Federal Aviation Administration again boosted its estimate of the cost of its troubled effort to overhaul the air-traffic control system.
It also said it is suspending funding for an important piece of the revamped system.
The new estimate is $6.5 billion to $7.3 billion.
But the agency quickly added that the figures assume that the current goals and timetable for the project will be maintained.
FAA Administrator David Hinson called that "a big if," and said he will replace the project's management team in an effort to prevent the worst-case scenario outlined in the revised budget estimate.
An internal FAA study that contained the new cost projections estimated that the project would suffer additional delays of nine to 31 months.
The FAA had been expecting that the first phase of the program would be installed in Seattle in October 1996.
The FAA report now estimates that June 1998 is more likely.
Transportation Secretary Federico Pena called the findings of the the FAA report "appalling and unacceptable," and vowed "any and all steps necessary to get this project on track."
The project, called the advanced automation system, is the heart of a modernization plan expected to cost about $18 billion.
The program would install new computer workstations in 20 air traffic control centers across the country and modernize 150 airport towers.
The program is "very important to us controlling air traffic in the 21st century," Mr. Hinson told reporters.
The program originally was contracted in 1988 at a price of $4.3 billion.
The original schedule called for the first installation piece -- the Seattle update -- to be completed by August 1993.
The agency also is planning to meet with its primary contractor, Loral Corp., which recently bought the original FAA contractor, Federal Systems Co., from International Business Machines Corp.
In order for Loral to take over the FAA contract, the agency must approve the transfer.
Mr. Hinson said he would make certain that Loral provides "performance guarantees" and schedule and cost commitments before transferring the accord.
But FAA officials said it is overwhelmingly likely that Loral will be granted the contract.
Mr. Hinson went out of his way to say that $2.3 billion that already went toward software and hardware for the new system was well-spent.
Indeed, an FAA spokesman said IBM has been paid $18 million in award fees, a type of performance bonus.
But acknowledging the need to reassess the project, the agency said it is suspending its plan to replace the central "host" computer with smaller machines in each of the 20 or so control centers.
Only $17 million has been spent so far on the so-called area-control computer complex, although the FAA report estimates that it eventually could cost more than $1 billion, or about one-seventh of the overall project budget.
Mr. Hinson said this part of the program will be re-evaluated during the suspension.
More changes could be coming.
Mr. Hinson said the agency is only at "the midpoint" in reevaluating the project.
Still in the works are a review to determine whether new technologies created since 1988 should be integrated into the new system and another, independent study by the Center for Naval Analysis.
The project has become a growing headache for the FAA over the past year.
In March, the agency was berated at congressional hearings for the way the project has been handled.
Then, after Mr. Hinson told Congress in September that the program was back on track, the agency was forced to concede in December that the schedule and costs had again become a problem.
