San Francisco -- This has not, on the whole, been a happy year at the War Memorial Opera House.
Facing a $6 million deficit last January, the San Francisco Opera began by axing future "festival" seasons in the summer.
Management then announced, Turandot-fashion, the chopping of 14 heads, though the biggest of them, belonging to general manager Lotfi Mansouri, remained firmly, mysteriously attached, his contract renewed for yet another six years.
Next, the company scuttled plans for a new "Die Meistersinger" and scheduled several revivals.
Andrei Serban, whose 1982 interpretation of "I Puritani" was re-created here by Jonathan Eaton, insisted on choking off Bellini's lyricism and logic at every turn.
To begin at the end, he has the hero's rival sneak out just before the final curtain and stab him in the back, thereby sparing us the sentimental tackiness of a happy ending.
The chorus in his production is made up of bloodied, dying soldiers hobbling or being dragged into the grim castle courtyard, to remind us that there's a war going on.
In Act II, they sing a long song of sympathy for poor jilted Elvira, the soprano-gone-mad.
Considering their condition, it seemed heroic of them to worry so much about hers.
The walking wounded later stagger together to sing Bellini's heroic victory song.
In Act III, the returned hero kisses a bleak no man's land covered with snow, while blissfully describing the green, green trees of home, as his dotty beloved plays hide-and-seek behind a junked Cinderella coach.
The whole production was little more than a drab, ill-conceived frame for June Anderson's everlasting mad scene in Act II, plus a few more of her mad moments in Act III.
Ms. Anderson's voice is slightly harsher and drier than Joan Sutherland's (the Elvira standard for our time), and she lacks Dame Joan's full rounded loveliness of tone.
But her singing, in this challenging bel canto role, was precise, powerful, varied, expressive, and superbly controlled, with some real hysteria in the trills.
If only we could have heard it at a concert, without the dumb, dun sets and the war wounded.
"La Clemenza di Tito" was played in 18th-century costumes against one huge, worn Roman brick wall, punctured by a surrealist hole.
Although he accepted the foolish Houston/Glasgow notion of a raggle-taggle Roman chorus out of Hogarth, director Albert Takazauckas managed to move and motivate his generally excellent cast in a manner that often made both humane and theatrical sense -- no easy feat for a ritualized opera seria staged in an inhospitable set, even with all of Mozart's fine music to carry it along.
Frederica von Stade, who will apparently never grow old, was an even more engaging Sextus, vocally and dramatically, than she was at her debut in the role here 32 years ago.
And Donald Runnicles, the company's musical director, proved he could handle late Mozart with as much tact and insight as he handles bigger-gun composers.
The one genuinely new-to-the-world production was the SFO's first "I Vespri Siciliani" by Verdi in a production by director Christopher Alden and his designing partner Paul Steinberg.
Sir Charles Mackerras, the company's new principal guest conductor, led the band with the intelligence that is his trademark around the world; Carol Vaness, Chris Merritt, Timothy Noble, and James Morris sang the leads with their usual high vocal proficiency.
But none of this could overcome the stupidity of what was going on onstage, which included such nonsense as a scrambling mass abduction of Sicilian maidens by 19th-century French soldiers (though the work is set in 1282), inside tilting, symbolic neofascist sets.
Fortunately, I had got my Verdi fix a week earlier in Los Angeles, where Leona Mitchell and Placido Domingo sang Amelia and King Gustavus (a.k.a.
Riccardo) in "Un Ballo in Maschera."
When they joined forces for the great second-act duet, two strong, mature, and distinctive voices twined into a single golden sound.
In San Francisco's "Meistersinger," it was primarily Maestro Runnicles and the opera orchestra who allowed us to admire much of what Wagner wrote, overcoming major weaknesses in casting and direction.
At first I thought Bernd Weikl, a fine singing actor from Hamburg was playing Hans Sachs as someone too young and vigorous for the respect and authority he supposedly commands.
But his grumpy shoemaker-poet became more credible and convincing as the opera progressed.
His christening of the prize song, as he ruefully grants his blessing to the young couples (none of the four quite good enough, though Ben Heppner's sweet, soaring tenor deserved a prize), was a heartbreaker, as it ought to be.
After grumbling silently for two or three hours, I mellowed along with the music of Act III, and left content.
Friends of mine thought that David Hockney's spectacular decors (and Ian Falconer's no-less-spectacular costumes) detracted from the emotional seriousness of "Turandot."
But as I've never detected any in it, I reveled in their dazzling contributions.
Were ever reds so utterly red, greens so Hollywood green, blues so moodily blue?
Is there a living stage artist who can play more knowingly than David Hockney with organic shapes, sudden washes of light, runaway perspectives gone mad?
I would rank his visual conception of "Turandot" on a level with his classic "The Rake's Progress" and "The Magic Flute"; and well above his "Tristan" and "Die Frau ohne Schatten," which I saw in Los Angeles just last month (with three excellent female leads -- Gwyneth Jones, Ellen Shade, and Jane Henschel).
This "Turandot" confirmed my suspicion that Mr. Hockney's unique visual style is ill-adapted to operas that are themselves devoid of anything like his own childlike wit and droll imagination.
He may sometimes twist other men's operas to fit his style; but in the case of "Turandot," I definitely think he improved it.
Donald Runnicles, the real star of this season, extracted every ounce of energy from Puccini's voluptuous score.
But I was dismayed to hear Eva Marton, the opening night Princess, gasping, wobbling, straining for her high notes.
So I went again to see if a more sympathetic soprano could pull the whole thing together -- and she did.
Ealynn Voss, the second Turandot, emits a molten flow of gorgeous sound, and promisingly recalls her teacher, Birgit Nilsson.
The second tenor (Vladimir Popov) was also better than the first (Michael Sylvester).
Unfortunately, it was the first cast that PBS videotaped for its New Year's Day telecast.
It was still worth switching to after the Bowl games to hear the orchestra and chorus, and to see whatever your TV set could capture of those astonishing costumes and sets.
