The Florida insurance department is expected to propose a $20 million fine against Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. to settle a multistate investigation into the company's sales practices.
But other states have raised questions about whether the penalty is too big, and Met is threatening to reject any proposal that contains a large fine.
If Met chooses to fight the proposed penalty, it could hold up repayment to 36,000 policyholders who were allegedly misled into buying life insurance.
Insurance department fines rarely run more than a few hundred thousand dollars.
But Florida, which has led the investigation into Met, believes a fine of $20 million or more -- to be split among 40 states -- is justified because of the widespread nature of the alleged abuses.
Florida is expected to unveil its proposal next week in Denver, when insurance regulators will discuss Met at the quarterly meeting of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
Tom Gallagher, Florida insurance commissioner, is hopeful that other states will quickly sign off on his plan.
But the other insurance commissioners, given the complexity of the issues, are unlikely to rush into an agreement.
One problem for them is the lack of precedent for the settlement being contemplated for Met.
States have traditionally handled insurance company investigations individually.
But the increasingly national nature of insurance marketing has changed the ground rules.
Last year, Florida accused Met agents, including those in the company's largest sales office, located in Tampa, of misleading policyholders into buying life insurance under the pretense that they were investing in retirement accounts.
A number of other states have found evidence of similar abuses in their own investigations.
The findings have already prompted a number of high-level dismissals at Met and a promise by Met to refund $40 million to $70 million to the policyholders who may have been misled from 1990 to 1993.
Met has already paid $12 million to Florida policyholders, but it is threatening to halt the voluntary payments -- and fight each policyholder individually -- if the multistate settlement can't be worked out, according to people familiar with the discussions.
"The subject of sanctions is under active discussion," said a spokesman for Mr. Gallagher, who declined to discuss details.
Separately, Pennsylvania and Met have worked out details of their settlement of a different investigation, say people familiar with the situation.
The investigation centered on widespread allegations that Met agents tricked policyholders into cashing in their old life insurance policies to buy new ones.
The activity, known as churning or replacement, hurts policyholders because agent commissions and other expenses make it uneconomical for a policyholder to cash in one policy for another.
Agents, however, can benefit because they earn a commission for making a new sale.
In addition to paying a $1.5 million fine, Met has agreed to interview more than 20,000 policyholders in the state who might have been victimized.
Those who sign a sworn statement saying that they were misled would get their old policies back and receive a credit for the costs of buying the new policy.
Pennsylvania plans to soon release a report blasting Met management for its failure to stop the activity.
But Met argued that the senior executives were unaware of the activity.
