Japan's strapped corporations are seeking creative ways to skirt the nation's costly lifetime-employment system while still avoiding layoffs.
In one of the most striking examples to date, Toyota Motor Corp. said Friday that it will create a new category of temporary professional workers for its Japanese labor force.
Toyota will take on automotive designers for a limited number of one-year contracts, instead of offering them a customary lifelong job.
The company will pay the designers a high annual salary based on individual merit, rather than using the traditional mode of linking pay to seniority and company performance.
Toyota's announcement of the plan reads in places like a manifesto against Japan's labor practices.
"The practice of long-term employment . . . contributed significantly to Japan's economic growth, and is expected to continue positively" in the future, Toyota's statement said.
"As the business conditions surrounding Japanese corporations underwent radical change, however, it was inevitable that the rigid organizational structure of the past would impose limits on corporate growth."
Toyota's program isn't the first of its kind in Japan, and it will start small, involving a handful of workers in its first year.
But Toyota President Tatsuro Toyoda said the plan marks the start of a broader effort to "gradually increase" the number of white-collar contract workers the company employs in Japan.
More important, Toyota's reputation as one of Japan's leading -- and most conservative -- industrial corporations means the plan could have a big influence on the labor practices of other Japanese concerns.
"This is part of a large trend," said Satoru Ishikawa of the Institute of Labor Administration, a labor-research organization.
Mr. Ishikawa noted that in recent years Japanese companies have steadily increased their use of white-collar contract workers, who are easier to terminate than lifetime employees.
The use of temporary blue-collar workers has long been much more widespread.
Last year 19% of Japanese companies employed contract workers of both types, up from 14% in 1989, according to the institute.
Like other Japanese manufacturers, Toyota has long employed factory workers on a contract basis.
The temporary work forces act as a safety valve, swelling during peak periods and shrinking in slack times.
In June 1991, when auto sales were strong, Toyota had 2,618 such workers in Japan.
Today, after nearly three years of falling output, it has close to none.
A growing number of Japanese executives are venting frustration with the lifetime employment system.
The practice inhibits companies from quickly reducing their bloated white-collar work forces -- one big reason why Japan is in the midst of its fourth-straight year of falling corporate earnings.
Earlier last week, Keizai Doyukai, a leading business organization, released a survey showing that 41% of top Japanese executives think Japan "must thoroughly revise the lifetime employment system."
Toyota also used its announcement to try spiffing up its somewhat stodgy image.
The new designers "will be expected to propose novel designs and revitalize the whole company with unconventional ideas," the company said.
Their work hours will be unusually flexible by Japanese standards: The designers need only show up at work once a day, according to the job description.
Toyota said it will hire between one and five vehicle designers to work at its head office in Toyota City, Japan, sometime after May 1.
They will start at an annual salary of 10 million yen ($89,800).
