Ontario Hydro, North America's second-largest utility, said it expects to record charges of as much as 3.5 billion Canadian dollars (US$2.64 billion) against its 1993 net income, up from earlier forecasts that they would reach C$1.6 billion.
The exact size of the charge won't be disclosed until February, when the state-owned utility expects to complete a study of its surplus generating capacity.
Some of the charges will be related to the sale and/or closure of some generating capacity, utility sources said.
About C$600 million of the loss will come from severance costs, as Hydro slashes jobs throughout the organization, with the remainder being write-downs on assets and charges related to the cancellation of uranium supply contracts and energy purchases from other provincial utilities in Canada.
Eleanor Clitheroe, chief financial officer of the utility, said the write-offs "will significantly improve Hydro's future net-income picture."
The utility said it expects to report a profit of C$600 million in 1994.
Ms. Clitheroe said the utility won't have an operating loss for 1993, despite earlier forecasts of a C$200 million loss as a result of falling demand for electricity.
She said she expects the utility to post net income of C$600 million in 1994, rising to C$885 million by 1996.
These forecasts are based on there being no increase in demand for Hydro's electricity.
Of the total estimated charges and write-offs, C$1.05 billion is related to restructuring, including staff cuts.
The remainder relates to asset write-downs, including C$595 million to mark the cost of Hydro's nuclear fuel inventory to market.
The charges related to surplus capacity will range from C$40 million to C$650 million.
Ms. Clitheroe said the charges don't include an amount yet to be awarded to Denison Mines Ltd., a Toronto-based uranium-mining concern, related to canceled supply contracts.
She said that amount could range from C$40 million to as much as C$400 million, but that the utility anticipates the figure will be at the lower end of that range.
Arbitrators are expected to reach their decision by spring, she added.
Hydro has received some expressions of interest in purchasing some generating assets, Ms. Clitheroe said, but she noted that it is too early to say whether these are "concrete" enough to pursue.
Many questions still surround the prospects of Hydro, struggling to deal with a debt load of about C$34 billion, and a debt-to-equity ratio which will hit 90% in the wake of the write-downs.
The utility's critics anticipate asset sales, as well as more write-downs in the coming years.
"There are a lot of assets, particularly on the nuclear-generation front, that are still wildly overvalued," said Tom Adams, an analyst at Energy Probe, a Toronto-based lobby group.
Ms. Clitheroe declined to speculate on the likelihood of all or part of Hydro being privatized in the coming months, noting that this would require "some public debate" and a decision by Ontario's government.
