New York -- A young woman recently called Random House pleading for a set of the galleys of Ethan Canin's "The Palace Thief."
If no galleys were available of this second collection of stories by the critically acclaimed, bestselling author of "Emperor of the Air" (1988), then how about an advance bound copy of the book or a press release?
"Or maybe," she added hopefully, "a toenail clipping or a hair follicle?"
Mr. Canin is 33 years old and a hunk, in the estimation of many bookish young women who don't know that he's getting married in July and who packed the house for a recent reading here.
Critics who may or may not feel the same primal urge call Mr. Canin a writer of tremendous talent, the real thing and guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of brilliance.
Still others just call him Doc.
Before he graduated from Harvard Medical School (he has a B.A. from Stanford and an M.F.A. from the Iowa Writers' Workshop), Mr. Canin published "Emperor of the Air," a short-story collection that fetched rave reviews and the Houghton Mifflin Fellowship, a $2,500 grant previously won by Philip Roth and Robert Penn Warren, among others.
During the five-year pause Mr. Canin permitted himself between med school and a residency in internal medicine, he wrote the generally well-received novel "Blue River," taught writing at the University of Michigan, the University of Iowa and San Francisco State, and polished off "The Palace Thief."
"I wanted to write stories where small things would take on huge significance.
I thought that would be like writer's macho: Could you make a line of dialogue as important as shooting a gun?" he says of "The Palace Thief" (205 pages, $21), a quartet of stories featuring middle-aged and elderly men of small, dashed ambitions examining past moments of misjudgment.
"I wanted to write without tricks and jazzed-up language, which I can do, but it's harder to write plain English and to write stories that have plots and make sense, or, as Flannery O'Connor said, that are `inevitable and surprising.'
"That was my challenge to myself: to write a regular story that sounded like a true story and that would hold up to second and third reading.
"You need a challenge to keep you going when you sit down to write because it's so miserable," he continues.
"It's like, `Can I run 12 blocks today?
Can I run past the water fountain and go two more blocks?'"
That pretty much depends on whether Mr. Canin is at large or, far more likely these days, on call at San Francisco General or the local VA hospital.
"It's pretty miserable timewise.
I work between 80 and 115 hours a week.
I stopped writing in May when I began my internship and I won't be able to start again until next month."
That is evidently just fine with Mr. Canin, since he insists he finds medicine, however grueling physically, to be a lot less challenging a career path than literature.
"If you can get yourself out of bed at five in the morning you can do it," he says.
"You just show up and DO it."
And you can easily believe you can do it again the next day.
But when he finishes a story, like many writers, Mr. Canin has the feeling that it is going to be his last.
Unlike many writers, however, Mr. Canin seems to shake the feeling like a 24-hour virus.
"Somebody says something or someone opens a door a certain way and you think of a trilogy of novels."
Mr. Canin, who is not that many years away from boyish gawkiness, has the quite innocent arrogance of the child prodigy.
However unpleasant he claims to find the process of composition, he says he rarely has to rewrite.
He takes some pains to differentiate the contents of "The Palace Thief" -- long stories -- from short fiction.
"To me short stories seem too easy.
They're kind of a trick.
You need one good line, 10 pages of passable dialogue and then one good moment and you have the story" (that would, no doubt, come as a surprise to Raymond Carver and William Trevor).
Mention the name John Grisham and Mr. Canin allows that he too plans to write a thriller next year, in fact began plotting it out this very morning.
"It will destroy my reputation," he says.
Express amazement that Mr. Canin is able to juggle two highly demanding careers -- to say nothing of doing with his own two hands the renovations on his 1903 Edwardian house in San Francisco -- and he will confide that he is planning to branch out.
"I'd like to do something else, maybe a third career.
You tell me which career.
I'm thinking of journalism."
If the tendency to ask questions is any indication, Mr. Canin will do just fine.
"What story in the collection did you like best?" he wants to know.
"I hate to say it but I'm easily swayed.
Whatever one you say is your favorite will be my favorite too."
The younger of two boys, Mr. Canin was born in Ann Arbor, Mich., and grew up in Oberlin, Ohio, Philadelphia and San Francisco, where his violinist father taught and performed.
His own rarefied upbringing parallels that of the narrator in perhaps the most heart-stopping story in this new collection, "Batorsag and Szerelem": Like the fictional family, the Canins had no television; Mr. Canin and his brother were encouraged in such creative pursuits as making their own toys.
His first intense exposure to creative writing came in high school by way of his teacher, Danielle Steel, then just beginning her career as a colossus of the romance novel.
"She made us write every single day," recalls Mr. Canin.
"She really liked my writing, which was the first strokes I ever got.
She wrote on my midterm evaluation something about that I fooled around too much and she hoped I would use my writing with some seriousness some day."
In fact, Mr. Canin didn't particularly intend to use his writing at all.
He was an engineering major at Stanford, "but when a friend of mine got a job as the editor of Waste World, the journal of the solid-waste-management industry, I realized, `Oh, God, I may have to do something like that.'"
Deciding to become a doctor, he says, was a failure of imagination.
"I was a Jewish kid.
It seemed like a reasonable thing: You're working with people and you're not trying to screw them like you would in law, the only other job I could think of.
It seemed like the safest thing I could do."
Safety is almost as big an issue with Mr. Canin as it is with his characters, people who are often torn between the conventional and the wild side.
Indeed, it was Mr. Canin's concern about his low output at Iowa -- he wrote only two stories during his two years on scholarship -- that helped propel him toward medical school.
"But I have more confidence now," he says.
"Now I'm more scared of knowing my future than not knowing it."
Mr. Canin who views himself as both a good doctor (he listens well) and a bad doctor (he's not up to speed on some diseases), does know a bit about his future.
He'll eventually confine his medical practice to 10 or 20 hours a week in a clinic and he'll continue to write, however tortured and lonely the process, however nerve-racking it is to wait for reviews and to check his standing on the bestseller list.
"You're trying to reach this brass ring and grab it and pluck it," he says.
"If you're No. 8 on the list you want to know why Michael Crichton is No. 3."
Unlike Mr. Canin, Mr. Crichton did not go on with medicine after Harvard.
But the authorial success of these two has caused an outbreak of creative writing among medics.
"Every doctor I know is writing a book," says Mr. Canin.
"They're calling me and want to show me their manuscripts at the end of dinner.
Just about anybody I've ever talked to would give up his job if he were assured of being a successful writer.
Except for writers.
They'd give up their jobs to become doctors."
Ms. Kaufman is a writer in New York.
