The following is reprinted with permission from the Des Moines Register of June 13, 1993.
A related editorial appears nearby {see related editorial: "Review & Outlook (Editorial): Who Was Webster Hubbell? -- I" -- WSJ March 15, 1994}.
When Hillary Rodham Clinton complained in a recent speech about profiteering in the health care industry, she could have found a ready example in the role one of her former Arkansas law partners played in an Iowa nursing-homes deal that made millions for the deal-makers.
William H. Kennedy III, a partner in the Rose Law Firm of Little Rock and now associate counsel to President Clinton, shepherded the deal for Beverly Enterprises, a giant nursing-home company that paired up with a Texas banker to sell its Iowa and Arkansas nursing homes.
Forty-one Iowa homes were acquired four years ago by a nonprofit corporation, now known as Care Initiatives, that was effectively controlled by the banker, Bruce Whitehead.
The deal was financed by $86 million in tax-exempt revenue bonds.
Whitehead and the bond underwriters took up-front profits exceeding $15 million.
Beverly, which needed cash to reduce its crippling debt, made about $10 million.
"Kennedy was involved in the whole thing, period.
He was the point man for Beverly," says Frank Pechacek, a Council Bluffs lawyer who investigated the deal for county assessors.
The assessors were contesting Care Initiatives' claim to property-tax exemptions for its nursing homes in about 30 counties.
Kennedy could not be reached for comment.
Other Rose Law Firm partners who now work in the Clinton administration may have been involved, too.
Webster Hubbell, who holds the No. 3 slot in the Justice Department {Mr. Hubbell resigned yesterday}, listed Beverly Enterprises among his 26 Rose Law Firm clients.
Vincent Foster Jr., deputy counsel to the president, represented Stephens Inc., a Little Rock investment-banking firm that owns 10% of Beverly's stock.
Beverly hired Stephens to find a buyer for many of its nursing homes.
The search led Beverly to Whitehead.
"There was absolutely no way that these people didn't know what was going on," said Roy Drew, a former Stephens broker and an independent investment adviser whose criticism of a similar nursing-home transaction in Arkansas involving Beverly, Whitehead and a nonprofit corporation helped touch off a political furor that scuttled the deal.
No one is saying that nursing-home company executives, lawyers, bankers or others involved in the Iowa homes' sale acted illegally.
In fact, great care was taken to dot the i's and cross the t's on the contracts.
But critics of the transaction have complained of profiteering.
Said Drew: "Rose Law Firm made it legal, but it didn't have anything to do with what was right or fair to taxpayers or people in nursing homes.
It had only to do with getting Beverly and Stephens Inc. off the hook."
Last month, the Iowa Supreme Court upheld District Judge Gene Needles's denial of Care Initiatives' request for an exemption from paying property taxes on its nursing homes.
Total taxes on the homes exceed $800,000 a year.
Needles and the Supreme Court sided with county assessors in concluding that Care Initiatives did not meet the tests of a charitable institution.
Said Needles, "Care Initiatives is a `shell' nonprofit corporation used by Bruce H. Whitehead and the bond underwriters to obtain the financing necessary to enable them to make millions of dollars of excessive profits."
Whitehead and lawyers for Care Initiatives contended that the profits were reasonable, given the size of the deal and the financial risk involved.
Court records and transcripts of testimony by Whitehead and his lawyer show that Kennedy looked after the interests of Beverly Enterprises.
He prepared the financial documents and negotiated with Whitehead and other parties to the Iowa and Arkansas nursing-home deals.
Whitehead testified that the nation's largest operator of nursing homes "was having severe financial difficulty.
They needed to raise cash desperately because of the financial problems they were having."
In 1988, Beverly sought to sell off its nursing homes in Iowa, South Dakota, Nebraska and Arkansas.
But finding a buyer and conventional financing for the sale would be difficult.
Whitehead, the Texas banker, was interested in only the Iowa and Arkansas homes.
A proposed sale agreement prepared by Kennedy called for a company controlled by Whitehead to buy Beverly's Iowa and Arkansas homes for about $115 million.
The Iowa portion of the deal was sealed in the summer of 1989.
Whitehead's Ventana Investments bought the Iowa nursing homes for $57 million as part of a two-step transaction that left Whitehead a hefty profit.
The homes were then sold to nonprofit Care Initiatives (known then as Mercy Health Initiatives) for $63.5 million.
The money was borrowed through the sale of $86 million in tax-exempt revenue bonds that the Iowa Finance Authority, a public agency, agreed to issue.
The Iowa Finance Authority served as a conduit; no state money was loaned.
Nursing-home revenue is used to repay investors who purchased the bonds.
The Iowa transaction caused no ripples.
At a public hearing, Whitehead assured the Iowa Finance Authority board that the Beverly employees in Iowa would keep their jobs.
At a follow-up meeting conducted over the telephone, the board voted unanimously to authorize the bond sale.
"There was the belief that there was a danger that some of those {nursing homes} could have closed," said Ted Chapler, executive director of the Iowa Finance Authority.
The lost jobs would have dealt an economic blow to the rural communities where the nursing homes are located, said Chapler, who was the finance authority's general counsel when the bond sale was approved by the group's board and Gov. Terry Branstad.
Care Initiatives employs 2,800 workers in Iowa.
Its nursing homes have 3,200 residents.
The sale of 36 nursing homes in Arkansas was to be financed in the same way, using $81 million in revenue bonds and another nonprofit corporation that had been set up for Whitehead.
He stood to gain $4 million from the transaction.
But during the fall of 1989 the deal unraveled.
The Arkansas Development Finance Authority, which had become an important economic tool for then-Gov.
Bill Clinton, initially supported the proposed bond sale but backed away as criticism of the deal mounted.
When Bob Nash, president of the Arkansas agency, recommended rejecting the deal, Whitehead challenged him to a fist fight, according to Little Rock news accounts.
Whitehead later testified in the Iowa property-tax case that he lost over $2 million in Arkansas.
Clinton, who had the last word in killing the deal, was brushed by the controversy but suffered no lasting political damage.
He was re-elected governor in 1990.
There have been changes in Iowa since the deal.
Last year, Care Initiatives severed its ties with Whitehead and his nursing-home management company.
Duncan Graham, the firm's president, says Care Initiatives now is managing the nursing homes itself.
He says the move should strengthen the firm's new bid for property-tax exemptions for its Iowa homes.
That's expected to touch off another court battle.
