Lintas:Worldwide, with its New York operation hurt by the loss of several major accounts last year, took an aggressive step yesterday to keep one of its most valuable remaining clients happy.
Lintas, owned by Interpublic Group, created a new agency, the Gotham Group, to handle the $50 million Maybelline account.
Lintas chose two executives from its hobbled New York operation to head the fledging Gotham agency: F. Stone Roberts, president and chief operating officer at Lintas:New York, will become chief executive officer, and Sheri L. Colonel, Lintas executive vice president, will be president.
Additionally, Lynn Giordano, who is group creative director at D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, is joining Gotham as creative director.
Gotham will be wholly owned by Interpublic, but Mr. Roberts will report to Kenneth L. Robbins, chairman and chief executive of Lintas:Worldwide.
It will have no connection with the New York agency, where Mr. Roberts, 49 years old, worked for nearly a quarter of a century.
Lintas is the latest ad shop along Madison Avenue to create an agency specifically to service a major client.
In August, Omnicom Group established the offshoot agency of DDB Needham, Berlin Wright Cameron, to work on the Volkswagen account.
In November, Grey Advertising established G2, an autonomous full-service agency to handle the account of Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America.
In both instances, Needham and Grey took top executives from their core agencies to form the spinoff operations.
These agencies were established partially so they and their bigger-sister agencies could compete for new business without facing client-conflict problems.
By opening Gotham to handle Maybelline, for example, Mr. Roberts says Lintas:New York now could compete for business from such advertisers as Johnson & Johnson and Chesebrough-Pond's, whose skin-care products compete with Maybelline's Revitalizing line.
Mr. Roberts won't have a successor at Lintas.
Instead, the title of president will be eliminated and the duties and title of operating chief will be taken by Anthony G. Miller, chairman and chief executive of Lintas:New York.
Mr. Miller's added responsibility was unexpected by the ad industry.
There was speculation recently that Mr. Miller might take the fall for the steady losses of accounts, including diet Coke and International Business Machine's personal computer.
But Mr. Robbins said in an interview yesterday that nothing could be further from the truth.
"We went to Interpublic with this plan including Mr. Miller's additional title, and they endorsed it," he said.
Gotham will have an initial staff of 30, all culled from Lintas's New York operation.
Its offices will be on lower Fifth Avenue, far from Lintas's headquarters in midtown Manhattan.
Lintas employees are no strangers to the offices at 79 Fifth Ave.
Last year, Lintas established a spinoff shop, called L2, in what was ultimately an unsuccessful attempt to retain the IBM personal computer account.
It was awarded to Omnicom's Merkley Newman Harty.
Mr. Roberts described the Gotham opening as a "seamless transition."
New ads for Maybelline are already in production.
Gotham began to take shape late last year and has "no connection" to the big account losses, said Mr. Robbins.
Lintas informed Maybelline about its plans two weeks ago and received its endorsement.
Mr. Roberts said that Gotham has plans to become a full-service agency, one that will compete for accounts from varying businesses.
But first, it must prove to Maybelline, its "charter client" as Mr. Roberts called it, that Gotham is "up and running."
The other spinoff agencies have accounts beyond their charter clients: Berlin Wright has the New Yorker magazine, among others; G2 has Mitsubishi dealers in Dallas, Houston and Los Angeles.
Asked whether Gotham is being established because Maybelline is unhappy with Lintas, Mr. Roberts said that "we have a happy client."
Mr. Roberts said his departure from Lintas is "bittersweet," because of the "tremendous number of friends and memories."
However, he worked with Ms. Colonel, 38, for about a dozen years.
Ms. Colonel said her arm didn't need any twisting, because the new agency represents a "challenge and opportunity."
Gotham marks a reunion of Mr. Roberts, Ms. Colonel and Ms. Giordano, 45.
The trio worked together on Procter & Gamble's Cover Girl cosmetics business at Lintas's predecessor agency SSC&B.
If Mr. Roberts has a specialty reputation on Madison Avenue, it is the beauty-care business.
He even married a former Cover Girl model.
"There are many rumors not true," he said.
"That rumor, happily, is true."
Kellogg Co. is pitching All-Bran Extra Fiber cereal with an anticancer message and a tie-in to the American Cancer Society, a return to a tactic the company first used 10 years ago.
The new campaign, from Leo Burnett, Chicago, consists of 30-second commercials divided into two parts.
The first 15 seconds are devoted to depicting healthy lifestyles, including a man pedaling an exercise bicycle and a woman performing a breast self-exam.
A voiceover recommends eating "foods with fiber, as part of a low-fat diet, which may actually reduce the risk of certain types of cancer."
An American Cancer Society information line appears on screen, and the narrator says, "Basic Health Care."
Immediately after comes a 15-second commercial for Kellogg All-Bran, claiming All-Bran is a superior fiber source to shredded wheat.
"The timing of the campaign couldn't be better," said Dr. Gary Costley, president of Kellogg's North American operations.
"The country is in a major serious debate on health care.
We believe fundamentally that one way to reduce costs is to provide ways for people not to get sick."
Ten years ago, Kellogg ran ads for All-Bran, touting the link between high fiber, low-fat diets and lower cancer incidence.
Kellogg also put the National Cancer Institute's name and address on product labels.
The Center for Science in the Public Interest, a Washington advocacy group, gave its annual Hubbard awards to ads it deemed "the most misleading, unfair and irresponsible" in 1993.
Among the 12 marketers cited were Honda Motor Co.'s American Honda Motor Co., which "obscures the true cost of leasing," CSPI charged, with ads that flash financial information on the screen too quickly.
And the American Dairy Association's claim that vitamin A helps keep skin smooth is unfair, the group said, because well-fed Americans don't suffer from skin problems associated with severe deficiencies.
Honda said its ads meet all legal requirements and invited viewers into showrooms for complete details.
The dairy association said it stands by its claims.
The group also named Capital Holding's First Deposit National Bank, citing "no annual fee" and "low interest rates" claims for its Visa Gold card, despite high monthly credit-line fees.
The New Hampshire bank said it stands by the accuracy of its marketing claims.
Also cited, for a Hubbard "Commercial Excess" award, was the Public Broadcasting Service, for airing underwriter acknowledgements that CSPI said are "tantamount to regular ads" on TV.
A PBS spokesman said, "I think the Center deserves the P.T. Barnum award for self-promotional excess."
