Think of vacation travel and Amtrak probably doesn't come to mind.
Instead, most Americans may associate the passenger railroad with a simpler time when traveling the country by rail seemed exotic and romantic.
So, in a new print campaign beginning this week, Amtrak is playing on that nostalgia.
It is embracing the persona of a kindly old relative that many have fond memories of, but want little to do with anymore.
A series of six double-page ads, from Omnicom Group's DDB Needham, asks such questions as "Has the art of conversation been found on a train?" and "Would childhood be a childhood without a train ride?" and "If you've never taken the train, what exactly have you missed?"
The objective of the ads is to make consumers consider Amtrak as a serious option for vacation travel.
Amtrak's own research showed that, among the thousands of individuals interviewed (Amtrak declines to provide the exact number), only about 25% mentioned the train when listing choices for travel involving more than 100 miles.
Amtrak's print campaign, which will appear in such magazines as Time, People, Life, Ladies Home Journal, Ebony and Better Homes & Gardens, is very different from most travel advertising.
While the aggressive ads for many airlines emphasize price, the new Amtrak ads don't even mention prices or schedules.
Instead, they describe sleeping cars that feature "cotton sheets and big, fluffy pillows."
They tug at memories, recalling the whistle "telling the world you were coming."
One ad (headlined "Can a Train Holiday Improve Your Love Life?") claims a train trip will "send your love life into orbit. . . .
You swoon over scenery.
You learn from a Native-American guide about the legend of the lovelorn Maiden of the rock. . . .
A train trip is like one long, fascinating date. . . .
You watch the movie, and then the stars.
And then, well, that's your business."
Amtrak says it will spend $30 million on advertising during its current fiscal year, ending Sept. 30, the same amount it spent during its past fiscal year.
But more money will be allocated to magazine advertising.
The nostalgia approach will eventually be seen in Amtrak's television commercials as well.
The campaign breaks at a time when consumer confidence in Amtrak has been somewhat shaken, says William Withuhn, transportation curator at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
Mr. Withuhn's candid assessment follows a series of accidents, including one last September in Alabama that killed 43 passengers, making it the worst in the railroad's 23-year history.
Just last month , some 63 passengers were injured when an Amtrak train derailed near Kissimmee, Fla.
But "safety was never considered to be included in the ads," says Joan Wheatley, Amtrak's director of advertising and sales promotion.
"Train travel is as safe, if not safer, than any other mode of transportation.
We didn't want to hang an ad campaign on safety issues."
Amtrak says it will still use its wellworn slogan, "All Aboard Amtrak" on some ads, but the main slogan is "There's Something About a Train That's Magic."
Damian O'Malley, executive vice president and director of account planning at DDB Needham, says that in the new ads, Amtrak had to trumpet itself as more than a means of transportation.
"We needed to find reasons for relevancy," he says.
"Train travel is unique.
It is great for carrying on a conversation, to maintain dignity that one has trouble maintaining when traveling by bus, plane or car."
Amtrak's ridership has shown little growth in the '90s.
In fiscal 1993, Amtrak carried 22.1 million passengers, up 4% from fiscal 1992, when it reported ridership of 21.3 million.
That was down 3% from fiscal 1992 when it carried 22 million passengers.
"Hopefully, Amtrak will get the budget it needs from the president to keep up its maintenance and fix some equipment," says Mr. Withuhn.
"The ads are nice.
Now Amtrak has to deliver with comfortable rides."
Marketing experts are split over whether the Amtrak campaign is effective advertising.
Clay Timon , president and chief executive of Landor Associates, a design and identity-management company based in San Francisco, says he "loves" the ads, calling them a "perfect response" to the "hectic, crass and in-your-face advertising from the airlines."
Mr. Timon, who saw each print ad, says he doesn't believe Amtrak is taking a big risk by avoiding the mention of pricing in these cost-conscious times.
"By taking a different approach," he says, "Amtrak is going to stand out from all the price shouting.
Amtrak can't compete on quickness, so it is trying to compete on the quality aspects of traveling."
But Hal Ross, president of Mapes & Ross, a communications research company in Princeton, N.J., says that although the ads are "interesting, there are some problems."
For instance, he says, readers have to wade through too much written material before finding out the benefits of taking the train.
"Amtrak should spell out the advantages much faster," says Mr. Ross, who also saw each ad.
"These ads require too much work on the part of the consumer and ask too much of their patience.
That is a virture that is fine for train traveling, but not so much for reading an advertisement."
PepsiCo's Pepsi-Cola Co. is using its four minutes of Super Bowl advertising time Sunday to break new ads for PepsiCola and Lipton iced tea, starring a standing-room-only crew of celebrity endorsers.
Michael Richards (Kramer on "Seinfeld") appears in one spot along with veteran pitchwoman Cindy Crawford, who turns into Rodney Dangerfield after a spell in a "Pepsi deprivation tank."
A second spot, depicting a Woodstock revival, stars a different genre of celebrity: Members of the old rock band Jefferson Airplane and singer John Sebastian mingle with a crowd of hippies-turned-yuppies.
Created by Omnicom Group's BBDO, the commercials continue to end with the command to "Be Young.
Have Fun.
Drink Pepsi."
Martial-arts actor David Carradine parodies his "Kung Fu" television series in a Lipton iced-tea spot created by WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson.
Pepsi also is airing previously seen spots featuring basketball player Shaquille O'Neal (for Pepsi) and Bo Jackson (for Lipton iced tea).
A sixth spot, from PepsiCola's international division, also is set to air, although Pepsi isn't saying much about that one, beyond the fact that it involves chimps.
Ad Notes. . . .
ACCOUNT: As expected, Grand Metropolitan's Burger King named three New York finalists in the creative review of its big national account: Ammirati & Puris, Interpublic Group's Lowe & Partners/SMS and Euro RSCG's Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer .
Vying for the media portion are WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather, DeWitt Media and the incumbent on the account, D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles.
WHO'S NEWS: Paul Meijer , creative director of Young & Rubicam's Amsterdam office, was named creative director of the world-wide agency, overseeing new technologies including interactive ads at Y&R offices.
In the new post, Mr. Meijer, 41 years old, will be based in New York and will report to Ted Bell, Y&R vice chairman.
