A healthy rise in orders helped the manufacturing sector expand again in January, according to a survey of purchasing managers, but the growth brought along new hints of inflation.
The report from the National Association of Purchasing Management indicated that manufacturers gained ground for the fifth straight month and that the economy is picking up momentum.
The purchasing managers' index rose to 57.7% in January from December's revised 57.1% and climbed back to prerecession levels, the report said.
A reading over 50% generally means the manufacturing sector is growing.
The index for new orders rose to 66.2% from 65%, reaching the highest level in 10 years.
The report also said new export orders rose to their highest point in more than two years.
However, the report recorded a large and unexpected increase in prices.
The index's price component jumped to 59.8% from 51.3% in December.
Although a reading over 47% generally means that prices for manufacturers are rising, analysts said the January increase shouldn't cause alarm.
In December, consumer and wholesale prices were both well-restrained.
"We shouldn't blithely ignore it, but we shouldn't panic inflation is here either," said Samuel Kahan, chief economist at Fuji Securities in Chicago.
Financial markets reacted negatively to the report.
Bond prices plunged, which helped push stocks lower.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average sank 14.35 points, to 3964.01.
Price increases were confined mostly to steel, grain, chlorine and lumber.
Robert Bretz, who heads the survey and is director of corporate purchasing for Pitney Bowes Inc., didn't believe the increases indicate an inflationary trend.
He explained that steel went up because of trade restrictions, grain went up because of the Midwest floods, and lumber went up because of the flood-induced construction boom, reduced cutting in the Northwest, and the winter closing of Northern mills.
The report indicated backlogged orders and supplier deliveries were up, while inventories and unemployment were down in a continuing trend suggesting demand exceeded supply.
Manufacturers have been cautious in hiring, but strong demand will likely lead to further hiring increases, said Charles Lieberman, managing director of Chemical Securities Inc. in New York.
Separately, the Commerce Department reported new construction spending for December rose 2.1%, following revised increases of 1.6% in November and 2.1% in October.
It was the sixth consecutive month of increases.
For all of 1993, total new-construction spending increased 8%.
Spending rose 6% on residential construction and jumped 13% on single-family homes.
Commercial-construction spending grew 12%, while public-construction spending grew 13% last year.
The strongest gains in December were posted for public and commercial construction, and single-family home building continued to rise.
Michael Carliner, an economist with the National Association of Home Builders, said commercial construction has finally turned around and although there was no recovery in multifamily housing, recent building permits indicate this should improve in the next few months.
All figures adjusted for inflation and normal seasonal variations.
Here are the Commerce Department's figures for construction spending in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates.
