More big institutional investors are being drawn to the big risks and heady returns of private "hedge funds," and one sign of the trend is an appointment by Blackstone Group Inc. yesterday.
Closely held Blackstone said Michael F. Holland joined the investment boutique as a general partner to expand the firm's asset-management business.
Blackstone is one of several firms that are vying to help institutions funnel investment dollars into an array of hedge funds, for a fee.
An institution will turn over a sum to Blackstone, which will spread it among several hedge funds to minimize risk.
Mr. Holland's job is to expand that business.
A gregarious 49 year old, he is a veteran of several successful asset-management businesses.
As vice chairman at Oppenheimer & Co., which he left in November, Mr. Holland added several publicly traded "closed-end" funds to the firm's money-management business.
Prior to that, Mr. Holland was chairman and chief executive officer of the asset-management operation Salomon Brothers launched in spring 1989.
By March 1992, when he left, the firm had attracted $15 billion from institutions and wealthy individuals.
Mr. Holland's biggest coup during his tenure at Salomon Brothers was the lucrative contract to manage a $7.1 billion portfolio for the Resolution Trust Corp., much of that distressed securities from thrifts taken over by the federal agency.
From 1984 to 1989, Mr. Holland was chief executive of First Boston Asset Management Corp., which he founded when the investment-banking firm bought his money-management business.
Blackstone, with $600 million under management, including $140 million of partners' funds, is in its infancy compared with more-established money-management businesses.
But Stephen A. Schwarzman, the firm's president, is confident that he can attract enough from pension funds and other investors to reach $1 billion under management within the year.
Currently, Blackstone monitors the performance of about 80 hedge funds, but invests in only two dozen at a time.
Last year, the firm returned 30% for its 14 clients, before subtracting a 1.25% management fee.
