Four years ago, Mario Barraza jumped at a chance to work for a small metal-recycling shop in Albuquerque, N.M.
But later, the unemployed young father did confide one worry to his family: The huge "guillotine shear" that he was then operating at Acme Iron & Metal Co. seemed dangerous.
The machine compacted scrap metal in a steel box 22 feet long and pushed out the compacted mass.
Then, its vertical blade sliced it like butter.
In September 1992, Mr. Barraza got caught inside the machine and was cut in half.
Though nobody witnessed the accident, a New Mexico safety inspector said Mr. Barraza probably was trying to retrieve a piece of scrap that had stalled the machine, when the ram re-energized and killed him instantly.
The state cited Acme Iron & Metal for 18 serious safety violations, including lack of any program to prevent the guillotine shear from unexpectedly starting up.
The $650,000 machine lacked a common safety device: a $30 padlock on its power switch.
A well-trained employee would lock off the power before doing any maintenance.
Acme's owner, Walter Schmider, says that safety has always been important to him and that since the accident the company has invested up to $70,000 in equipment to meet regulations.
But he contends that the changes haven't made his company any safer and doubts that a padlock would have saved Mr. Barraza's life.
Although unsafe conditions at giant corporations attract the most attention, many of the worst hazards are at small companies.
A Wall Street Journal computer analysis of more than 500,000 federal and state safety-inspection records from 1988 through 1992 shows that 4,337 workers died at inspected workplaces with fewer than 20 employees, but only 127 died at those with more than 2,500 workers.
At the smallest sites there were 1.97 deaths per 1,000 workers over the five years, compared with just 0.004 deaths per 1,000 workers at the largest workplaces.
Of employees at inspected work sites with fewer than 20 workers, one in six worked in an area cited for a serious safety violation; at the big sites, only one in 600 did.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration officials caution that because of government inspection policies, any database analysis might exaggerate the dangers in a small business.
They say a high number of inspections of small, very hazardous construction sites may partly skew the results.
They add that investigators typically inspect a small plant thoroughly but a large one only partially.
Moreover, many small workplaces do maintain high safety and health standards, and some are parts of big companies.
Still, the findings raise fresh concerns about worker health and safety -- especially as big companies lay off employees and more people work at small firms.
The statistical evidence echoes the experience of professionals in the field.
"We have seen more deplorable conditions in small businesses" than in large ones, says Gary Anderson, area director for the OSHA office in Calumet City, Ill.
Carol Amato, administrator of Virginia's occupational health and safety program, notes that more than half of the deaths that her office investigates occur at sites with fewer than 21 employees.
At many small businesses, she says, "It takes a serious accident or fatality for them to wake up."
Professionals say small businesses generally don't face the publicity, union pressure and government scrutiny that force large companies to take health and safety seriously.
Instead, many are preoccupied with just staying in business.
"Sometimes, small businesses survive by pushing labor standards down," says Harley Shaiken, a University of California at Berkeley workplace specialist.
Acme's Mr. Schmider, for example, says he is reluctant to dismiss employees who don't observe safety practices -- a common course of action at large companies.
Noting that his starting pay is only $5.50 to $6.50 an hour, he says, "We can't get people, so how can we fire them?"
Most small companies don't have any medical staff, trained supervisors and professionals who track health and safety regulations.
A recent National Safety Council survey found that only 31% of companies with fewer than 50 employees have labor-management committees that monitor workplace health and safety, compared with 75% of larger employers.
Lack of expertise breeds disregard of hazards.
Ulysses Griffin worked for years, sandblasting metal products with silica sand, at Commercial Steel Treating Co., a tiny, metal-treating firm in Cleveland.
He died in July 1991, at age 56, of severe silicosis, medical professionals say.
Although the dangers of breathing silica dust have been known for centuries, OSHA's Nancy Newman, who supervised a Commercial Steel inspection after Mr. Griffin died, says: "Nobody who worked there had any idea how bad it really was.
From the workers to the owner to his sons, nobody had a clue that the silica was making the employees so sick."
Employees were told Mr. Griffin had died of tuberculosis -- an early diagnosis of his symptoms, according to government inspectors' reports.
The company continued using tons of silica a week, in bags with clear warnings, one report says.
In early 1992, health officials found a pile of silica sand and dust that stood as high as six feet and covered a 15-by-50-foot area on the factory floor.
They also found, according to their reports, employees exposed to silica dust without proper respirators or protective gear.
The government administered chest X-rays to 16 current and former employees, and five had lung tissue indicating silica-dust reaction.
One of the five, 37-year-old Wallace Overby, had symptoms of a severe, often-fatal form of silicosis, according to government medical reports and his lawyers.
Mr. Overby filed a lawsuit last year in state court in Cleveland that alleges Commercial Steel intentionally caused him permanent, total disability.
The company denies the charges.
Harold Seitz, Commercial Steel's 79-year-old owner, compares the company's problems to other warnings people ignore, such as "labels on your cigarettes."
He refuses to comment further, citing the litigation.
In a settlement with the government, Commercial Steel, while not admitting to any allegations, agreed to pay a $25,000 penalty, abate violations and begin medical monitoring and treatment for current and former employees.
It also switched to a less toxic abrasive.
Even a small company's informality, which many people like, can lead to unexpected dangers.
Akira Kon loved the creative atmosphere at Altura Studios Inc., a tiny woodworking business in New York City, and swore he would never work on a big furniture maker's assembly line.
In October 1992, Mr. Kon was helping a co-worker get a 4-by-8-foot maple panel from a stack leaning against a wall.
When pulled off the wall and balancing on edge, the heavy panels fell and struck Mr. Kon.
He hit his head on a steel table and died shortly afterward.
Altura's owner, Jeff Behnke, says that if he had seen the men trying to move the panels, he would have insisted on having a third person help out.
But Mr. Behnke was in his office, and his production manager wasn't available.
"There's no way I can be out in the shop following everybody around and saying, `This looks a little dangerous,'" Mr. Behnke says.
Steven Wilkes, an OSHA compliance officer who investigated the accident, says the typical small-business owner accepts responsibility for safety but "wears too many hats" to pay sufficient attention.
"You have workmen working by themselves . . . and nobody has the time to watch them," he says.
What's more, competitive pressures can cause small businesses to avoid investments in safety.
In November 1992, three St. Louis workmen were using lacquer thinner to refinish the metal inside a closed elevator when, according to a police report, a rag touched exposed wires.
The elevator caught fire, and two died.
OSHA cited the employer, Renaissance Metals Inc., a small Forsyth, Mo., metal refinishing company, for three "willful" violations involving unsafe use of hazardous materials.
The company seemed ready to settle the complaint when it learned the cost of improving the safety of its procedures, a government official says.
OSHA's recommendation, that the company routinely remove elevator doors before starting a refinishing job, would add $300 to $1,600 to the cost of a job -- for which the company says it normally charges $500.
"The other companies who do not take elevator doors off. . . would get the jobs, and our employees would be out of work," says a company filing with an administrative review commission.
The firm is contesting official accounts of the accident.
Chemical hazards are common problems.
A 1991 General Accounting Office survey found that 58% of employers with fewer than 20 workers weren't complying with some aspect of federal requirements that they identify such hazards and inform employees.
Only 20% of employers with 500 or more workers failed to comply.
But small businesses often skimp on safety information and training across the board.
That can be especially risky because such companies rely more heavily than do big companies on workers who are young or speak little English.
In February 1992, Everardo Rangel-Jasso was crushed to death at Denton Plastics Inc., a Portland, Ore., plastics recycler.
According to an OSHA report, the 17-year-old was backing up a forklift, with a box high on its fork, when he cut the rear wheels sharply and the vehicle tipped over.
A posted sign, in English, warned forklift drivers to wear seat belts -- but the Mexican youth didn't speak English, inspectors reported.
One inspector surmised that a seat belt might have saved his life.
Employees told investigators that Hispanic workers learned their jobs through "hand signals and body gestures."
They also said management told untrained workers to run forklifts, though management contended that only trained workers were permitted to do so, an investigator's report notes.
Mr. Rangel-Jasso hadn't received any forklift training and lacked a driver's license and a juvenile's work permit, according to official sources.
The company, disputing the official accounts, is contesting a $10,000 federal fine for allegedly permitting a minor to operate a forklift, and a $64,805 penalty for alleged violations of state health and safety regulations.
The company and two principals also have pleaded not guilty in a Portland state court to a two-count indictment stemming from the accident.
Separately, the company agreed to pay $80,000 to settle a state complaint on child-labor and overtime violations.
Many companies escape scrutiny altogether.
Congress exempts employers in low-hazard industries with 10 or fewer workers from regular OSHA inspections.
OSHA, in practice, also exempts from regular inspections small companies in highly hazardous industries other than construction.
Moreover, small employers cited for standard violations routinely get discounts on their OSHA penalties.
Often, OSHA steps in only after a tragedy.
Lakes Illustrated Inc., a Mt. Vernon, Mo., maker of electronic fishing gear, was first inspected in 1992 -- after a pressurized 55-gallon lubricating drum exploded and killed a 28-year-old technician, William N. Coen.
OSHA cited the company for numerous serious violations.
Former employees say working conditions at the plant had been unsafe for years.
They recall employees using open containers of hazardous solvents for cleaning parts; poor ventilation; piles of boxes blocking an exit; an overhead weight-bearing cable that often broke, and poorly grounded electrical equipment.
Jean Coates, a former employee, says the conditions contrasted sharply with those at big plants where she worked previously.
Since the accident, Joseph Meirick, the company's owner, says it has complied with OSHA requirements.
It started safety training, set up a safety committee and agreed to pay $9,000 in reduced penalties.
Mr. Meirick admits that before the accident, his company didn't "spend as much time, effort or money" on safety measures as it should have.
Getting out new lines of fishing gear took priority, he says.
Edward P. Foldessy did computer analysis of government data for this article.
