Amid the celebration of the 1992 Democratic convention came some jarring words from former Rep. Barbara Jordan of Texas.
"We must address the question of entitlements," she told Democrats in her keynote address.
"That's not easy," she added, repeating the phrase twice for emphasis.
"But we have to do it.
We have to do it."
Ms. Jordan's booming message signaled the emergence of a new rhetorical consensus in mainstream American politics: "entitlements" -- a fuzzy word for government benefits ranging from Social Security to food stamps -- must be cut.
The mantra was heard throughout last year's budget debate.
And Democratic Rep. Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky from Philadelphia's Main Line even held a highly publicized conference last month on the "Future of Entitlements," attended by President Clinton.
But actions speak louder than words.
In the midst of this flurry of antientitlement talk, the Clinton administration has laid three large new entitlement programs on the table.
The first is a health-care reform proposal that entitles every American to a generous health-insurance plan.
The second is a welfare-reform plan that wins praise from conservatives by promising to "end welfare as we know it" but in fact amounts to a costly promise of a job for every able American.
And the third, and least understood, is Vice President Al Gore's call for "universal service" on the "information superhighway"the popular name for a broad-band system that allows two-way communications on multiple channels.
The nation must avoid creating a society of "information haves" separate from "information have-nots," Mr. Gore said in a recent speech to Hollywood haves, such as Disney's Michael Eisner.
"It is critically important . . . that all carriers must be obliged to contribute, on an equitable and competitively neutral basis, to the preservation and advancement of universal service."
Translation: We must tax phone, cable and other information services to subsidize access to the superhighway for everyone.
The notion of guaranteeing everyone access to a service that doesn't yet exist may seem more amusing than disturbing.
After all, what is being guaranteed?
The inalienable right to shop from home by video?
Or to watch interactive Court television and cast a personal verdict in the Menendez trial?
But Mr. Gore and his followers insist that traffic on the information superhighway will include invaluable educational programs, health-care hot lines and job-posting services.
Anyone without a vehicle could be left on the shoulder of life.
Administration officials also argue that their proposal would merely expand on the huge subsidies already implicit in the current, regulated phone system.
Business and long-distance users now subsidize telephone rates for residential and rural users by as much as $20 billion or more a year.
But that hidden telephone subsidy exhibits the very attributes that make more explicit government-entitlement programs so vexing.
Only a small portion of the telephone benefits -- less than a billion dollars, says Eli Noam, professor of finance and economics at the Columbia Business School -- goes to the truly needy.
Most of the subsidy goes to the middle class.
And a not-inconsequential portion goes to the very affluent, subsidizing, for instance, phone lines to Taos, N.M., and Aspen, Colo.
The subsidy plan proposed by Mr. Gore will probably be similar.
The administration has no thought of requiring that subsidies go only to the needy -- which would undercut the political backing they seek from powerful senators in rural states who want the subsidies to serve their constituents.
Instead, the administration's plan will probably let states determine how to spend the money.
And politics will drive that money to the middle class, where the votes are.
The nation can afford to provide, if it wants, wide-ranging services and subsidies for the poor.
What it can't afford, without much higher taxes, is to continue to expand government subsidies and services for the middle class.
As former Commerce Secretary Pete Peterson illustrates in his new book "Facing Up," government spends $109.8 billion a year on federal benefit programs for those living in poverty; it spends a $570.7 billion for those who aren't.
And the average benefit going to households with incomes over $100,000 is larger than that going to households with incomes under $10,000.
Some economists say there may be an economic argument for subsidizing universal access to the information superhighway: If everyone is on it, it will have added value for businesses that want to use it.
That is a variant of what Atlantic magazine has dubbed Mr. Clinton's "Field of Dreams" theory of economic growth, which argued that if you build better public infrastructure, private investment will come.
But that isn't the argument Mr. Gore is making.
Instead, he is paving the way for a big new middle-class entitlement program that would increase the government's drag on the economy for decades to come.
