GE Capital Corp. launched a proxy battle against Kemper Corp., seeking to replace four Kemper directors and pressure the company to accept a $2.2 billion takeover bid.
According to the proxy statement, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the General Electric Co. finance unit will nominate four retired GE or GE Capital executives to replace the Kemper directors up for re-election at the company's May 11 annual meeting.
Among the four directors up for re-election on the 13-member board is Kemper Chairman David Mathis.
The GE nominees' goal, if elected, is to push for the sale of Kemper for "at least $55 per share" in cash, the proxy filing said.
GE Capital's move puts Kemper's fate in the hands of its shareholders, many of whom have already indicated that they believe the company should be sold, albeit at a higher price.
As a result, Kemper faces an uphill battle trying to convince holders that the company is better off remaining independent, several big Kemper shareholders said.
GE Capital disclosed its unsolicited offer last week, only the second time in GE's history that it has made unfriendly overtures for a company (It acquired Rorer Corp. in a hostile takeover in 1988).
Kemper's board quickly rejected GE's bid, calling it a "low-ball" proposal that was aimed at "stealing" the company.
Mr. Mathis wrote to GE Chairman John Welch that "when most people thought of corporate raiders, General Electric did not come to mind."
He told Mr. Welch to "attend your own business."
Though a proxy fight is clearly unfriendly, GE Capital is reluctant to actually launch a hostile tender offer for Kemper's shares.
GE also has ruled out a higher offer for now because no rival bidder has appeared and GE Capital sees little reason to bid against itself, people close to the company said.
GE disclosed in the proxy, however, that although it doesn't plan to change the terms of its proposal, it could offer shareholders stock in GE.
A person close to GE said the company would consider changing the terms only if requested by Kemper management.
GE's proxy filing was expected, though the company didn't announce the move until after the markets had closed.
Kemper shares rose 87.5 cents to $61.75 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, in a day where the broader market was down sharply.
Kemper shares have soared 50% since GE Capital announced its bid last week.
GE Capital, a financial-services company based in Stamford, Conn., is seeking Kemper to expand its presence in personal financial services.
Kemper is a money management, mutual fund and insurance company based in Long Grove, Ill.
The proxy filing came as Kemper began calling its big institutional shareholders to lobby against GE Capital's bid, according to one large shareholder.
Kemper, which has been under pressure from stockholders to began discussions with GE Capital, gave no indication of what it would do to counter GE's proposal.
Last night, Kemper said it would respond to the proxy filing "in due course."
One large shareholder contacted by Kemper said the company maintained that its stock would stay at about $60 a share even if GE Capital withdrew its bid.
The shareholder said he disagreed with that contention and told Kemper it needed to come up with an alternative for investors.
"They're trying to take people's temperature to see what kind of support they have from shareholders," this investor said.
He quoted a Kemper executive as saying, "We feel you should put your trust in the board."
GE Capital's proxy said that Kemper directors "have repeatedly rejected GEC's acquisition proposals but have not presented you with any alternative other than Kemper remaining independent."
Investors will be receiving the proposal once GE obtains a list of shareholders from Kemper and gets clearance from the SEC, which can take as many as 10 days.
Kemper said it would provide the shareholder list to GE "within the legally established guidelines," which will likely be by Monday.
GE recently bought 100 shares of Kemper so that it could initiate the proxy battle.
Greg Steinmetz contributed to this article.
