With the lifting of the trade embargo against Vietnam, Madison Avenue has set its sights on that country's 72 million people.
At least three major agencies are already in Vietnam with liaison, or informal, offices.
Now that the embargo has been lifted, J. Walter Thompson and Ogilvy & Mather, both units of WPP Group, and Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide expect to be up and running almost immediately.
Another agency, Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson, already has produced a television commercial for Coca-Cola.
A Coke spokeswoman in Atlanta declined to describe the commercial beyond saying that it would include the global slogan "Always."
A Coke official said production would begin as soon as concentrate and other necessary materials can be brought into the country.
As for rival PepsiCo, the Purchase, N.Y., beverage company was handing out samples of the soft drink in Ho Chi Minh City on Friday, and the company plans to be fully operational in a week, a spokesman said.
Already prepared is Pepsi's first TV commercial aimed at the Vietnamese market.
"Vietnam is the next great frontier," says Brian Watson, deputy regional director of McCann-Erickson's Asia-Pacific region who is based in Hong Kong.
"There is an enormous amount of interest among many clients.
Every meeting starts with a question about going into Vietnam."
Mr. Watson says he anticipates that such companies as Gillette and Unilever will enter the Vietnam market.
Even though Vietnam appears to be fertile ground for American products, it is less clear how big the market will prove to be.
The per-capita income registers a mere $200 annually, for instance.
Still, ad agency executives note that many U.S. products, including Coke, are already popular in Vietnam through the black market at inflated prices.
Once the merchandise is legal, the executives say, the price will be lower.
"There are many business opportunities over there because it is a young population, hard-working and very literate," says Joji Konoshima, president of the U.S.-Asia Institute, a nonprofit organization in Washington.
According to a study last October by Ogilvy & Mather, titled "The Lure of Vietnam," about 50% of the population is under 20.
It is that age group, marketing experts say, that most craves American products, such as blue jeans and athletic footwear.
"There is a solid middle class," says William Thompson, vice chairman and chief marketing officer at J. Walter Thompson.
"The dilemma is that the infrastructure is bad.
The telephone system isn't up to 1994 standards."
Mr. Thompson says advertising agencies will devise campaigns for Vietnam that will build a brand image because it will be the first time consumers are bombarded with such product names, albeit some of them familiar.
"The real battle," he says, "will be who can build their brand faster.
Since many are starting from ground zero, it'll be a fierce race and that's where advertising will come in."
Mr. Thompson says it is "too early to be specific" about which Thompson clients will be marketing in Vietnam.
"We're ready to go when our clients are ready to go," he says.
Thompson and Backer Spielvogel are separate partners with the Vietnamese agency VinexAd; Ogilvy & Mather is a partner with Saigon Advertising; McCann-Erickson has no partner and may be independent.
Carl Spielvogel, chairman of Backer Spielvogel, says some of the agency's regional clients, including Heineken beer and British American Tobacco, expressed interest in selling in Vietnam.
Ad executives say the first venue for ads, with few exceptions, won't be television or radio.
Vietnam has five major TV stations, three broadcasting from Hanoi and two from Ho Chi Minh City.
But the most popular way to advertise remains the many billboards that populate the country.
Mr. Spielvogel, who has traveled to Vietnam several times, says there is ample evidence that U.S. companies are the last major entrants into Vietman.
On a recent trip to Vietnam, Mr. Spielvogel recalls, he stepped out onto the balcony of his hotel.
"I stood facing a huge billboard directly across the street," he says.
"It simply said Sony."
Other companies plastering the landscape with billboards include Panasonic and Sharp.
They won't be alone for long, say ad agency executives.
According to ad agency executives, Unilever is exploring the possibility of marketing Lux soap as well as toothpaste within a few months.
Colgate-Palmolive is also contemplating a move into Vietnam.
And just what kind of advertising will be seen?
"It will be similar to what was first introduced in China," says Mr. Watson of McCann.
"Initially most of the advertising would be simplistic and involve product demonstrations."
Curiously, one major company that plans a presence in Vietnam, American Express, doesn't plan to use advertising at all.
Steve Friedman, president and general manager of Asia operations at American Express based in Tokyo, says the company signed an agreement with Vietnamese banks last week to make it possible for the card to be used in the country.
But, says Mr. Friedman, because the goal isn't to "penetrate the domestic market" by signing Vietnamese to be cardholders, advertising within the country isn't necessary.
Instead, the objective is for travelers to use the card in hotels and restaurants.
CBS Inc.'s CBS network said it will offer an on-line Olympics information service on the Prodigy computer network and promote it during coverage of the Lillehammer Games.
After the Games are over, CBS said it plans to continue providing the service on the Prodigy network, as a permanent, interactive "hub" of information about regular CBS programming.
Prodigy Services Co., a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co., is a sponsor of CBS's late-night Olympics coverage.
Prodigy and the Olympics service also will get plugs during coverage of the Games, with CBS hosts providing viewers with Prodigy's toll-free new-subscription phone number, said George Schweitzer, CBS senior vice president of marketing.
"We get an interactive capability and the ability to speak to a targeted audience" of on-line users, Mr. Schweitzer said.
"Prodigy gets to enhance their position with millions of viewers, carry our information and build their network."
CBS has used the Prodigy network before, including an electronic focus group about "Late Show with David Letterman" it conducted last summer.
The on-line Olympics service will include sessions with CBS commentators and researchers, as well as bulletin boards, polls and a Winter Olympics archives.
After the Games are over, Mr. Schweitzer said, CBS plans to add promotions for shows and sponsors.
Ad Notes. . . .
SHAWMUT: Ketchum Advertising, New York, said it resigned from Shawmut National Corp.'s $9.5 million account, citing "compensation difficulties."
A spokesman for the New England commercial bank called the decision "mutual" and said it was still "assessing its options" for hiring a new agency.
Separately, Ketchum's Los Angeles office said it won the projected $15 million PacifiCare Healthcare Systems account and the $8 million account of Southern California Kentucky Fried Chicken franchisees.
SPRINT: Six agencies are still in the running to become Sprint Corp.'s second agency handling long-distance ads for the company's new business services group.
They are: Wells Rich Greene BDDP; Grey Advertising; Interpublic Group's Lintas; Omnicom Group's Goodby Berlin & Silverstein; and Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates and Cliff Freeman & Partners units.
An April decision is expected.
