Japan is shooting for full membership in the global rocket club with tomorrow's scheduled launch of its much-delayed H-II space vehicle.
But convincing the world the rocket isn't a costly white elephant may prove difficult.
Japan's nearly $2.2 billion H-II program has turned into a case of bureaucratic overstretch.
By opting for an ambitious engine design and a tight schedule, space-agency officials opened the door to two serious explosions during development, which delayed the project two years.
Worse, the H-II may have a difficult time paying for itself.
It will enter a launch-services market crowded by the U.S., Europe, China and Russia -- and will be more expensive.
Even if the rocket's cost comes down, it could have trouble finding customers: Many analysts expect the commercial satellite market to start cooling off by 1997, when the H-II will start carrying commercial payloads.
"After we started the project in 1986, we found that things were much more difficult than we expected," says Eiji Sogame, assistant executive director for launch services at Japan's National Space Development Agency.
"Now we are in a difficult situation if we have to rely on the H-II for commercial business."
Why did Japan, which has a reputation for building high-quality goods, have such trouble making a decent rocket?
The answer says a great deal about Japan's desire to escape dependence on U.S. space technology -- and the price it has been willing to pay.
Japan has built and launched rockets since 1975, but all depended at least partly on U.S. technology.
With the H-II, the first rocket to be entirely developed and produced domestically, Japan can sidestep U.S. restrictions that had limited it to launching only non-military payloads and U.S.-approved foreign satellites.
Japanese officials insist that neither restriction has been a problem, but say they worried about the possibility of additional ones, possibly related to trade friction.
Government officials also saw an opportunity to build up Japan's lagging aerospace sector.
"We wanted to have our own high level of technology," says Mr. Sogame.
Without the technology to build a rocket on its own, "we thought Japan would be weak in our development of space."
Partly as a result, the space agency chose to design the rocket with an advanced high-performance propulsion system called a staged-combustion cycle engine.
Unlike more conventional engines, which throw away a hefty proportion of unburnt fuel products, the staged-combustion cycle engine burns the fuel in two stages, eliminating much of the waste.
Had Japan looked westward, however, it might have seen the trouble the design caused for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which used it for the main engine for the U.S. space shuttle.
"It's an extremely complex unit that has to work at high speed and under heavy pressures," says Boyce Mix, deputy manager for the space shuttle's main engines at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center.
"It's just a very difficult machine to tune up properly and get working."
As a result, NASA lost at least a year, Mr. Mix says; Japan fared worse.
Two explosions, one of which killed an engineer, prompted lengthy internal reevaluations and a two-year launch delay.
Japanese space-agency officials now say the H-II is glitch-free and ready to continue Japan's unmatched record of flawless launches.
Tomorrow, the H-II will carry a re-entry experiment designed to test heat-resistant materials for Japan's space shuttle project; its next several payloads also will be science projects or government satellites.
Japan has hopes of making the H-II a commercial success.
Starting in 1997, it will carry one or two satellites a year for paying customers, says Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corp., the consortium created to handle the H-II's commercial business.
The H-II, however, promises at best to be a quirky commercial launch system.
Thanks to a longstanding agreement with Japanese fishermen, who must clear out of the rich fishing grounds near Japan's space complex on the southern island of Tanegashima during launches, the H-II only can be launched during two 45-day "windows" each year.
Moreover, the first two launches each will cost roughly $150 million -- considerably more than the $100 million to $120 million that industry analysts cite as a competitive benchmark.
What's more, any government attempt to subsidize the H-II's cost would likely lead to trade friction with the U.S. and Europe.
Mr. Imamura, however, claims that won't be necessary, saying volume production of the H-II will cut launch costs by 30% to 50%.
And while many industry experts expect 19 commercial satellites to be launched this year, some projections show that figure falling to as few as 13 a year by the turn of the century.
"There's more than enough launch capacity already -- the H-II will simply make competition even more cutthroat," says Robert White, marketing director for commercial launch services at General Dynamics Corp.
"Things will probably start slowing down about 1997, and pick up again in 2004 or 2005," says Arlo Brown, vice president of Martin Marietta Corp.'s Japan unit.
These estimates don't take into account satellites launched into low Earth orbit, a developing market.
Companies such as Motorola Inc. have ambitious plans for networks of low-orbiting satellites to provide world-wide telephone service.
But some launch-industry officials think the H-II has a chance to be a strong competitor strictly because of its pedigree.
"The rocket has a tremendous heritage -- no other launch supplier has had 100% success in flight," says Sam Mihara, marketing director for McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s space transportation division.
As for the prelaunch problems, "everybody has those," he says.
"In five to 10 years, no one will remember them."
