Shares of Jefferies Group Inc. soared 31% in the wake of Tuesday's announcement that the brokerage firm plans to sell a stake in its automated stock trading subsidiary through an initial public offering.
Jefferies, a major player in offexchange, "third-market" trading services, said after the close of trading Tuesday it would offer about 18% of Investment Technology Group Inc. to the public.
At a proposed price of $12 to $14 a share, the subsidiary has a hypothetical market value of about $240 million.
That's slightly higher than the current market valuation of Jefferies as a whole, which even with yesterday's stock rise is about $220 million.
Jefferies shares closed at $40.125, up $9.50, on Nasdaq Stock Market volume of 216,300.
Average daily volume is 16,200 shares.
Gerard McMahon, who follows Jefferies's as director of research at Thomas James Associates, said the group's stock has jumped because investors feel the automated trading systems business has been a drag on earnings.
ITG's operations are "very capital-intensive," and while they account for a large portion of Jefferies' revenue, they haven't been nearly as profitable as the rest of the firm.
"Investors feel that once Jefferies is free" of ITG's low profit margin, "it can do even better," Mr. McMahon said.
John Keefe, a financial-services consultant, said part of the reason for carving out ITG is to recognize its faster growth rate, which commands a higher stock-market multiple.
ITG's operations include Posit and QuantEx, which are automated stock crossing, routing and analysis systems.
Jefferies's other businesses include stock brokerage and investment banking.
Mr. Keefe said Jefferies's officers "think they have a jewel in ITG, and they want the world to realize it's there."
Jefferies, by retaining a majority stake in ITG and highlighting its value, hopes to create more value for the firm as a whole, he said.
A Jefferies official said he was unable to comment because the offering is in registration.
Jefferies's stock is thinly traded, since there are only 5.7 million shares outstanding and a majority are in the hands of employees.
For this reason, buying or selling pressure is sometimes exaggerated by wide sizable changes in share price.
