A loophole in a federal small-business lending program helped an entrepreneur named Peter Van Oosterhout to charge American taxpayers $28 million for his own bad investments, regulators say.
Mr. Van Oosterhout, 62 years old, was also able to use some of this money to invest in a tiny Salt Lake City company whose stock price has soared, even as it has been losing money.
Mr. Van Oosterhout got the major part of his investment funds from the Small Business Investment Company program, in which privately owned firms, known as SBICs, use a combination of federally guaranteed debt and private capital to help finance small businesses.
Currently, some 280 SBICs have about $850 million in government-backed debt -- as well as $2.3 billion in private funds.
The SBIC program was created by Congress in 1958 as a way to help promote the growth of small businesses.
To get SBIC status, investment firms have to apply to the Small Business Administration, which oversees the program.
SBICs have helped hundreds of small businesses grow and prosper, including Apple Computer Inc. and Federal Express Corp.
The problem is that during the 1980s, when making risky investments was commonplace, hundreds of investments went sour, dozens of SBICs sank and taxpayers were left footing a bill that has been estimated at several hundred million dollars.
The SBA has had to go to court in recent years to seize control of some six dozen failing SBICs in order to sell assets and try to recover at least some of the taxpayers' money.
Probably no single case better exemplifies the abuses in the program, say SBA officials, than that of Mr. Van Oosterhout and his SBIC, River Capital Corp., of which he is president and has been a major owner, regulators say.
Mr. Van Oosterhout had been a leading figure in the SBIC industry even before he became president and part owner of River Capital.
In 1983, he was chairman of the National Association of Small Business Investment Companies.
He helped establish River Capital, based in Springfield, Va., a few years later, and, with about $7 million in private funds and $28 million from the government, he developed it into one of the country's biggest SBICs, financing dozens of companies.
The SBA wasn't able to recover any taxpayer dollars in the case of River Capital.
Before it could seize control of the foundering firm, River Capital filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code in 1989.
And there, regulators say, is the loophole.
Congress designed the SBIC program to make the government a subordinate debtor.
So in bankruptcy reorganization proceedings, the debts owed to the government can be canceled if the court finds there isn't enough money to pay off all the creditors.
The availability of bankruptcy offers a "sweet situation for the SBIC owner" in which the "government becomes the convenient fall guy," says Martin Teckler, deputy general counsel for the SBA.
"It is a big problem."
Bankruptcy court eliminated River Capital's $28 million federal debt.
Fourteen other SBICs have also filed for bankruptcy in the past several years, SBA officials say.
Including River Capital, more than $70 million of federal obligations have been or are expected to be wiped out, says Mr. Teckler.
Federal officials say they believe fraud kept them from seeing the SBIC's problems sooner.
Mr. Van Oosterhout is facing criminal charges in a Cleveland federal court on fraud, conspiracy and extortion charges stemming from his operation of River Capital.
His trial is expected to begin sometime this year.
Mr. Van Oosterhout has pleaded not guilty to the charges.
Neither he nor his attorney returned phone calls seeking comment.
The indictment charges him with being part of a "scheme to misrepresent" the financial health of River Capital and its investment portfolio in order to keep federal money flowing.
For instance, two of the portfolio companies allegedly claimed equipment that they didn't actually own.
Along with three others, Mr. Van Oosterhout also allegedly tried to extort money from a businessman who supposedly was in debt to one of them.
The four are charged with setting fire to the businessman's car and threatening his wife, according to the indictment.
River Capital is still in business, though it is no longer in the SBIC program.
The company emerged from bankruptcy in 1991, still in possession of some of its federally backed investments.
One of those investments has turned into a winner.
For a $1 million investment, starting in the early 1980s, River Capital's predecessor, which Mr. Van Oosterhout helped operate, picked up about 1.7 million shares of Alanco Environmental Resources Corp., a Salt Lake City company that owns some dormant mines and manufactures pollution-control equipment.
Mr. Van Oosterhout has been an Alanco director since 1983.
Over the past 20 months, River Capital has sold more than one million Alanco shares, according to Alanco filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The filings didn't reveal what prices River Capital received for its stock, but it paid about 63 cents a share.
In that period, Alanco traded in a range of about 63 cents a share to about $6.
Recently, the stock has hovered around $5.
A woman who answered the phone at River Capital's office said all questions would have to be directed to Mr. Van Oosterhout.
Alanco's stock-market performance contrasts sharply with its financial performance.
With 19.4 million shares outstanding, its market value has surged to about $90 million, more than a threefold increase in the past year.
Yet, in the past four years, the company has reported accumulated losses of $8 million, including a $4.1 million loss for fiscal 1993, ended June 30.
Revenues for that year were just $10,987.
Alanco, however, has produced a steady stream of upbeat press releases -- particularly concerning various pollution-control deals in China, including one "potential multibillion dollar" contract.
Alanco has also announced a series of financing arrangements over recent years, many of which never came to pass.
And one that did -- a $72 million credit line -- was arranged by one Mario Renda through a New York City firm called Financial Security Corp.
In the early 1980s, Mr. Renda was a deposit broker who placed billions of dollars of deposits in thrifts and banks around the U.S.
He was convicted or pleaded guilty in 1987 in three different courts to crimes ranging from bank fraud to racketeering to tax evasion.
Prosecutors and investigators contended that Mr. Renda's crimes contributed to the demise of several dozen thrifts and banks, partly by arranging for fraudulent loans.
Brent Dyer, Financial Security's president, didn't return repeated phone calls.
A woman answering the phone at Financial Security identified Mr. Renda as a vice president of the company.
Mr. Renda denies the title but admits he was, for a time in 1992, Alanco's marketing director.
An Alanco spokesman says the SEC has been investigating the company's announcements but that the company has done nothing wrong.
SEC officials decline to comment.
The SBA has been urging Congress to bar SBICs from seeking bankruptcy protection.
A bankruptcy reform bill containing such a measure, passed the Senate last year but died in the House of Representatives.
Though the SBA has changed its SBIC regulations to give it more protection against bankruptcy losses, the agency still believes congressional action is necessary, says Mr. Teckler, the SBA's deputy general counsel.
Otherwise, SBICs could continue to "stick it to the government," Mr. Teckler says.
