Financial consultants eager to influence the markets can sometimes succeed, even with the latest wild speculation.
David Smick proved that yesterday when his financial-gossip newsletter printed a report -- unproven, he readily concedes -- about the suicide of deputy White House counsel Vincent Foster, and helped send stocks and bonds tumbling.
Concern that the Whitewater mess would derail the Clinton legislative agenda certainly helped depress the markets, but the periodic newsletter published by Johnson Smick International was cited in particular.
The two-page issue reported that staffers in the office of Sen. Daniel Moynihan, the New York Democrat, said that the body of Clinton aide Vincent Foster was moved from an administration apartment in Virginia to the park location where it was found.
If true, such a claim would raise shocking questions about the Clinton administration's investigation of the death of Mr. Foster.
But Mr. Smick, a one-time aide to former Republican Congressman Jack Kemp, said he was surprised by the market reaction to his column casually passing along a rumor.
He said he didn't know whether it was true.
The tone of the newsletter was far more sober and authoritative.
"Again, we normally ignore Washington's regular stream of rumor mongering every time a President gets into trouble because the rumors are almost always untrue," it read.
"In this case, however, the offices of Senate Finance Committee Chairman Moynihan are putting the word out that Foster in fact committed suicide in a private apartment in Virginia."
The White House and Sen. Moynihan's office vigorously denied the rumor.
Mr. Smick and his partner, Manuel Johnson, the former Federal Reserve vice chairman, characterize their business as practicing "information arbitrage."
Mr. Johnson's former position gives them entree to financial movers and shakers, but even they don't pretend that their information is 100% reliable.
"If you're 55% to 60% right, you're gold," Mr. Smick has said in the past.
He won't disclose the circulation of his newsletter or its price, but both he and his partner have prospered with the firm, which also holds conferences and gives advice.
Washington has been rife with Whitewater rumors, but once the Foster rumor was set in the type of the Johnson Smick newsletter, it was given a wide airing.
Market news services widely reported the newsletter was affecting the credit and currency markets.
And the conservative talk-show host Rush Limbaugh discussed it on his widely followed radio broadcast.
Said Thomas D. Gallagher, a political analyst for Lehman Brothers Inc. in Washington: "We're in a situation where the scandal has taken on a life of its own and the markets are going to be susceptible to rumors."
