It has often been said, "If you invent a better mousetrap the world will beat a path to your door."
But I don't believe it for a second.
You must beat a path to the world's door, and you may have to knock on that door until your knuckles are bloody.
Let's suppose you've discovered an inventor who has devised what you know is an important new technology.
You've incorporated, recruited funds and pushed the start button on a new research and development company.
However, your inventor, though technically proficient, has had no commercially successful inventions as yet -- a diamond in the rough.
Based on my own experience, the odds against polishing up such a gem for commercial success are great.
Regardless of your inventor's technical expertise, you will soon discover that potential clients will view him with great skepticism.
Venture capital firms and potential licensees habitually shy away from inventors with no previous success in the marketplace.
Nevertheless, as my own story demonstrates, the odds can be beaten.
My inventors were a pair of Russian engineers, political refugees who arrived on our shores in 1974 from Leningrad via Vienna and Rome.
Naum and Alex ended up in Des Moines, Iowa, with their wives, children and one suitcase per person.
Unable to find employment as engineers, they were working as draftsmen for a construction company, which is where I met them.
They professed to be experts in the automatic control of industrial compressors and brought with them a dozen Soviet patents that I examined through a translator.
Having a degree of my own in mathematics, and carrying a self-confidence that I can only find astonishing today, I convinced myself and my associates that their expertise was worth backing.
We invested the seed capital and set up the two inventors in a back office of our textile factory.
Our inventors' first U.S. patents went far beyond their earlier Russian work.
In that little back office they designed three completely innovative controllers for the big turbo-compressors used in steel mills, in oil and gas production and refining, and in chemical plants.
These controllers can be described as small industrial computers that automatically operate the compressors.
Our inventors claimed to offer major energy savings to compressor owners, decreased compressor maintenance costs and more reliable production.
But they had no installations in North America to establish their credibility.
So our little company, Compressor Controls Corp., faced a mighty task.
We soon discovered that Russian inventions and engineering installations carried no weight with our prospective customers.
Our inventors were treated as novices, though time would eventually prove that Naum was a genius in his field of engineering.
I have since learned that a similar skepticism faces U.S. inventors who lack commercially successful inventions.
The obvious licensees for our patents, we believed, would be major industrial control manufacturers such as Foxboro, Honeywell, Fisher.
At our very first meeting, however, the opposing in-house control expert was so antagonistic that a shouting match developed between our inventors and him, and the air became blue with hostility.
This was the "NIH" effect, the infamous Not-Invented-Here syndrome.
Other control companies were more polite, but quite indifferent.
As I watched, completely fascinated by these blackboard debates, I came to the conclusion that our inventors did indeed know more than their NIH opponents.
So our little two-person company soldiered on.
We dug deep into our pockets to keep the operation going, for we couldn't recruit outside investors.
Now we targeted the compressor manufacturers.
Not much luck there, either.
Our controllers were much more expensive than those of our competitors.
So the compressor manufacturers saw our expensive controllers only as an added cost, not as an added value for them.
Finally, we realized that our controllers would be valued highest by the compressor users -- the steel mills, refineries, pipelines and chemical producers who would directly benefit from the energy savings for their compressor operations.
They would also benefit from lower compressor repair costs, and a more reliable production line.
When we called on these industries we were met with deep interest, but much caution.
The compressors that we offered to control were sometimes multimillion-dollar machines of 20,000 horsepower or more, and vital to the production of steel, oil and gas, and chemicals.
The clients' engineers acknowledged that Naum displayed very impressive knowledge of control theory and its application to compressors.
But we had no installations in North America to demonstrate that our theories worked in real life.
Our first break came from a pipeline compressor station owned by Northern Natural Gas.
One complex turbo-compressor had given them nothing but trouble, and none of the major control companies were able to make it run.
As a last resort, we were called in to install our controls.
We did, and all went well.
Our next major installation came at an Amoco refinery in Texas.
Their gasoline process line kept shutting down, due to trouble with the catalytic cracker turbo-compressor -- something that turns heavy oil into lighter fuel.
Each of our competitors had failed to fix the compressor, so they called us in desperation to install our controllers.
Again, all went well.
These two installations were the beginning of our credibility and of our company's success.
We were now able to lure a first-rate marketing manager from a rival control company.
From that point on it was just straight hard work for our little company and steadily earned gains.
Successful installations multiplied and spread world-wide.
The company eventually was acquired for $35 million and it's still growing.
I have since worked with several other high-tech startups.
And I am now convinced that innovative technology, no matter how impressive, is never enough by itself.
An untried inventor must prove that the product works in real life -- not just in blackboard demonstrations.
But that's not all.
The new company will live or die by its manufacturing, marketing and financial decisions.
Inventors, no matter how intelligent, rarely have experience in these fields.
Unfortunately, that does not preclude inventors from having ironclad opinions on how to manufacture, market or finance their inventions -- inventions for which they have already made so many sacrifices.
An experienced and independent board of directors is a necessity.
If the invention looks exciting, it is not too difficult to assemble a board with good general business experience.
But it is much more difficult to find board members who will take the time to understand something of the invention or its manufacturing, or who will make customer calls to learn about the marketing firsthand.
With a talented inventor, a useful product and a board who will learn enough of the product to make independent business decisions, you will have fun for sure.
And you might even make a lot of money.
Mr. Ladin is a director and consultant for several high-tech ventures.
