Employees at a savings and loan owned by Bill Clinton's former business partner James McDougal had a secret incentive to make a political contribution in 1985 to Mr. Clinton, then governor of Arkansas.
It wouldn't cost them a dime.
The employees contend in interviews that a Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan executive promised that they would be reimbursed for whatever they contributed at an April 1985 fund-raiser to help retire Mr. Clinton's 1984 campaign debt of $50,000.
H. Don Denton, a senior vice president, says he was reimbursed for a $500 contribution, but refuses to say whether he was repaid by Mr. McDougal or with Madison Guaranty funds.
"It could be incriminating," Mr. Denton explains.
If Madison funds were used, such reimbursement could be an illegal misuse of federally insured deposits; if Mr. McDougal's own money was used, it could be an evasion of political contribution limits under state election law.
There is no evidence that either Bill or Hillary Rodham Clinton knew of the alleged fund-raising gambit.
But it promises to be yet another political embarrassment arising from their entanglement with Jim McDougal, the S&L executive who rode Madison Guaranty $50 million into the red while favoring politicians with loans and investment opportunities.
Robert B. Fiske Jr., the newly appointed special counsel, is setting up shop here in Little Rock, taking over the government's investigation of the Clintons' Whitewater Development Co. partnership with Mr. McDougal.
Federal investigators are trying to determine whether Madison Guaranty funds were illegally diverted into the Whitewater vacation-home development in northern Arkansas or into the campaign coffers of Mr. Clinton and other politicians.
Of special interest are the funds raised at the cocktail party that Mr. McDougal hosted in his thrift's art deco lobby.
Among the 50 Madison employees, directors and borrowers in attendance was a senior executive who helped Mr. McDougal solicit contributions.
The executive, who would speak only on the condition of anonymity, says he may have made a contribution himself -- he doesn't recall whether it was $500 or $1,000 -- with the understanding that he would be paid back.
Davis Fitzhugh, vice president of a Madison subsidiary, says he was approached by this executive, but declined to go along with the fund-raising stratagem.
"I was left with the distinct impression that I would be reimbursed," says Mr. Fitzhugh.
"It wasn't something I wanted to get involved in."
Meanwhile, another employee, Larry Kuca, who at the time was managing a Madison real-estate venture on Campobello Island off the Canadian coast, says he contributed $1,000 to Gov. Clinton at Mr. McDougal's request, but without a promise of repayment.
Instead, he says, Mr. McDougal pointed out how much Mr. Kuca would be reaping in real-estate commissions.
These contributions, all personal checks, helped swell the total take from the fund-raiser to about $30,000.
Federal investigators already are inquiring about $12,000 in cashier's checks issued by Madison, including some from Mr. McDougal's personal and corporate accounts.
One check for $3,000 bore the name of Ken Peacock, son of a Madison director and a major borrower.
At the time of the fund-raiser, Mr. Peacock was a 24-year-old college student.
Last month, he denied making such a contribution.
Investigators are also trying to trace the source of funds for a $3,000 cashier's check from Mr. McDougal.
Mr. Clinton used the contributions to help pay off the $50,000 loan that he had obtained from a bank in Cherry Valley, Ark., toward the close of the 1984 campaign.
Federal investigators have subpoenaed records from the Cherry Valley bank as well as whatever records are still available from the 1984 campaign.
Certain records, including the list of contributors from the fund-raiser, have been discarded or lost.
Mr. McDougal, who couldn't be reached for comment, has denied illegally funneling money into the campaign or the Whitewater venture.
His attorney, Sam Heuer, says Mr. McDougal "didn't do anything wrong" and dismisses the notion of employee reimbursment for contributions as just "another smoke trail."
For Mr. McDougal, throwing a party for the governor was hardly extraordinary.
By all accounts, Mr. McDougal, a failed politician himself, reveled in hobnobbing with elected officials.
He also sought to ingratiate himself by doing financial favors, such as cutting the Clintons into the Whitewater real-estate deal in 1978 and putting Hillary Clinton's law firm on a $2,000-a-month retainer in April 1985, after the governor had complained about being financially strapped.
"McDougal bragged about what he could get done, about greasing the skids," says Mr. Fitzhugh.
And it appears that he did get things done, such as finding renters for office space at Madison Guaranty.
The Arkansas Development Finance Authority, a Clinton brainchild, moved into the thrift's's maroon headquarters in 1985, when offices in a more convenient location, Little Rock's financial district, were going unrented at comparable rates.
Another state agency leased a McDougal-renovated service station across the street from the S&L for $7,432 a month.
Adding to Mr. McDougal's image as a man who could get things done was Mr. Clinton's March 1985 appointment of John Latham, Madison Guaranty's chief executive officer, to the Arkansas Savings and Loan Board.
In banking and political circles, before Mr. McDougal was ousted from Madison by federal regulators in mid-1986 and tried and acquitted of bank fraud charges in 1990, he was widely admired for his folksy charm and persuasiveness.
Mr. Kuca recalls how Mr. McDougal telephoned him on Campobello Island and talked him into contributing $1,000 to Gov. Clinton.
"It wasn't `give the money or else,'" he says.
"It was actually very polite."
At the time, Mr. Kuca was earning $100,000 a year in commissions plus a small salary selling oceanfront lots.
"He pointed out how well things were going," Mr. Kuca says.
"He didn't have to be crude about it."
On the other hand, the Madison executive who solicited contributions in Little Rock was decidedly more blunt, according to Don Denton, the thrift's senior vice president: "He said, `I need a check for $500.'
I made out my check to Bill Clinton.
I was reimbursed for it."
TWO ARKANSAS STATE AGENCIES rented space in an office building and a renovated service station owned by Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan in 1985 for a total of $7,432 a month.
An article Monday incorrectly reported that the rent on the service station alone totaled $7,432.
(WSJ Feb. 2, 1994)
