General Dynamics Corp. detailed the next step in its corporate shrinkage, a sharp cutback in its board that includes the departure of Chairman William A. Anders in May.
The Falls Church, Va., company -- which has dismantled its vast weapons-making business in recent years and is now largely a producer of submarines and tanks -- also declared a 2-for-1 stock split and a 17% rise in its dividend.
The increase to 35 cents, payable May 13 to post-split shares of record April 15, would be the second boost in the payout in recent months.
Last fall General Dynamics raised the dividend to 60 cents from 40 cents.
The company said its board also "reconfirmed" management's authority to buy back as many as 1.5 million of the approximately 62 million shares that would be outstanding after the stock split, which is payable April 11 to stock of record March 21.
In composite trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange, General Dynamics shares rose $2.875 to close at $94.50.
As expected, James R. Mellor, president, will succeed Mr. Anders as chairman on the reconstituted nine-member board.
The departure from the 14-member current board of Mr. Anders, a 60-year-old former astronaut, had been expected after he resigned as a company employee effective last May, turning the chief executive officer's job over to Mr. Mellor, 63.
Also leaving the board this May will be Vice Chairman Harvey Kapnick, 68, who retired as an employee with Mr. Anders last year.
Messrs. Kapnick and Anders will continue as consultants to management, Mr. Anders said.
Nicholas C. Chabraja, 51, a senior vice president, will become a director.
Also leaving the board are two other former General Dynamics chairmen and chief executive officers, David S. Lewis, 76, and Stanley C. Pace, 72, as well as Thomas G. Ayres, 79, and Elliot H. Stein, 75.
Mr. Anders several years ago initiated a sweeping sell-off of assets and a distribution of proceeds to shareholders in a post-Cold War plan he described as "the most efficient way to convert surplus defense assets to productive nondefense uses."
Holders were paid $1.55 billion in special cash distributions as part of the plan.
Phil Friedman, who follows aerospace stocks for Morgan Stanley & Co., said the latest commitment to the stock-buyback program reflects General Dynamics's confidence in new management's ability to keep generating cash as the company awaits a possible resolution this summer of a longstanding dispute with the Pentagon over the A-12 attack jet.
The Navy, which canceled that program three years ago, seeks more than $1.4 billion in total claims from General Dynamics and McDonnell Douglas Corp., and the companies have filed counterclaims for similar amounts.
