The United Steelworkers union ended its strike against Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corp.'s steel unit, just two days after the work stoppage began.
The two sides began informal talks almost immediately after the USW called 4,700 workers out on strike at several plants at 3:25 a.m. EST Tuesday, with both sides realizing that a prolonged strike was a losing proposition.
The U.S. steel market is riding a strong recovery, with most mills operating at or near capacity, and a long strike could have cost Wheeling-Pittsburgh shipments and profits, and possibly jobs.
The short strike saved Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp. from completely shutting down its mills and enables a quick restart.
According to the union, the tentative accord includes a company agreement to begin funding a trust for retired employees' medical and life insurance coverage, work rule changes, bonuses totaling $2,250 a worker and a possible $500 bonus based on the company's 1995 pretax income.
In addition, the accord includes a wage increase of $1 an hour, three additional holidays and pension improvements.
The pension plan was a major obstacle in earlier negotiations.
The union wanted major pension changes.
But Wheeling-Pittsburgh, of Wheeling, W.Va., said it was hamstrung on that matter by an agreement with the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp.
That agreement was signed when the company terminated its pension fund while operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy law protection from 1985 to 1991.
Apparently, though, the new pact doesn't violate the agreement with the PBGC, one person familiar with the situation said.
The contract is similar to others signed last year with major steelmakers, except for length.
The Wheeling-Pittsburgh contract is for 2 1/2 years -- compared with a standard six years for other steelmakers -- and coincides with the 1996 expiration of the company's agreement with the PBGC.
The union said talks will begin on retirement benefits Jan. 15, 1996, about nine months before the contract expires on Oct. 1, 1996.
