Daniel Crowley, president and chief executive officer of Foundation Health Corp., said he expects results for the fiscal second quarter ended Dec. 31 to reflect "the best quarter we've had" since going public.
Separately, Foundation lost a court bid to keep Aetna Life & Casualty Co. from being installed as prime contractor on a health program for military retirees.
Analysts have said they expect the managed-health-care company's earnings to be between $19.9 million, or 69 cents a share, and $23.3 million, or 81 cents a share.
Pending auditors' final review of the figures, Mr. Crowley said, "We expect to be above the high-end" estimates.
Revenue should rise about 45%, to $484.4 million, Mr. Crowley said.
In the year-earlier quarter, Foundation had net income of $9.6 million, or 32 cents a share, after a one-time charge of about $12.4 million, or 30 cents a share.
Revenue totaled $334.1 million.
Analysts have been uncertain about the effect of Foundation's loss in July of a government contract to provide health-care benefits to military retirees and dependents.
The contract went to Aetna, but the Defense Department last month reopened bidding after a critical Government Accounting Office report.
Meantime, Foundation sought to prevent Aetna from taking over on Feb. 1 as prime contractor for the Civilian Health and Military Program of the Uniformed Services.
On Friday, a federal court in Alexandria, Va., denied a request for a preliminary injunction barring Aetna's installation during reprocurement.
Foundation said it filed an appeal, but later added in a statement that it might proceed with previously announced plans to cut its 4,100-person payroll by 500 to 700 positions to adjust for lost business.
However, a spokesman said, "our main concern was getting the contract re-bid.
This issue isn't dead yet."
Meanwhile, Mr. Crowley said membership at Foundation's health-maintenance-organization business grew to more than 500,000 as of Dec. 31 from 475,000 at the end of September.
