A school headmaster drags his children off to Hawaii where a new job as well as numerous other adventures, cultural and romantic, await him.
The schoolmaster has his work cut out for him, (as do the scriptwriters) for -- with the exception of the youngest (Ryan O'Donohue) -- his progeny are as unappetizing a set of whiny adolescents as has hit the screen this season.
Not much keeps the "The Byrds" from flying off in dull directions except Timothy Busfield, who brings a crisp authority to the role of the father.
The scenery doesn't hurt, either.
-- 8-9 p.m. EST, on ABC.
This hour-length drama is set in a suburb of Chicago that manages to look and sound a great deal like that Los Angeles hub of postadolescent high life, "Melrose Place" -- and for good reason.
The same creative team -- Aaron Spelling and E. Duke Vincent -- is responsible for both.
From the looks of this glibly entertaining mishmash with its regiment-size cast of strivers with messy lives, the team seems not to have lost its touch.
Ed Begley, Jr., in fine form as Winnetka's lead loser, abandons a wife for a vile mistress.
The other characters are out of work (MBA's here have to work as gardeners), divorced, or about to be, or just about hanging on generally -- but make no mistake: This is fun melodrama, a brand perfected by Spelling and Co., in which menace always looms, and nothing actually bad ever happens.
-- 10-11 p.m. EST, on NBC.
This chapter of "Biography" begins with one of America's most famous chorus lines -- those jolly gas-station attendants belting out "We are the men of Texaco."
They will forever be associated with the program that brought television into the big time in the 1940s, "The Texaco Star Theatre," better known to roaring millions as the Milton Berle show.
When it first went on the air in June 1948, there were, this splendid bio-film relates, only some 500,000 television sets in the entire country.
By the time Uncle Miltie had been on the air dazzling audiences for a few months, the number of sets reached a million, and there was no doubt about who had sold them.
As the film makes clear, Berle was the child of the ultimate stage mother.
Long after her son had become Mr. Television, she sat in the audience, nudging and poking those near her if they failed to guffaw at Milton's jokes.
The uproarious clips here, of Uncle Miltie zinging straight men and other guests, make it seem unlikely Mother Berle had to use her elbows very often.
-- 8-9 p.m. EST, on Arts & Entertainment.
Cynthia Gibb stars in this improbable but fact-based movie about a rape victim who unknowingly marries the man who previously attacked her and made her pregnant.
Innocent, bookish and the dutiful daughter of a strictly religious family, Billy decides to keep the baby, just as the handsome male stranger Jim (Richard Grieco), who has mysteriously begun hanging around, urges her to.
Take it from there.
Still, for all its predictability, there is something to be said for a film that can eke some credibility out of this fruitcake of coincidence.
The performances help, in particular those of Ralph Waite as the bible-thumping father and Ms. Gibb, a rising made-for-TV heroine.
-- 9-11 p.m. EST, on CBS.
Its title has a pleasant innocence (who, after all, says "heck" anymore?) but this mildly endearing film by Doug Block is knowing enough about the troubles aspiring filmmakers confront.
One youngish picturemaker finally ends up going home to Illinois in order to find people kind enough -- and trusting enough -- to invest their hard-earned money in his film.
Good luck.
Others are shown coming up against the hard world of distributors, acquisitions people, industry sharks and just plain sane business folk.
The filmmakers suffer like heck, and some occasionally have the grace to laugh -- but one has the sense they'll endure.
It does seem, from some of the artists' conversations here, that hard-nosed Hollywood may be responsible for saving the world from some terrible movies.
-- 10-11 p.m. EST, on PBS.
PBS air dates and times vary so check local listings.
