New York -- I'm a nice girl.
I own several headbands.
I don't wear my earrings in my nose.
And I always listen to my mother.
I'm not very popular right now.
"NO MORE NICE GIRLS" cries the flier from ABC No Rio, a Lower East Side gallery.
"BAD GIRLS" leers the red-lipped logo emblazoned on the wall of Soho's New Museum of Contemporary Art.
Feeling threatened, I put on my pumps and pearl earrings and went to find out what, beyond Tonya Harding, separates the bad from the nice.
At the New Museum, it's director Marcia Tucker's mother.
"Whatever she said, I vowed never to do," Ms. Tucker declares in her program notes.
Ms. Tucker found so many artists who were also rebelling against their mothers -- or at least, defying the "never wear more than three colors at once" rule -- that she has had to stage her show in two parts: Part One ended last month; Part Two can be seen through April 10.
I got a clue into the deeper thinking behind "Bad Girls" from the "You're more apt to be a bad girl if" quiz posted at Part One.
One of the few printable options: "Someone made your hair a primary color and you didn't sue."
Since no one ever has, I checked out the "less apt" list.
"You think wrist corsages make sense," it read.
"You could survive in the suburbs without taking prozac."
Wondering if I could survive this show without it, I turned to Elizabeth Berdann's "Topless Hall of Fame": a wall of copper discs painted with pairs of swollen breasts.
Across the way from Ms. Berdann's celebration of Beverlee Hills and Lotta Topp, Elaine Tin Nyo's "Daikon" and "Twisting Carrot" photographs celebrated the erotic root vegetable -- "grown especially for her by an organic farmer."
More colorful, if lower in fiber, was Portia Munson's 100% artificial "Pink Project": a long table completely covered with pink combs, pink mirrors, pink bottles, pink spoons, et cetera.
Ms. Munson began collecting pink objects in reaction to her mother -- who tried to discourage her from wearing pink as a child.
Take away the pink plastic phalluses, and "Pink Project" looks a lot like a nice girl's revenge on her politically correct parent.
Cammie Toloui, on the other hand, looks a lot like a bona fide bad girl.
A stripper/photographer, Ms. Toloui took her camera into her place of business and snapped pictures of her patrons.
You can ogle her slideshow "The Pleasure Palace" -- which has been held over to Part Two -- through sets of peepholes.
But bad girls come in a lot of packages.
Even men can qualify, if they are very good boys.
Chuck Nanney's life-size photographs of himself wearing girlish dresses won him honorary bad girl status; so did Keith Broadwee's photographs of plastic dolls wedged between his thighs -- which, the museum crows, turn " `phallic power' into harmless fun."
The harmless fun continues in Part Two, which kicks off with Judith Weinperson's self-explanatory "Blue Penis."
Although representations of the male member outnumber the female 36 to two here, a guy still has to put on a dress to crash this party.
In his lush "Angels Descending a Staircase," Yasumasa Morimura shows multiple photographic images of himself clad in flowing pre-Raphaelite-style gowns and various wigs.
The only female bad girl who seems to enjoy dressing up is Beverly Semmes: Her enormous "Yellow Pool," which spills across the floor of the gallery, is a black velvet and yellow organza gown for a very big bad girl with a date for the prom.
All it needs is a giant wrist corsage.
Still, it probably wouldn't appeal to the heroine of Susan Silas's "Thurber Carnival/Fables for Our Time," a painting which takes its text from James Thurber's morbid retelling of the Little Red Riding Hood story.
In it, the little girl pulls an automatic out of her basket and shoots the wolf dead.
"Moral:" the painting reads.
"It is not so easy to fool little girls nowadays as it used to be."
Certainly, you can't fool third-grader Phyllis Michelle Green, one of a number of little girls (and a few boys) whose work is included here, perhaps to prove that the bad girls behind "Bad Girls" aren't ageist.
In any event, in this art, nice girls finish first.
Ms. Green depicts her bad girl puffing on a cigarette and bubbling the words: "I'm not good because I droped {sic} out of school," while her good girl is headed for college.
If you're hungry for more bad media, you can check out the museum's "Bad Girls Film" series, or head for the Knitting Factory, a nearby performance space, to hear bad-girl bands such as Kissyfur and Homer Erotic perform.
The museum even provides a shelf-full of BG-approved reading material, which you may peruse from a whoopee-cushion-topped stool.
Nothing happens when you sit on it: Like most of the show, the cushions have no oomph.
Over at "No More Nice Girls" in the tiny ABC No Rio gallery on not-very-nice Rivington Street through April 1, the mood is grimmer -- perhaps because there's no heat.
Beyond the locked steel door, two bad girls in hats and coats sat huddled over a space heater talking -- gasp -- about boys.
"Certain dysfunctional aspects of a relationship, people get too comfortable with," one sighed.
She's probably been looking at the bad art too long.
Jennie Booth's drawing of a two-headed woman is also "Pondering the Strangeness of Man."
It's one of the more benign artworks here: Many others feature avenging women, who are seen using knives to cope with their dysfunctional relationships.
An exception is Nancy Floyd, who photographs girls with guns.
"At a young age she learned what Stopping Power is," a caption reads.
By now, so had I: An extended vacation in suburbia was starting to sound like just the ticket.
On my way out, the bad girl in charge handed me a list of upcoming events and thanked me for stopping by.
She couldn't have been nicer.
I decided not to say "Have a bad day."
