The Clinton administration is heading toward a split with some other United Nations Security Council members over lifting the international oil embargo against Iraq.
An early sign of trouble came this month.
Following its latest routine review of the sanctions that were imposed to punish Iraq for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait, the council was set to issue a now-customary statement that Baghdad hadn't yet met preconditions for lifting the embargo.
But France, Russia, China and several other council members tried to insert a sentence commending Iraq for its recent cooperation.
The U.S. balked.
The result: No official statement was issued.
The issue won't go away.
After two years of resistance, Iraq has indeed begun meeting the U.N. requirements for lifting the oil embargo: It has cooperated with efforts to destroy its weapons of mass destruction, and it has accepted a U.N. plan for long-term monitoring designed to assure that it doesn't rebuild this fearsome arsenal, U.N. officials say.
No one claims that Saddam Hussein has fully complied with the U.N. terms, or that he has met conditions for lifting other U.N. sanctions.
For instance, he still insists that Kuwait is part of Iraq and refuses to recognize its border.
The Iraqi ruler may never relent on such issues.
But his recent cooperation on the arms issue has begun to raise questions about how long the embargo should continue.
The U.S., frustrated by Saddam's continued hold on power, would like to continue the embargo until the Iraqi leader is driven from power -- even though no U.N. resolution calls for such an outcome.
Washington is concerned that a resumption of oil sales would give Saddam funds to tempt arms sellers to break other sanctions and help rebuild his conventional military arsenal.
So, to the growing annoyance of some allies, the U.S., which has veto power over Security Council actions, is fudging about the exact circumstances under which it would agree to end the oil embargo.
During a recent congressional hearing, Robert Pelletreau, assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, resisted persistent efforts to get him to answer that question.
"I'm not sure it's wise to get into detailing . . . the conditions for lifting" the oil embargo, he said.
Saudi Arabia, a major U.S. ally in the Mideast, also worries that lifting the sanctions would flood the world's oil markets at a time when soft prices already have damaged its economy.
But other nations are eager to see the sanctions come down.
France is anxious to build oil ties with Baghdad, and Russia wants Baghdad to be able to repay old debts and to resume arms purchases.
Turkey, a staunch U.S. ally and Iraq's northern neighbor, complains that the sanctions are costing it billions of dollars in lost trade and fomenting anti-U.S. sentiment in southeastern Turkey.
The nation's ambassador to the U.S., Nuzhet Kandemir, says the oil pipeline between Turkey and Iraq, which is still full of oil, is corroding.
Of course, Saddam Hussein always could make it easier, through miscalculation or hostile acts, for the U.S. to persuade its allies that sanctions are still needed.
Just last week, he threatened to move against a Kurdish rebel enclave in northern Iraq, according to wire service reports.
A U.S. congressional aide who follows Mideast affairs predicts that the Iraqi ruler also could launch operations against Shiites in the south, or verbally threaten Kuwait.
Still, Rolf Ekeus, head of the U.N. special commission on Iraq, notes Iraqi cooperation.
"We feel we have a good handle on their existing weapons programs," he says.
"We have found them, identified them and destroyed them."
He adds that Iraq recently provided "comprehensive data" on its chemical weapons program.
The U.N. plans soon to take the first step toward setting up a long-term monitoring operation.
Mr. Ekeus hopes to dispatch inspection teams to begin gathering data on Iraq's missile-production capability.
Later this spring, similar teams will go to Iraq to gather data on facilities capable of producing chemical or biological weapons.
The inventory could be completed in months, paving the way for the monitoring operation to be put in place.
That could be the moment of truth for the U.S. and its allies.
"The U.S. will approach a major decision point at which it will have to decide whether it wants to move the goalposts on Iraq," says Kenneth Katz, a Mideast analyst at the Congressional Research Service.
