While many African leaders worry about famine, corruption and coups, the leaders of this tiny nation think about money.
A major concern: How should they invest the $1.4 billion Botswana earns each year as co-owner of the world's richest diamond mine?
Although Botswana may resemble a parched scrubland, it was the fastest-growing country in the world during the past two decades, with gross domestic product expanding at an average annual rate of 14.5% between 1970 and 1980, and 9.8% between 1980 and 1991, according to a soon-to-be-released report from the World Bank.
Moreover, the World Bank says Botswana, which it considers to be one of the world's best-managed countries, is an upper middle-income economy in the same category as Venezuela and South Korea.
On a continent better known for poverty than prosperity, such rankings make Botswana -- along with a handful of other African countries such as Gabon and Mauritius -- an anomaly.
Located on the northern side of the Molopo River from South Africa, Botswana is perhaps best known for the Kalahari Desert, which takes up 70% of the country's land, and its conservation parks where elephants, zebras and giraffes roam freely.
It is the country where sparsely clothed bushmen still hunt with bows and arrows in the Okavango Delta.
Until 30 years ago, most of the country's residents -- not just the bushmen -- were caught back in time.
In 1966, when the country, then known as Bechauanaland, gained independence from Britain, it was one of the five poorest countries in the world with a per capita annual income of only $35 and just 25% of its children attending school.
One year later, diamonds were discovered beneath the Kalahari sands.
The Botswana government cut a handsome deal with South Africa's diamond leader De Beers Consolidated Mines Inc.
Botswana collects 85% of the income from the Debswana Diamond Co.; De Beers pockets 15%.
Currently, more than 50% of the country's export income is derived from the diamond business.
"Diamonds poured revenue into the government and outstripped our ability to spend it," says Central Bank Governor Quill Hermans.
"What was remarkable is that Botswana didn't blow it," he adds.
Political analysts say that what separates Botswana from so many other resource-rich African countries isn't that it was given a gift, but that it used its gift wisely.
Botswana recycled diamond revenue into education, health care, clean waters, telecommunications, and electricity to make the country appealing to international businesses.
Unlike many other African nations, it didn't subsidize state-owned corporations; it invested in private corporations, always insisting that it be paid back on time.
"One of the reasons why so many African countries are in shambles is because they put so much capital into enterprises and either forgive the loans or forgive the interest on the loans," says Stephen Lewis Jr., president of Carlton College and a consultant to the government here.
"Botswana's leaders don't throw money away."
This conservative approach was born partly out of fear, as tiny Botswana was dependent upon its much larger neighbors for 80% of its goods and services.
There was an overwhelming concern that South Africa "would close the border and stop imports from moving into the country," says Liyanda Lekalake, a member of Botswana's investment team and special assistant to the governors of the Bank of Botswana.
Just in case, Botswana saved money, borrowed very little, and in 1976 replaced the South African rand with its own currency, the pula.
Though the possibility of a conflict with South Africa now seems remote, Botswana maintains $4 billion in foreign reserves, the largest per capita reserves of any nonpetroleum country.
In fact, Botswana's proximity to South Africa has become a valuable asset in attracting foreign investment.
"If South Africa makes it, I will make a fortune in Botswana because it's next to a potential gold mine.
If South Africa doesn't make it, I won't lose anything and will still make a good return," says James B. Rogers Jr., a professional investor and host of "Your Portfolio" on cable television.
Mr. Rogers, who visited Botswana several years ago, ended up buying shares of every one of the 11 stocks on the fledging Botswana Stock Exchange.
Not everyone is as bullish, however.
Some analysts say Botswana is so small and the reasons for its growth so unique that it should be dismissed as a model for success.
Morgan Stanley & Co. analyst Michel ZuParris, for one, says the country will likely "remain a small blip on the whole industrial production graph for southern Africa."
The biggest challenge is to convince the citizens, most of whom would prefer to be cattle ranchers, that there is life off the farm.
Indeed, as the Kalahari Desert encroaches on Botswana's already arid land, farming and ranching are becoming less viable occupations.
Moreover, political leaders still haven't been able to raise the living standard appreciably for many rural inhabitants, some of whom live in mud huts with thatched roofs.
A talent drain also threatens the country.
Many South Africans who were antiapartheid activists immigrated to Botswana during the 1950s and 1960s.
Now, the children of those exiles are moving back to South Africa to take advantage of possible career opportunities.
Nothing in Botswana can compete with the sophistication and Western lifestyle in South Africa.
Botswana's capital city of Gaborone can appear desolate as dry winds carry tumbleweeds across parched grass.
Unlike many other African capitals, Gaborone has no lavish monuments or grandiose buildings.
Instead, the seat of government sits on a dusty lot in several low-rise, nondescript buildings.
"It's very sleepy and quiet and docile," says Jeffrey Dunshee, managing director of the Africa Growth Fund, a venture capital fund managed by an affiliate of Equator Bank in Hartford, Conn.
The fund is a major investor in Gabarone's Sheraton Hotel.
"There are far more exciting countries in which to invest than Botswana."
But that's the point, says Mr. Rogers, the investor.
"No, it's not Geneva or Monte Carlo, but if it were, it would be time to sell, not buy," he says, paraphrasing the stock market dictum that it is more profitable to buy a stock when it's unpopular and cheap.
Botswana may not have fancy buildings, he adds, but it does have modern telecommunications and other amenities.
"You have no trouble using the telephone and fax machine.
How many developing nations can you say that about?"
