Michael Baker Corp. said it will take $13 million in after-tax extraordinary charges and, as a result, post a fourth-quarter loss.
The engineering and construction concern said most of the charges relate to its decision to get out of the military housing construction business.
In a letter to shareholders, Chairman Richard L. Shaw said, "The actions we've taken today are more disappointing to me than words can express."
Mr. Shaw added that "Baker is now positioned to perform well in 1994 and beyond, and that the balance sheet "remains strong, with more than $50 million of stockholders' equity and minimal debt."
In the year-ago fourth quarter, Baker had net income of $1.6 million, or 20 cents a share, on revenue of $99.6 million.
In trading on the American Stock Exchange Friday, Michael Baker closed at $9.875, down 37.5 cents, or 3.7%.
Baker said its Intelcom Support Services Inc. unit is exiting military housing construction because "we've lost money in that business.
It was a business we managed poorly."
The $13 million in total charges include a $7 million addition to reserves for completion of military housing construction contracts and the termination of Intelcom's construction business.
Though it is exiting military housing, Intelcom will continue performing operations and maintenance services on military bases, which is a profitable business, a Baker spokesman said.
The charges include a $3.1 million provision, including $2.1 million in increased reserves for doubtful accounts -- accounts that may not be paid -- and a $1 million accounting adjustment at Baker's Baker/MO Services unit, which provides operations and maintenance services for the energy industry.
Mr. Shaw said Baker/MO Services "believes we'll eventually collect our money" on the doubtful accounts.
Also included in the extraordinary charges is a $1.9 million provision to write down certain assets of Baker's Mellon Stuart Construction Inc. unit and to discontinue Mellon Stuart's international marketing efforts.
Mellon Stuart Construction was formed in 1991 when Baker acquired certain assets, including equipment, from the former Mellon Stuart Co.
Mr. Shaw said "some of this equipment has not been used since the acquisition and is now worth considerably less than when we purchased it."
Baker has closed Mellon Stuart's offices in Taiwan and Abu Dhabi, "which have already cost the company more than $1 million in 1993."
Mr. Stuart said, however, that Baker isn't "abandoning the international market."
Finally, the charges include a $1 million addition to corporate reserves, primarily for the sale or closing of Baker's small Weston Geophysical Corp. unit, which does nondestructive testing.
