This is a fairy-shrimp tale that came true.
Once upon a time -- up until 1990 -- three species of fairy shrimp were so obscure that they dwelt on this planet unnoticed by humankind.
But in just four years, the vernal pool, longhorn and conservancy fairy shrimp have gone from undetected crustaceans to prawns in a bigger battle between environmentalists and developers.
These tiny creatures aren't the stuff that shrimp cocktails are made of.
Biological cousins of the Sea Monkeys sold through ads in comic books, fairy shrimp measure about an inch fully grown.
They swim upside down in mud puddles throughout California's Central Valley, where they feed on plankton.
But the most remarkable attribute of the three newly discovered species is their ability to turn the faces of Sacramento County developers red.
The fairy shrimp and the developers unwittingly lived together in peace until May 1990, when the three new species were first written up in the Journal of Crustacean Biology.
In itself, the discovery was hardly earthshaking.
Scientists identify 7,000-odd new plant and animal species somewhere in the world each year.
Harvard entomologist Edward O. Wilson, a leading scientific advocate of biodiversity, estimates that the 1.4 million known species logged thus far represent less than one-tenth the total currently inhabiting the earth.
"It is a myth that scientists break out champagne when a new species is discovered," Mr. Wilson has written.
"Our museums are glutted with new species."
What happened next, however, was somewhat more unusual.
Few creatures (the snail darter comes to mind) have gone so rapidly from discovery to the threat of extinction.
In November 1990 -- six months after the journal article appeared -- Roxanne Bittman, a botanist with California's Fish and Game Department, petitioned the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to list the three new fairy shrimp species as endangered.
The agency formally proposed the listing in 1992.
A final decision is pending.
If the drive to declare the species endangered succeeds, developers say many of their projects here will be dead in the water.
So, rival biologists have been mud wrestling.
The developers have sent a team of environmental consultants up and down the state dipping canvas nets into muddy ditches to show that California has no shortage of fairy shrimp.
They take to the skies to videotape the fairy shrimp's natural habitat -- geological creases in the dry Sierra foothills that fill with rainwater in the winter months, becoming vernal pools come springtime.
From the co-pilot's seat of a droning prop plane, Paul Sugnet, a biologist working for developers led by Angelo Tsakopoulos, the owner of AKT Development Corp., points to streaks of glinting blue in the greenish-brown landscape below.
Conservationists say these vernal pools are being bulldozed out of existence.
Mr. Sugnet disagrees: "Vernal pools everywhere you look," he says, peering through sunglasses.
That sort of talk enrages Robert Holland, a lean, grizzled biologist and sheep farmer.
Wading ankle-deep in a muddy pool in search of fairy shrimp, he mutters about "land rapers."
Mr. Holland denies he is referring to Mr. Sugnet, who disputes Mr. Holland's claim that at least two-thirds, and possibly as many as 90%, of California's vernal pools have vanished since Europeans first settled here.
Mr. Holland wrote a letter in support of the proposed endangered-species listing, taking aim at "esurient land developers, their sniveling attorneys and their `accepta pecunaria quisque advocata' consultants."
(A brief glossary: "Esurient" means "greedy," and the italicized phrase, Mr. Holland says, is "bad Latin" for "any position for a price.")
Oh, yeah, well, the conservationists and regulators are "zealots" who wrongly view developers as "bad people who only take care of themselves," counters Mr. Tsakopoulos, a wealthy home builder.
If the proposed designation is approved, the developers contend, it could cost them up to $500 million during the next decade in foregone construction.
Officials at the Interior Department's Fish and Wildlife Service answer that the 1973 Endangered Species Act doesn't permit them to take economics into account when considering a listing.
Besides, such action is far less likely to stop building projects than to make developers "plan and think," says Cay Goude, an assistant field supervisor at the agency's Sacramento office.
Suspicions abound that in the ongoing debate the fairy shrimp are actually a red herring.
People on the developers' side whisper that Ms. Bittman, the botanist, is using the new species as a pretext for protecting various exotic plant species, such as Downingia pusilla and Orcuttia viscida, that are native to the Central Valley's vernal pools.
Ms. Bittman denies that she is just out to preserve plants.
But she agrees that "I am concerned about plants in the habitat."
She adds that "plant species don't receive the same level of protection as animal species" under the Endangered Species Act.
So why not petition the federal government to protect the habitat, not merely the shrimp?
Because "there's no endangered natural community law," she explains.
The federal government can move to limit development in a "critical habitat," but only after a species within that habitat has been declared endangered.
On the other hand, evidence that a habitat is disappearing can be used as a basis for declaring species found in the habitat to be endangered.
(Vernal pools destroyed by bulldozers might do the trick.)
In the regulatory kingdom of endangered species, such a ruling then means that the federal government can move to protect the habitat.
But developers claim that the fairy shrimp -- whose Sea Monkey relatives are so hardy their eggs can be shipped in little packets by mail -- aren't necessarily all that partial to vernal pools.
Peter Balfour, a biologist working for Mr. Sugnet, makes this point by scooping out one of the fairy shrimp proposed for listing as endangered from a narrow, rain-filled ditch.
Conservationists argue that when fairy shrimp are found in such places, it usually means the spot is a vestigial vernal pool.
But this one runs between a highway called Industrial Boulevard and a gravelly railroad bed.
Mr. Balfour says the ditch was probably created by bulldozers when they laid the railroad tracks.
Despite their herculean efforts to prove that the newly discovered species are here to stay, some developers confess they can't see much difference between one fairy shrimp and another.
"We're talking about invertebrates," says Chris Vrame, project manager for AKT Development.
