MCI Communications Corp. plans to announce today a major expansion that may entail an investment in Nextel Communications Inc., a wireless-services provider.
People familiar with MCI's plans said Nextel would be the likeliest candidate to fill out MCI's strategy to expand into wireless services and challenge its bigger archrival American Telephone & Telegraph Co., which is set to buy giant McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.
MCI declined to comment on its plans other than to say it would make a major announcement today involving its "networkMCI" expansion plan.
Nextel officials couldn't be reached for comment.
Nextel shares rose $2.125 on Friday, or 5.8%, to close at $38.625 a share on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Nextel operates a nationwide wireless radio network for dispatch services such as taxis.
The company is turning its network into a nationwide phone service reaching hundreds of U.S. markets to rival cellular phone networks.
Nextel has been on an acquisition binge, buying up similar operators of so-called specialized mobile radio (SMR) services.
This type of service uses a radio spectrum that's similar to one used by cellular phone services.
Nextel's current owners include Comcast Corp., a cable-TV and cellular carrier, and Motorola Inc., the telecommunications equipment manufacturer.
It isn't clear how much a Nextel purchase would cost.
The company's market value exceeds $3 billion.
MCI launched a strategy early last month to expand its network to provide local telecommunications services in addition to its basic long-distance service.
MCI said it would accomplish an expansion through alliances with wireless networks and cable-television companies that could carry its long-distance traffic locally.
The nation's No. 2 long-distance carrier had been poised to enter the bidding for licenses to provide a new kind of wireless service called "personal communications services."
However, there has been talk that the Federal Communications Commission may delay the bidding for PCS licenses until 1995.
MCI watchers said the company may have decided it was better to launch its wireless attack now via Nextel than to wait for the nebulous world of PCS to develop.
In fact, MCI's head PCS strategist resigned recently, indicating the company was ready to take another tack.
MCI was close to signing an alliance with Tele-Communications Inc. before the Denver-based cable giant stunned the industry by announcing last fall that it would be acquired by Bell Atlantic Corp., a plan that has since collapsed.
With that marriage now off, MCI could still put together an alliance with TCI and other cable companies.
The cable companies could cut the costs MCI must incur to hook up its long-distance service with local phone service.
These stiff fees now amount to about 45 cents on every dollar MCI takes in in revenue.
The networkMCI plan is designed in part to cut these costs by putting MCI directly into competition with local phone companies in each of their markets.
And MCI has begun building local phone networks in 20 U.S. cities to accomplish its goals.
MCI is getting major help to finance its dreams from its 20% owner, U.K. giant British Telecommunications PLC.
For its MCI stake, BT is paying the company $4.3 billion in cash.
Analysts have said that MCI could raise twice as much as that by borrowing against the BT cash.
In addition to its BT alliance, MCI has an agreement to share traffic with Stentor, a consortium that is Canada's largest long-distance carrier.
And MCI recently announced plans to build a network in Mexico with Grupo Financiero BanamexAccival.
MCI closed at $26.50 a share, up 87.5 cents, in trading Friday on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
