The poverty and rage of marginalized Indians in Mexico is a symptom of a larger and long-simmering Latin disease: radically unequal distribution of income.
"Latin America has had an embarrassingly long tradition of poverty and poor income distribution," says Sebastian Edwards, the World Bank's chief economist for the region.
Between 1960 and 1980, Latin America was the only part of the world whose income distribution became more unequal.
Then, from 1980 to 1990, the gap between the top 20% and the bottom 20% widened slightly more.
The implications are troubling for a part of the world that's increasingly seen as an economic sizzler, with stock markets rising 56% last year.
As the Mexican rebel uprising demonstrates, there are large segments of Latin society that haven't gained anything from economic reforms that the rest of the world is applauding.
That makes the reforms vulnerable to political cross-currents.
Moreover, when large swathes of society lack buying power, the prospects for continued growth are undercut.
As in many other aspects of economic reform, the East Asians provide a useful model.
A World Bank analysis of growth rates and income distribution shows the East Asians with high rankings on both.
The Latins, until recently, have shown comparatively low growth rates and wider disparities in wealth.
In the mid 1980s, Malaysia and Brazil showed comparable median income levels; but the bottom 20% of the population in Malaysia showed a per-capita annual income nearly twice that of Brazil.
Richard Sabot, economics professor at Williams College, argues that Asian governments saw the alleviation of poverty as a way to blunt the appeal of Communist movements in the 1960s.
"The elites came to believe that their future well-being, economically and politically, depended on the well-being of the poor," he says.
In contrast, Latin American leaders usually opted to crush Communist-leaning insurgencies militarily -- without bettering the lot of the poor.
One way governments can show support for the bottom rungs of society -- as well as create the basis for future economic improvement -- is to provide basic education for the entire population.
But according to an analysis by Mr. Sabot, Venezuela was committing only 20% of its education budget to primary education in the late 1980s, compared with 78% in Korea.
Often, Latin governments will subsidize university education, benefiting just the children of the wealthier segments of society.
One bright spot in this generally dismal picture is Chile, considered the strongest Latin reformer currently.
Alongside annual economic growth of nearly 7%, Chile has lifted some 1.3 million of its citizens out of poverty in the past four years.
And along with privatization and price liberalization, Chile has pushed health and housing programs for the poor.
It's time the World Bank explicitly treated enlightened income-distribution tactics as one of the conditions for certain concessional loans.
It would be consistent with the institution's broader emphasis on "sustainable development."
In the past, talk of better income distribution carried connotations of socialist schemes that were inflationary and punitive to investors.
But providing basic education, sanitation, and health services shouldn't be viewed as a socialist subterfuge: It's basic to economic reform.
Land reform is trickier.
The Asians turned thousands of peasants into small farmers by redistributing land seized by Japan during World War II.
Land ownership in the Latin countries never went through such an upheaval.
Land reform has been talked about perennially but seldom carried out.
In many areas, poor -- usually Indian -- peasants, like those in Chiapas, have been pushed into infertile highlands that can't support them.
Their economic options are limited.
The question of land reform in Latin America is explosive politically.
The World Bank and the other international institutions have steered clear of the issue, and remain hesitant to push changes.
That makes it more important that the institutions deliver a forceful message, along with financial help, when it comes to education and health.
The World Bank's Mr. Edwards says that funds for "the social program" in Latin America will increase.
This includes primary education, health, nutrition and sanitation.
He adds that the bank is also determined to make sure that the funds actually get through to the intended recipients, and not "leak through to the middle and upper classes."
Given the history of Latin inequality, it will take time for the poorest segments to believe that government economic policies can truly benefit them.
"In Latin America, governments have a credibility problem," says Mr. Sabot.
"Because they've tried things and failed, populations ask, `Why should this time be any different.'"
