Computer software "viruses" and lax safeguards in China "threaten the nation's security," the official Beijing Evening News said.
Computer-crime investigators are checking the capital's computer centers to combat high-tech subversives.
Of government agencies with computers, 80% don't have systems to protect their data, the newspaper said, and an estimated 90% of all microcomputers in China are infected by viruses, which can destroy files.
This indicates high potential to compromise government data and hurt China's fledgling information industry.
The Public Security Ministry's computer-crime task force, formed a few years ago, has distributed its own antivirus software.
But viruses have spread quickly because of hackers' efforts and rampant piracy of computer programs.
The government estimated one million personal computers are in use in China, but industry monitors put the total at three million and expect the number to grow to four million this year.
The Italian government will dock its employees' salaries each time they duck out to coffee bars.
The Civil Service Ministry said Italy needs to dismantle its ingrained coffee-break culture and emulate fellow European Union countries' delivery of public services.
The move was the latest in the ministry's effort to overhaul Italy's bureaucracy, known for its inefficiency despite all that caffeine power.
Steamed civil servants said their hard work merits frequent coffee breaks.
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur unveiled plans for France to develop its own information superhighway, with testing to start by year end.
To produce a report for drafting legislation for the project, he appointed Gerard Thery, who presided over France Telecom's modernization and the launch of the interactive Minitel service, now common in homes and businesses.
Mr. Balladur, who wants to create more jobs, suggested a "growth pact" to spur investment by allowing links among the France Telecom monopoly, cable television operators, TV stations, multimedia publishers, audiovisual producers and computer services operators.
The sell-off of 50.7% of a big Russian auto maker was canceled because of managers' illegal actions to acquire stock, the Itar-Tass news agency said.
Shares in the Gorky Automobile Factory, known as GAZ for its Russian initials, were to be distributed to citizens in exchange for privatization vouchers.
But the government found that GAZ management used $29.3 million in state credits, earmarked for developing engines, to buy vouchers on the open market.
These vouchers were won at the auction that ended Jan. 17 by about 15 front companies to prevent outside investors from gaining a large stake.
Retail sales in China last month climbed 22% to $13.7 billion from a year earlier, the official Economic Information Daily said.
The jump indicates continuing trouble for government efforts to slow economic growth, after a previous report that industrial output last month soared 33%.
Consumer buying was strongest in prosperous coastal areas, led by a 30% increase for retailers in Guangdong, a rich province adjacent to Hong Kong.
Even in poor inland regions, sales grew 13%.
A majority of South Korean exports last year went to developing nations, shifting from industrialized economies.
Shipments to the U.S., Japan and European Union totaled $39.11 billion, dropping to 47.6% of total Korean exports from 50.8% a year earlier and a peak of 70.5% in 1987; the decline has been blamed on uncompetitive quality of goods.
Exports to developing markets in Asia and the Mideast rose 16.4% to $42.37 billion last year, or 51.5% of the total, because of goods' competitive prices and Korean investment efforts.
Foreign ministers from the European Union and Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden began a last-ditch effort to agree by Tuesday on the four countries' entry into the 12-nation trade bloc.
Major obstacles include truck traffic, agriculture and fishing rights.
Last Sunday's Swiss vote to ban foreign truck transit through the Alps complicated difficulties with Austria, which wants to continue limiting trucks on its Alpine roads for a decade.
France fears the Swiss action could divert trucks to French roads.
On fishing rights, Norway wants immediate access to EU waters, resisted by Spain, as its fleet was banned from Norwegian waters in 1981.
This dispute could push the talks past the March 1 deadline.
If the issues are resolved by March 10, the European Parliament still could decide on the memberships before its June elections.
If the matter goes to the new assembly, the four countries would miss their target for admission by January.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
The northeastern Brazilian city of Fortaleza, a coastal resort popular with foreign tourists, declared a state of emergency because of an outbreak of 9,000 cases of cholera and acute diarrhea that have caused eight deaths in the past two months. . . .
The Uffizi art gallery in Florence, Italy, reopened the Michelangelo Room, damaged last May by a car bomb explosion.
Fifteen other rooms in the west wing are to be restored by year end.
