President Clinton nominated Deputy Defense Secretary William Perry to move up to the top slot at the Pentagon, but still faces deep doubts about the strength of the administration's national-security team.
Bobby Inman proposed having Mr. Perry replace him as the nominee for defense secretary last week, when Mr. Inman withdrew his own nomination, people familiar with the situation said.
Mr. Inman told White House aides that his views were largely the same as Mr. Perry's, and that the biggest difference between the two was that the deputy defense secretary possessed far more patience than he.
"Bill Perry is a real pro -- you can depend on him," President Clinton said yesterday in announcing the nomination at the White House.
Mr. Perry, 66 years old, is a mathematician and military technologist whom Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, has called "the father of Stealth technology."
Mr. Perry, who is held in high regard on Capitol Hill for the clarity and precision of his testimony, is expected to win Senate confirmation easily.
Sen. Dan Coats, one of the most conservative members of the armed services panel, said yesterday that Mr. Perry is "well-liked and well-respected."
His only concern, the Indiana Republican added, is that "the No. 1 job requires completely different skills.
You need to be a political operator, a budget battler, someone who can sit down with world leaders."
But in his year in the Pentagon's No. 2 slot, Mr. Perry has seen more of the world than most defense deputies, partly because he has pinch-hit when health problems prevented Defense Secretary Les Aspin from taking scheduled trips abroad.
The president said yesterday that Mr. Perry "played an important role in the recent breakthrough to eliminate Ukraine's nuclear weapons."
Robert Gates, the former director of central intelligence, said yesterday that Mr. Perry "has a very clearheaded view of the world."
But Mr. Perry has left little public record of his views on a broad range of foreign-policy issues, even though he has long participated in foreign-policy discussions at think tanks.
Mr. Perry can be forceful, but his generally low-key, even bland manner is similar to that of Secretary of State Warren Christopher and National Security Adviser Anthony Lake.
Because of his relative lack of foreign-policy experience, Mr. Perry's nomination doesn't appear to bring a strong new voice to a national security team that critics have said needs bolstering.
But in Democratic political circles, a consensus is growing that Mr. Clinton has another major foreign-policy problem: Mr. Lake.
Many Democrats believe that Mr. Lake hasn't provided the vision, coordination or high public profile that Mr. Clinton needs.
Mr. Clinton has invested little of his own prestige in foreign policy, and the rest of the team is filled with bland management types such as Mr. Christopher at the State Department, and now Mr. Perry at the Pentagon.
Mr. Clinton has taken small steps to address the problems.
Vice President Al Gore plays a larger role as spokesman on foreign policy, and Strobe Talbott is moving into the No. 2 spot at the State Department to help fill a void there.
But Democrats are concerned whether that will be enough, particularly since they now expect the Republicans to hit the administration hard on national-security issues while Mr. Clinton is doing well on domestic issues.
Even the unveiling of Mr. Perry was low key.
Instead of a grand Rose Garden ceremony, like the one held for Mr. Inman, the defense secretary was introduced to a small group of reporters.
And Mr. Clinton grew testy when he was asked what Mr. Perry brought to the job that Mr. Aspin didn't provide.
"I don't think the two things are related," Mr. Clinton said.
Mr. Perry's views are strongest on the need for an activist policy to help the defense industry stay healthy while it shrinks -- an area that appears to be his first love.
Indeed, in his White House comments yesterday, he said: "We read about the problems every day in Mogadishu, Sarajevo, Pyongyang, but we must not lose sight of the opportunities in this new post-Soviet world."
But the specific opportunity he then offered as an example wasn't a global vision of, say, expanding democracy or free-market capitalism, but instead of reforming the Pentagon's system of buying weapons and other goods.
Mr. Perry, who served as the Pentagon's acquisition czar during the Carter years, has expressed a kind of "tough love" approach to the defense industry.
He has shown sympathy for beleaguered defense contractors, but has repeatedly emphasized that he doesn't intend to subsidize companies to keep them alive, either directly by giving them contracts or indirectly by allowing them to export high-technology weapons.
Disturbed, for example, by a newspaper article last September that asserted the Pentagon's new defense industrial policy was partly a jobs program, he told a group of reporters that "nothing in this plan preserves jobs."
At the Pentagon over the last year, Mr. Perry has pushed a two-pronged approach for his defense industrial policy.
This approach distinguishes potential "dualuse" manufacturers from "defense-unique" concerns.
Under this approach, most of the defense industry is encouraged to integrate itself into the broad commercial sector and go "dual-use," serving the Pentagon as well as consumer and industrial markets.
Mr. Perry has said he is especially interested in seeing dual-use production in four main industrial areas: semiconductors, computers, telecommunications and advanced materials.
Only a small rump of the defense industry -- the part that makes nuclear submarines, tanks and other products that have no commercial application -- is considered eligible for subsidization.
As part of Mr. Aspin's "Bottom-Up Review" of how to reshape the U.S. military to fit the post-Cold War world, the Pentagon in September took the first step in making this policy explicit, saying it would ask General Dynamics Corp.'s Electric Boat unit to build another Seawolf attack submarine -- not because the sub is needed, but to keep alive the capability of building submarines.
Because Mr. Aspin appears to have deferred to Mr. Perry on questions of defense industrial policy in the past year, major changes in this area aren't likely.
But in the coming years, Mr. Perry may be inclined to shift Pentagon spending away somewhat from procurement and more toward research and development.
"Whatever else we do" in cutting the defense budget, he said in an October speech, "we should maintain our technology base."
To do that, he quickly went on to say, the procurement budget -- the money that actually goes to buying things -- would have to be cut even more.
"I would estimate that the procurement budget . . . will go down about 60%" between 1986 and 1996, he said.
"Therefore, there's going to be even more consolidation in the defense industry than has happened to date."
To find the money to maintain R&D spending, Mr. Perry is likely to look for even bigger cuts than already have been made in personnel and in the defense infrastructure, such as Defense Department laboratories and military maintenance depots.
That could lead him into conflicts both with the military and with Congress.
The Army especially resents the planned reductions in force structure that it already faces, and would be sure to balk at being told to make deeper cuts.
And many in Congress jealously protect the secure, high-wage jobs that defense labs and depots represent in their districts and states.
For months, Mr. Perry has been warning that he will push for even more base closings in the next scheduled round, in 1995, than the 31 major closures the Pentagon proposed this year.
"Even though people have regarded this '93 base closing as a major jolt, I can tell you quite candidly that the '95 base closing is going to be greater," he said in the October speech.
Mr. Perry may see those closures as an opportunity to help the defense industry by pushing some Pentagon spending into the private sector.
"I didn't have to be persuaded to take the job."
On reducing the defense establishment: "Reducing overhead is the most difficult management task that anyone can confront."
On cutting personnel as the defense budget declines: "Trade-offs between the size of the force and the readiness of the force will be made in favor of readiness."
On shrinking the defense industry: "The defense industrial base is going to have to be contracted to about one-third of what it was in the mid-1980s."
On defense-industry subsidies: "I explicitly reject the idea of supporting a defense company just to keep it in business. . . .
We fully expect several defense companies to go out of business, and we will stand by and watch that happen."
On North Korea: "It is quite predictable that if North Korea ends up with any number of nuclear weapons in their hands that the minimum danger we have is the danger of a nuclear arms race starting in the western Pacific, and the maximum danger, of course, is that nuclear war might actually break out."
On supporting research in defense technology (from "Defense Investment: A Strategy for the 1990s," December 1989): "The technology base program should focus on two different areas: Those technologies likely to lead to dramatic improvements in performance, such as microelectronics, supercomputers and advanced materials; and those technologies likely to lead to dramatic reductions in cost, such as computer-aided design (to reduce design costs), simulation technology (to reduce training costs) and computer-integrated manufacturing (to reduce production costs)."
