Sears, Roebuck & Co. has partly restored a variation of the sales-incentive practice that led to widespread charges of bilking consumers in its U.S. auto centers less than two years ago.
And the giant retailer may soon revive the practice even more broadly.
The charges, first brought by California officials in June 1992, alleged that Sears auto-center employees systematically recommended unnecessary repairs largely to earn more commission payments.
Sears ultimately paid $15 million in refunds and other costs to settle such charges in 41 states and 19 related class-action suits.
To end its public-relations nightmare, Sears also pledged to stop using the commission system and substitute a full salary plan.
Now it turns out that commissions never disappeared entirely from the Sears auto centers.
They continued for some employees and re-emerged for others in a different guise -- one that Sears says safeguards against abuse.
But authorities in several states say they plan to investigate the company's practice.
As part of a corporate restructuring in early 1993, Sears eliminated the job called service adviser -- the one covered by the old commission plan.
Then the company created a new post called service consultant.
Though many people lost their jobs, some of the old service advisers got posts as service consultants.
Also getting the new posts were Sears employees who hadn't worked in the shop but on the sales floor -- and who had continued getting commissions all along on products like car batteries and jumper cables.
Sears quietly put the new service consultants on a commission plan.
It expects them to earn at least 40% of their total pay in commissions on the sale and installation of tires, batteries, shock absorbers and struts.
The plan doesn't include brakes and front-end wheel-alignment work -- the services and products at the core of the 1992 commission scandal.
In October 1993, Sears went a step further.
In 25 of its 799 stores nationwide, the company began testing a new compensation plan that includes commissions for the brake and front-end work.
Sears also is testing an alternate plan that eliminates commissions altogether.
The company says it will choose one of the two plans this spring to roll out across the country.
Jim Thornton, the Sears official in charge of its auto centers, defended the use of commissions and cited safeguards he said should prevent a recurrence of the 1992 problems.
"We don't believe all commission is bad," said Mr. Thornton, vice president, automotive.
Mr. Thornton said the new service consultants aren't involved in actually evaluating repair needs -- unlike the old service advisers, who helped to inspect cars and diagnose the repairs that led to their commissions.
Repairs are now diagnosed solely by mechanics, who don't earn commissions.
They then pass their recommendations along to the service consultants, who write up the sale.
"There's no direct sale in the shop anymore," Mr. Thornton said.
"That's a major departure from where we were."
So far, there is no evidence of abuses at Sears's auto centers since the company implemented its new commission plans.
Still, authorities in several states that brought charges against Sears in 1992 said they were disturbed by the company's current behavior and planned to investigate further.
"What they're doing now sounds very similar to what they did then," said Derry L. Knight, deputy director for legal affairs with California's Department of Consumer Affairs.
The department first uncovered a pattern of unnecessary repairs at the auto centers after a year-long undercover investigation.
"I hope we're not going back to square one on this," he added.
Herschel T. Elkins, a senior assistant attorney general who helped supervise California's settlement with Sears, said the separation between the new service consultants and the mechanics "theoretically might work."
But, he asked, "are technicians going to feel they need to satisfy the people who are making the commissions?"
California's settlement with Sears didn't explicitly prohibit the payment of commissions, Mr. Knight said.
Even so, he added, the retailer's resumed payment of commissions "would be clearly contrary to what they publicly stated at the time of the settlement."
Sears did agree to eliminate commissions for the service advisers in its settlement with New Jersey.
"Our agreement defines the commission ban quite narrowly," said Lauren Carlton, a New Jersey deputy attorney general.
She said she now plans to investigate whether the new commission plan and job change in the auto centers breach Sears's agreement with the state.
"We're going to want to know more," she added.
A Sears spokesman, citing wording from a June 1992 news release, said the company explicitly pledged to eliminate commissions only for its now-defunct service adviser job.
The release didn't say "we would eliminate incentive compensation for everyone forever in the auto center," he said.
Another Sears spokesman noted: "The key is, at one time the people who were recommending the repair work got the commissions.
We eliminated that arrangement and have no plans to put it back into place."
The fraud allegations dealt a big blow to Sears's auto-center business, which dropped sharply in some areas after the scandal and has never fully recovered.
In 1992, Edward A. Brennan, the company's chairman, said the unit produced 9% of Sear's U.S. merchandise group revenue, which that year totaled $25.4 billion.
One Sears spokesman wouldn't offer an updated breakout of the auto-centers' performance, but said the company recently told analysts that the unit's results "were disappointing."
Last year, as part of its broad restructuring, Sears also reduced its auto-center business, eliminating major repairs and tune-ups to focus on a handful of products and services.
The unit now employs 23,000 people, down from 33,000 two years ago, Mr. Thornton says.
