London -- The most pressing artistic issue of our century, claimed the art critic of the least vulgar of the Murdoch newspapers in a cover story last month, is whether Matisse or Picasso "was the greater artist."
In this attempt to hype the latest Picasso exhibition three weeks before it even opened, the Sunday Times critic, Waldemar Jan-uszczak, not only reduced the achievements of Matisse and Picasso to a heavyweight boxing match, he also examined the status of their seconds: "I do not think that Francoise Gilot is the writer hated most fervently by the Picasso admirers -- that distinction probably rests with Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington."
Silly as such ballyhoo is, a point does emerge from it.
"Picasso: Sculptor and Painter," at the Tate Gallery until May 8, is an event comparable with the great Matisse exhibition seen in New York and Paris.
Unlike it, this show will not travel, as some of the works are too fragile to be moved a second time, and the diplomacy required to get them here was so great that it was just not possible to get most of the lenders to agree to a second venue as well.
Eight rooms are being used in the Tate show, with 160 works, 15 of which have never before been exhibited; half the works shown have never been seen in Britain.
Obviously this show will be a boost to tourism here, as art-world types will come by the planeload to see it.
But to experience the full action, you actually have to live here -- at least for the two weeks of BBC2's Picasso season, with its three films by Picasso's biographer, John Richardson; plus "Yo Picasso," "a racy TV biography starring Brian Cox as the artist"; "The Picasso Files," a look at "the artist's controversial politics"; and, inevitably, a film titled "Picasso Versus Matisse."
This last featured interviews with the man responsible for the entire jamboree, the art historian John Golding, who co-curated the show with his favorite pupil, Elizabeth Cowling.
In a further celebration, the Mayor Gallery on Cork Street on Friday opened a show of Dr. Golding's own large, colorful abstract paintings, and a book of his essays, "Visions of the Modern" (with much matter about both Picasso and Matisse), has just been published by Thames & Hudson and the University of California Press.
It was at Cannes in the summer of 1955 that Dr. Golding, then 26 years old, managed not to meet Picasso.
Jacqueline Roque, Picasso's final muse (and later his wife) told Dr. Golding, who was then writing his thesis on cubism, that the master was just not feeling well enough to see him.
Dr. Golding had wanted to ask him several questions about the relationship between his painting and his sculpture, and for nearly 40 years now he has been carrying on the conversation that never took place, by scrutinizing the works of art instead of the artist.
This amazing exhibition is the culmination of this silent dialogue, and it is a tribute to Dr. Golding's charm and seriousness of purpose that so many people, especially Picasso family members, were willing to lend to this show.
It began four years earlier, when Dr. Golding's term as a trustee of the Tate was just coming to an end, and the director, Nicholas Serota, approached him about mounting a Picasso show.
There had, in fact, been quite a large Picasso sculpture show at the Tate in 1967, put together by the late Roland Penrose, and, of course, there have been several blockbuster painting shows.
There has never before, however, been a show like this: As you walk around it, you can't help but see that some of the paintings and drawings are really sculptures waiting to be realized, and that some of the sculptures are really three-dimensional paintings.
Picasso, Dr. Golding does not hesitate to say, "was the greatest sculptor of the 20th century," as well as its best painter.
His claim is a large one.
"If one searches for a truly valid parallel for Picasso's role as a painter and a sculptor," Dr. Golding writes in his introduction to the Tate catalog, "for another artist who changed both the vocabulary and outward appearance of both art forms, one must go back much further in time and to a figure by whom Picasso was secretly obsessed: Michelangelo."
There are some key works in this exhibition.
The painting "Seated Nude With Crossed Legs" (1906) is "the single painting in which you feel the sculpture crisis coming," said Dr. Golding; "but I nearly didn't get it.
I had to travel to Prague, to convince the people at the Narodni Galeri that it was crucial to the show."
Dr. Golding then went on to do for me exactly what he'd done for the museum officials in Prague, and then again, in the case of "Head and Shoulders of a Woman (Fernande)" (1909), for the Art Institute of Chicago: He laid out the 160 photographs of the works he proposed to exhibit.
They made the case, as the sheer logic of their arrangement did for several other reluctant lenders.
Why is this exhibition so special?
There are, as Dr. Golding himself points out, plenty of works by Picasso in accessible collections all over the world, for "he was the most prolific artist who ever lived.
The question is getting the great ones, and I think we have some very great ones."
