Continued fluctuation between the value of Japan's yen and the dollar has sparked a flurry of securities that appeal to risk-tolerant private investors as well as the growing number of small hedge funds.
The American Stock Exchange has added three yen-warrant offerings since March 2, bringing to five the number of listed currency issues tied to the exchange rate of the yen.
And it expects to add another issue as early as this week.
The issuers are trying to capitalize on widespread anticipation that the value of the dollar will rise against the yen.
They note that the dollar is near its historic low against the yen and trade trends could force Japanese importers to buy more dollars, which could improve the exchange rate in favor of the dollar.
Late Friday, the yen was trading at 105 to the dollar.
The five yen warrants on the Amex are all "bear" warrants that increase in value only if the value of the dollar rises in relation to the yen.
Unlike most currency instruments, which tend to be short term, the yen warrants don't expire for two years, and when they expire, their value is settled in dollars rather than in delivery of any underlying currency.
Investors should realize they pay a hefty premium for the right to play the yen-dollar game.
For instance, new warrants issued by Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., a unit of American Express Co., are pegged at a ratio of about 104 yen to the dollar.
If that were the spot exchange rate in two years, the warrant would have a value of zero.
But investors paid $6.60 each for the warrants, including a 40-cent commission, which means the yen would have to fall to about 112 to the dollar for an investor to break even.
On the other hand, the warrants have considerable leverage, says Emmett Harty, president of Parallax Group, a Stamford, Conn., research group specializing in financially engineered products.
For instance, if the dollar rose to 120 yen in two years, a 15% rise from when the warrants were issued, the warrants would be valued at about $13 each, roughly a 100% gain.
Thus, "when you have volatility, you have a lot of entities wanting to take an opinion on that volatility," says Mr. Harty.
With these warrants, "those entities are individual investors, smallish money managers and a lot of small hedge funds."
March 2, the Amex added two million yen warrants issued by International Finance Corp., a part of the World Bank Group.
The next day, the exchange listed five million yen warrants sold by Lehman Brothers.
Wednesday, Paine Webber Group Inc. chimed in with five million yen warrants.
Lehman Brothers already had three million warrants listed on the exchange from an issue sold publicly in September.
It added new ones at a slightly lower yen-dollar ratio because of growing demand, says Michael Rulle, a Lehman Brothers managing director who heads equity-derivative products.
The September Lehman Brothers' issue, set at 106.27 yen to the dollar, was sold at $6.75 and traded as high as $13 when the dollar traded for 113 yen in January.
The higher warrant price reflected both the dollar's appreciation and stepped-up interest in the warrants, Mr. Rulle says.
Friday, they closed at 7 7/8, an increase of nearly 20%.
Ben Krause, an Amex senior vice president, says investors mainly buy the warrants as a hedging tool to help maintain the value of yen-denominated assets such as stocks and bonds.
"It's a kind of insurance policy," he says.
"The value of yen-denominated assets when you convert back is worth less if the dollar strengthens, but the warrants become more valuable."
If the dollar doesn't rise in value "the warrant may become less valuable, or may expire worthless -- but the underlying asset generally is as strong or stronger than before."
The mushrooming number of hedge funds also drives demand, Mr. Harty of the Parallax Group says.
Hedge funds are investment pools of wealthy individuals who bet on some investments to go up and others to go down, a method expected to hedge against broad market swings.
Because hedge funds tend to be secretive, exact figures are hard to come by.
But Antoine Bernheim, publisher of the U.S. Offshore Funds Directory, says there's "no question" hedge funds have proliferated in the past several years.
Since beginning his directory in 1990 with 78 listings, he expects "well over 200 listings" this year.
His directory generally includes only those funds with more than $10 million in assets, and many upstarts are much smaller.
Big-time, globe-trotting hedge-fund gurus like George Soros have long played the currency markets using various financial instruments and dealing directly with big trading institutions.
(Mr. Soros recently acknowledged his funds lost $600 million in two days betting wrongly on the direction of the yen.)
Smaller players have less access, so they rely on securities traded on an exchange.
The warrant issuers enjoy several advantages, including the commissions on the sale, as well as the additional capital they raise.
Of course, the issuers have to hedge their own exposure when the warrants expire in two years by purchasing forward currency contracts and options to offset the risk.
For them, the yen warrants are profitable because underwriters can get "economies of scale" in interbank trading that aren't available to the investors who buy the exchange-listed warrants, Mr. Harty says.
