The scene is repeated regularly: Vice President Al Gore appears with a group of U.S. industrialists to announce a new government-business partnership to march forward together into a brighter, high-tech future.
The first was with auto makers to build a new "green" car.
Then came cable and telephone companies to build an information superhighway.
And just this month, Mr. Gore joined with semiconductor companies to research computer chips.
The goal is a kind of new-wave industrial policy, which Mr. Gore calls a "uniquely American model" of government and business cooperation -- one that likely would have been rejected by both the free-marketeers of previous Republican administrations and by the business-skeptics of previous Democratic administrations.
Yet in entering this new era of cooperation, the Clintonites haven't checked all their populist impulses at the door, and business leaders are finding that those leanings sometimes clash with the Democrats' new desire to cooperate.
The tensions sometimes come out in dealings with the very industries the administration is trying hardest to cooperate with.
The telecommunications industry, for example, is being jawboned to take upon itself the expensive task of wiring every school and hospital in the country.
While the administration promotes alliances such as the one among the auto makers to develop a cleaner-running car, it also pledges to take a harder look at all sorts of potential antitrust violations.
And while the White House wants to help cutting-edge businesses such as the biotechnology industry, the industry complains that the president's health-care plan, with its provisions for an advisory council on breakthrough drugs and possible price controls, has driven away investors.
"There's a clear contradiction" between the populist and industrial-policy tendencies of the Clinton camp, asserts Decker Anstrom, president of the National Cable Television Association.
The anxieties that run below the surface of both government and business raise a larger question: Is it possible in a country with America's social and political structure to have a clear and consistent Japanese-style industrial policy?
Most analysts are skeptical.
"If you were to look at other countries where business and government seem to be united, a corporatist industrial policy where the interests of the little man are largely ignored is possible," says Paul Krugman, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who has written extensively about industrial policy.
"But there's a big populist streak in the history of American politics.
Democrats and the Clinton administration in general don't get along well with the corporate world."
Nowhere are these strains clearer than in the cable industry, where a shaky proposed merger between Tele-Communications Inc. and Bell Atlantic Corp. collapsed just hours after the Federal Communications Commission -- which is headed by a Gore friend and was interpreting legislation Mr. Gore championed in the Senate -- ordered a cut in cable rates.
The companies' criticism of the FCC action has opened the door for industry officials such as Mr. Anstrom to complain about a disconnection between the administration's desire to have the information superhighway speed ahead and its backing of rate cuts.
"All that costs money" at a time when recent regulatory decision will cut the cable industry's revenue by 17%, Mr. Anstrom contends.
"I think there's an enormous amount of anxiety and concern in our industry."
Administration officials counter that while they don't want to stifle development of new services and technologies, they also don't want to see them developed with funds raised by "monopolistic" rates on cable television.
Business leaders, meanwhile, have their own contradictory feelings about cooperating with government.
Many have groused for years that their Japanese and European counterparts get more cooperation from their governments.
Yet the Clinton administration has often found business leery and suspicious of its intentions.
That has been a complication in the green car venture.
In an interview, Mr. Gore discloses that he conducted a series of unpublicized meetings with the Big Three's chief executive officers to get them to agree to join forces with the government in the new, 10-year joint project to develop a more energy-efficient and environmentally sound car.
Mr. Gore says the meetings -- some with the chief executives individually and at least two in the White House with them as a group -- were necessary both to convince the auto makers that the government would live up to its long-term funding commitment and to assuage fears they would somehow be penalized if they failed to develop a new car in a decade's time.
Mr. Gore says that as they sat around a table in his office down the hall from the Oval Office, the executives wondered: "Is there a hidden agenda?
Are they going to use this against us?
What about the consequences of the industry publicly saying we will agree to try and reach that goal?"
But the biggest problem, Mr. Gore says, is that "there was on both sides of the relationship an accumulated backlog of mistrust and animosity and confrontation and adversarial agendas that both sides needed to work through."
Senior administration officials say that the globalization of the marketplace in the 1990s dictates that some sort of new relationship between government and business be worked out.
They argue that there has been a thinly disguised cooperative relationship between government and large segments of the business community for decades, defined first by the industrial push of World War II and then by the enormous defense budgets and militaryindustrial complex of the Cold War.
Now, the business-government relationship "has to come out of the closet," says Labor Secretary Robert Reich, one of the country's leading thinkers on the subject of business-government relations.
"And that creates some awkwardness on all sides."
The administration, which prefers to call its vision a "competitiveness policy" rather than industrial policy, insists that it will use what Mr. Gore calls "a light touch" in assisting business.
One reason for the light touch is that, as a self-styled New Democrat, Mr. Clinton doesn't want to be accused of interfering too much in the free market.
But another reason is financial: The administration simply doesn't have a lot of money at its disposal to pay for a heavier role in some of its dream ventures.
Recently, for example, Mr. Gore, Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary, Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown and a roomful of business executives launched a new program of joint government-business research into semiconductors.
The air was filled with high-flung rhetoric; Mr. Brown called it "a historic partnership" and Mr. Gore hailed "a new level of cooperation."
But when pressed, Ms. O'Leary concedes that all the hoopla is over a mere $4.8 million appropriation, which could grow to as much as $25 million over a longer period.
The broader problem for the administration is reconciling the new urge to build bridges and the old inclination to tell business how to behave.
Some business leaders see those desires colliding in the administration's health-care reform plans.
Biotechnology companies, for instance, represent the kind of cutting-edge, American-led technology that the administration says it wants to help create the jobs of tomorrow.
But industry leaders complain that the uncertainties created by the Clinton health plan are helping slow investment in the industry.
They cite, among other things, one study showing that more than $1.5 billion was invested in industry public offerings in 1992, but that the total dropped below $1.5 billion in 1993, even though there were more companies engaged in more-expensive research in the latter year.
"When you're a growing industry . . . the curve should have gone up steeply," says Peter Teeley, Washington representative of Amgen Inc., a leading biotechnology firm.
Amgen's own stock has fallen to about $40 from a high of $78.
To address many business concerns, the administration is slowly building an organizational structure that guarantees more high-level dialogue between the government and high-tech business leaders for years to come.
For instance, a new National Information Infrastructure Advisory Council, made up of communications and cable company representatives and government officials, began meetings last month; the Commerce Department has set up a technology committee to bring together government and Big Three engineers to work on the green car, and is assigning one official the full-time task of helping smaller companies get a piece of government research grants earmarked for the project.
But the administration also makes clear that it expects some things in return.
The administration heeded corporate calls to cut the federal budget deficit, loosen export controls, pass the North American Free Trade Agreement and get tougher in opening Japanese markets, Labor Secretary Reich says; now, he says, the administration hopes for some aid on such issues as overhauling the health-care system and improving worker training and education programs.
"Every step along the way we have sought to help American business in a far more activist manner than previous administrations," he says.
"The question is what kind of role will business take at this juncture."
