Deere & Co., helped by strengthening demand from the agricultural sector, reported fiscal first-quarter earnings substantially higher than Wall Street had been expecting.
The report caused Deere shares to jump 6.8% and sparked buying in a broad range of economically sensitive stocks.
The Moline, Ill., maker of agricultural equipment reported net income of $87 million, or $1.02 a share, in the latest period, ended Jan. 31, compared with the year-earlier period's operating loss of $36.9 million, or 48 cents a share; in last year's quarter, a big accounting charge gave the company a net loss of $1.14 billion, or $14.78 a share.
Revenue rose 21% to $1.73 billion from $1.42 billion.
The per-share earnings were far above the about 48 cents many analysts had projected.
"They really beat the Street," said Karen A. Ubelhart, an analyst with Lehman Brothers, who had been carrying the highest projection of 75 cents a share.
"It's a heck of an earnings surprise."
The results also marked the third consecutive quarter in which the company bested projections.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Deere shares climbed $5.25, to $82.50.
Deere's sales of agricultural equipment, at $887 million, were up a solid 29% from the year-ago period.
The upturn reflects increased demand from farmersless burdened by debt and encouraged by lower interest rates -- who have begun to replace their aging combines and tractors.
Farmers who have held off "simply have to replace their equipment," a Deere spokesman said.
"The farmer's psychology is much more optimistic" than it was in the recent past, said Ms. Ubelhart of Lehman Brothers.
"They've wanted to hold on to money even when they've had a strong balance sheet.
Now, it's a situation of feeling rich and, in fact, being rich."
Deere said it expects world-wide production tonnage for 1994 to be about 13% higher than in 1993, despite weakness in the European market.
That region's agricultural sector "remains in the midst of fundamental change," because of changing agricultural policies, said Deere's chairman and chief executive officer, Hans W. Becherer.
As a result, analysts expect Deere to continue to trim its European operation.
The company said that while the long-term sales trend is downward in Europe, it expects agricultural equipment sales this year to about match those of 1993.
Analysts cited Deere's increased productivity and cost-cutting measures as big reasons for the first-quarter results.
In recent years, Deere has cut nearly a third of its work force.
The move has been in line with other U.S. manufacturers that have slimmed down since the 1980s.
"These companies are so lean now," said Barry Bannister, an analyst with S.G. Warburg.
"As the demand returns, it's going to be green acres for Deere and their competitors."
