Viacom Inc. is preparing to raise its $9.3 billion bid for Paramount Communications Inc. to stay alive in the contest with QVC Network Inc., according to people familiar with the situation.
The new bid could come as early as today, according to one of the people.
Viacom could boost the value of its bid by raising the cash component, currently at $105 a share for 50.1% of Paramount shares; it could attempt to bolster the value of securities being offered for the remaining 49.9%, or it could do a combination of both.
If Viacom doesn't raise its bid by 5 p.m.
Friday, QVC could win the contest, provided that holders of 50.1% of Paramount stock tender their stock to QVC's bid, currently valued at $10.1 billion, or about $84.37 a share.
In conversations with investors and analysts last week, Viacom executives and advisers hinted that they would return with a higher bid, indicating that they wouldn't have gone to the trouble of putting together the $8.4 billion acquisition of Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. just to walk away from the Paramount contest.
The Blockbuster deal provides Viacom with $1.25 billion in cash to sweeten the cash portion of its bid.
"My belief is they'll come back with a higher bid by Friday," said entertainment industry analyst Lisbeth Barron of S.G. Warburg & Co.
"It would be shocking if they didn't."
Viacom used a device called a variable common right in its proposed acquisition of Blockbuster.
That device is supposed to provide extra compensation to Blockbuster holders in the event of a decline in Viacom shares.
Some traders have speculated that Viacom could offer something similar to Paramount holders.
QVC shares rose 87.5 cents to $43.50 on the Nasdaq Stock Market yesterday amid continued speculation that Viacom would come back with a higher offer.
Viacom Class B nonvoting shares fell 37.5 cents to $39.125 yesterday on the American Stock Exchange.
Each bidder's stock tends to rise if it appears that it will lose the contest, and tends to fall if it appears that it will win.
QVC's stock has risen steadily from $39.25 on Jan. 10, after Viacom made a lower-than-expected bid for Paramount.
Mark Dickstein, a stock trader who owns Paramount shares, said, "I expect Viacom to try to give QVC a false sense of security by bidding just enough to keep the process alive" -- and then coming back with a much higher bid on the "final" deadline of Feb. 1.
Early last week, Viacom took the position that its current offer was really worth more than QVC's, by arguing that QVC shares should really trade at $26 a share, and that Viacom B shares, which would be issued to finance $2.2 billion of the current Viacom bid, should trade at $55 a share instead of their current market value of $39.125.
Ms. Barron notes that the acquisition of Blockbuster without the incurrence of extra debt gives Viacom more flexibility to raise its Paramount bid without stretching its balance sheet past the danger point.
Ms. Barron estimates that if both bidders raised their debt to the point where cash flow would cover interest payments two times over, Viacom could outbid QVC by $9 a Paramount share, or $1.1 billion.
But she notes that QVC could strengthen its own balance sheet by obtaining more cash from partner BellSouth Corp.
Paramount stock ended at $78.75, up 25 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Viacom kept the four-month-old bidding war alive Jan. 7 by announcing the Blockbuster merger and restructuring its offer for Paramount to include more cash without changing the overall value.
But that change came only hours before the previous deadline, confusing and angering traders who didn't immediately realize that Viacom had reduced the value of securities being offered for 49.9% of Paramount.
If Viacom makes a higher bid today that could be an effort to make its terms known well in advance of the Friday deadline.
Paramount has set Feb. 1 as its deadline for both bidders to submit their highest offers.
