New York -- Sometimes we get so caught up with the excitement of being part of the great information superhighway, about buying a CD-ROM, about telling our VCRs to tape a public-television program on one channel while we watch the Menendez brothers on Court TV, that we don't recognize the important moments in our lives.
They're not always subtle, but for one reason or another, even in this age of total recall, we miss them.
But more and more young people like me are experiencing what could only be called a Frank Sinatra moment.
I was strolling down 34th Street, which was crowded with holiday shoppers.
I walked past Macy's and, without thinking, wandered into a festively decorated music store.
A bunch of guys in colorful baggy pants and sweatshirts were hanging out near the rap titles.
So was an ominous-looking store clerk with dark sunglasses.
I looked for a less-crowded corner of the store and found myself in front of a cardboard display for a new CD.
It had Luther Vandross.
Gloria Estefan.
All singing with Frank Sinatra on his new album "Duets" (Capitol, $12.99, currently No. 16 on Billboard's Top-200 Albums chart).
Inexplicably, I bought it.
I was sitting in a subway car and heading home before I realized what I had done.
It was an epiphany.
Much like the moment I found myself suggesting to a friend that she buy a computer before the end of the year for tax reasons.
You must understand my confusion.
For me, Frank Sinatra represented everything that happened this century before I was born.
Everything I never experienced and would never understand, like Eisenhower or girdles, or the excitement over color television.
Didn't we always have color television?
For the longest time, I thought Frank Sinatra was black and white.
No colors, no youth, the kind of thing only old men at the local Veterans of Foreign Wars chapter and their blue-haired wives would buy tickets to see weeks in advance.
They'd steer their ship-sized gas-guzzling automobiles to the show from the congested suburban mall parking lots with "New York, New York" blasting at earpiercing volumes.
They'd be wearing old shiny suits and their best ties.
They'd be reminiscing about Bob Hope's performances for the troops somewhere in the South Pacific, and they could remember the day JFK was killed.
Forget that.
They could remember what they were doing the day Pearl Harbor was bombed.
There are dozens of Time-Life books dedicated to summarizing the important historical events in the lives of Frank Sinatra fans.
Frank Sinatra fans belong to the Rotary Club and wear tie clips.
At some point in their lives, polyester suits were acceptable but female managers were not.
For them, cigarettes may have smelled bad but they didn't kill you, and neither did nuclear energy, electric power lines, or French fries.
They didn't grow up knowing about couch potatoes, or for that matter, Spandex.
Scandal, for them, was a miniskirt, not Madonna acting out sexual fantasies in front of millions of strangers.
I don't dress like them.
I don't act like them.
I don't drink what they drink.
Frank Sinatra fans and I have nothing in common.
Music is that way.
It identifies generations: You are what you listen to.
That's why I'm so terrified to be the owner of a Frank Sinatra CD.
It's like learning how to mix a martini or putt.
It's like going to the dealership and recognizing the practicality of an Oldsmobile, or even worse, a station wagon.
It's like wearing ties every day and buying an appointment book.
It's like trading in your backpack for a briefcase.
It's like having just one drink when someone invites you to have a drink.
It's like going to work every day and one day finding yourself saying, "You have to learn how to network."
It's like finally paying off all of your student loan.
It's like learning what IRA means, why points are not just bad marks on a license but costly for a mortgage as well, and worrying about your credit record.
It's discovering how you can put a year's worth of relaxation into a two-week vacation.
It's going to bed at the same time and getting up at the same time every day.
Old Blue Eyes scares the Bejeezus out of me.
But here I am, listening to Frank Sinatra.
U2's Bono sings "I've Got You Under My Skin," with the Chairman of the Board.
It's like watching Mick Jagger dancing a polka with a martini in his hand.
I can't help it.
I haven't even hit 30 yet and I am getting old.
I am terrified that I am reaching the point where I might, without thinking, mention Bob Dylan and Sinatra in the same sentence.
But it isn't all bad, especially if you compare it to my first sip of scotch.
A taste for scotch is acquired, my dad once said.
I think the same goes for Sinatra.
So I'm not breaking out scotch and the Sinatra CD every time friends stop by.
I'm not ready for that.
But I do sample the CD once in a while.
I don't know how to dance to it, but it's good background music when I'm reading the Sunday paper.
What's more, in "Under My Skin," Sinatra actually sounds better than Bono, who is one of my favorite hipsters but sounds like he is moaning for most of the song.
Besides, I understand none of the artists actually sang with Sinatra in the studio.
They sang over special phone lines.
I can relate to that.
Duets on an answering machine.
Mr. Vogel writes the Journal's Credit Markets column.
