Ford Motor Co., which has been trying to sell First Nationwide Financial Corp. since November, has received two bids for the unprofitable thrift unit, each estimated at about $1 billion, people familiar with the offers said.
One of the bidders is Gerald J. Ford, a Texas investor who heads Madison Financial Inc., a Dallas-based thrift.
He is believed to have the inside edge over a rival offer being made jointly by Los Angeles-based Great Western Financial Corp., one of the largest U.S. thrifts, and Lehman Brothers Inc., the investment banking unit of American Express Co. that is being spun off.
Although the Great Western/Lehman bid has a nominally higher value, it carries more conditions, such as additional protection from First Nationwide's portfolio of problem loans, people on Wall Street said.
Ford is expected to retain at least a portion of some $1 billion in nonperforming loans in order to sell the unit.
Mr. Ford's bid is contingent upon financing, which he is now lining up through a private placement of equity and is expected to complete within weeks.
Mr. Ford, who has no connection to Ford Motor or former president Gerald R. Ford, couldn't be reached for comment.
The two bids for First Nationwide were first reported Friday in the Washington Post.
People close to the First Nationwide deal said there have been other bidders, but they appear to have dropped out.
Ford and First Nationwide executives have said they won't comment on speculation of divestitures or acquisitions.
But Ford Chairman Alexander Trotman and other Ford officials have done nothing in recent weeks to discourage talk that First Nationwide may be sold soon, closing one of the more unsuccessful of Ford's efforts to diversify during the 1980s.
Ford bought the big thrift in 1985 from National Intergroup Inc. for $493 million.
Since then, Ford has invested $707 million to offset losses related to bad commercial loans.
It's not clear whether either of the offers now on the table would allow Ford to book a profit from unloading First Nationwide.
First Nationwide, with assets of $16 billion, hasn't turned a profit since 1990.
Last year, the San Francisco-based thrift posted a loss of $55 million, largely reflecting bad investments in the apartment and commercial real estate business.
Although Great Western hopes to expand its thrift operations with the First Nationwide bid, Lehman Brothers is participating solely in order to sell the bulk of First Nationwide's problem real estate loans.
Lehman has become a buyer of both distressed real estate loans as well as performing loans.
It recently purchased $836 million in performing loans from Northeast Federal and $100 million both performing and nonperforming loans from Summit Bancorp.
