GE Capital Corp., in a bid to sharply expand its business catering to individual investors, announced a $2.2 billion takeover bid for Kemper Corp., a money management, brokerage and insurance company.
But Kemper rejected the $55-a-share proposal.
Nevertheless, GE Capital, the huge and highly profitable financial services unit of General Electric Co., appears to be moving forward with what could become an outright hostile bid.
GE said it could sweeten its offer if it obtained additional information about Kemper's troubled real estate holdings.
Kemper shares soared on the news, climbing $16.125, or 39%, to $57 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Kemper's chairman, David Mathis, said in a March 2 letter to GE Chairman John F. Welch that "we strongly believe that a sale of the company at this time is not in the best interest of our stockholders."
However, he said the proposal will be reviewed Thursday by Kemper's directors at a regularly scheduled board meeting.
Mr. Mathis said in the letter, which was released by GE, that he discussed GE's proposal with board members, but indicated that the full board didn't meet to formally review the proposal.
The GE Capital bid for Kemper is what Wall Street takeover specialists call a "bear hug," an unsolicited bid that is made public to put pressure on the target company's directors to consider the proposal seriously.
Typically, this maneuver stops short of a formal hostile tender offer for the target's shares.
This is the second major proposed takeover in the past week.
Last week Martin Marietta Corp. agreed to purchase Grumman Corp. for $1.93 billion, only to see Northrop Corp. launch a $2.04 billion counterbid.
While unfriendly acquisitions are rare in the financial-services industry, GE Capital appears ready to take that route because of its desire to strengthen its mutual fund and money management businesses.
GE Capital is one of the largest finance companies in the U.S., and has been trying to build its services to individual investors with a spate of recent acquisitions.
Kemper, based in Long Grove, Ill., has $70 billion in assets under management.
"Kemper would be the flagship of our major thrust in the asset management business," Mr. Welch said in a letter to Mr. Mathis.
Clearly, GE wants to keep the pressure on Kemper's management.
GE went public with its rejected offer because "we believe it would be helpful for all of us to hear the views of your shareholders," said Gary Wendt, chief executive of GE Capital, in a letter to Mr. Mathis dated yesterday.
He added pointedly, "Let me reiterate our sincere intention to accomplish this transaction with you, your colleagues in management and Kemper's board of directors."
People on Wall Street say part of GE's strategy is to drum up support in advance of Kemper's annual meeting on May 11, and there is actually still time to recommend a slate of new directors.
Kemper could find it a tough to convince shareholders that the bid isn't in their best interest.
About 70% of the company's stock is held by institutions, which are more likely to side with a bidder who offers a premium for the company's shares, takeover experts say.
And the makeup of the company's owners could make Kemper's defense difficult.
Stockholders include well-known hedge fund managers such as George Soros and Michael Steinhardt, and other smart-money investors such as Leon Cooperman of Omega Advisers, according to regulatory filings.
They couldn't be reached for comment last night.
One person close to the situation said GE is making the bid principally to get in on the boom in mutual funds, joining a scramble that last year saw Pittsburgh's Mellon Bank Corp. agree to acquire Dreyfus Corp. for nearly $1.9 billion.
This person said the Kemper asset that most interests GE is its $70 billion in money management assets, including $48 billion in mutual funds.
Kemper's mutual funds could be sold through GE's existing brokerage unit, Kidder, Peabody & Co.
But despite a booming market for mutual funds, Kemper has actually been running in place.
It didn't increase its assets under management last year, and lost $1.6 billion in mutual funds assets, according to Dalbar Financial Services, a Boston consulting firm.
Outflows of money-market funds exceeded the growth of other funds.
Still, Mr. Mathis has received good marks for paring the company's operations.
Last year, Kemper shed its property and casualty insurance operations to concentrate on running its money management, life insurance and securities-brokerage businesses.
The largest transaction involved trading its reinsurance and risk-management operation back to its former parent, Lumbersmens Mutual Casualty Co., for stock valued at more than $600 million.
Kemper reported 1993 net income of $235.5 million, including losses on discontinued operations, in contrast to a 1992 loss of $203.4 million.
But its stock has lagged behind those of many other financial services concerns.
The company has been hobbled for several years by serious problems with its real estate portfolio, and by long-running difficulties with its brokerage operation.
There have been recent indications, however, that Kemper may have put the worst of its problems behind it.
Better-than-expected results for the fourth quarter of 1993 seemed to confirm that Kemper was mounting a comeback.
A restructuring that got under way in 1992 has changed the company drastically, concentrating its focus on what it considers its core businesses, and reducing earnings volatility.
In addition, the real estate problems, which repeatedly dismayed investors in recent years by requiring big write-downs, appear to have come under control.
The Kemper Securities brokerage business, which Kemper unsuccessfully put on the block last summer, remains lackluster, however.
The company's two life insurance companies, Federal Kemper Life Assurance Co., a term-life insurance and annuity company, and Kemper Investors Life Insurance Co., an annuity company, together reported $829.8 million in life insurance and annuity premiums last year, according to A.M. Best Co.
Last year, life insurance contributed $90.2 million to Kemper's operating profit while asset management contributed $99.1 million.
Its brokerage firms had a loss of $3.7 million, while the company's real estate operations showed a loss of $257.7 million.
For GE Capital, the acquisition would represent another step toward expanding its annuity business.
Last year, GE Capital bought United Pacific Life Insurance Co., another annuity company, from Reliance Group Holdings Inc. for $550 million.
It also bought Great Northern Insured Annuity Corp., a major seller of annuities through commercial banks, from Weyerhauser Corp. for about $525 million.
"They see growth in the annuity market," said Larry Mayewski, senior vice president at A.M. Best.
"They want to move in with companies that have a presence, and support them with capital."
As the baby boom generation matures, its members are expected to buy more annuities and other savings vehicles, creating opportunities for life insurers.
Randall Smith contributed to this article.
