South Korea's domestic political debate over North Korea's nuclear ambitions is taking on an increasingly anti-American tone, complicating U.S. efforts to rein in the North.
In the midst of this debate, President Kim Young-Sam has remained silent recently, exasperating Washington and leaving even some Korea analysts puzzled.
That silence matters because the year-long negotiations over North Korea's suspected nuclear ambitions could revert to a stony confrontation if Pyongyang doesn't fulfill its recent promise to grant international inspectors access to its nuclear sites.
Any perceived foot dragging by Pyongyang will revive talk of sanctions, which South Korean opposition politicians are portraying as an American provocation that could lead to war.
They're likewise critical of U.S. plans to place Patriot missiles and Apache helicopters in South Korea.
That criticism has helped disrupt longstanding plans to upgrade the U.S. military presence in South Korea.
From the beginning, political analysts say, President Kim has waffled on the North Korean nuclear issue.
He has darted enigmatically from soft line to hard line and back again, at times forcing U.S. policy makers to trim their strategies to accommodate his political constraints.
"President Kim is unskilled in foreign policy," says Ahn Chung Si, professor of political science at Seoul National University.
"His operational code is tuned to domestic issues.
It's made him naive about the need for hard thinking on foreign affairs."
The confrontation over North Korea's nuclear program coincides with a rising tide of anti-Americanism in South Korea, despite the strong alliance between Washington and Seoul.
Over the past six months, lawmakers and demonstrators have decried what they perceive as a U.S.-led plot to open the Korean rice market to imports; a Washington-hatched conspiracy to cut South Korea out of negotiations with Pyongyang over the nuclear issue, and questionable motives behind the proposed introduction to South Korea of new U.S. weaponry, particularly the Patriot missiles and Apache copters.
Such sentiment is expected to boil over if the standoff between Washington and Pyongyang leads to sanctions.
Pyongyang said recently that it would allow members of the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect its seven declared nuclear plants, but didn't set a specific date.
North Korean immigration officials have yet to issue travel visas for the inspection team, prompting some administration officials here to doubt the sincerity of Pyongyang's announcement.
North Korea's announcement compelled the IAEA to delay its decision on whether to refer the matter to the United Nations Security Council, which could lead directly to sanctions.
Many South Koreans regard the prospect of an embargo against North Korea as a reckless provocation inspired by a bellicose U.S.
The concern is understandable: North Korea has said it would consider sanctions "a declaration of war."
South Koreans have the most to lose if North Korea lashes out, whether through an all-out assault or random terrorism.
The debate in South Korea about its role in the standoff would have been unthinkable under the military regimes that controlled South Korea before the election a year ago of President Kim, a former dissident and the country's first civilian leader in 30 years.
Under his administration, vocal opposition has flourished.
But the freer political atmosphere he long championed has lately proved painful for the president, a consummate politician with a keen populist touch.
His approval ratings have slipped to about 60% from 90% late last year, before the Kim government finally buckled to foreign pressure and signed the Uruguay Round trade agreement, which eventually will pry open South Korea's protected rice market.
The decline reflects public discontent with Mr. Kim over his inability to protect rice farmers as well as his ambivalence on the North Korea issue.
Although he states repeatedly that South Korea's interests in the standoff converge with America's, he has also tried to avoid sounding like an echo of Washington.
Thus, he tends to assume a hawkish posture when the U.S.-North Korean dialogue stabilizes, and counsels restraint when it intensifies.
"When the negotiations turn heated, the policy is to go slow," says an exasperated Kim administration official.
"When it cools off, the policy is to harden our stance."
Policy signals from the White House have also been muddled at times.
But because North Korea's nuclear program isn't a grassroots issue in the U.S., public opinion on the confrontation isn't so much of a factor in the U.S. as it is here.
"The opposition is critical, saying we are too dependent on Washington, but the criticism is not warranted," complains a Kim administration spokesman.
"We have tried to do our best to send the message that the U.S.-North Korea dialogue is beneficial in that it would eventually encourage talks between North and South."
Unfortunately, says the spokesman, North Korea has resisted direct talks with South Korea, leaving the Kim administration exposed to attack from the opposition.
Days after North Korea's move to abandon its nuclear treaty, South Korea implored Washington hard-liners not to convene the U.N. Security Council immediately to discuss sanctions.
In November, when reports surfaced that the U.S. was considering a "package deal" of incentives to entice North Korea to the negotiating table, President Kim turned hawk.
At a summit meeting in Washington, he discouraged the U.S. from appeasing North Korea with the package, and insisted on having the final say on whether the two allies would agree to suspend joint military exercises in exchange for international inspection of North Korea's nuclear plants.
Mr. Kim's tough stance followed outrage in Seoul that the U.S. overture to North Korea would lead to diplomatic ties between Washington and Pyongyang.
Editorials and politicians warned that Washington was trying to cut a deal behind President Kim's back.
"This is a perfect example of how the administration is conducting foreign policy by reacting to local headlines," says a former Korean diplomat.
"President Kim's announcement took everybody by surprise."
A month later, with the consensus growing in the U.S. that Pyongyang had developed at least one or two crude atomic weapons and with hard-liners in Washington bellowing for action, President Kim said publicly that there was little evidence to confirm such reports.
