Each year Freedom House, a New York-based human rights organization, rates countries on political and civil rights.
Their latest report lists the United States as one of 29 nations that are truly free.
But Freedom House notes this is "no sign of perfection"; problems cited for the U.S. include election laws favoring entrenched incumbents and "significant controversies over the sometimes strangely shaped legislative districts designed to guarantee the election of racial minorities."
Racial gerrymandering has become enough of a blight on America's political system that it's now being cited as a real problem by a leading human-rights group.
It is therefore significant that late last month a three-judge federal panel issued a unanimous decision that Louisiana's bizarrely shaped Congressional districts are an unconstitutional racial gerrymander.
The court said the state had gone too far in packing black voters into two districts in order to guarantee minorities would win.
The Fourth District is depicted here (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Jan. 10, 1994), snaking around the perimeter of the state.
Ed Adams, a black city councilman who sued to overturn the districts, says the decision is a welcome step away "from a segregated society where we see everything in terms of color."
The Louisiana decision will likely be appealed to the Supreme Court.
Last year, the court ruled for the first time that districts drawn for the sole purpose of segregating voters by race resembled a form of "political apartheid" and could be unconstitutional.
In Shaw vs. Reno, which challenged a serpentine 190-mile-long North Carolina district, the court noted such racially packed districts reinforce "impermissible racial stereotypes," namely that members of a minority group "think alike, share the same political interests, and will prefer the same candidates."
We would add that they also go against the long-held view that individual rights, not group rights, are enshrined in the Constitution.
Indeed, the Voting Rights Act clearly renounces "a right to have members of a protected class elected in numbers equal to their proportion of the population."
But Justice Department lawyers have twisted the act to effectively require a spoils system that would lead to a certain racial outcome.
Some black elected officials cheered Justice on for self-interested reasons: racial gerrymanders give them safe, protected seats that don't require them to build political alliances across racial lines or tolerate opposition from other potential black leaders.
John Payton learned that.
Last month, the Congressional Black Caucus effectively forced Mr. Payton, President Clinton's choice to be assistant attorney general for civil rights, to withdraw because he declined to strongly support the continued drawing of race-conscious districts.
Still, some black leaders are having second thoughts.
Reps. Craig Washington and John Lewis have worried that racial gerrymandering could dilute minority voting power because it means more Members of Congress will have lily-white districts and might feel free to shortchange minority concerns.
Princeton Professor Carol Swain, an expert on blacks in Congress, argues that blacks can't easily increase their current numbers in legislative bodies if they are corralled into a few "super-black" districts.
Ms. Swain notes there are many recent examples of blacks who've made appeals across racial lines and won white votes.
Senator Carol Moseley Braun, Virginia Governor Doug Wilder, Mayor Norm Rice of Seattle, Mayor Sharon Sayles Belton of Minneapolis and Reps. Alan Wheat and Gary Franks all won among electorates that were at least 80% white.
In Louisiana, there are also signs that racial voting is abating.
David Duke has vanished from the political landscape, and Rep. William Jefferson easily became the state's first black congressman in 1990 in a New Orleans district just over 50% black.
But Louisiana's legislature created a geographic monster that includes parts of 28 of the state's 64 parishes, or counties, and meanders along the edges of the state for 600 miles.
Along the Mississippi River it's only 80 feet wide in spots.
Mr. Adams, the black city councilman from Grambling, says the district smacks of segregation.
He joined with three white plaintiffs to argue it violated the 14th Amendment's ban on race-based legislation.
The federal court agreed, noting that "Equal protection cannot mean one thing when applied to one individual and something else when applied to a person of another color."
The decision even quoted George Orwell's "Animal Farm" in rejecting the notion that although all are equal under the law, "some . . . are more equal than others."
This term the Supreme Court will decide several Voting Rights Act cases.
It will have a chance to lay down some firm guidelines on what the Act does and does not require in racial matters.
No one argues that race can be ignored in public policy.
But we should reject tribal thinking that constantly emphasizes the differences between people instead of common values.
These policies, it's now clear, are exacerbating social tensions and resentments in the United States.
