Santa Monica, Calif. -- Days after the earthquake, people here were still waiting for the devastation around them to show up on the TV news.
Chopper 2, the Eyewitness News vans and all the other mediators of local reality concentrated on images of death and dislocation near the epicenter, 13 miles away in Northridge.
They doted on ruptured gas lines in the San Fernando Valley and shattered freeways near Sylmar, yet they failed to focus on this seaside community of hitherto serene beauty.
Maybe Santa Monica doesn't look serious enough to suffer.
Maybe the beauty beguiled news managers into thinking we had breezed through the upheaval unscathed, just as we'd done in 1992, during the riots, and in 1993, during the fires that never singed so much as a frond of our stately palms.
Whatever the case, we struggled with cognitive dissonance, not to mention wrecked neighborhoods and shattered landmarks; what right did we have to feel undone if TV news hadn't certified our undoing?
Then the cameras finally moved in, we saw how we looked, and soon felt vindicated in the eyes of what we had considered the real world.
This is not to say that we have turned into a tent city, with thousands of homeless lining up for food stamps and potable water, as in other areas of Los Angeles.
Many homeowners here woke up on the fateful morning to nothing worse than fallen chimneys, broken glass and kitchen floors awash in olive oil (cold pressed extra virgin) and pure maple (as opposed to Aunt Jemima's) syrup.
But the real Santa Monica is much more than elegant homes, hyperchic shops on Montana Avenue, rock stars in residence at the Shangri-La Hotel and Elizabeth Taylor periodically in extremis at Saint John's Hospital.
It's a city of renters, stringent rent-control laws -- a legacy of Tom Hayden's crypto-radical takeover of the city council two decades ago -- and singular politics; until his recent removal from office, the city attorney refused to prosecute homeless persons arrested for sleeping in parks.
Now it's also the renters who are without homes, if not literally homeless, for the earthquake's greatest impact in Santa Monica was on hundreds of frame-and-stucco apartment buildings that were supposed to withstand a 6.6 Richter-scale shaker, and didn't.
Of the 26 apartment buildings on my block of San Vicente Boulevard, a thoroughfare graced with coral trees on a broad median strip, one has already been bulldozed, while half a dozen, including mine, have been declared unsafe, and summarily evacuated.
I have no way of knowing whether or when my building will be repaired, but the explosive violence that seized it, and me, was great enough to make me think I was going to die.
Now that I haven't, I find myself grateful to the rickety pile for not falling completely down, and full of unexpected affection for the city that I, like the TV people, had rarely taken seriously.
I'm glad that the Fireside Market, on Montana Avenue, will soon be in business again.
It's not just a theme-park version of an old-fashioned grocery store, but a cheerful place, albeit an overpriced one, where checkout clerks know the customers' names.
I'm relieved that the Aero Theater plans to reopen within a week, and resume its policy of double features plus popcorn with real butter.
One of the last neighborhood movie houses in the area, the Aero was built during World War II to give around-the-clock shift workers at nearby Douglas Aircraft a place to relax.
I'm encouraged that the Wednesday farmers' market will go on.
One of the great anomalous pleasures of living here has been buying fresh produce from genuine farmers in the heart of the hip downtown (though seismic insults to a nearby parking structure have forced the market into temporary quarters on the unfashionable outskirts).
I'm pleased that the main branch of the public library survived with minor damage (though it's frustrating, and a little weird, that I can get into the card catalog via modem and my home computer, but not into the building, which remains closed for repairs).
I'm also amazed at the number of good stories that the TV reporters missed.
The best one I know involves a neighbor in my building, Ernie Purpura, who is 84 years old and who, despite his vibrant good health and youthful spirit, had a heart attack when the earthquake hit.
Ernie's daughter and son-in-law lived in the building too.
They rushed him to Saint John's, where emergency-room doctors got him stabilized in short order.
The next day, a cardiologist found that his heart attack had done no damage, and suggested that a balloon angioplasty might be the next step.
But an angiogram showed coronary arteries so occluded that the doctor upped the ante to a quadruple bypass, an option that his patient eagerly embraced.
The surgery began at 7:30 the next morning, three days after the earthquake.
At 11 o'clock, as Ernie lay with his chest split asunder, a security guard wearing a surgical mask and gown came into the operating room, announced that the hospital was being evacuated because of newly discovered structural damage, and told the four doctors in the surgical team to finish up as fast as they could.
They did not finish up as fast as they could.
They finished up when they finished up, at 1:30 p.m., by which time the hospital was completely empty except for them, their nurses and their patient.
Then the four doctors loaded Ernie into an ambulance, with a helicopter standing by if traffic proved too slow, and rode with him to nearby UCLA Medical Center, where he was whisked into an intensive-care unit.
Two days later he was eating Jell-O, and the day after that he was on his feet, talking a blue streak.
Now I think of my neighbor Ernie every time I hear about earthquake recovery on the TV news.
Mr. Morgenstern is a journalist and screenwriter in Santa Monica.
