Committees representing a broad cross-section of U.S. business endorsed the world trade pact negotiated last month but expressed considerable disappointment that the accord didn't accomplish more.
At the same time, a committee representing U.S. labor bitterly criticized the trade deal, negotiated under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva.
"The failure of the accord to address the social side of the production equation -- worker rights and standards and environmental protectionis a major shortcoming," said a labor advisory committee.
The committee reports represent the most detailed evaluation the private sector will make of the GATT pact.
The two-dozen panels filed their comments, totaling more than 1,000 pages, by Jan. 15, as required by U.S. trade law.
But the reports won't be distributed publicly until this week.
The comments of the panels, which represent manufacturing, agriculture and service industries, foreshadow the congressional fight over the GATT pact.
Labor and environmental groups are expected to oppose the agreement, though not with the vehemence with which they attacked the North American Free Trade Agreement.
And U.S. businesses are expected to be supportive but not especially enthusiastic.
Few industries are likely to campaign against the accord.
However, all of the parties will be lobbying in Congress for legislation that will commit the U.S. to interpret the GATT pact in ways they find advantageous.
Even the Motion Picture Association of America, which was sorely disappointed that the U.S. couldn't get the European Union to dismantle quotas on foreign broadcasts, didn't oppose the GATT accord.
Instead, association President Jack Valenti couched his complaints in a panel report as "a grievance which has to be illuminated."
U.S. trade officials have hinted that they would take retaliatory action against the EU, but so far the administration hasn't even met to consider action.
The biggest committee, which advises the president on trade policy and is packed with the U.S.'s largest corporations, said that "on balance" the pact "advances U.S. economic interests."
But the panel said it was "disappointed" that "many objectives were not fully achieved."
The panel cited a lack of progress in financial, basic telecommunications, and audiovisual services as well as insufficient tariff reductions in wood products, non-ferrous metals and chemicals.
However, it noted that tariff negotiations were still continuing, and the U.S. is pressing for larger cuts.
On the positive side, the trade panel said the pact eliminated tariffs in many countries and on a number of industries in which the U.S. is highly competitive: beer, pharmaceuticals, furniture, paper, toys and medical equipment.
Overall, tariffs in developed countries were cut by an average of 33%.
The reductions "should increase U.S. exports and lead to lower prices and more consumer choice in the domestic marketplace," the report said.
In agriculture, the committee praised limitations on export subsidies and the decision by Japan and South Korea to open their rice markets to imports.
With patents and copyrights, the committee commented, the pact represents "both success and failure."
The panel praised the global commitments to protect intellectual property but panned the "length of the transition periods" before developing countries must enforce patents.
For instance, the pact allows India, a big center for pirated drugs, to continue flouting pharmaceutical patents for another decade.
Panels representing the chemical and paper industries said they currently oppose the main portion of the pact because the tariff cuts were inadequate.
Negotiations in those areas are expected to continue until the end of March.
The GATT pact will be signed by trade negotiators in Marrakech, Morocco, on April 15.
The accord will then go to Congress and other legislative bodies for ratification.
A REPORT by the U.S. paper industry said that the world trading agreement negotiated under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade generally meets the industry's objectives, but that the industry still has some reservations.
An article Monday incorrectly reported that the paper industry opposes the accord.
(WSJ Jan. 26, 1994)
