After a year-long investigation, eight former Honda Motor Co. executives have pleaded guilty to bribery-related charges, federal prosecutors said.
The eight men admitted that they accepted bribes from dealers in exchange for generous supplies of hot-selling cars and coveted dealerships.
Honda, which isn't being investigated, said it is "outraged and saddened by the criminal activities."
Federal prosecutors in New Hampshire said seven of the former Honda sales and advertising executives face as many as five years in prison after pleading guilty in federal court in Concord to charges of conspiracy and mail fraud, and for participating in an advertising kickback scheme.
The eighth sales executive pleaded guilty to racketeering charges, and faces as many as 20 years in prison.
In addition, five other former senior sales executives were indicted by a grand jury on charges that include fraud and bribery schemes between 1979 and 1992.
The bribes allegedly involve $10 million in cash, cars, real estate and jewelry.
According to prosecutors, one bribe scheme involved a series of payments ranging from $100,000 to $750,000 from people who wanted new Honda and Acura dealerships.
The auto maker said in a statement it will take legal action to recover damages from all executives involved in the criminal activity.
"These illicit acts represent a betrayal of trust that harmed the company and defrauded American Honda of millions of dollars," the auto maker said in a statement.
The allegations of corruption in Honda's marketing operations surfaced in a lawsuit filed in 1989 by a Concord, N.H., Acura dealer.
The dealer charged that Honda ignored his struggling franchise while giving special treatment to a nearby Acura dealer who bribed the district sales manager with a car and money.
The special treatment included giving the dealer a generous number of popular Acura models that were in short supply for other dealers.
Acura is Honda's luxury car division.
Investigations into those charges led to a broader probe by the Federal Bureau of Investigation of Honda's sales and marketing practices.
Numerous dealers said they had given Honda executives money and gifts in exchange for adequate supplies of cars and dealerships in desirable locations.
The practice had existed for nearly two decades, the dealers said.
Honda said it is taking steps to "ensure that the company and its employees are not betrayed again."
For instance, Honda is implementing a financial disclosure policy that will be applied to all senior executives who have "substantial decision-making authority."
The company also said it will establish a toll-free telephone number to encourage employees and dealers to express concerns of possible misconduct.
In the grand jury's actions, two of the five former senior sales executives were indicted on charges of racketeering, mail fraud and conspiracy.
They could face jail terms of as many as thirty years.
The two are also charged with diverting American Honda and dealer funds into their own pockets rather than paying for advertising and sales training expenses.
The men allegedly received between $2.5 million and $3 million in kickbacks.
