The typical U.S. senator counts on raising some $12,000 a week toward re-election.
Dianne Feinstein needs $22,000 a day.
In breakfast huddles with Washington lobbyists, street-corner calls by cellular telephone and cozy receptions at the homes of the well-to-do, the California Democrat scours the nation for the $10 million or more she will need this year to defend the seat she won only 16 months ago.
That's on top of the nearly $30 million she has spent since 1990 on a failed bid for the California governorship and the campaign for her current, abbreviated Senate term.
"You have to set up your own corporation," says the weary senator.
Her burden is all the greater since she has just two years, not the usual six, to raise money.
But her campaign's weekly cash-flow reports are undeniably robust: If Feinstein Inc. were a business, its projected revenue would place it among the top 5% of U.S. corporations.
As Congress again grapples with the issue of campaign-finance reform, Mrs. Feinstein's predicament starkly demonstrates everything that critics -- including the senator herself -- find wrong with the current system.
It diverts large chunks of Mrs. Feinstein's time from Senate business just as she is trying to deliver for economically squeezed constituents after years of campaigning.
It forces her to depend on special-interest contributions, thus fueling opposition attacks that further erode public confidence in government.
And it squeezes out potential competitors who can't keep the financial pace.
Freshman GOP Rep. Michael Huffington has emerged as Mrs. Feinstein's likely November opponent for one overriding reason: his willingness to tap his personal fortune, estimated by the Capitol Hill newspaper Roll Call at $75 million, to short-circuit the fund-raising grind.
Thus California voters face the spectacle of the wealthy Mrs. Feinstein -- who with her investment-banker husband is worth an estimated $50 million, according to Roll Call -- complaining that her opponent wants to "buy the election."
Mrs. Feinstein says she doesn't plan to put much, if any, of her own money into her campaign, though she used family wealth to help obtain some $3 million in bank loans for her 1990 governor's race.
"It is terrible," says fellow Californian Alan Cranston, a master fund-raiser during his four Senate terms.
"Virtually all your campaign time is spent raising money."
Ultimately the process consumed Mr. Cranston, who retired in 1992 in the wake of the Keating Five influence-buying scandal.
Granted, California is the most expensive state in the country for political campaigns.
Still, the system's inexorable logic -- requiring vast sums to reach voters through television advertising -- places most national politicians on the same financial treadmill.
Mrs. Feinstein's fundraising guru, Priscilla Burton, is a protege of former Cranston operative Joy Jacobson.
And while there has never been a hint of scandal involving Mrs. Feinstein, aides and contributors acknowledge that the system provides precious access to the senator for those who can afford it.
For donors as well as candidates, the campaign-finance system "has become a quasi-corporate process," says Joe Scott, a political consultant who recently worked in the campaign of Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan.
"The big contributors become the major shareholders.
The rest of the population is left just to vote, to affirm the management."
Among those with the biggest stakes in Mrs. Feinstein's 1992 campaign: executives from the entertainment, legal, finance and real-estate industries.
It is a process that participants themselves have come to dread.
"My people want me . . . to be on the phone all the time," Mrs. Feinstein says.
Amid a hectic daily schedule, that isn't easy.
Since rules prohibit fund raising within the Capitol and Senate offices, she must step outside with her pocket phone to dial up contributors.
Mrs. Feinstein reserves Friday afternoons, when the Senate often isn't in session, for making calls from her home.
Even so, she still feels uncomfortable asking people for money.
"I'll start to sweat," says the senator, who hopes benefactors raise the subject first.
But facing TV ad costs of $700,000 or more each week in the campaign's home stretch, the former San Francisco mayor can't help but make fund raising a top priority.
She pays campaign fund-raiser Burton $10,000 a month, more than anyone on her Senate staff, records show.
She employed at least five other fund-raising consultants or staffers in 1993.
Mrs. Feinstein returned to fund raising within days of winning Gov. Pete Wilson's unexpired Senate term in November 1992.
She flew late that month to south Florida for a couple of gatherings that raised a total of $50,000.
Business executive Monte Friedkin, who supports pro-Israel Democrats and hosted a reception for Mrs. Feinstein, says politicians' requests for financial help have become "almost an hourly occurrence."
On the day the 103rd Congress convened in January last year, Mrs. Feinstein attended a $100-and-up reception for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, or DSCC.
The next month, her campaign chairman, Duane Garrett, an amiable San Francisco lawyer, auctioneer, radio host and longtime fund-raiser, put on a bash at his home that yielded $100,000.
Even Mrs. Feinstein's June birthday became a fund-raising vehicle, as the campaign raised $300,000 apiece at events in Los Angeles and San Francisco.
Feinstein Inc. generates additional revenue in small doses through telemarketing and direct mail (though the senator minimizes use of the latter, finding it too impersonal).
Three personal computers track incoming checks.
Capitalizing on her cachet as one of just seven women senators, Mrs. Feinstein taps a network of politically active women in California and beyond.
The Hollywood Women's Political Committee (members include $1,000 Feinstein donor Roseanne Arnold) has met its goal of raising $50,000 for the 1994 campaign and isn't stopping.
Kate Bartholo, a Walt Disney Co. executive, hopes to raise $100,000 or more from friends and associates.
Emily's List, which "bundles" contributions from its 25,000 members and sends them to selected Democratic women candidates who favor abortion rights, will "be there for her" if necessary, says president Ellen Malcolm.
The two have "been there" for each other before.
Emily's List sent along some $500,000 to Mrs. Feinstein's 1992 campaign, and the senator has since lobbied to provide it an exemption from anti-bundling provisions in pending campaign-reform legislation.
Washington lobbyists do their part to help.
Cassidy & Associates, which represents corporations, state and local governments and universities, generated some $10,000 at a breakfast for Mrs. Feinstein last year.
"It's a regular thing" the firm does for lawmakers, says Wally Chalmers, executive vice president.
When Democratic rainmaker Vance Opperman threw a $1,000-a-head reception last October at the Monocle, a lobbyists' hangout on Capitol Hill, the invitation underscored the senator's clout: "Member, Appropriations, Judiciary, Rules and Administration."
Opperman associate Allen Johnson says Mrs. Feinstein, a longtime friend, maintains "a fire wall" between contributors and policy decisions, but access to the senator is another matter.
"They do have the opportunity to spend time" with her, he acknowledges.
Even powerful home-state interests feel the need to ante up.
Having backed Mrs. Feinstein's Republican opponent in 1992, California agribusiness concerns sought to smooth relations with Mrs. Feinstein by arranging a $50,000 fund-raiser in Modesto a few weeks after she took office.
"We just wanted her to understand our needs," explains Bob Vice, president of the California Farm Bureau.
"It makes it easier to have a conversation, rather than calling cold."
That's why incumbents rake in more than 70% of the money doled out by political-action committees, which can give candidates $5,000 each for their primary and general-election races.
At the same time, some special interests can be quite direct in pressuring incumbents and their aides.
Fund-raising consultant Terres Unsoeld, who has worked for Mrs. Feinstein and other women candidates (including her mother, Democratic Rep. Jolene Unsoeld), recalls how some political-action committees last year declined requests for contributions until after fence-sitters had committed themselves on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
"The dance between raising money and trying to be ethical is a fine line," says the consultant, who favors reform that would replace the current campaign-financing system with public financing.
"When you're asking for $10,000 from a political organization, and then you're meeting with them in your office to discuss legislation, that's a tricky situation. . . .
That's just not right," she says.
Like other current and former Feinstein aides, Ms. Unsoeld says that the senator's integrity is beyond question and that fund raising is only one of many often conflicting political pressures weighing on candidates.
Yet money pressures are so great in large-state races that lawmakers find enormous incentives to rationalize assisting contributors on grounds of policy or constituent service.
"You're constantly thinking about your weekly, or daily, or monthly targets," says Democratic Rep. Robert Matsui, who briefly campaigned for a California Senate seat in 1991 before dropping out to devote more attention to his ill father.
Mr. Matsui played a high-profile role on behalf of Nafta.
But had he remained in the Democratic Senate primary, where labor money and votes are crucial, "it would have been very easy to say . . .
`Why should I worry about this?'"
Because his campaign was so brief, Mr. Matsui adds, "I never got a chance to test my integrity."
Mr. Huffington, Sen. Feinstein's likely opponent this fall, hopes to use the issue of special-interest money to test hers.
"It buys influence," says Mr. Huffington, calling Mrs. Feinstein's vote against Nafta "a payback" for more than $2 million in labor contributions.
In winning his House seat, Mr. Huffington got around the problem by spending $5 million of his own money, and California political operatives in both parties believe he is prepared to pour $20 million or more into a race against Mrs. Feinstein.
Mr. Huffington calls that "pure fabrication" and says he will raise outside money, too.
But he boasts: "I can't be bought."
Mrs. Feinstein, noting her longstanding reservations about Nafta, says the array of organized interests in California ensures that she comes under no undue pressure from any particular group.
Nor does the centrist Democrat worry that time spent with large donors skews her perspective in favor of the affluent.
"They can't contribute a lot," she says.
Yet the $4,000 that well-to-do couples can give ($1,000 apiece for both primary and general elections) is more than a month's income for the average California family.
Some California politicians argue that the fund-raising circuit is better than nothing, a last face-to-face link with sprawling constituencies that otherwise know lawmakers almost entirely through television.
"Freed up from fund raising through public financing, candidates would have nothing to do with little people," says Republican Rep. Christopher Cox, who shied away from this year's Senate race because of the prospect of expensive battles against Mr. Huffington and Mrs. Feinstein.
Candidates aren't likely to be freed from fund raising anytime soon.
Sandwiched between conflicting public attitudes -- distrust of the current system and unwillingness to pay more taxes to finance campaigns -- Congress is struggling to find a middle ground.
With prodding from President Clinton, the House and Senate have passed differing reform bills that would limit spending, but neither identifies a way to substantially replace private donations with public money.
Negotiations begin soon on a compromise bill.
The money chase is hardly unique to giant California; increasingly, it burdens lawmakers from every state.
"It takes a lot of time," says Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, speaking recently by telephone on his way to a New York luncheon to raise $15,000.
The Maine Democrat is often pestered by colleagues who don't want floor votes to conflict with fund-raisers, and sometimes obliges them.
As the Senate considered crime legislation last Nov. 8, for example, the Democratic leader arranged a "window" for Mrs. Feinstein and other party members to attend a $250-a-head DSCC gala that evening.
Senators can't always be accommodated.
As the Senate churned toward adjournment last Nov. 20 with debates over Nafta and the Brady gun-control bill, Mrs. Feinstein faced the added pressure of making a fund-raising dinner that would yield $700,000 in San Francisco that evening.
The star attraction for the $1,000-a-plate affair: President Clinton.
When the Senate wrapped up business that evening, Mrs. Feinstein raced to Washington National Airport and hopped on a chartered jet for the West Coast.
Exhausted, she dashed into the Fairmont Hotel just after 11 p.m., in time to catch Mr. Clinton and a lingering group of $5,000 contributors to the DSCC.
"It's a brutal system," says Bob Burkett, a Los Angeles-based Democratic fund-raiser and Feinstein adviser who was on hand.
Lamenting the "wear and tear on her body," he adds: "It's time when you need to be relaxing, or reading, or doing something else."
To be sure, conflicts between official duties and campaign money don't always hurt.
The Los Angeles earthquake forced Mrs. Feinstein to cancel some scheduled fund-raisers, but it isn't likely to be a financial disaster for her campaign.
Her visibility and forcefulness during the crisis undoubtedly impressed some potential givers.
The Feinstein team is "doing everything they can to capitalize," observes Paul Equale, a Washington lobbyist for the Independent Insurance Agents of America, "turning challenges into opportunities."
