THE CLOCK TICKS.
Hunched over a desk, I delicately squeeze a tweezer and pluck a pin from its hole on a wooden board.
Moving my hand several inches to the left, I carefully align the pin above another hole and drop it in.
Four minutes later, I have transferred 99 more pins -- all but one flawlessly.
Feeling pretty cocky, I await the good news.
But it doesn't come.
I didn't tweeze the pins fast enough.
That might not seem to matter much, except for one fact: This is part of a test that could change my career.
More people, unhappy at work but uncertain about their options, are using career exams to gauge their strengths before they test the job market.
"There's expanding demand for all kinds of vocational testing," says John W. Jones, senior psychologist at London House, a personnelassessment firm in Rosemont, Ill.
"These tests can be a good first step," especially for those who want to discover unused skills, he adds.
But picking the right exam can be tricky.
Some match your personality traits to certain professions.
Others target your interests, intelligence or aptitudes.
Industrial psychologists and career-counseling services tout such tests in the Yellow Pages.
They're also offered by some outplacement firms and college psychology departments.
You may spend as little as $25 for a standardized test but considerably more for a proprietary exam with customized interpretation.
Because the field is largely unregulated, you should check a tester's references and make sure an exam is copyrighted and backed by research, experts advise.
Typically, the more reputable the tester, the better the test, says Bill Jackson, a vice president of Development Dimensions International, a Pittsburgh concern that evaluates personnel for companies.
The Wall Street Journal recently paid for me to test-drive a well-established career exam, given in 11 cities by the nonprofit Johnson O'Connor Research Foundation.
THE $480 TEST seeks to measure "aptitudes" -- natural talents and skills, such as musical ability or the tendency to think in certain ways.
Many factors contribute to job satisfaction, of course.
But you're more likely to enjoy work that also takes advantage of your inborn aptitudes, says the foundation, whose main offices are in New York, Boston and Chicago.
About 5,000 people take Johnson O'Connor's test every year.
New college graduates once predominated.
But now, the foundation says, more takers are educated adults who aren't happy in their work.
I had little idea what to expect from the test, spread over two mornings.
I get the easy stuff first.
After moving plastic cards back and forth in front of my eyes, pretending to throw a baseball and performing other tricks, I learn I'm right eye-and-hand dominant.
Perfectly normal -- but not the special "cross-dominance" that many professional athletes enjoy.
So much for sports.
Next, I stare at a picture of 20 household objects for about a minute.
Then, I look at a bunch of photos with the same objects removed and rearranged.
If I could quickly identify that the razor and shoehorn traded places, for instance, I would be observant enough to do detective or quality-control work.
I'm not.
Then comes the folded-paper-with-a-hole-in-it test: Predict where all the holes will be when the paper is unfolded.
I can't.
That means I probably lack the 3-D visual skill so critical in good architects, engineers, even plumbers.
And my wheezing tweezing on the pin-moving test suggests I lack the dexterity needed to be a surgeon or a dentist.
Just 45 minutes gone and already I show a decided lack of aptitudes.
I ENDURE 26 EXERCISES, directed by a tester or audiotape.
Virtually all are clocked.
I enjoy some, such as reasoning tests in which I must arrange words into ideas.
Others, such as memorizing English translations of "Martian" words quickly flashed on a screen, are tedious.
But then, I never was very good at the skill that drill seeks to gauge: picking up languages.
I undergo about seven hours of such activity, including a long vocabulary test and an "interest inventory" -- to calibrate my attitude toward 192 occupational tasks.
By the end, I am eager to escape.
Four other recent test-takers agreed the regimen seemed overly long.
Notably, none was terribly surprised at their results, delivered by a foundation counselor along with possible types of work based on their strengths.
Still, they generally found the experience helpful.
Bruce G. Maasbach took it last year after feeling frustrated by his inability to sustain his sales record as a real-estate broker.
The test confirmed Mr. Maasbach's skill for sales work, but concluded that he might be happier working with numbers.
Now, the 38-year-old New Yorker says he's "thrilled" and more effective working as a mortgage broker.
"I found out what my gifts are," he says.
I found out what my limits are.
My editors won't like this, but I ranked in the dismal 10th percentile on "divergent thinking" -- a brief essay designed to measure my flow of ideas.
A high score suggests a career in sales, advertising, teaching and -- um -- journalism.
Also, I only hit the 80th percentile on vocabulary, hardly an ideal showing for someone who works with words for a living.
What should I be instead?
I learn my personality is best suited to "working with and through others."
In other words, the foundation says, I should be the boss.
But that's hardly news to me.
