The dollar was flat to marginally lower in quiet trading yesterday as many players moved to the sidelines after taking losses in the hectic trading that followed the Federal Reserve's federal funds' rate increase last week.
Traders said market uncertainty over the possibility of more rate boosts by the Fed -- and continued trade tensions with Japan -- have put a temporary lid on further volatility in the foreign-exchange market.
But they also noted that the dollar could be headed for higher ground -- at least against European currencies -- as evidenced by the relative lack of profit-taking in the face of Friday's dollar surge.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7590 marks, up slightly from 1.7585 marks late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 108.70 yen, down from 109.30 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4825, up from $1.4775.
About midday Tuesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.60 yen and at 1.7583 marks.
"There was a lot of carnage on Friday," said Thomas Benfer, director of foreign exchange at the Bank of Montreal.
"A lot of operators got caught in the Fed's move and were maintaining a low profile yesterday."
Mr.BBenfer said traders are still trying to sort out the implications of the Fed's move to push up short-term interest rates by 0.25 percentage point, particularly as it came in the face of weak U.S. January employment data.
"The fact that the Fed has tightened rates, could be an indication of fairly strong economic growth coming down the pike, and possibly more tightening by summer," he added.
But Mr. Benfer said the market remains uncertain whether the Fed's move was "a one-time pre-emptive strike" against inflation or whether it was just the first in a series of rate increases.
Lawrence Summers, U.S. Treasury undersecretary for international affairs, appeared to condone more rate boosts, traders said, when he commented yesterday that the Fed's decision will contribute to a long sustained recovery in the U.S. and shouldn't hurt U.S. competitiveness overseas.
Meanwhile, the dollar traded in a tight range against the yen, as U.S.-Japan trade negotiations again appeared to flounder prior to Friday's summit between Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and President Clinton.
Bank of Montreal's Mr. Benfer said the dollar-yen fluctuations on comments by U.S. officials once again prove that the yen "is a politically driven currency."
Traders noted the yen initially softened on comments by Mr. Summers disavowing U.S. economist C. Fred Bergsten, an influential voice for a strong yen.
Mr. Summers said Mr. Bergsten is "totally unconnected" to Clinton administration thinking.
But the yen then gained on statements by Mr. Summers and Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown decrying the pace of the U.S.-Japan trade negotiations and Japan's reluctance to lower trade barriers.
