Like the action figures it creates, Bandai Co. is ready for battle.
Energized by its extraordinary success with the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, the Japanese toy maker plans to triple Ranger production this year.
It also is working on several flashy new promotions -- including a full-length Ranger movie -- and is developing an array of new, offbeat characters.
The company recently scrapped a long-term European marketing agreement with Japan's Nintendo Co. and will roll out the Rangers in Europe this spring.
It is scouring Southeast Asia for new media and production opportunities.
And having already doubled Ranger-related production at its facilities in Thailand, China and Hong Kong, Bandai will this year invest in new facilities in Mexico and Vietnam.
All this activity is quite a switch for what was -- until the Rangers, anyway -- a fairly sleepy company.
"This is a boring, conventional toy company on the face of it," says Edward Brogan, an analyst at Smith Barney Shearson Inc. in Tokyo.
Bandai's main business -- rendering popular Japanese movie and television characters into toys -- long ago made it one of Japan's biggest toy companies.
But until now it never translated its domestic success into profits abroad.
Such characters as Ultraman, a metallic superhero with laser-beam eyes, were big hits in Japan but were "too foreign" for Americans, says Bandai's president and chief executive officer, Makoto Yamashina.
Moreover, Bandai failed to mount the local marketing efforts needed to make its characters popular in markets ranging from Florida to France.
And it relied too heavily on partners who were also competitors.
Much of Bandai's new energy can be traced to the Mighty Morphins.
Buttressed by the support of Japanese movie maker Toei Co., California producer Saban Entertainment and News Corp.'s Fox Children's Network, Bandai was finally "able to translate its Japan strategy in the U.S.," Mr. Brogan says.
Together, the three companies worked to make the long-running Japanese "Jyu Rangah" ["Power Ranger"] television series and toys work for U.S. viewers.
After Ultraman, both companies "realized that we needed to put an American perspective" on the concept, says Peter Dang, vice president of marketing, sales and product development at Bandai's U.S. office in Cerritos, Calif.
With the Rangers, Bandai paid close attention to local tastes.
It actually toned down the violence for the U.S. audience.
It portrayed the off-duty Rangers as normal American kids who shoot baskets, mall-hop and do aerobics -- when they aren't fighting space aliens with machines they summon by hollering the names of dead dinosaurs.
And it tossed in a moral at the end of each show.
The result: a campier, Californian version of the Power Rangers, and a "cultural bridge between the two countries," boasts Haim Saban, head of Saban Entertainment.
Bandai also "Americanized" the toys, integrating the U.S. likenesses in unmasked characters and giving more focus to the female half of the team.
But it stayed faithful to the toys' original technical intricacy.
"Even the index finger moves to hold a laser gun," says Mr. Dang, who adds that the Rangers' appeal stems in part from the fact that kids can manipulate them "and their parents can't."
After the Rangers' debut in U.S. stores last August, the figures started vanishing as fast as the evil trolls they battle (and that dissolve in smoke puffs when defeated).
After the Fox show started, the trend became a craze: By Christmas, the Rangers were in tight supply.
Analysts say fiscal third-quarter sales of the Rangers in the U.S. totaled almost $19 million -- nearly six times higher than what had been expected.
The "Morphinomenon" even spread to the streets: A five-mile traffic battle erupted on a Hollywood freeway after 35,000 visitors rushed to a Morphin appearance at Universal Studios.
Bandai officials see their new, cutting-edge image as a way to foster other niche-market concepts in the U.S. and elsewhere.
Ranger-weary parents, for example, can always introduce their children to "The Tick," a blue, blood-sucking hero with a sidekick accountant who dresses like a moth.
Based on a U.S. comic book, the toy will be marketed through an animated children's television show, according to Bandai's U.S. office.
"The big companies are not going to pick up something weird like a tick.
They have the safe things they can rely on," Mr. Dang says.
Bandai is also looking at other Japanese items for potential export.
New concepts might include a long-legged schoolgirl named Pretty Soldier Sailor Moon, who doubles as a crime-fighting femme fatale in a top-rated television show and a movie here.
"Of course," Mr. Dang adds, "we'd have to find the linkage in the American psyche, and it would have to be culturally appropriate."
