Chinese securities regulators ignited a share rally Monday by promising to slow the flow of new share listings.
They failed, however, to dispel longer-term questions about their ability to foster a market subject to supply and demand, rather than official whims.
Liu Hongru, chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission, announced a "four no's" policy on stock market reform, the most important of which will delay new listings and postpone a capital gains tax on share trading.
The moves delighted China's stock market investors, most of them private individuals.
Buyers sent the Shanghai Class A share index soaring 10.24% and pushed the Shenzhen market up 5.13%.
Turnover set new records.
The markets are open only to Chinese citizens.
China's Class B share markets, open to foreign investors, were flat for the day, though analysts said an invigorated A share market probably would give a modest boost to B shares in the near future.
Monday's sharp rebound came after months of steady decline on the A share markets, where prices had fallen almost 60% off February 1993 highs, returning to 1992 levels.
Many stockholders bitterly blamed the government's heavy regulatory hand for their losses.
Investors in Shenzhen staged a demonstration outside the Shenzhen Securities Exchange last week to demand changes in government policy toward the markets.
Last month, Shenzhen securities officials announced a unilateral move to reduce the number of companies permitted to list locally, but the central government criticized Shenzhen officials for acting without authorization.
Mr. Liu's concession may have reflected the government's fear of any social unrest.
But the delay in new listings is also a recognition that China's state-directed timetable for expanding stock markets is far too ambitious -- given the speculative inclinations of most traders and the market's current doldrums.
Investors have demanded a slowdown in the pace of new listings because they complain that new issues spread a small pool of capital too thin and undermine still heavily inflated stock prices.
In that sense, the new policy marks a victory over the government for the private sector.
But Mr. Liu's announcement also demonstrates the degree to which China's stock markets remain under government control.
Beijing dictates annual quotas for new stock listings and determines the types of companies qualified to list.
The central government also reserves the right to alter its plans or revise securities regulations at a moment's notice.
Like many other elements of the central plan, however, controls on the stock market are not often effective.
Beijing's targets for expansion of the stock market appear no more realistic than its policies to convert state-owned banks into commercial banks or to legislate the country's economic growth rate.
Monday's announcement is "confirmation that the government still wants to control stock price fluctuations," said Lawrence Ang, a China share analyst in Hong Kong.
"It's not the kind of signal that should give professional investors much confidence."
Under the "four no's" policy, the state's ambitions to bring 5.5 billion yuan ($631.7 million) of new issues to the market this year have been scaled back, and no new listings will be allowed until at least the second half of 1994.
A "large" but unspecified proportion of companies selected to list this year will now have to wait until 1995.
The China Securities Regulatory Commission also took two other steps to cap the number of shares in circulation.
It cracked down on the common practice of allocating "bonus shares," in place of stock dividends, and decided that it will not allow shares held by state-controlled entities to be traded on the market any time soon.
Finally, the government has postponed indefinitely a capital gains tax on share transactions, originally announced as law Jan. 1.
