Schroders PLC announced record earnings for the third year in a row, heightening market speculation that it may soon seek to acquire full control of its New York affiliate, Wertheim Schroder & Co.
Unveiling net profit of #140 million ($208.7 million), doubled from #70 million in 1992, the U.K. merchant bank said it would raise its dividend 50%, to 16.5 pence a share.
The 1992 earnings were restated to take account of changes in accounting procedures.
Even after the unexpectedly big dividend increase for 1993, the bank was able to add #119 million in retained earnings last year to its capital and reserves, increasing shareholders' funds to #674.5 million at the end of 1993, from #545.6 million a year earlier.
The result was to give Schroders a capital adequacy ratio of more than 20%, double the 10% minimum set for it by the Bank of England.
Analysts greeted the figures as "particularly impressive."
Schroders shares responded by closing at #11.70, up 80 pence, on the London Stock Exchange.
Though the bank didn't give any breakdown of its earnings in various sectors of operations, "They have obviously done incredibly well across the board and without taking any major risks," commmented Philip Gibbs, of Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
Schroders's high capital adequacy ratio raises the question of what it can usefully do with its extra earnings, if it doesn't intend to distribute them to shareholders.
Schroders Chairman George W. Mallinckrodt said the bank would use some of the earnings to fund the capital needs of subsidiaries in various geographical areas.
A major focus for future expansion is China, where Schroders has requested a banking license, he said.
Officials also confirmed that a drive is under way to forge closer links with Wertheim Schroder, hinting that Schroders may increase its stake in the U.S. investment bank.
Under an arrangement from 1986, Schroders and the partners of the former Wall Street investment bank Wertheim each hold 50% of the voting shares of Wertheim Schroder.
Three outside institutions -- Bank of Boston, Massachusetts Mutual Life and Mitsubishi Trustbank -- each have small nonvoting stakes equivalent to 4.9% of total equity.
Wertheim Schroder has "access to U.S. institutions, while we have access to major privatizations," said Nick MacAndrew, Schroders's group managing director for finance, strategic planning and information technology.
"The important thing is to get the businesses working together."
Among the many bright spots in Schroders's 1993 results: Its fund management unit increased total funds under management by 47% to #52.9 billion; this included a net inflow of #6.5 billion in new funds, the bank said.
Schroder Capital Management is now the largest manager of foreign equities for U.K. institutions.
On the corporate finance side, Schroders was involved in 115 mergers and acquisitions during the year, for a total value of #15 billion.
In the U.S., Wertheim Schroder took part in over 40 financing operations, totaling more than $6 billion.
In Britain, Schroders was lead or co-lead manager for #2.8 billion of equity or equity-linked issues.
Schroders's publication of relatively detailed figures for 1993 marked a break with former secretiveness and a tradition of disclosing only part of its profits, setting aside the rest in the form of hidden reserves.
Changes in EU accounting rules this year obliged Schroders to reveal hidden reserves of #102 million in its restated 1992 accounts.
