Rebuild L.A., the private group formed to revitalize blighted areas after this city's 1992 riots, has selected Atlantic Richfield Co.
Chairman Lodwrick M. Cook as its chairman.
The naming of Mr. Cook came as a surprise to many Arco insiders, but the oil company said the 65-year-old executive has made it clear he doesn't expect the new job to interfere with his corporate responsibilities.
"He is going to give the company all the attention it requires," Arco spokesman Al Greenstein said.
Linda Griego, a businesswoman who was an unsuccessful mayoral candidate last year, was named executive director of Rebuild L.A., according to a spokeswoman for the organization.
In that role, Ms. Griego will be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the organization.
The revamped RLA structure -- with an unpaid chairman offering the weight of his reputation and leadership, along with a paid chief executive handling daily affairs -- replaces the previously unwieldy system of four co-chairs.
The chairman's job had been held by Peter Ueberroth, the former baseball commissioner and head of the committee that organized the 1984 Summer Olympic Games here.
When Mr. Ueberroth stepped down last May without a single high-profile successor, many considered the organization to have been a failure.
The Arco spokesman said that Mr. Cook previously had said he wouldn't take the RLA job without a full-time executive to manage the organization's affairs.
Ms. Griego, 46, was Mr. Cook's hand-picked choice, people at RLA said.
"We have selected for the board a terrific team to head the inner-city effort," said Barry Sanders, a former RLA co-chairman and a member of the 13-member selection committee.
He said he was confident the two would be confirmed by RLA's 96-member board at a meeting next Tuesday.
While guiding Atlantic Richfield through a restructuring and major personnel reductions over the years, Mr. Cook has also played an active role in civic and philanthropic organizations in Southern California.
For example, he is chairman of a group raising money for the Los Angeles public library system.
Before the announcement, Mr. Cook had said he planned to retire from Arco in the summer of 1995.
He became 65 last year, but the company's board asked him to stay on as chairman past the mandatory retirement age, until June 1995.
