Wal-Mart Stores Inc. signed an agreement with Michigan to not make misleading price comparisons in its Wal-Mart and Sam's Club stores in the state.
The agreement, filed Friday in state court in Lansing, Mich., stems from a state investigation that began six months ago after complaints from Kmart Corp., Dayton Hudson Corp.'s Target stores division and Meijer Inc.
Michigan Attorney General Frank J. Kelley said the court filing, in which Wal-Mart agreed to various changes in the way it compares its prices to those of competitors, settles alleged violations of the state's consumer-protection act.
However, in the agreement, Wal-Mart doesn't admit any guilt.
Don Shinkle, a Wal-Mart vice president, said the company believes it "did everything by the book."
He added, though, that "we did learn some lessons, and in the future we'll be doubly sure to place dates and our competitors' addresses on signs we use."
Mr. Kelley, who characterized Wal-Mart as "extremely uncooperative," also said his office has been in touch with attorneys general in several other states considering or conducting similar investigations of Wal-Mart, including Iowa, Florida and Minnesota.
Florida's attorney general's office couldn't be reached late Friday; Minnesota's said it can't comment on continuing investigations; and a spokesman for Iowa's said it isn't currently conducting any investigation of Wal-Mart's pricing or advertising.
A spokesman for Mr. Kelley said Wal-Mart's in-store ads compared products that weren't the same sizes or models without noting the differences, and that the ads sometimes inflated the prices competitors charged.
In the court filing, Wal-Mart agreed, among other things, not to claim its price on an item is lower without verifying the price a competitor is charging; not to leave in place signs comparing prices if it knows the comparison isn't accurate; to update comparisons weekly and post the date any comparison was made; not to compare products that aren't the same size or model; and not to lower an item's price just so it can claim a better price comparison.
Wal-Mart and Target have feuded since last year, when Target ran advertisements around the country accusing its competitor of making misleading price comparisons.
Headlines in the ads read, "This Never Would Have Happened if Sam Walton Was Alive."
Wal-Mart denounced the ads as a smear campaign, saying the accusations were unfounded.
