Convinced that the U.S. is at last in a strong economic recovery and that the U.S. has put its fiscal house in order, the Treasury's top international official said the governments of Japan and Western Europe need to do more to get out of their slump.
The Wall Street Journal last week asked Treasury Undersecretary Lawrence Summers for his prescription for what ails the global economy.
The 39-year-old economist said it's his "very strong hope" that Germany will lower interest rates further -- though he didn't predict when that may happen.
He described Japan's economic-stimulus plan as "not enough, not soon enough."
And he boasted that the U.S. government now stands out for its "fiscal virtue" among the Group of Seven industrialized countries.
How would you describe the state of the world economy?
We've got a foundation on which we can build a strong world economy, but outside of the U.S., the house isn't going up as fast as we or other countries would like to see.
What storm clouds are on the horizon?
Budget deficits are one, but, for a big change, not the American deficit.
Budget deficits in Europe will have to be addressed as recovery takes hold.
The Japanese current-account surplus is another cloud.
It represents the major asymmetry in the world economy today in much the same way as the U.S. budget deficit represented a major asymmetry in the world economy in the mid-1980s.
It holds back demand and it fuels protectionist measures.
An additional crucial concern is providing adequate levels of employment.
Everywhere the number of people who are not working has increased significantly.
In the U.S., almost one in 10 men aged 25 to 55 is not working.
The figure is higher in Europe.
The people who are not working are very disproportionately those with less education.
Has Germany cut interest rates sufficiently?
Lower German interest rates would make an important contribution to strengthening demand in Germany and in the rest of Europe.
But lower short-term interest rates that were associated with higher long-term interest rates could actually be counterproductive.
So it's a difficult job managing monetary policy in Europe.
It depends also on wage settlements, progress in inflation, the credibility of fiscal positions.
But my very strong hope would be that conditions would evolve that would make it both appropriate and possible for interest rates to fall quite significantly in Europe.
Obviously the Bundesbank's decisions are crucial in that regard.
Is the stimulus proposed by the Japanese government too little, too late?
Not enough, not soon enough.
Secretary Lloyd Bentsen has indicated that with respect to what is a protracted problem, a temporary tax cut is not a very strong answer.
There is a need for stimulus that is multiyear.
The case for a Kennedy-Johnson tax cut in Japan is compelling.
It's interesting to note how many people talked in the early '60s about how America's real problems were structural, not problems of demand, and how wrong they proved to be.
There are important parallels.
The case for fiscal expansion in Japan is much stronger because of the overlay of financial difficulties and chronic trade surplus that weren't present in the U.S. in the early 1960s.
Even with the Clinton health initiative, the White House projects the U.S. budget deficit will be above 2% of the gross domestic product in 1999.
Is that low enough?
Smaller deficits would surely be better because they would make possible more savings and investment.
But the deficit is no longer our defining macroeconomic problem.
The clearest evidence of that is that many explanations for the disturbing increase in long-term bond yields have been bandied about, but literally no one has mentioned the budget deficit.
The benefits of further deficit reduction have to be weighed against the benefits of crucial public spending and possible tax incentives.
Our deficits are no longer a critical international economic factor.
We stand out for our fiscal virtue rather than our fiscal sin in G-7 meetings.
What is our "defining economic problem?"
Raising rates of growth and assuring that the benefits of growth are more equally shared.
What tangible results has the G-7 produced since you came into the government?
We didn't think it made sense to try to pull rabbits out of hats at G-7 meetings.
I don't think countries take action because other countries tell them to.
But the process of consultation and cooperation -- much of it publicly invisible -- has probably led to somewhat more fiscal stimulus in Japan, somewhat more interest-rate reduction in Europe, somewhat more fiscal deficit reduction in the U.S. than otherwise would have taken place.
The process is a kind of insurance policy.
The fact that there was a responsible process of consultation and cooperation has been a source of greater stability in financial markets than there otherwise would be.
Financial markets haven't exactly been stable lately.
Has the G-7 done anything about that?
Individual countries are pursuing what they regard as appropriate policies and consultations.
We haven't pulled a rabbit out of a hat in the last month.
You recently said, "Monetary policy is destiny.
The prospect for peace and prosperity for the rest of this century and beyond depend as much on monetary policies as on any other factor."
Consider how much brighter the history of the 20th century would be if hyperinflation had been avoided in Germany in the 1920s, or if deflation in Europe and the U.S. had been avoided in the 1930s.
Or ask yourself how much darker history would have been if Germany and Japan had hyperinflated and there had been a postwar depression.
A Russia that avoids hyperinflation and moves to a reasonably strong currency is much more likely to be a prosperous and peaceful Russia.
Healthy growth in the world economy depends on ensuring the flow of capital to the developing world is both strong and sustained.
Successful economic management is as close to a free lunch as you can get because no one really loses from it.
