Nutri/System Limited Partnership, coming back from bankruptcy-law proceedings, is counting on a tie-up with health-care giant Johnson & Johnson to get its financial profile into shape.
The Horsham, Pa., company acquired an exclusive license to offer as part of its weight-loss regimen a version of Johnson & Johnson's "wellness" program.
The five-year agreement gives Nutri/System a way to tap into preventive health care, while for Johnson & Johnson, of New Brunswick, N.J., the arrangement opens up a new consumer market for its "Live for Life" health-promotion program.
Johnson & Johnson devised the system 15 years ago to help improve the health and lower costs of health care for its own employees and later parlayed it into an over-$10 million-a-year business targeted at corporate clients.
The new agreement "presents us with an opportunity to test" whether there's a way to reach a broader audience, a Johnson & Johnson spokesman said.
Under the arrangement, Nutri/System's customers at both company and franchisee-owned centers will fill out a questionnaire devised by Johnson & Johnson's Health Management unit.
The answers will be fed into a computer to determine a health-risk profile.
Classes on topics such as stress and weight management, based on Johnson & Johnson material, will augment Nutri/System's meal plans.
The companies didn't disclose many financial details.
Joseph DiBartolomeo, a Nutri/System spokesman, said Johnson & Johnson eventually will install a computer and the health-profile software in each of the 800 or so Nutri/System centers.
Johnson & Johnson will recover its costs from the sale to Nutri/System of health promotion materials such as books and brochures.
Mr. DiBartolomeo said he doesn't expect Nutri/System's fees to change significantly after the new services are introduced.
A one-year program costs about $250 in addition to about $55 to $72 a week for the diet meals.
The partnership is "a reasonably good fit," said David Calkins, chief of general internal medicine at the New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
Dr. Calkins, who had studied the Live for Life program, said the new Nutri/System product is similar to weight-loss programs offered by many hospitals.
"The difference is in its national scale."
Diet-center companies have been tinkering with their programs to climb out of a five-year industry slump.
Last year the business shrank 5% to $1.99 billion, said John LaRosa, editor of Diet Business Bulletin, Valley Stream, N.Y.
Jenny Craig Inc. of Del Mar, Calif., recently altered its diet program to emphasize weight maintenance.
Jenny Craig's revenue fell 11% in the fiscal first half ended Dec. 31, while net income dropped 46% to $8.9 million.
Weight Watchers International Inc., a division of Pittsburgh-based H.J. Heinz Co., now offers simplified meal plans and started an at-home program that includes an $89.99 kit and a toll-free help line for clients who don't want to go to Weight Watchers' diet classes.
In the quarter ended Oct. 27, attendance at Weight Watchers' classes was down 10% from a year earlier.
Nutri/System was the most badly hurt of the big three (which includes Weight Watchers and Jenny Craig) in the industry.
Last April, bank creditors seized the heavily indebted company's assets and forced the closure of 283 company-owned outlets.
The company eventually filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection.
Last December, Nutri/System's assets were purchased for $15 million by a Chicago investor group led by Michael Heisley, now the company's chairman.
Of the 1,200 or so Nutri/System outlets, about 800 remain.
