USX Corp., aided by strong demand for steel and by special gains, earned $37 million, compared with a year-ago fourth-quarter loss of $343 million.
The steel, oil and natural gas concern said sales rose almost 1% to $4.6 billion from $4.58 billion.
USX's improvement was led by its U.S. Steel Group, which took advantage of higher demand and prices.
It earned $124 million, or $1.67 a share, compared with a loss of $225 million, or $3.80 a share, in the year-earlier quarter.
The latest period was bolstered by gains of about $83 million on an after-tax basis.
They included the reversal of litigation charges and income from a subordinated note from the 1988 sale of Transtar Inc.
The year-ago period included an after-tax charge of $166 million for items including legal and environmental accruals.
Sales jumped 28% to $1.55 billion from $1.21 billion.
Shipments climbed 17% to 2.7 million net tons from 2.3 million net tons.
And U.S. Steel's mills ran at 98% of capacity.
"It's a management feat to run at 98% capacity," said John C. Tumazos, an analyst with Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette.
"A 98% operating rate permits them to make more steel, ship more steel, have lower costs and higher revenue."
But U.S. Steel also shipped more "nonprime," or lower-quality steel, in the period, producing a lower operating profit per ton than expected, said Anthony B. Rizzuto, an analyst with Bear Stearns & Co.
He had projected a $25 profit per ton, but the figure came in at $18.
Thomas M. Van Leeuwen, an analyst with CS First Boston, said the company was clearing out inventory.
Still, U.S. Steel's earnings are an indication that "there's no question that the steel industry has turned the corner and that the outlook continues to be bright," said Mr. Van Leeuwen.
In a statement, USX Chairman Charles A. Corry concurred, saying first-quarter orders are at high levels.
"Flat-rolled markets key to U.S. Steel's commercial strategies remain strong, most notably automotive," he said.
"Construction, appliance and tin-mill markets also remain strong."
While U.S. Steel enjoyed higher prices, USX's Marathon and Delhi units were hampered by low prices for oil and natural gas liquids, respectively.
The low prices forced Marathon to take an inventory market valuation reserve of $187 million on a pretax basis in the period, larger than the $98 million reserve in the year-earlier period.
Including other charges and gains, which in total cut net income by $117 million, Marathon recorded a net loss of $88 million, or 31 cents a share, compared with a loss of $120 million, or 42 cents a share, in 1992's fourth quarter.
The year-earlier net included the inventory valuation reserve and other charges and gains totaling an after-tax net charge of $62 million.
Sales fell nearly 10% to $2.92 billion from $3.24 billion.
"The drop in oil prices clearly took its toll, but it was made up largely by better refining margins," said Robin Shoemaker, an analyst with Lehman Brothers.
"The story of 1993 was a huge improvement in the refining and marketing business."
Indeed, Marathon said operating income from refining, marketing and transportation reached $111 million in the quarter, up sharply from $3 million a year ago.
The improvement was spurred by "higher refined product margins reflecting lower crude costs, stronger retail margins and decreased refinery maintenance costs," the company said.
Meanwhile, Delhi Group, USX's natural gas subsidiary, earned $2.1 million, or 15 cents a share, in the fourth quarter, down from $3.1 million, or 22 cents a share, a year ago.
Sales climbed nearly 5% to $143.5 million from $136.9 million.
Delhi's results were hobbled by lower average prices and volumes for natural gas liquids, such as propane and butane, and a fall in natural gas transportation margins and volumes.
