The Clinton administration hopes its new proposal to ban smoking at work will help fire up the economy.
The White House plan on indoor-air quality estimates that U.S. businesses will reap an $8.4 billion annual windfall from increased productivity.
But some of the figures came from a group that would probably gain from the proposal.
The government estimates that 83% of worker-health complaints related to problems with indoor-air quality would be eliminated if the proposal were to become law.
The changes would prevent three million severe headaches and 4.5 million upper-respiratory symptoms over the next 45 years.
As many as 32,502 cancer deaths and 577,818 heart-disease deaths could be avoided in that same period, the administration projects.
The administration estimates that the rules would cost businesses $6.6 billion a year, much of that coming from improvements and maintenance of air-conditioning and heating systems as well as training for an employee designated to monitor company systems.
In the first year, the plan would cost corporations an additional $1.5 billion to set up separate rooms and vent them to the outside, if employers choose to do that.
While the Occupational Safety and Health Administration largely regulates the safety of workplaces with 10 or more employees, agency officials contend that the rule would apply to all workplaces, including smaller locations.
A 1989 study by the Energy Department says that 46% of buildings have regular maintenance done on their ventilation systems, leaving about 2.3 million buildings needing to step up maintenance, which OSHA estimates would cost about $2,000 a year for each building.
The benefits side is tougher to calculate.
The administration used figures generated by the National Energy Management Institute, a private operation of the sheet-metal industry and the sheet-metal workers' union.
The group's members stand to gain from any broad retrofitting of heating and air-conditioning systems.
Alexander Willman, director of engineering at the trade group, calls the administration's plan "very progressive."
Five years ago, the group studied 13 types of nonindustrial buildings, classifying them by how "sick" they were.
The study was conducted before many smoking bans had been instituted, taking smokers away from their work and into the street for their habit.
For the 10% of buildings that had the worst air quality, the group estimated that worker productivity could be lifted 6% as a result of fewer illnesses, including headaches.
Another 30% of the buildings posed some health-related problems -- and had the potential to raise productivity 3.5%.
Overall, average productivity gain would be 3.5%, or about 30 minutes of production time for a full-time worker each day.
To be conservative, the administration reduced that estimate to 3% and then multiplied by payroll costs.
As a result, the administration determined that the proposal would save companies $15 billion a year, or roughly $8.4 billion more than they would spend on the changes.
The proposal excluded any reduction in company health-care or workers-compensation costs.
