Novell Inc., the world leader in networking software, has narrowed the choice of its chief executive officer to three people, including the highest-ranking woman executive at International Business Machines Co.
People familiar with the search say that Ellen Hancock, an IBM group executive who oversees IBM's computer networking business, is being considered as the successor for Raymond Noorda, Novell's chief executive.
Mr. Noorda, who is nearing 70 years old, said he will step down as chief executive this summer, though he plans to remain as chairman.
IBM declined to comment on the consideration of Ms. Hancock for the job.
People familiar with Ms. Hancock, however, said they believe she would be unlikely to take the job and would remain at IBM.
The selection of Mr. Noorda's successor comes at a critical time, since the Provo, Utah, software maker last week made one of the biggest acquisitions in software history, agreeing to pay more than $1 billion in stock for WordPerfect Corp.
Mr. Noorda last week said he was "actively looking for a successor" among outsiders.
Yesterday, Novell declined to provide the names of candidates.
But people familiar with the search say that besides Ms. Hancock, Novell is seriously discussing the top post with Ronald J. Whittier of Intel Corp., or Robert Frankenberg of Hewlett-Packard Co..
At Intel, which supplies the microchip that powers most personal computers, Mr. Whittier oversees relationships with major PC software suppliers, including Novell and Microsoft.
Mr. Frankenberg has been responsible for various forays into the PC market by Hewlett-Packard and is highly regarded by the industry.
None of the candidates returned telephone calls.
Of the three, Ms. Hancock elicits the most enthusiasm, since she is considered among IBM's most capable executives and is highly knowledgeable about the network-software needs of large organizations.
As it adds power to its products, Novell is expected to appeal increasingly to customers who manage large computer networks.
By hiring Ms. Hancock, Novell also would satisfy its need for a high-profile spokesperson for the company, able to engage in public debates with such key rivals as Microsoft Corp.'s William Gates.
Any replacement for Mr. Noorda, however, would have to live with a flurry of recent acquisitions, of which the proposed WordPerfect deal is the largest.
Mr. Noorda's promise to stay involved in Novell's business also could present problems for a new chief executive.
"Ray Noorda is not hands-off in anything.
So the opportunity for second-guessing the new CEO is very significant," said Terrence Quinn, an analyst at Furman Selz.
