Ted Turner wants Asian political leaders to relax: Despite his reputation for making outrageous remarks, the television entrepreneur says he doesn't expect to stir up trouble in Asia.
"I come from a country that wants to tell other countries what to do," Mr. Turner told Western and Asian TV executives during a speech at a conference here.
"But I personally don't believe that any country is in a position to tell any other country what to do."
Coming from a man whose proclamations once earned him the nickname "The Mouth of the South," it was an artful example of diplomacy.
Mr. Turner, chairman of Atlanta-based Turner Broadcasting System Inc., may have learned from the experience of another media baron, Rupert Murdoch.
Soon after Mr. Murdoch's News Corp. acquired control of the Asian satellite TV broadcaster Star TV last August, he delivered a speech warning that satellite television posed a threat to totalitarian regimes everywhere.
That idea apparently set off alarm bells in some Asian countries, particularly China, whose leaders don't relish the idea of allowing foreign TV broadcasters to egg on local dissidents.
Ever since then, News Corp. has been struggling to reassure China that Star TV isn't in the business of exporting revolution.
Like Mr. Murdoch, Mr. Turner has big ambitions in Asia.
He is touring the region with his wife, Jane Fonda, as Turner Broadcasting prepares to expand the international reach of its Cable News Network.
It also is about to launch a cartoon and movie service in Asia, drawing on the company's MGM film and Hanna-Barbera cartoon libraries.
CNN's expansion in the region comes as its chief rival, Britain's BBC World Service Television, is in retreat.
Earlier this week, Star TV announced that it would stop broadcasting the BBC to China, Taiwan, South Korea and Hong Kong next month, replacing it with a movie channel.
By dropping the BBC, Mr. Murdoch may be able to mollify Beijing, which is furious over a recent BBC documentary that made unflattering suggestions about the sex life of Chairman Mao.
But at the same time, he is handing Mr. Turner's CNN an opportunity to draw more viewers in the region.
At present, CNN can be received in about nine million homes and 677 hotels across Asia.
Meanwhile, Turner executives are seeking Indian government approval for a plan under which Doordarshan, India's state-owned broadcaster, would cooperate with Turner in broadcasting CNN programming and producing news programs to be shown by both organizations.
CNN already has a less-extensive cooperation accord with Beijing's China Central Television.
By this year's fourth quarter, the launch of three satellites will expand the reach of both CNN and the cartoon and movie channel.
Turner executives also are considering acquiring capacity on other satellites to increase their coverage of Southeast Asia and India.
"Currently, our satellite network in Asia is inferior to Star," Mr. Turner conceded in his speech.
By year end, however, he predicted Turner and four allied broadcasters "will give Star a real run for their money."
To some extent, Turner Broadcasting's future is in the hands of its two largest shareholders, Tele-Communications Inc. and Time Warner Inc.
In an interview, Mr. Turner ducked the question of which shareholder will play a bigger role in shaping that future.
"It's like if you're dating two different girls," he said.
"You don't want to talk about how you feel about either one in the pages of a newspaper."
Despite his company's ambitions in the region, Mr. Turner pronounced himself cautious about prospects for Western media companies hoping to mesmerize Asian TV audiences.
He said CNN's international service is profitable, thanks partly to synergies with the U.S. arm.
But Mr. Turner added that he doesn't know "when or if" the new cartoon and movie channel will show a profit.
Referring to the profusion of competing channels, he slipped back into the kind of frank talk that helped make him famous: "The more of them there are, the harder it will be to make money.
We could all lose our buns out here."
