The European venture-capital industry is trying to make life easier for investors.
Funds in different European countries currently follow widely varying accounting rules, making it tough to compare fund managers' performances.
Such differences are believed to be one of the main obstacles stymieing the development of venture capital in Europe.
The Brussels-based European Venture Capital Association recently produced long-awaited guidelines for measuring the performance of funds.
The guidelines would oblige managers to measure their funds' performance in a similar fashion and report results to investors on a regular basis.
That should allow an investor, a pension fund for example, to track and compare its various investments.
"There's a great need for performance data in Europe," says Susan Lloyd, director of investor relations for Schroder Ventures, a global venture-capital network affiliated with Schroders PLC.
"U.S. investors in particular are used to having industry statistics.
They want some hard data on how funds have performed."
Common principles should help in the effort to determine European fund managers' skill at picking investment opportunities.
In addition, once the investments are realized and the cash paid back to the investors, they would be able to compare the fees and costs charged by fund managers.
The association hopes to have the proposed guidelines, which are the result of months of painstaking work, in effect by next year.
That may prove a bit optimistic, say industry officials who worry that ironing out Europe's maze of different accounting and tax rules is likely to be an uphill struggle.
The common performance principles are only a first step, however.
By proposing the guidelines, the association has a far more ambitious goal in mind: the publication of Europe-wide statistics on venture-capital funds' performances.
Such industry-wide data are readily available in the U.S.
In Europe, such figures don't yet exist even at the national level.
But the venture-capital industry in the U.K., France and the Netherlands have started studies and a few pilot projects to meet that objective.
"It's a huge task," says Ms. Lloyd of Schroder Ventures.
