The punch line of this story is improved customer service in the American economy.
I say that up front to be reader-friendly, because a bit of a tale follows by way of illustration.
Recently a smoke detector expired in my home, loudly as is their wont.
Some detective work located the maker, which had been acquired and moved across country.
But now it had an 800 number, so location didn't much matter.
Score one point for this and other businesses that have added toll-free lines (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ March 22, 1994).
About 80% of that traffic is consumer use.
From there, things went downhill.
I asked for customer service and was switched to a young woman who, I'd have to say, was in the wrong department.
The tone of voice was the first clue.
You know what I mean: an immediate indication of weary impatience.
It didn't help that I was having to describe a mechanical problem, which is not my strong suit.
Her apparent eagerness to get off the line (to do what?) only increased as I tried to explore my options and what they were likely to cost.
Ultimately, she said I'd have to take the detector to an area distributor, which would then ship it back for "cleaning and recalibrating" ($14, plus handling).
No, I couldn't ship it myself.
And, as it turned out, the distributor wouldn't, because it only dealt wholesale.
I was given the name of a local dealer who helpfully told me that I should just buy a simpler replacement.
Or I could just vacuum out dust myself.
I belabor the background because there were two elements -- the "get lost" tone and the repair runaround -- that reminded me of the bad old days.
Back then, a distant company would give you the business.
Now that seems unusual.
That reflects a sea change in corporate attitudes, extending from the auto companies to the reigning retailing chains that have made customer care their hallmark.
Survey data suggest business, especially in services, was boosting customer relations budgets through the early 1990s.
(But training is four times as likely for staff or line employees as for upper management, according to the International Customer Service Association.)
Investments of this sort may be paying off.
Highest marks for customer satisfaction, as measured by the Indiana firm of Walker: CSM for its corporate clients, rose to 67% from 56% in financial services between 1988 and 1992 and by seven percentage points in telecommunications between 1991 and 1993.
(Interestingly, both those industries cost consumers more at common entry points -- checking accounts, phone and cable access -- than they once did.)
But inputs aren't sufficient for this kind of output.
It's greater competition that's lit a fire under previously complacent companies.
That's come from breaking down barriers -- regulatory, technological and trade.
Without that, little quality-consciousness would have set in, despite all the gurus and prizes.
Those sectors of U.S. industry with the most "competitive intensity" -- autos, electronics, retail -- are the most satisfying to customers, says Dan Finkelman of management consultant McKinsey & Co.
But the showdown over service in such fields, he says, comes only among players that can cover the "table stakes" of price, quality and features (or product development) and enter the game.
Promptness and courtesy are just part of what keeps us coming back to a business.
When it comes to products, we also want reliability, technical parity with the Joneses and economy in purchase price and operation.
In the service sector, we expect knowledge, a range of choices and adaptability to our needs.
In selling to business, the best companies wrap themselves tightly around a customer, a common example being Procter & Gamble and its relationship with Wal-Mart.
The service kick probably got started in Japan, whose people remain some of the world's most demanding in this regard.
Trade, particularly when followed by overseas investment in distribution and then production by the Japanese, has succeeded in importing those standards to the U.S.
The record is spottier in Europe, which has been more protectionist.
Indeed, Americans may be getting ahead of themselves in their expectations.
That's the warning from a source synonymous with customer satisfaction, Dave Power of J.D. Power & Associates.
This Southern California firm was a pioneer in rating auto-buyer attitudes, and has expanded to other goods and services.
Mr. Power says that thanks to improved media information (yes, we've shaped up our products, too), expectations have risen "faster than the ability to deliver," and some companies promise more than they provide.
At least, that was his finding in a major survey four years ago.
J.D. Power is doing another this year.
To see dissatisfaction, look at the major U.S. airlines, which have competed like mad (although only among themselves, domestically) but won little favor.
Where were the friendly skies?
Anyone who's waited on a help line for a computer technician knows that some promises to "always be there" are hollow.
Yet a note to a company of any sort generally pays off -- and, thanks to faxes and e-mail, is expeditious.
(Oddly, perhaps, journalists and others in the information industry may be some of the least conscientious about replying; perhaps we were exempted from the customer-service seminars along with the top dogs.)
Companies can misplace their attention to the customer.
A car dealer who spruces up the waiting lounge forgets that his client would rather be spared the stay.
And Mr. Power remembers the most famous refutation of the simple dote-on-'em approach: the demise of the corner grocer, who "knew his customers" yet watched them flee to the supermarkets where they got a better selection, cheaper prices and free parking.
Much consumer irritation has stemmed from an inability of business to be able to process a request or provide information quickly and competently.
(You wonder why companies often assign their greenest or least-valued personnel as gatekeepers to the public.
Thank goodness for well-designed voice mail.)
As long as so much of the U.S. work force is ill-equipped, by skills or manners, to handle routine inquiries, this is going to be a problem.
But computerization is an answer.
The on-line office can get answers fast.
In the end, however, helpfulness is best transmitted by a cheerful voice or the smoothness of a procedure for resolving difficulties.
My recent exception just underscores the progress.
Across America, the smoke from consumer ire has triggered all the right alerts.
