No one is irreplaceable, George Mitchell is the first to argue.
But President Clinton is going to miss the Senate majority leader when he's gone.
The Maine Democrat's announcement last Friday that he would retire from the Senate after this year, in good health at age 60 and at the peak of his power, confounded all of official Washington and jarred his fellow Democrats -- most of all the man in the White House.
Sen. Mitchell has been pivotal to the Clinton victories to date, and the administration's biggest challenge, health-care reform, is ahead.
His departure "to consider other challenges" -- potentially a Supreme Court seat or the baseball commissioner's post -- was hardly good news for the Clinton administration's troubled health-care initiative.
His leaving still could be turned to advantage as Sen. Mitchell redoubles his efforts to sell Mr. Clinton's program.
Yet it was with good reason that the president quizzed the senator about his decision to retire, in a post-dinner talk with Sen. Mitchell at the White House late Thursday, and again in a late-night phone call after the senator had returned home.
"I can't think of anyone who can replace him," says Sen. Jim Sasser, a Tennessee Democrat and Mitchell friend, and for that reason, many Republicans privately are gleeful.
In five years as majority leader, he has been able to unite the fractious Senate Democrats at crucial moments, as he did in passing President Clinton's economic program last year, through personal persuasion, public argument and adroit use of his office's levers of power.
Yet even before Sen. Mitchell departs, his lame-duck status could undercut his leverage with balky party colleagues.
His leaving sets off a succession struggle among Senate Democrats just when they most need stability.
And it throws Maine's Senate seat up for grabs, complicating Democrats' efforts to protect their 56-44 majority.
Sen. Mitchell, back home in Maine for the weekend to make his announcement there, dismissed the hand-wringing in his party.
"The major elements of the president's agenda can be enacted into law this year," he said in an interview, citing health-care, campaign-finance and welfare reform, and a crime bill.
"And I'll do everything I can to see that's true."
The liberal senator, in fact, has his own stake in achieving health-care reform.
Early in his 14-year Senate career, he made it a personal priority, along with environmental legislation.
As majority leader during the Bush administration, he put the issue at the top of the Democrats' agenda long before Mr. Clinton had emerged as the party's presidential candidate.
His relations with colleagues range from warm to respectful, and some Democrats will want to help the majority leader pass a health bill in deference to his legacy.
Sen. Mitchell, it seems, already is playing that card.
Laughing, he said, "Some of the senators, when I called to tell them I was retiring, said, `What can I do to help you?'
And I said, `Gee, you can vote for health care.'"
Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, said his first reaction after Sen. Mitchell called Friday was glum: "Lame duck.
That's it."
But Sen. Leahy said he has concluded Sen. Mitchell will remain effective: "He's a master tactician, and he still has that ability.
He still determines when legislation comes up in the Senate, and he still has a great deal of respect among senators."
Even the embryonic struggle among Senate Democrats to succeed him might work to Sen. Mitchell's -- and Mr. Clinton's -- benefit.
Potential contenders among more conservative Democrats, such as Louisiana Sen. John Breaux, will be eager to showcase their support for president and party on such an important issue.
In part because Sen. Mitchell's decision was so unexpected, no clear candidates have emerged.
The popular David Pryor of Arkansas, currently a midlevel leader, could be a favorite, although senators have questions about his health.
Kentucky Sen. Wendell Ford will find it hard to go beyond his current No. 2 post.
Sens. Sasser and Leahy don't rule out candidacies, and Sen. Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia is a possibility.
Meanwhile, speculation centers on junior lawmakers -- among them Sen. Breaux, Mitchell protege Thomas Daschle of South Dakota and Harry Reid of Nevada -- who were elected in 1986 with the help of Sen. Mitchell, then head of Senate Democrats' campaign committee.
It was Sen. Mitchell's role that year in helping the party regain Senate control that propelled him to victory two years later as leader.
As for Maine's Senate seat, Rep. Olympia Snowe or her husband, Gov. John McKernan, were immediately considered potential GOP candidates.
Sen. Mitchell predicts Rep. Thomas Andrews, another liberal Democrat, will succeed him.
More generally, chances of Republicans taking over the Senate have been counted as slim, and Sen. Mitchell said, "We'll hold the Senate, I'm confident of that."
But without Sen. Mitchell, that Senate will likely be tougher terrain for Mr. Clinton, especially if Democrats emerge from this year's elections with a smaller majority.
The senator's value to the White House was evident last week when he secured defeat of a proposed balanced-budget constitutional amendment.
The impassioned public arguments of the former prosecutor and federal judge gave nervous colleagues ammunition against the popular proposal.
He engineered an alternative that was certain to fail but gave a few Democrats political cover.
Privately, he won over waverers -- shamed them, a senator said -- by knowingly asking each: How would you vote if votes were secret?
Sen. Mitchell's decision to walk away from power was a rare act in a capital more accustomed to seeing older lawmakers hang on.
He insisted it had nothing to do with the frustrations of public life that have been driving some lower-ranked lawmakers to leave.
Nevertheless, "he was feeling the strain of the job," says former Sen. Warren Rudman, a New Hampshire Republican who lunched with Sen. Mitchell recently, and whose own retirement after 1992 was a surprise.
At the same time, Mr. Clinton's 1992 victory seemed to put out of reach Sen. Mitchell's dreams of the job with more power -- the presidency.
Only his closest friends and his three brothers and a sister in Maine weren't shocked.
"Everything he's done he's been successful at, but he's never overstayed his time," says Portland, Maine, lawyer Harold Pachios, a longtime friend.
"He just wasn't interested in serving another full Senate term," says former Sen. Edmund Muskie, Sen. Mitchell's mentor and the man he succeeded in the Senate.
"At 60, if you're going to make a change, now is the time to consider it."
Sen. Mitchell plans to complete his third book, a history of democracy's victory over communism.
Meanwhile, he says, if either the baseball owners offer him a job or the president offers him a future opening on the Supreme Court, "I'll consider it."
But he stresses that his decision, at bottom, had nothing to do with such options.
"My concept of public service is, it's not a permanent thing," he says.
"I tell people, I am not a powerful person.
I am a person who temporarily holds a position of power."
David Rogers and John Harwood contributed to this article.
