Fleet Financial Group Inc. aims to cut from 3,000 to 5,000 jobs, or as much as 19% of its total work force in a broad effort to slash operating expenses, people familiar with the initiative say.
The bank holding company initially had as its goal reducing annual costs by $150 million, with "anything over $200 million thought to be a pretty good job," said one person familiar with the program.
But in recent weeks, Fleet insiders have said the final figures, expected to be released this week, could be substantially in excess of $200 million.
Fleet, Providence, R.I., has declared its interest in a merger with another bank of similar size, and analysts say the effort to cut costs would improve its profitability and negotiating position in any combination.
Fleet officials also have said the bank has fallen behind its competitors in efficiency.
Fleet, which is the largest bank in New England and the 15th-largest in the U.S., has about $48 billion in assets and 27,000 employees.
Although Fleet officials wouldn't comment on details, analysts say the program may result in an additional charge of at least $25 million, which would probably be offset by gains in the sale of assets, primarily securities.
In the 1993 third quarter, Fleet took a $125 million restructuring charge to cover severance and office closings expected to result from the cost-cutting initiative.
The charge was offset by $127 million in securities gains.
Planning for the cuts began in July and has involved thousands of employees.
Some worked full time in brainstorming sessions for the program, which the bank calls Fleet Focus.
The company has said the cost-cutting initiative may result in a 50% reduction in expenses in some business areas.
Fleet is moving further toward automated cash machines in retail outlets, telephone banking and other less-expensive means of conducting transactions.
Fleet's efforts come after many other banks, including Citicorp and Shawmut National Corp., a Fleet regional competitor, have instituted cost-cutting programs.
"The shift has been to clearly wring out expenses," says James McDermott, an analyst at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods Inc.
Fleet has said the goal of its cost cutting is to improve profitability and reduce the company's current efficiency ratio -- or cost per dollar of revenue -- to under 60% from the current 67% in the next two years.
Fleet also would like to improve its long-term return on assets to 1.30% to 1.50%, from 1% at Nov. 30, 1993.
The cost cutting will affect only Fleet's banking franchise, and 22,000 bank employees, in the six New England states and New York.
Fleet, benefiting from reduced nonperforming loans, reported record net income for 1993 of $488 million, or $3.01 a share.
Fleet had a capital ratio of about 11.7% at Dec. 31, up from 10.4% in the year-earlier period and above a regulatory minimum of 4%.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Fleet gained 50 cents to $34.875.
