Why would the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, supposedly a staunch defender of American small business, do a complete policy reversal and try to resurrect the dying Clinton health care plan?
The answer is another illustration, if one more were needed, of why Big Business is such an unreliable friend of a free economy.
Let's lift the veil to see how corporate self-interest is driving an effort to hijack the nation's largest, supposedly "grass-roots," business lobby.
Think back two weeks, as virtually all of American business lined up against ClintonCare.
The pooh-bahs of the Business Roundtable had resisted White House pleadings and endorsed an alternative.
The National Association of Manufacturers showed admirable spine, and even the Chamber, after an embarrassing public flip-flop, rejected the Clinton plan.
That phalanx raised the blood pressure at John Dingell's House Energy and Commerce Committee, the Clinton plan's first real congressional gate.
The Duke of Detroit is used to treating that body as his private fief, but business's united front has spooked many of his Democratic vassals.
In particular he doesn't have the votes to pass an "employer mandate," which would force businesses to pay most health costs while government sets all the rules.
Mr. Dingell knows that without a "mandate" ClintonCare is a corpse.
If business won't foot the bill, government will have to raise taxes.
Some form of health reform could still pass, but not the radical, German-style system the White House has designed.
That's why the Clintons talk about compromising on everything except mandates, which are the hook in the fish of the middle class.
Mr. Dingell needs at least some business cover to bait the hook.
He found it at the Chamber's health-policy committee, which met this week and voted 16-7 to endorse an employer mandate, thus reversing Chamber testimony of only two weeks ago.
This might be fair enough if the arguments were evenhanded.
But I'm told the meeting had the air of a staged event dominated by large businesses with a financial stake in ClintonCare.
Small business barely had a voice, though 96% of the Chamber's 215,000 members have fewer than 100 employees.
One of the loudest mandate cheerleaders, for example, was Chrysler lobbyist Walter Maher.
Forceful and passionate, he's Mr. Dingell's pal and private-sector alter ego.
It's no secret that Chrysler stands to benefit as much as any U.S. company from ClintonCare.
As an old-line manufacturer, Chrysler carries huge health care liabilities from its generous labor contracts.
It would love to pass those off onto taxpayers and small business.
So would Ford and GM (through a subsidiary), which also endorsed mandates, despite their recent soaring profits.
The Big Three also had an ally in the chairman of the Chamber health committee, Robert Patricelli.
A Washington health wonk going back to the 1960s, Mr. Patricelli now runs fast-growing Value Health Inc., a managed-care company in Avon, Conn.
What are Value Health's specialties?
Well, would you believe drug and mental-health benefits, both of which would get big new subsidies under the Clinton plan?
Even more intriguing, last month Value Health won a contract from Ford and the United Auto Workers to administer a drug benefits program for 275,000 people nationwide.
That's worth a cool $90 million a year.
Value Health already has Chrysler's drug business in Michigan, says a spokeswoman, and is bidding for it nationwide, too.
And more coincidence: The Patricelli committee also recommended that working spouses not be covered under their husband's or wife's company insurance.
This is also a boon ("megabucks," says one business source) for Chrysler, which offers such a rich plan that it usually lures spouses.
But it also means that family members forced to join different plans might have to see different doctors.
No doubt these men think they're acting out of motives higher than self-interest, and maybe they are.
But what are the Chamber's small business members supposed to think?
They're the ones who get stuck with big new costs under the Clinton plan, while the fat cats who do the voting get the gravy.
The Chamber seems to be proving once again that government power is usually bent to serve the powerful.
All of this is set for a showdown vote at the next Chamber board meeting on Feb. 28.
The Patricelli-Maher line will be that it isn't endorsing ClintonCare per se, because that involves an 80% employer mandate (employees pay 20%).
But the Chamber's endorsement of a 50% mandate is the German model and has been the White House fall-back strategy all along.
Once this hook is in place, the price controls and rationing will come eventually as they have in Germany.
President Clinton knows this, which is why he hailed the Chamber action yesterday morning.
It may be too much to expect a business lobby to stand for liberty, but the U.S. Chamber can't even seem to stand for the general business interest.
Instead it feeds red-meat rhetoric to the provinces even as its insiders try to rescue John Dingell.
If the Chamber is merely going to echo the views of Chrysler and the UAW, why does it even exist?
