Woolworth Corp. said it expects to post a $46 million loss for its fiscal fourth quarter, mainly due to a one-time charge that was more than three times the retailer's original estimate.
But even without the charge, Woolworth said its fourth-quarter results, to be released this week, were hurt by "disappointing sales and heavy promotional activity."
Responding to the news, Moody's Investors Service Inc. lowered its rating on the company's long-term senior debt.
Woolworth's stock closed at $22.50, down 37.5 cents, in composite New York Stock Exchange trading Friday on heavier-than-normal volume.
Woolworth said preliminary losses for the quarter ended Jan. 29 are estimated at $46 million, or 35 cents a share, compared with a profit of $165 million, or $1.26 a share, a year earlier.
It said it took an estimated $168 million charge to cover costs associated with the sale of the company's Woolco stores in Canada to Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
When Woolworth announced the sale in January, it estimated the loss on the transaction at $45 million.
It blamed the increase on inventory markdowns, a delay in closing the deal and higher costs for disposing of stores that weren't sold.
The charge was partially offset by a $145 million pretax reversal of a charge taken in the third quarter.
Woolworth said it estimates that its operating profit was only $2 million in the quarter, down from $286 million a year earlier, showing weakness in the company's business.
Meanwhile, Moody's said it downgraded the rating on Woolworth's senior long-term debt to single-Baa-1 from singleA-3.
Moody's said it was concerned that the company marked down inventories in its continuing stores in addition to those it is selling.
Woolworth had no immediate comment.
Fourth-quarter revenue is estimated to have fallen to $2.82 billion from $3.14 billion a year earlier.
For all of fiscal 1994, Woolworth said it expects to report a loss of $495 million, or $3.76 a share, compared with a profit of $280 million, or $2.14 a share, a year earlier.
The fiscal 1994 results are expected to include a $630 million "repositioning" charge.
Revenue is expected to fall 3.4% to $9.63 billion from $9.96 billion.
