Cranberry juice helps prevent urinary tract infections in elderly women, a new study found, providing scientific validation of a decades-old folk remedy.
Researchers at Harvard Medical School in Boston found that women who drank 10 ounces of a cranberry beverage a day were much less likely to have evidence of urinary tract infection in their urine than women who drank a similar beverage that didn't contain cranberry juice.
The results suggest that cranberry-based drinks could play a role, either alone or in combination with antibiotics, in preventing or treating urinary tract infections.
They are among the most common complaints treated by primary care doctors and by some estimates account for more than $1 billion a year in health costs in the U.S.
They are much more prevalent among women than men.
Cranberry-based drinks have long been considered as a remedy for such infections, but studies dating back to at least 1914 have yielded conflicting evidence of their effectiveness.
"Some things about folk wisdom in health turn out to be true and some turn out to be bogus," said Jerry Avorn, associate professor of medicine at Harvard.
He is lead author of the current report, which he said is the first large-scale scientifically rigorous look at the question.
Dr. Avorn, who is also a geriatrician at Brigham and Women's Hospital, said researchers at Weizmann Institute in Rehovot, Israel, reported in 1991 that cranberries and blueberries contain compounds that may restrict the ability of certain bacteria to stick to the bladder wall where they can lead to urinary tract infections.
The latest study was funded by Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc., Lakeville, Mass.
Dr. Avorn said the company didn't play any role in designing the experiment or in analyzing and interpreting the findings, which appear in today's Journal of the American Medical Association.
The report is based on 153 elderly women, with an average age of 78, who were randomly assigned to daily doses of a cranberry drink or a placebo beverage for six months.
Samples of their urine were gathered once a month.
Neither the women nor the researchers knew who was getting which beverage.
Enough bacteria and white blood cells to indicate infection were found in 15% of urine samples from the cranberry beverage drinkers, compared with 28.1% of those drinking the placebo.
Researchers also found that infections that did occur in women drinking cranberry juice were only 25% as likely to persist beyond one month than in those who didn't get the cranberry drink.
The beneficial effect appeared after four to eight weeks of drinking the juice.
The researchers are now conducting a second trial to determine if younger women, for whom urinary tract infections are more likely to result in painful symptoms, might also benefit from cranberry drinks.
