During the Reagan and Bush years, the Japan Auto Parts Industry Association's most visible face here was James Lake, the K Street lobbyist and well-connected Republican operative.
Over the past seven years, his firm, Robinson, Lake, Lerer & Montgomery/Sawyer Miller Group, has received more than $2.5 million from the autoparts makers and other Japanese clients to put out protectionist brush fires in Congress and the executive branch.
But Mr. Lake's high political profile and connections to Japanese clients attracted unflattering scrutiny during the 1992 Bush campaign, in which he served as an unpaid but highly placed communications strategist.
Now JAPIA, as the Japanese auto association is known, wants to bill itself as a U.S. interest group and has brought in another lobbyist to make its pitch: The 56-year-old Mr. Lake's 36-year-old son, Michael.
Since taking over the JAPIA account last year, the younger Mr. Lake has directed a repackaging of the group as a coalition of U.S. companies whose U.S. employees would be hurt by any efforts to constrain trade with Japan.
With trade tensions between the U.S. and Japan escalating, Mr. Lake's most immediate concern is scrambling to keep auto parts off a list of goods possibly targeted for retaliatory U.S. sanctions in the current fight between the countries over cellular telephones.
He is also advising his Japanese clients to have their U.S. affiliates lobby U.S. lawmakers with the same argument: They're U.S. companies whose jobs will be lost if the U.S. pursues actions under the tough "Super 301" trade provision renewed by the Clinton administration last week.
More broadly, Mr. Lake's ascension represents a significant change in Japan's extensive U.S. lobbying.
While his father used to press Japan's arguments personally, and his clients were rarely seen, the younger Mr. Lake likes to guide from behind the scenes, putting officials of the Japanese companies' U.S. subsidiaries out front.
"Several years ago, high-priced lobbyists would go around," he notes, avoiding any mention of his father.
"Now, we think it's best and most effective to have the clients do their own messages."
No wonder.
Attacks on foreign lobbyists such as those launched by Ross Perot in his 1992 presidential bid have left many lawmakers skittish about setting up private meetings with high-priced foreign representatives.
By contrast, meeting with U.S. executives from back home falls under the more acceptable heading of constituent service -- even when the constituents owe their paychecks to Japan.
"They are now putting an American face on their lobbying," says author Pat Choate, a harsh critic of foreign interests' U.S. lobbying and sometime adviser to Mr. Perot.
The strategy was evident as the U.S. and Japan prepared for last month's fractious trade talks.
Under Mr. Lake's guidance, a number of U.S. executives from Japanese auto-parts companies set up and attended meetings with key U.S. officials and lawmakers.
While arming his clients with "draft talking points" and even draft thank-you notes to send when they got back home, Mr. Lake himself was all but invisible.
Mr. Lake has also helped put together a grass-roots campaign of letterwriting and meetings with lawmakers to stress the danger of job losses in members' districts as a result of trade frictions with Japan.
The plan is so intricate that JAPIA leaders in Tokyo sent it out to members with a flow chart.
Mr. Lake isn't the only second-generation Lake at his firm, which is a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon & Eckhardt.
Jim, Michael's six-minutes-older fraternal twin brother, handles the firm's other big foreign client, the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority, through which Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahyan, the ruler of Abu Dhabi, obtained control of Bank of Credit & Commerce International.
To avoid confusion with his father, who is also known as Jim, Mr. Lake tells clients to ask for "Jim Jr." or "Jimmy" -- even though he isn't a junior and doesn't go by "Jimmy."
The younger Lakes have tracked their father's career, a hybrid of politics and lobbying.
Both of them took temporary leaves from college to work on Ronald Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign, during which their father was a top official, and they helped haul the candidate's luggage.
Michael Lake worked in the Reagan White House for several years until leaving to work on Robert Dole's and then George Bush's 1988 presidential campaigns, then he joined Robinson Lake.
The younger Jim Lake, who had abandoned aspirations to become a fireman, held jobs at the Commerce Department starting in 1985, leaving last year with the arrival of the Clinton administration.
He started at Robinson Lake soon after.
In helping the U.S. subsidiaries of Japanese companies fashion their message, Michael Lake in some ways is simply adopting the same strategy that U.S. companies have long used.
The Big Three auto makers recently ran a radio campaign on the theme, "What America drives drives America," pointing out that 600,000 U.S. jobs depend on them; Andrew Card, transportation secretary during the Bush administration and now a Washington lobbyist, touts the same message at press briefings for the American Automobile Manufacturers Association.
But for the U.S. subsidiaries of Japanese companies, "this was a totally new undertaking," says Mr. Lake.
"They had to realize there was nothing wrong with speaking out.
They're American companies."
Signs of the new pitch are everywhere.
When Honda Motor Co.'s Honda North America Inc. last year held its first major Washington reception -- a usual lobbying trick -- to tout its newest Accord, the company proudly handed out a "Honda in America" binder and flew a banner overhead with the message: "1994 Honda Accord: Made in America for the world."
When Nissan Motor Co.'s Nissan North America Inc. officials wanted to underscore their importance to the U.S. economy, they invited reporters to a meal of chicken, mashed potatoes and iced tea at the Red Sage, a trendy Southwestern-style restaurant near the White House.
Is the new, born-in-America pitch working?
The elder Jim Lake, who's been lobbying for the Japanese as long as anyone in Washington, certainly thinks so.
"It's worked very well," he says.
"For the first time, these companies have unleashed their American workers to explain that their jobs are at risk.
It's the American way."
