Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS Inc. and Loews Corp., is at the center of a storm at R.H. Macy & Co., where he is both a director and an investor.
In recent days, Mr. Tisch, 71 years old, has, along with three other board members, goaded the company's board into placing a higher value on Macy than the company had initially wanted.
He succeeded in increasing the value to $3.6 billion from $3.5 billion and increasing the distribution to unsecured creditors.
Mr. Tisch insists he is seeking a fair value for Macy.
But his stance may push Macy's powerful senior creditors into the arms of Cincinnati-based Federated Department Stores Inc., Macy's unwanted suitor.
Federated has acquired a stake valued at more than $500 million in Macy's senior-secured debt and announced its intention to merge with Macy.
Critics charge that Mr. Tisch is acting in part to protect his own investment in Macy.
And they say his actions threaten the independence of the giant 135-year-old retailer.
He denies both assertions.
"The independence of Macy is not my issue," he says.
"I don't argue out of self-interest.
I'm past that point in my life."
Mr. Tisch, a billionaire through his family's 30.8% stake in Loews, which in turn owns 20% of CBS, favors a low-key, tightfisted personal style.
Despite compensation from Loews and CBS of about $2.5 million a year, Mr. Tisch and his wife Billie drive a two-door Cadillac and park it on the street in New York.
When other directors climbed into waiting chauffeur-driven limousines after a recent Macy board meeting, Mr. Tisch set off on foot.
War broke out in the Macy boardroom in late February when Mr. Tisch discovered that Macy executives had been negotiating with two creditors to put together a reorganization plan.
That plan would have transferred control to Fidelity Investments, which has a large stake in Macy bank debt.
The change in control would have triggered a windfall for Macy Chairman Myron E. Ullman III, who stood to receive 0.75% of the value above $3 billion when the company changed hands-more than some creditors would have received.
Mr. Ullman says the board was fully informed of all talks with creditors, and that no plan with Fidelity had been agreed to.
What irked Mr. Tisch most was the plan's low valuation.
Too little, he charged.
"I grew up with Macy's," he explains.
"It's a very valuable franchise with excellent prospects for the future."
Indeed, Mr. Tisch's love affair with Macy began when he joined the board after Loews participated in the retailer's illfated 1986 leveraged buyout.
His feelings intensified in December 1990, when he and other board members contributed an additional $160 million to help shore up the faltering retailer.
Mr. Tisch told friends at the time that this investment was "one of the greatest deals I've ever done."
Within 13 months, a second $1 billion rescue attempt failed, and Macy filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection.
Loews's portion of the investment, which analysts estimate at $100 million, was virtually worthless.
"It's been disastrous," he says with a shrug.
"My investment is gone for all intents and purposes."
Even a billionaire doesn't like to see an investment fail, his friends say.
"Larry is one of the smartest, shrewdest people I've ever met," says investment banker Gilbert Harrison, who has known Mr. Tisch for more than a decade.
"He doesn't like losing.
It's a blow to his ego."
As part of Loews's investments, Mr. Tisch controls about $52 million worth of junior Macy bonds.
Those bonds would have been worthless under the joint plan with Fidelity, but could receive a substantial recovery under Macy's current plan.
"When Larry was to invest a billion in Macy's to bail them out, we thought he was the white knight," says Bud Konheim, chief executive of Nicole Miller Ltd., a Macy supplier.
"My opinion is Larry's in it for Larry, not for me."
Mr. Tisch won't comment on the Macy board meetings that occured after he learned of the Fidelity negotiations.
But people who attended them say the marathon sessions that led on March 22 to the $3.6 billion valuation were highly contentious.
Mr. Tisch swung into action in mid-February.
He demanded that the board be told about Macy's deal with Fidelity.
On February 28, the board met to hear what Mr. Ullman had in mind.
Arthur Newman of the Blackstone Group, Macy's leading financial adviser, told the board Macy was worth no more than $3.5 billion.
That was $200 million less than it had been worth when Mr. Tisch first invested, even though the company's revenue had grown almost 40% since then.
The company's only hope to stay independent, the advisers told the board, was to forge an alliance with a powerful creditor, such as Fidelity Investments.
Fidelity's mutual funds own $490 million of Macy senior debt.
Mr. Tisch disagreed.
He insisted the five-member finance committee, which he chairs, hear from Macy's unsecured creditors, the bondholders and tradesmen who likewise believe that the retailer is worth more than $3.5 billion.
On March 10, the finance committee convened to hear from the bondholders' bankers.
Mr. Tisch was "entranced" by the picture they presented, say people familiar with the meeting: Macy might be worth as much as $4 billion.
Mr. Tisch erupted, angry that Macy's advisers were pushing a lower figure.
"How can I believe your $3.5 billion, when you were telling us that the company could stay in bankruptcy until 1996?" he yelled at Macy's own advisers, according to people who were there.
The senior creditors paraded in a few days later.
While eating Macy's famous chocolate-laden muffins, the bankers tried to make the board swallow their low-ball assessment of Macy.
Mr. Tisch would have none of it.
According to people present, he said repeatedly, "but the bondholders say Macy is worth $4 billion."
The inconclusive get-together set the stage for a series of fractious meetings that started at 9 p.m.
Sunday, March 20, and lasted until noon Tuesday.
Mr. Tisch says he won the backing of directors Harold Williams, Louis Page representing Hong Kong magnate Sir Run Run Shaw, and mall developer A. Alfred Taubman.
No one seems happy with the proposal Macy put before creditors at a closed-door meeting last week.
At the meeting, Mr. Ullman refused to say whether it had unanimous backing from the board.
And Mr. Tisch winces when asked about it.
In the end, he says, Macy will go to the "fairest" bidder, he says.
"I can only do what's right."
