The Food and Drug Administration said there is growing evidence that tobacco companies deliberately maintain the level of nicotine in cigarettes at addictive levels.
The FDA's statement marked the federal government's latest attack on the tobacco industry.
The FDA's finding, if confirmed, could provide a legal basis for FDA regulation of cigarettes as a drug, according to FDA Commissioner David Kessler.
But acknowledging that such regulatory action could have "dramatic effects" on society, Dr. Kessler suggested that the agency wouldn't act without a directive from Congress.
There have been various proposals for almost 20 years that the FDA regulate cigarettes, and it isn't considered likely that Congress will act now.
Nonetheless, several government actions during the past 14 months have made business increasingly difficult for the tobacco industry in the U.S.
"The Clinton administration is the first to have been willing to acknowledge the extent of the public health harm caused by tobacco," says Matthew Myers, an attorney that represents major health groups on smoking issues.
The Clinton administration has proposed sharply raising the excise tax on cigarettes to help pay for health-care reform, and several tobacco experts said that the report that the FDA is considering regulating cigarettes as a drug should strengthen the government's hand.
"This is going to support the government's case for a tax and it's going to make it harder for the industry to fight against it," says S. Leigh Ferst, a tobacco analyst at Prudential Securities Inc., a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
Already causing major problems for the industry is the Environmental Protection Agency report issued last year that said that second-hand cigarette smoke causes lung cancer, a finding that served as a powerful tool in prodding businesses, restaurants, local governments and even sports stadiums across the country to ban or severely restrict smoking to avoid liability for subjecting people to such smoke.
Last week, Surgeon General Dr. Joycelyn Elders urged a ban on cigarette advertising directed at teenagers.
The FDA's comment, which many view as a change in position, came in response to petitions from the Coalition on Smoking OR Health, which comprises the American Heart Association, the American Lung Association and the American Cancer Society.
They are urging the FDA to regulate cigarettes as drugs.
Drugs are regulated under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
A product can be categorized as a drug if it is deemed to be for therapeutic or diagnostic use or to affect the structure or function of the body.
Dr. Kessler said that the FDA traditionally hasn't asserted jurisdiction over most cigarette products, although there isn't any exemption for them under the act's definition of drugs.
"Evidence is accumulating that suggests that cigarette manufacturers may intend that their products contain nicotine to satisfy an addiction," Dr. Kessler wrote in his letter.
Tobacco Institute Disagrees Thomas Lauria, spokesman for the Tobacco Institute, assailed the FDA commissioner's statements, and said the agency's evidence isn't significant.
"They have been raising this issue since the '60s," Mr. Lauria said.
"The fact is tobacco isn't a drug, and is already being sufficiently regulated in every aspect."
But Scott Ballin, vice president, public affairs, at the heart association, said that evidence gathered by that organization and the FDA shows a "very calculated and intended effort" by the tobacco industry to control the amount of nicotine in cigarettes.
He said companies are actively studying ways to extract nicotine from tobacco and pack it into cigarettes.
"The tobacco industry is in the drug business.
We know it.
People who are desperately fighting their addiction to nicotine know it," Mr. Ballin said.
"And now the FDA knows it."
The FDA's Dr. Kessler said that while technology exists to remove nicotine from cigarettes or control its level in them, cigarettes are still marketed with sufficient nicotine to "produce and sustain addiction."
Mr. Lauria and cigarette-company officials deny that there is any deliberate manipulation of nicotine levels in cigarettes.
The companies argue that cigarettes that are extremely low in nicotine have failed to catch on with smokers.
A few years ago, Philip Morris Cos. dropped Next, a cigarette with its lowest nicotine level to date, after "it was rejected by consumers," a company spokeswoman said.
Reps. Mike Synar (D., Okla.) and Richard Durbin (D., Ill.) have sponsored legislation that would give the FDA stronger and broader authority to regulate the manufacture, sale and promotion of tobacco products.
"That piece of legislation has never made it out of committee, and I don't expect it to this time, either," Mr. Lauria said.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said about 400,000 Americans die from smoking every year.
About 45 million Americans smoke, and a recent study released by Dr. Elders said at least 3.1 million teenagers smoke, an increase from last year.
Eben Shapiro in New York contributed to this article.
