HEALTH-CARE LOBBYISTS move to deluge lawmakers during the Easter recess.
The Health Care Reform Project, including backers of both the Clinton plan and a government-paid system, sends a million-piece mailing to 16 congressional districts that declares: "Insurance companies are spending MILLIONS to kill health-care reform."
The Campaign for Health Security, a 30-member coalition for universal coverage, produces TV and radio ads that will first air in five congressional districts.
The National Federation of Independent Business is heading to Florida to stir smallbusiness owners' complaints about the Clinton plan.
"The one that really gets them is the paperwork," says lobbyist John Motley.
Meantime, an association representing big companies on benefit matters begins plotting how to combat the payroll taxes in two House committees' plans.
The Campaign for Health Security urges "legislation that guarantees every American quality health-care coverage like every member of Congress has."
A NEW SHOWDOWN looms with North Korea over its nuclear arsenal.
Spent fuel from a nuclear reactor expected to be shut down temporarily this summer could enable the North Koreans to make two or three more bombs, possibly doubling its arsenal, intelligence analysts warn.
The International Atomic Energy Agency wants its inspectors to be there for the closedown.
Some in the Pentagon suggest that attacking the plant during the shutdown would be one way to destroy it without creating a radioactive plume.
The mere threat could force North Korea to keep the plant running, which would eventually overcook the plutonium and make it unusable for bomb-making.
But some warn that loose talk about raids is dangerously provocative.
WHITE HOUSE WOMEN grumble that they don't have equal clout on the job.
Political director Joan Baggett, after a maternity leave, unhappily finds much of her work is handled by male aides who are closer to Clinton.
White House aide Ann Walker gets a new boss, Donald Baer, whose post includes overseeing the research operation she heads.
Other female aides privately complain that women hold positions of real influence only on the first lady's staff.
Women's groups complain, too.
Though President Clinton has more female aides than past presidents did, "there are not many women in his most immediate inner circle," says the National Organization of Women's Kim Gandy.
"Presidents surround themselves still with their buddies," adds Harriett Woods of the National Women's Political Caucus.
But Ricki Seidman, the president's scheduler, rises; she suggested the Clintons' Gridiron dinner lampoon of the "Harry and Louise" health-insurance commercial.
NOW PITCHING: Hillary Rodham Clinton agrees to throw out the first ball at the Chicago Cubs opening-day game April 4 against the New York Mets.
The first lady had accepted the honor last year, but withdrew when her father became fatally ill.
FIRST-BROTHER-IN-LAW Hugh Rodham's campaign manager Michael Copperthite angers Democratic leaders in a private meeting by allegedly calling party officials "hacks" and saying he doesn't need their help.
Copperthite denies the statements, but Washington operatives want him removed from Rodham's Florida Senate campaign.
BABY BELL phone companies prepare an ad campaign urging changes in the Senate telecommunications bill to give them a free hand to offer long-distance service.
The Bells are still deciding whether to use the ad in key senators' states over the Easter recess.
AT&T Chairman Robert Allen personally lobbies against such changes.
CHURCH AND STATE: Justice Ginsburg may be the deciding vote in a ruling on New York state's creation of a "public" school district for a Hasidic community.
Several justices may try to overturn a 1971 precedent and let government accommodate religion in such cases.
Ginsburg has indicated a reluctance to dump precedent.
WELFARE OVERHAUL faces delay as Clinton searches for ways to pay for it.
The president's welfare proposal isn't likely to reach Congress by late April, as was originally expected.
Clinton sends cabinet officials and aides back to work on funding ideas.
A gambling tax is still considered as a "lesser of evils," but a few smaller levies are also examined.
The overhaul plan is still at least $2 billion short of the $7.4 billion needed to fund full implementation by 1999.
In 2001, the price may rise above $8 billion annually.
The indelicate choice: adopt only a modest program or raise taxes.
Republican William Bennett says he would prefer "no reform at all" this year if the bill doesn't focus more on the problem of family breakdown.
MINOR MEMOS: Al Gore says it was so cold in Washington this winter that people were "huddling around Bob Dole for warmth." . . .
At the Senate Finance Committee's health-care retreat this week, lawmakers and staff divided into two teams -- the Mandates and the Nonmandates -- to play darts.
The winner: the Mandates. . . .
Deputy Treasury chief Altman's admissions of additional White House meetings on Madison Guaranty were written on RTC stationery with the motto: "Resolving the Crisis, Restoring the Confidence."
