Bell Atlantic's shares have plunged 21% since the company announced plans to acquire Tele-Communications in a stock swap.
So does this mean Bell Atlantic's shares are finally a buy?
Not so fast.
Wall Street savants are convinced that Bell Atlantic is about to restructure its agreement with TCI to make it more favorable to shareholders of TCI.
Speculation is all over the map.
There might be an increase in the number of Bell Atlantic shares issued to TCI holders as part of the deal, some believe.
Others have been wondering if Bell Atlantic might even cut its dividend as a way of leaving more of the pie for TCI holders.
In any case, the theory goes, a restructuring would cause Bell Atlantic's shares to take a fall.
But while Wall Street whispers, Bell Atlantic's chief executive, Raymond Smith, strongly denies most of the rumblings that traders are chasing.
While he said in an interview that he is "mystified" at the decline in Bell Atlantic shares since the deal was announced, he reiterated that the company isn't cutting the dividend and hasn't considered it.
"That's not going to happen," says Mr. Smith, who made retaining the $2.86-a-share annual dividend for at least five years a central pledge when he announced the TCI deal.
"I'll do all kinds of crazy things, but I'm not cutting the dividend.
I'd cut my throat" first, the Bell Atlantic chairman said.
He added that the stock's slide has provided a "buying opportunity" and that his family is taking advantage of it.
Bell Atlantic closed at 54 5/8, up 7/8.
TCI's Class A shares were unchanged at 26 7/8.
He further maintained that despite the decline in Bell Atlantic shares since the news of the planned TCI acquisition, there aren't any plans to restructure the deal in any way.
And he directly ruled out the possibility that the regional Bell company would issue an extra batch of shares to sweeten the terms of the TCI deal.
Mr. Smith said Bell Atlantic has "no plans to restructure the deal in any manner."
Still, savvy investors on Wall Street think something is up.
And they are placing big bets that any restructuring of the deal would boost TCI's stock price.
"We're buying TCI because we think the terms of a new deal will be favorable to TCI shareholders," says James Engle, a portfolio manager at Wood, Struthers & Winthrop, a unit of Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette.
Talk about a restructuring of the acquisition agreement may be only wishful thinking on the part of TCI holders.
Indeed, the value of the shares in the combined company that they would receive under the accord has sunk, along with Bell Atlantic's stock price, since the deal was announced.
Bell Atlantic's shares traded at 69 1/8 around the time of the mid-October announcement, then zigzagged downward, hitting a low of 53 1/2 in recent weeks.
Some investors are convinced that TCI's chief executive, John Malone, has been pressuring Mr. Smith for a dividend cut of at least 50%.
Why would a man who would be a big holder of Bell Atlantic want a lower dividend?
Because Mr. Malone and TCI shareholders would receive a new class of stock in the acquisition, and that new stock doesn't pay a dividend for five years.
Because Mr. Malone (with his partner, TCI founder Robert Magness) holds what amounts to voting control of TCI and its Liberty Media spinoff, what he demands in this negotiation will be paramount.
But Bell Atlantic's Mr. Smith maintained yesterday that, while he is in touch with Mr. Malone every other day on the merger, the notion of restructuring the deal simply hasn't come up.
A cut in the dividend of the existing Bell Atlantic shares would mean the new class of stock would have a higher value.
Bell Atlantic's annual dividend rate equals 4.9% of yesterday's stock price, an above-market level that appeals to many small investors.
At the very least, investors believe Bell Atlantic will be forced to make some improvement to the agreement because the value of their chunk of the new company has fallen so far.
"It was obvious to me that they would restructure the deal after the first deadline passed for a definitive agreement on Dec. 15," one large investor said yesterday.
"I don't think they will cut the dividend, though Malone wants them do that."
TCI declined to comment.
The rumblings among investors are an example of the increasing pressure Mr. Smith will face as he tries to keep two camps happy in his new shareholder base.
On the one hand, he must consider his traditional shareholders, made up of a large number of small investors who own the stock chiefly for its dividend yield.
When the purchase goes through, however, he also will face the task of keeping TCI shareholders satisfied -- and they are likely to demand growth, rather than predictable dividends, from the company.
Indeed, Bell Atlantic's stock has fallen since the deal was announced in part because its traditional investors have rushed for the exits.
Part of their concern was that, despite assurances otherwise, Bell Atlantic's dividend might be cut.
Talk of a dividend cut heated up late last week after a company executive spoke to analysts.
Yesterday, Michael Elling, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co., said in comments to the firm's clients that he believes it's worth considering selling Bell Atlantic because of the possibility of a dividend cut and swapping into long-distance companies instead.
A growing number of institutional investors believe Bell Atlantic will choose a different route, however.
Wood Struthers' Mr. Engle is fattening the portfolio's TCI holdings based on his bet that Bell Atlantic will add to the number of shares that go to TCI holders as part of the accord.
If the deal is restructured as he expects, he predicts TCI stock will jump to $35 or even higher.
Bell Atlantic and TCI have set a Jan. 31 deadline for a final agreement.
Under the terms of the initial agreement in October, TCI shareholders were to receive roughly 39% of the new entity, or about 279 million shares of the new company, says Mr. Engle.
Because the value of their prospective interest in the company, however, has sunk, some investors believe Bell Atlantic will be forced to come up with a new formula that will give TCI holders a larger stake in the combined company.
