Despite harsh winter weather, the nation's big retailers reported strong sales gains for February.
Even apparel sales, weak in recent months, made some modest gains, some retailers reported.
Home goods continued to sell well.
February sales for stores open at least one year jumped a surprising 6.4% from a year earlier, according to Salomon Brothers Inc.'s index of 22 retailers.
That's almost double the 3.5% gain in January, but it's compared with a weak year-earlier period, when sales gained a meager 0.8%.
Still, Salomon said it was the best monthly gain since December 1992.
PaineWebber Inc.'s index of 21 companies showed same-store sales jumping 5.7% from a year earlier, up from the January figure of 3.2%, and more than double the gain of 2.4% a year earlier.
Analysts were upbeat about the results, although they noted that it was fairly easy to beat last winter's generally poor results.
Still, analysts generally saw the February results as a signal of rising consumer confidence.
Jeffrey Feiner, a retail analyst at Salomon, said, "The numbers are even better than they look.
The weather did hamper things, but still there was good store traffic despite that."
Looking ahead, Margo McGlade, an analyst with PaineWebber, said, "We are in for a good couple of months of very nice sales gains.
We will have to see how things shake out when comparisons get tougher in the summertime."
Department stores and mass-market retailers, buoyed by sales of home furnishings, appliances and other hard goods, generally reported sales on par with or better than analysts' expectations.
Specialty apparel chains had a mixed showing, as analysts expected, with conservative-minded clothiers faring better than the rest.
Some large department-store chains did very well.
J.C. Penney Co. said samestore sales in the month gained 10%.
Penney registered "good sales gains" in every region, with "exceptional" categories including apparel, jewelry, and bedding and bath accessories.
Sears, Roebuck & Co., posted a hefty domestic same-store rise of 13.5%.
Sears's hardgoods, such as appliances, home electronics and furniture, had double-digit increases, but strong gains also came from jewelry, juniors, and men's and women's sportswear.
Cosmetics and fragrances, recently introduced in 22 stores, also showed big increases.
May Department Stores Co., the nation's largest department-store operator, said same-store sales rose 7.8%.
Federated Department Stores Inc., which include Bloomingdale's and Burdines stores, posted a same-store increase of 1.8%.
Some specialty apparel sellers rebounded from weak or lackluster results in recent months.
Talbots Inc., whose women's apparel has fared well during the recent slump, continued to show strong same-store figures with a gain of about 19%.
Gap Inc.'s same-store sales rose 3%.
But not everyone had a good month.
Charming Shoppes Inc.'s same-store sales dropped 3%, and the company blamed winter storms.
Limited Inc. reported flat same-store results for the month.
Among discount-store operators, WalMart Stores Inc., the nation's largest retailer, said February same-store sales rose 9%.
But its Sam's Club warehouse stores saw a 2% same-store decline.
Kmart Corp.'s general merchandise stores posted a decrease in same-store sales of 0.6%, but its specialty OfficeMax chain's same-store results were up 19%.
Dayton Hudson Corp., which operates Target discount stores, Mervyn's moderate-price stores and upscale department stores, reported a same-store increase of 2.5%.
Poultry giant Tyson Foods Inc. pressed forward with its hostile pursuit of WLR Foods Inc., saying it will launch a $30-a-share tender offer next week for the chicken and turkey processor.
The offer, to begin Wednesday, values WLR at about $330 million, based on its 11 million shares outstanding.
WLR's stock jumped 10% on the news, closing at $30.375, up $2.75 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
The stock had closed at $19 a share on Jan. 24, before Tyson, the largest U.S. poultry concern, first made an unsolicited proposal to acquire WLR at the same $30-a-share price.
WLR's board rebuffed that overture Feb. 6.
Despite the market's reaction yesterday, Tyson spokesman Archie Schaffer III said Tyson doesn't intend to raise its bid.
Gail Price, WLR Foods spokeswoman, said that if Tyson carries out its tender offer, "our board will exercise its fiduciary duty and advise shareholders in what it believes is their best interests."
Tyson has filed claims in federal court to neutralize defensive measures that WLR's board adopted in recent weeks, such as a "poison pill" that would cancel voting rights and substantially dilute the holdings of any entity acquiring 15% or more of its common stock.
Tyson is also challenging special compensation packages that WLR recently gave to more than 600 employees.
Tyson, which yesterday disclosed that it holds 5% of WLR's common stock, said it will ask, under a Virginia law, for a WLR shareholder vote on a proposal to give Tyson full voting rights for any shares acquired in the tender offer.
