The state of Massachusetts is expected to award charters today to start 15 new publicly funded schools, including three elementary schools that would be run for profit by Whittle Communications L.P.'s Edison Project.
The concept of charter schools -- public schools that receive state funding but have some autonomy from local school boards and rules that govern conventional schools -- has been spreading nationally.
In issuing charters to Whittle, the only applicant that won multiple charters, Massachusetts rejected arguments of teachers' unions and some educators, who contend that profit-making motives will lead to cutting corners and inferior education.
For Whittle, of Knoxville, Tenn., winning the charters is a small step forward after several setbacks to the Edison Project, which pulled back from its original plans to build hundreds of for-profit schools after financing proved difficult.
Opening in 1995 The new charter schools -- including five in Boston, two in Lowell and eight others scattered around the state -- will open in September 1995, assuming the winning proposals can clear bureaucratic hurdles.
Under Massachusetts law, another 10 charter schools can be approved; and rejected applicants may reapply.
Minnesota and California already are operating charter schools, while Massachusetts and six other states have enacted legislation authorizing them.
Massachusetts' law has drawn particular attention because it provides greater independence from the educational establishment than most other states offer.
State officials winnowed the 15 winning proposals from 64 submitted last month, according to sources familiar with the process.
The new schools will be developed by diverse applicants, including Boston University, Middlesex Community College in Lowell, a parents group on Cape Cod, two public school teachers, a Boston program for high-school dropouts, a daycare center, and a private consulting company that works with nonprofit groups.
At least three of the new schools hope to focus on poor children in inner-city Boston.
The approved Edison schools will be among the first of a planned network of innovative institutions.
Edison officials hope to open up to a dozen similar schools next year in Colorado, Arizona and possibly Virginia.
Under Edison's proposed plans, the new schools in Massachusetts will begin as elementary schools, but eventually will be expanded through 12th grade.
Edison officials have said they expect to invest up to $3 million in each school, which will have longer days and a longer year than conventional public schools.
With heavy emphasis on intensive academics, art and music, the schools will feature small groups of team teachers to work with the same students for several years.
