Hartford, Conn. -- "The Women," a 1936 play by Clare Booth Luce, is the story of a group of rich society ladies who spend their lives trying to catch a man -- particularly if he is someone else's husband.
Though its bitchy dialogue remains amusing, everyone assumed it was hopelessly dated: everyone, that is, except director Anne Bogart who has mounted an astonishing new production at the Hartford Stage.
Without changing either the lines or the characters, she has literally reinvented the play.
The set by Loy Arcenas is an all-white bare stage.
Across the rear is a Lucite wall with a crosswalk and a spiral staircase ascending into the space above.
The stage itself is empty except for a baby grand piano at one side.
All the other furniture and props, mostly of glass and chrome, are carried on by the performers who are dressed authentically in 1930s attire, with hats, veils, gloves and fox furs looped around their necks.
Ms. Bogart has added a narrator-chorus in the person of Helen Gallagher, who introduces each scene.
Ms. Bogart has also interpolated six songs from the period, but these do not function like musical-comedy numbers, underscoring the mood or theme; most often they make an ironic comment on the action of the play.
For example, two optimistic, upbeat songs, "Singing in the Rain" and "Fools Rush In," are performed at points where the women are undergoing severe emotional traumas, not moments of carefree love.
Mary Haines (Ellen Lauren) is a contented wife who discovers that her husband is having an affair with a trashy, flashy shopgirl named Crystal Allen (Laila Robins).
Mary is no match for Crystal and in scenes with her friends (who betray her at every turn), her mother (Lynn Cohen) and her young daughter (Caitlin Mitchell), she is devastated.
Ms. Bogart has the performers play these scenes in deadly earnest, and they are exceedingly moving.
Other scenes, however, such as those in Reno where bored women wait for divorces to come through, are played for broad farce.
Somehow, with the punctuation of the songs and introductions by Ms. Gallagher, it all fits together.
Mixing the music and the drama has an unexpected and particularly startling effect.
When Mary is at a low point, four women, wearing their 1930s best, begin singing Duke Ellington's "In My Solitude," and the plight of the characters takes on an entirely new dimension.
Toward the end of the play, when similarly dressed women break into close harmony with Cole Porter's "Down in the Dumps on the 90th Floor," the empty lives of these society matrons come resoundingly into focus.
These are women who cannot envision lives without men; the notion of a self-reliant woman with her own identity and her own career has never dawned on them.
If "The Women" is a 1930s play retrofitted for the 1990s, "The America Play," by Suzan-Lori Parks, is a ground-zero 1990s work.
Ms. Parks, a poet and word-musician, is fascinated with questions of history and identity, especially as they affect the African-American experience, and she expresses that interest in unmistakably avant-garde terms.
The story of "The America Play," which is being given its premiere at the Yale Repertory Theatre in New Haven, concerns an African-American grave digger (Reggie Montgomery) who has a physical resemblance to Abraham Lincoln.
He becomes obsessed with Lincoln, gives up his digging career, leaves behind his wife (Gail Grate) and five-year-old son (Michael Potts), and sets out across the country portraying Lincoln in a sort-of one-man show.
He refers to himself as the Foundling Father, and in his performances, he strikes a particularly strong chord with his audiences when he lets them come on stage and re-enact the shooting of Lincoln in his box at Ford's Theatre.
Act II takes place some 35 years later: The hero has died out West and his wife and son set out to find his remains and give him a proper burial.
The story of "The America Play" is told in a manner frequently encountered in experimental theater.
Act I is a monologue by Mr. Montgomery, and act II is a series of vignettes and tableaus, not unlike those favored by Robert Wilson.
Actions are repeated and individual moments held up for close scrutiny; interspersed among scenes with the wife and son are brief interludes from "Our American Cousin," the play being presented at Ford's Theatre the night Lincoln was shot.
The entire piece has been sensitively directed by Liz Diamond, who has collaborated with Ms. Parks on other plays.
It is not an easy play to realize on stage.
Ms. Diamond wisely focused on various central metaphors that give the play a thematic shape where it lacks a conventional skeleton of sequential plot.
Digging is one of these controlling tropes.
The Foundling Father, remember, was originally a grave digger.
On his honeymoon, he and his wife had visited a theme park, the Great Hole of History.
They stood on the edge of a vast crater and viewed scenes featuring famous people of the past.
At the end of his life, the Foundling Father dug a similar crater out West, hoping to bury the artifacts of his own life.
It is here the wife and son dig in the last act, as they attempt to discover the trail of their lost husband and father.
Despite their pervasiveness, however, the point of these many excavations is not entirely clear.
The significance of another major theme -- following another person's footsteps -- is more obvious.
The Foundling Father attempts to retrace Lincoln's steps, and his wife and son in turn hope to follow his path.
There appears to be a moral lesson here for black Americans: Following Lincoln, as great a hero in the struggle for black equality as he may be, is no substitute for blazing your own trail.
Ms. Parks is a highly original and talented writer and "The America Play" is both arresting and provocative.
At the same time, it remains a difficult piece: enigmatic and at times opaque.
Still, this is precisely the kind of work a theater like the Yale Rep should be presenting, particularly at a time when other regional theaters are increasingly unadventurous.
Both "The Women" and "The America Play" run through Feb. 5.
