Chinese Premier Li Peng will take center stage when the National People's Congress opens Thursday.
But the eyes of the congress's 3,000 delegates will be on his economic czar and first deputy, Vice Premier Zhu Rongji.
As in previous years, the delegates' main task at the annual two-week meeting of China's parliament will be to rubber-stamp the government's work report and to pass new laws.
But the increasingly independent-minded delegates are also expected to have much to say about Mr. Zhu's management of the economy and his recent controversial reform initiatives.
With no major personnel reshuffles or new laws on this year's agenda, the congress could prove to be an interesting barometer for the credibility of the central government, and specifically the clout of Mr. Zhu.
This test of authority comes at a time when top leaders are scrambling to position themselves for a power struggle ahead of the death of 89-year-old paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
"All the leaders are playing the game now in preparation for a showdown later," said Byron Weng of the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
These struggles will largely be played out in meetings behind closed doors.
Local officials are clamoring for faster growth and more autonomy.
Their Beijing counterparts want to check double-digit inflation and maintain stability.
To that end, observers expect Mr. Li, in his Thursday report to the congress, to target a growth rate of 9% and an inflation rate of under 10% this year.
The Beijing-funded Wen Wei Po newspaper said Tuesday that Mr. Li's report would call for a cap on new infrastructure investments and on the establishment of new development zones -- two areas that helped fuel last year's economic overheating.
But it would seek to increase funds for agriculture, the Hong Kong-based daily added.
Many Chinese officials and economists believe that China's growth and inflation rates will exceed Mr. Li's predictions.
"Every department has its own estimate for inflation . . . but few agree with Mr. Li's figure," said one government official.
He added that his calculations suggest this year's national inflation rate won't be below last year's 13%.
Growth for 1993 also surged 13%.
Although Mr. Zhu's position is secure for now, and the congress isn't in a position to alter his contentious reform package, "it can show how strong his authority is," said one Chinese economist.
"Now that conflicts have come up in the implementation of his program, we can see how willing the localities are to accept his opinions."
According to the government official, "there's not one of Mr. Zhu's reforms where everyone agrees."
As a result, work has hardly begun on several of the reforms, which were unveiled in November.
These include changes to revamp the banking system and to reallocate tax revenues among Beijing and the regions, and a new capital gains tax on property sales.
Although the official said Beijing has decided to take a wait-and-see and adjust-where-necessary attitude over regional reactions to the reforms, such resistance must come as a blow to Mr. Zhu.
In extensive tours around the country last year and over the Lunar New Year last month, the tough vice premier cajoled, bargained and yelled to get local leaders to go along with his plan.
Mr. Zhu's position is both powerful and precarious.
Widely viewed as the most knowledgeable about economics among the top leadership, the 66-year-old vice premier has taken on increasing responsibility as the issue has come to dominate the national agenda.
Although Mr. Li continues to oversee overall management, his deputy has taken charge of almost all economic affairs.
Mr. Zhu's duties include heading the central bank, tackling financial and monetary problems and coordinating among relevant ministries through his State Economic and Trade Commission.
Despite Mr. Zhu's apparent initial plans to step down as central bank head this month, he said recently that he will continue to stay on for the time being.
He joked that the reason was that "the post isn't popular . . . not many people would like to take it."
Economists say Mr. Zhu would first like to see his reforms through.
Mr. Zhu's confidence was apparent during a recent high-profile visit to Japan, where he pledged to bring China's inflation down to single digits by next year.
Still, many believe that, should there be a serious economic stumble or a backlash over his programs, Mr. Zhu could find himself with few allies.
While one official who works for him describes the vice premier as "sharp, someone who understands economics and quickly gets to the heart of an issue," others consider him abrasive and intolerant.
His reforms have alienated both provincial leaders, who label him an enlightened central planner, and industry leaders, who see him as a tight-fisted central banker.
And he has no links to China's military.
There appear to be plenty of chances for things to go wrong.
Inflation, running at more than 23% in major cities, has become such a problem that Beijing on Tuesday announced a nationwide inspection of prices.
State-run factories, especially in the auto and textile industries, are struggling to survive after being hit by Mr. Zhu's credit squeeze last year and new taxes this year.
Workers, teachers and civil servants aren't being paid because their employers don't have money.
In scattered instances, some have taken to the streets.
For now, Mr. Deng's designated collective leadership -- Communist Party General Secretary Jiang Zemin, National People's Congress Standing Committee Chairman Qiao Shi and Messrs. Li and Zhu -- appears unified in how to tackle these problems.
They are likely to strongly resist rebellious local leaders, and insist that their economic program represents stability and sustainable growth.
This could change once Mr. Deng dies, potentially setting off a scramble for power.
This concern has taken on added urgency following a television appearance last month by the patriarch, who looked weak and sometimes confused over his surroundings as he was filmed touring Shanghai with his daughters.
