Japanese authorities are conducting a widespread probe into the flow of high technology from Japanese companies to North Korea, the isolated communist nation widely suspected of developing nuclear weapons.
Tokyo Metropolitan Police said Friday they are making searches and questioning officials at nearly a dozen different companies in and around Tokyo.
Police suspect the companies may have used a complicated pipeline to export an electronics device that can improve the accuracy of missiles.
Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, which enforces the nation's export control laws, also has launched an investigation, ministry officials said.
Japan's moves mark the first time that any nation has conducted such a public investigation since North Korea's nuclear program triggered international tensions over the past year.
Pyongyang insists its nuclear reactors are purely for civilian energy use, but its persistent refusal to allow international inspection has fueled suspicion it is developing atomic weapons.
After months of difficult negotiations, North Korea agreed earlier this month to allow inspections of its declared nuclear research sites.
But the U.S. is continuing to press for further inspections of additional sites and is still seeking to have North Korea reaffirm its obligations under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
Some U.S. experts claim Pyongyang already has built one or more bombs.
North Korea also recently tested a heavy missile called the Rodong-1, which is thought to be capable of delivering a nuclear warhead to parts of Japan.
"It seems incredible that Japanese would help the North Korean missile program, since the Rodong-1 is aimed at them," said Gary Milhollin, head of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control in Washington, D.C.
"But it wouldn't be the first time that firms undermined their own country for money."
Japan, in particular, has a complex relationship with North Korea, and technology exporters may have had political, as well as profit, motives.
Japan is home to roughly 700,000 ethnic Koreans, 150,000 of whom are loyal supporters of North Korea's Kim Il Sung.
Analysts say Tokyo is afraid of offending Pyongyang supporters lest they cause unrest in Japan.
North Korea is understood to be highly dependent on the support of ethnic Korean sympathizers residing in Japan.
An organization of North Korean supporters in Japan reportedly channels about $600 million a year to North Korea.
The Japanese companies are suspected of shipping "spectrum analyzers," which are widely used in industry to study and improve radio and television broadcasting methods, defense analysts said.
More sophisticated spectrum analyzers, however, can be used to "fine-tune" radar signals as well.
More accurate radar would allow weapon developers to improve missile accuracy.
The leading industrialized nations, including Japan, prohibit the export of technology with potential military applications to communist nations.
Japanese officials insist they have been especially careful to curb such sales since a Toshiba Corp. affiliate caused a stir for selling equipment in the early 1980s that was used to make "quiet" propellers for Soviet submarines.
Police on Friday declined to identify which companies are suspected of the illegal exports to North Korea.
Japanese media, however, widely reported that several years ago, a small trading company called Yokohama Machinery Trading Corp. exported spectrum analyzers to North Korea through China.
Officials at the company, which is registered as having only three employees, were not available for comment.
Several Japanese companies make spectrum analyzers.
On the Tokyo stock market, shares in electronic equipment maker Anritsu Corp. fell 11% in heavy trading on Friday on rumors that an Anritsu subsidiary had delivered the technology to the exporters.
Anritsu officials, after refusing to return repeated telephone calls, held a news conference Friday, without inviting foreign journalists.
On Saturday, major Japanese newspapers carried articles quoting officials at an unidentified electronics company admitting to the sale of the spectrum analyzers.
Jennifer Cody contributed to this article.
