A niche serving tiny companies and lower-income people doesn't sound too profitable in managed health care.
But some believe it can be, when the target populations are tightly knit ethnic groups -- and if President Clinton and Congress will allow a market test.
The problem is, under reform White House-style, there'd be little room left for an HMO like VivaHealth Plan, recently licensed on the east side of Los Angeles.
It's one of the first independent attempts to turn a gap in the health care system -- a burgeoning number of mostly Latino immigrants, outside the mainstream of U.S. medicine -- into an opportunity.
Ruth Lopez Williams is the CEO of this startup, the same post she's held for the past 13 years at a cancer-treatment operation in the area founded by her brother, Dr. John Thropay, who is also chairman of VivaHealth.
Like the nascent HMO, the cancer facilities are aimed at bridging a cultural gap, Ms. Lopez Williams says.
VivaHealth has assembled 1,000 doctors and other medical providers, many of them equipped to speak Spanish.
But language isn't the only major accommodation.
Reasonable deference to cultural norms, such as the widespread use of home remedies, is expected of typically wary MDs.
With such sensitivity, VivaHealth may be able not only to expand the market but to head off entrenched plans such as Kaiser that are grasping for a larger Latino share.
Ms. Lopez Williams sees the proclivities of her patient base not as quirks, but strengths.
A strong tradition of breastfeeding, for example, is good for Latino babies, as is the social convention against cigarette and alcohol use by their mothers.
In the extended families common to ethnics, it's more likely someone can get good ol' TLC from a relative.
According to David Hayes-Bautista, a UCLA medical researcher who is advising VivaHealth, Latinos in HMOs spend a third less time in the hospital than others in the plans.
Simply put, immigrant groups can prove to be better risks than the general population.
The model holds for Latinos but also, Ms. Lopez Williams says, "for any true community: people that work, live and worship in the same demographic area, and have family."
As a result, "they rely on each other," and that acts to curb the overall costs they impose on the medical system.
Also, she notes the influence on behavior of "old-fashioned ideas . . . something as simple as getting married before you have kids."
(Actually, that last condition is subject to deterioration.
Illegitimacy among "White Hispanics" has risen appreciably, according to California state statistics, and now accounts for half their births in Los Angeles County.
Still, their family-formation rates are relatively high.)
Undeniably, a big reason the immigrant-ethnic profile is appealing to an HMO planner is the younger makeup of these groups.
Average incomes may lag, but so does the incidence of chronic ailments.
This market could benefit from specially tailored coverage.
"They go in the hospital for babies.
Why should they pay for heart disease?" says Ms. Lopez Williams.
Aging is inevitable, of course, so part of the "value added" VivaHealth promises is preventive counseling and checkups to help its enrollees stay well to the end.
It isn't easy to get an HMO going under a California law that responded to busts of some early plans.
San Diego health consultant Edward Martinez figures startup capital must exceed $1 million and "the amount of technical resources required to get licensure are beyond the means of the typical medical group."
Nevertheless, ethnic providers are emerging.
VivaHealth's founders, who took more than seven years and $3 million to get out of the gate, envision expansion along the ethnic corridors of California and out to the states of the Southwest, probably through joint ventures.
The big uncertainty now is Washington.
Any reform plan that forces a blending or "community-rating" of risks would deprive a younger, sturdier subgroup of the chance to exploit its advantage, and in the case of Latinos would compel them to subsidize a wealthier and sicker -- or at least more medically demanding-society.
VivaHealth's approach is geared to picking up one of the most difficult pieces of the health care puzzle, the small or family business.
Coverage for such enterprises is usually expensive because they represent such tiny risk pools.
Ms. Lopez Williams seeks to offer an affordable plan to the multitude of mom-and-pop operators, using the larger ethnic base's experience profile.
But the Clinton plan, though it contains subsidies to indigenous health care in under-served areas, would gut VivaHealth's vehicle.
In place of pre-paid care suited to the modest expectations of the ethnic market, uniform "Fortune 500" coverage would be established by mammoth planning boards and micromanagement.
An alternative, the Cooper-Grandy bill now attracting big-business support, is OK "as long as it leaves the option to say no" to "blueprint" coverage, Ms. Lopez Williams says.
But she'd prefer Sen. Phil Gramm's more market-oriented bill.
(Some of the senator's thoughts on health care appear on the editorial page today.)
Given a choice, a cafe owner might choose to cover only catastrophic illness.
Moreover, a family-business clientele means an insurance plan less subject to third-party payer distortions.
It's as close as you're likely to get to point-of-purchase responsibility in today's world of packaged, employer-paid medicine.
VivaHealth would have to prove itself as an enterprise, but its concept is an example of how the marketplace can work to rid even a flawed system of some of its sorry manifestations.
The scientific statism of Clintonized health care, designed so methodically to rid an $800 billion sector of its perversities, would suck the oxygen out of such innovation.
Ms. Lopez Williams says VivaHealth is prepared for the worst.
If it is unable to function as a self-contained HMO, it can become an "access piece" for one of the giant health-care networks that will emerge under a Clinton-type system.
But in that environment, she fears, the higher payroll costs that will be spread over the whole economy will most affect the ethnic population she is trying to service, by threatening jobs on the margin.
The financing of the Clinton plan, she says, would fall so far short that the promised subsidies to small business will be gone in short order.
This Pepperdine MBA uses management argot to brand the Clinton way a departure from nearly everything executives have learned in recent years about gleaning efficiencies and serving customers.
In lay terms, it all comes down to the folly of one-size-fits-all.
"I think the intent was magnificent," she says, but "it's going to be dictated from the top, and my community is vulnerable."
