Three blocks from the spot where black slaves were once auctioned off to white bidders, a black man is telling his mostly white audience why he should be Missouri's next senator.
The scene is history made visible.
French fur-traders, Lewis and Clark, Daniel Boone, even Aaron Burr -- all have left their marks on this old Missouri River town just northwest of St. Louis.
Now Alan Wheat is here, seeking to make history himself.
Mr. Wheat, a Democrat, is trying to become the first black to win a Missouri statewide election.
If successful, a tall order, he'd succeed GOP Sen. John Danforth, who is retiring.
Missouri, with its Democratic "Little Dixie" balanced against its GOP Ozark highlands and its rural countryside counterweighting its big cities, has long been a national microcosm.
Mr. Wheat's bid is further evidence of the gradual national emergence of a new kind of black candidate: not simply a representative of black America but a bridge-builder between black and white America.
At the age of 42, he has won six House elections in a Kansas City-area district that is 73% white.
He entered politics, not as a civil-rights leader, but after a stint with the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
He's a blue-suit kind of guy, more earnest than eloquent, more cerebral than instinctive.
"I had to learn politics," he laughs in an interview here.
"Policy is what I think I know."
Confirming a published account, Rep. Wheat says that when he first ran for Congress he asked a psychologist friend to critique his stump style.
"Alan," the friend concluded, "when you're thinking, you look mean.
So now he smiles.
Speaking here, his hands making little steeples in front of his suit jacket, his talk is laced with self-deprecatory stories that draw his audience in and put it at ease.
He tells about the time he was introduced as a "model congressman" -- and his wife Yolanda reminded him that a model is, by definition, "a small representation of the real thing."
He talks about the time that, exasperated by the prolonged delay of a tax refund, he called the Internal Revenue Service.
"Write your congressman," he was advised.
"I am my congressman," he sighed.
But the main thrust of his talk, with its repeated references to "hard work" and "opportunity" and "achievement," is gutlevel mainstream America.
In an era when the black family is crumbling, Rep. Wheat can point to a high-achieving brother and sister.
And talk with pride of his parents, particularly of a father who began a military career as a private and ended it as a colonel.
"He showed us by example that in this nation you can be anything you want to be."
It's a culturally conservative message, well-attuned to an 88% white state and it harkens back to a time when civil rights was defined as equality of opportunity, not necessarily equality of outcome.
It also, some suggest, represents a soft-pedaling of issues that are more commonly associated, fairly or unfairly, with black officeholders.
"He takes the safe, bumper-sticker issues -- hunger, for example -- and not things like public housing," says Carol Coe, a black Kansas City councilwoman with an aggressive, sometimes confrontational approach to issues.
But Mr. Wheat, whom she is about to endorse, has little choice, she believes.
"The media are so biased, so racist, that they would make him a one-dimensional candidate" if he more assertively pursued "black" issues, she says.
"And we of the black community are willing to give him wiggle room.
The greater good is to be elected."
Yet the coming campaign, and the treacherous cross-currents of what racial politics has become -- will severely test whether Rep. Wheat can stick to his centrist, traditionalist theme.
First Mr. Wheat faces a potentially bruising primary contest whose contenders include a woman bent on shattering a stereotype of a different kind.
Marsha Murphy aims to become Missouri's first woman senator.
Combining an engaging smile with a sharp rhetorical bite, she has already established herself as a local giant-killer.
In 1990 she knocked off a male incumbent to become Jackson County (Kansas City area) executive, a job similar to one once held by an up-and-comer named Harry Truman.
She has been endorsed by Emily's List, the women's political action group, and will benefit from contacts made as Missouri deputy director of Richard Gephardt's 1988 presidential campaign.
She portrays Rep. Wheat as a too-liberal Washington insider.
"All the voting rankings put him among the most liberal members of the House," she says.
In her formal announcement Sunday, she assailed Congress as "a governing aristocracy -- isolated and privileged," and, without mentioning Rep. Wheat's name, referred to the 1992 "House Bank check scandal."
(Rep. Wheat was among those who overdrew their House bank accounts.)
The primary winner will face a formidable foe, the GOP's John Ashcroft.
Although Mrs. Murphy raps Mr. Ashcroft as "Jesse Helms with manners," that just might be a combination that Missourians like; they elected him twice as governor.
(A two-term limit forced him to step down in 1992.)
The ex-governor's gospel singing and conservative views make him especially strong in rural Missouri.
More fundamentally, even as Alan Wheat campaigns, the national terrain of racial politics is shifting beneath his feet.
On one hand, there are signs that black voters may be losing faith in politics.
The phenomenon showed up clearly in eroded black turnout in last year's New Jersey gubernatorial race, which incumbent Democrat James Florio lost, and it seemed to cross both gender and class lines there.
Observes pollster Geoffrey Garin, who worked for Mr. Florio: "In a time of economic difficulty, some black voters have come to doubt whether any of this {politics} makes any difference in the long run."
On the other hand, the black community seems increasingly receptive to the rhetoric of racial polarization.
That shows up in its attitude toward the incendiary declarations of Louis Farrakhan and his Nation of Islam followers.
In mid-February a Time/CNN poll by Yankelovich Partners Inc. found that 62% of the blacks familiar with Mr. Farrakhan, and almost three-fourths of them were, thought he is "good for the black community" and 70% believe he "says things the country should hear."
In an interview here, Rep. Wheat admits "surprise" when shown the Yankelovich poll results.
But he says: "Racist views are repugnant to me, no matter who voices them."
Here in Missouri, the common wisdom is that Rep. Wheat's liberalism may well be more of an obstacle to his election than his race, although some supporters do worry.
"I really hope outstate Missouri is ready for an African-American as senator," says Tim Braun, who is white, at the town meeting here.
Black supporters, closing ranks, aren't pressing Mr. Wheat to go even further out on the liberal limb by emphasizing "black" issues.
Clinton Williams, a black Kansas City attorney who himself is waging an outspoken campaign for the city school board, puts it this way:
"He was not elected as a `black congressman' but as a congressman who happens to be black. . . .
We understand the demographics."
"People in the black community are probably the strongest believers in the American dream.
They have to be," argues Rep. Wheat, sticking with his centrist theme.
He repeats the advice of his old political mentor, the late Rep. Richard Bolling of Missouri: "Just call on the best in people.
If you call on the best, you'll get their best."
And he insists that Missouri's Senate contest not only can, but must, transcend skin color.
"It not only denigrates Missouri, it denegrates democracy to say that I can't win."
CLINTON ADAMS JR. is a Kansas City, Mo., attorney and school-board candidate.
His name was misstated in an article about U.S. Senate hopeful Alan Wheat that appeared in yesterday's Politics & Policy page.
