Federal investigators have been looking into the activities of a unit of Lehman Brothers in connection with a squeeze in Treasury two-year notes sold in April 1991.
People familiar with the matter said the government's interest centers on Lehman's alleged role in financing the positions in the April notes of two hedge funds, Steinhardt Partners L.P. and Caxton Corp., for a time during the summer of 1991.
The April notes were subjected to a protracted squeeze that was overshadowed by a high-profile squeeze of Treasury two-year notes sold in May 1991.
In the May squeeze, Salomon Brothers Inc. and others were accused of restricting the supply of the notes, thereby driving up the price.
Lehman Government Securities Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Lehman Brothers, has been listed in Justice Department Antitrust Division subpoenas along with Steinhardt, Caxton and other parties whose government-bond-market activities the department is investigating.
During the period in question, the firm was called Shearson Lehman Brothers.
Steven Faigen, a Lehman Brothers spokesman, said the firm, like other primary dealers, has responded to government requests for information regarding trading in the Treasury securities market, and noted that such requests date back as far as 2 1/2 years.
He said that Lehman strongly believes that "our trading activities in these markets were and are proper" and that the company "is not aware of any allegation by the government to the contrary."
The company as a policy refuses to discuss specific trading activities.
The Antitrust Division has been conducting a lengthy inquiry into both the April and May squeezes.
Salomon in 1992 settled antitrust charges that it manipulated the May notes to create a squeeze and is immune under the terms of its settlement from any charges with respect to the April squeeze.
The Securities and Exchange Commission also is continuing its investigation of the April squeeze.
Neither the Justice Department nor the SEC would comment on the Lehman matter.
A lawyer for Steinhardt had no comment on his client's dealings with Lehman.
In arguments in a private lawsuit dealing with the 1991 Treasury market squeezes, Steinhardt recently said it will claim that the antitrust laws are implicitly repealed in the market "because of the extensive regulation under other laws . . . and extensive regulation by the Treasury and Federal Reserve."
Caxton's lawyer couldn't be reached for comment.
