Federal Judge Richard Posner is sitting in judgment of his fellow jurists.
Most of them, he says, aren't "Prometheans or saints" but ordinary "utility maximizers."
"Utility" is economist lingo for personal satisfaction.
That, says Judge Posner, is what judges want (when you clear away the fancy talk about fairness and liberty).
A Reagan appointee to the U.S. appeals court in Chicago, Judge Posner, 55 years old, helped pioneer a whole new school of legal thought known as "law and economics," which applies economic principles to legal problems.
Now Judge Posner has turned his economic eye on the black-robed set, who, he notes, shouldn't be seen as "miraculously immune to the tug of self-interest."
"Because the judiciary has been placed on a nonprofit basis, we should expect that judges on average do not work as hard as lawyers of comparable age and ability.
I believe that this is true, at least of appellate judges."
But that isn't necessarily a bad thing: "Since leisure is a form of income, an increase in leisure should reduce the amount of pecuniary income demanded by judges of a given quality."
In addition to money and free time, judges seek popularity among colleagues, or so says Judge Posner: "A busy, active, forceful judge can impose costs on his colleagues by writing many separate opinions to which they have to respond, by criticizing their work and by making arguments that they have difficulty answering."
(In an interview, the author says that he himself avoids "nitpicking": "I will hold my nose and join opinions that I don't agree with fully.")
Judge Posner himself has written more than 1,000 majority opinions in a dozen years, but he believes that few other appellate judges get their jollies from writing.
It's "not important to most judges, who are happy to cede opinion-writing to eager law clerks," believing that the core judicial job is making decisions, not justifying them, Judge Posner writes.
What reaction have Judge Posner's unblinking observations elicited among his colleagues?
"Zero," he says.
