MasterCard International's president and chief executive officer, Alex W. "Pete" Hart, is leaving the credit-card association to become executive vice chairman of Advanta Corp., a financial-services company.
Advanta markets a variety of products, including mortgage services and equipment leasing, but credit cards are its main business.
The company, based in Horsham, Pa., focuses on no-fee MasterCard and Visa gold cards, and it ranks as one of the nation's 10 largest gold-card issuers.
Dennis Alter, Advanta's chairman and chief executive, said Mr. Hart will help plan the company's future in the rapidly changing consumer-finance industry.
"We're not sure what direction Advanta will take," Mr. Alter said.
He later predicted that Mr. Hart will explore the possibility of overseas expansion or the introduction of "co-branded" credit cards, the card industry's fastest-growing product line.
Co-branded cards are issued by banks but bear the name of nonbank companies or organizations.
Although Mr. Hart will report directly to Mr. Alter, the chairman emphasized that "we're a company with an entrepreneurial approach" without a rigid hierarchy.
He said Mr. Hart actually will function as a "partner" with him and Richard A. Greenawalt, Advanta's president and chief operating officer.
Mr. Greenawalt, who also is a MasterCard International board member, has known Mr. Hart for several years.
For MasterCard, an association of more than 29,000 financial institutions, Mr. Hart's departure is a setback.
MasterCard lost market share for most of the 1980s, and Mr. Hart is widely credited for a turnaround that began about three years ago.
"Pete caused the board to set up a strategy," Arthur B. Ziegler, chairman emeritus of MasterCard's board, said in an interview.
"He broadened our product, honed our marketing, developed our global business and, best of all, he created a strong management team."
Mr. Ziegler, who will direct the search for Mr. Hart's successor, said the board's executive committee would meet tomorrow to begin a world-wide search.
He said that both external and internal candidates would be considered.
Mr. Hart said he was drawn to Advanta for a number of reasons.
"They have a reputation for being on the front end of every trend in the market," he said, "and they are in a great position to take advantage of new services driven by technological improvements."
Mr. Hart also said that MasterCard's improved competitive condition made it a less exciting place to work.
"Some of the excitement of the turnaround was behind us," he said.
Another factor was the travel demands of the MasterCard job; Mr. Hart said he was away from home 135 nights last year.
In addition, Advanta offers its senior executives equity ownership and stock options, incentives that MasterCard, a nonprofit association owned by card-issuing banks, could not provide.
More than anything, however, Mr. Hart said the new job will give him a chance to be more directly involved in the business of consumer finance.
"I found myself doing a lot more refereeing than playing" at MasterCard, he said.
"I'm looking forward to getting back on the field."
