Mesa, Ariz. -- It's 9:30 a.m. on Saturday, 3 1/2 hours before game time, but already a deeply tanned man of late middle age stands near the auto entrance to HoHoKam Park here, the Chicago Cubs' spring-training base, holding aloft the ticket seeker's eternal "Need Two" sign.
Need two?
At 9:30 a.m.?
For a spring-training game against the Seattle Mariners?
And a split-squad game at that?
This is spring training 1994, and, at least here, if you want to see a weekend game, you better have bought your ticket in advance.
Almost 100 people already are inside, lined along the field-level fence waiting to ambush players for autographs or lounging in a seat in the morning sun, watching the Cubs do stretching exercises.
Just about everyone is wearing a Cubs cap or T-shirt.
This suburb of Phoenix ought to change its name to Chicago West for March, so many Chicagoans come here.
They can buy a Vienna hot dog with all the trimmings at the ballpark, just like at home, and, if they can get in, have ribs for dinner at Don & Charlie's restaurant in Scottsdale, owned by Chicago guys.
The White Sox might need Michael Jordan hitting batting-practice ground balls to fill their spring-training park in Sarasota, Fla., but the Cubs do it with whoever happens to be on their roster.
Over in the one-room brick shed that serves as a ticket office, Phil Kellis is counting the house via computer.
He's the managing partner of a hotel in the area, and ticket chairman for the HoHoKams, the local service club that manages the facility.
He can remember when the park had about 6,000 seats instead of the current 8,967, and they sold for top prices of $4 or $3 instead of $10 and $9.
"We'll sell out today.
That'll make twice in the six games so far, and we've got at least three more sellouts assured," says Kellis.
He figures that 92% of the tickets for the Cubs' 16 home games will be sold this spring, an average of about 8,400 a game.
That's a higher per-game count than the team drew in Chicago over several regular seasons in the 1950s and '60s.
The Cubs' lease here expires after next spring, and the team has told Mesa it must build a replica of Wrigley Field here, seating 10,000 to 12,000, if it wants the team to stay.
Kellis doubts the city can swing that -- "there's got to be some reasonableness as to money" -- but believes it'll "go most of the way" to please the team.
"The Cubs are good for business . . . good for the area," he says.
Then he adds, "Spring training used to be more fun.
It's a business now."
That, however, depends on your perspective.
For the fans in the HoHoKam Park stands Saturday morning, it is glorious fun, the best.
"There's nowhere I'd rather be.
I've always wanted to do this and this is the year," grins Randy Rambo, 21, a bespectacled grocery clerk from Valparaiso, Ind.
But being a fan of a team that hasn't won a pennant since 1945 doesn't require the suspension of disbelief that the movies do.
Quizzed about his view of his favorites' prospects for the season, Rambo soon was proving himself to be wise beyond his years.
"We need more pitching -- same as last season, same as every season," he says.
"What else can you expect from the team that traded Bruce Sutter, Dennis Eckersley and Lee Smith, the three best relief pitchers in baseball history, while they were still good?
We've got Randy Myers now, and he's a good one.
Guess that means he's about to be traded."
"We need pitching," Bob Anthony is saying a few rows up.
He's an ex-Chicagoan who's been living in Arizona for 30 years.
He's an actor who says he did the first Arby's television commercial.
"So what else is new?
We might trade for it," says his friend, Larry Baldino.
He's also ex-Chicago, retired here.
He played some minor-league baseball once.
"Yeah, but everybody wants pitching," says Anthony.
"We could trade {Shawon} Dunston {a shortstop who, while once highly rated, missed most of the past two seasons with a back injury}.
He's from New York, and I hear the Mets want him," says Baldino.
"The Mets don't have any pitching, either," says Anthony.
"How about {Dwight} Gooden?" says Baldino.
"He's had arm trouble," says Anthony.
"It'd be an even trade then," says Baldino.
Both men laugh.
"We need pitching," says Ed Smith.
He owns a sales company in Naperville, Ill.
His son runs it while he spends four weeks in Arizona every winter and attends 70 or so regular-season Cub games annually.
He goes on: "We let {Greg} Hibbard and {Mike} Harkey go after last season and didn't replace them.
They might not have been great, but between them they pitched 350 innings {348, to be exact}, and somebody's gotta pick that up.
Our defense could use some work, too.
They used to say {second baseman Ryne} Sandberg never got dirty because he didn't have to, but he can't reach a lot of balls now, and he still doesn't get dirty.
Sammy Sosa catches one in the outfield every now and then, but what he does with the ball afterward is awful."
Smith thinks baseball is a game of 10s.
"Teams getting better win 10 games more than the year before.
Teams getting worse win 10 fewer," he declares.
The Cubs won 84 last season, he's reminded.
"They'll win 74 this year," he says.
"We need pitching," says Sue Osborn.
She's a truck driver's wife from Mesa, a lifelong Cubs fan.
She's wearing a T-shirt with the lettering "Die-Hard University" around a shield showing a bear cub peering through crossed bats.
"Glenallen Hill {a young power hitter} looks great, and Karl Rhodes {a young centerfielder} could be the leadoff man we need, but we also need a big starting pitcher, like Jack McDowell {of the White Sox} or Tom Glavine {of the pennant-winning Atlanta Braves}."
Or Greg Maddux? it's suggested, tongue in cheek.
He left the Cubs via free agency before last season to sign with the Braves for about the same money the Cubs offered.
"Not him, never," Osborn says.
"He sold us out for a ring."
