Carol Cox Wait and Martha Phillips share almost identical credentials as deficit hawks.
Both are Republicans; both are former congressional aides; both hold key positions with fiscal-watchdog groups; both believe Americans are ready to make sacrifices to reduce the government's red ink.
Yet as Congress again takes up the proposal for a constitutional amendment that would require a balanced federal budget, they find themselves in sharp opposition to each other.
Ms. Phillips, executive director of the Concord Coalition, sees a constitutional amendment as the last and only hope for the U.S. to unburden itself of interest payments that total $213 billion this year alone, and may grow to crippling levels for future generations.
"No one is going to present this as a smooth, clean, wonderful option," she says, "but we can't figure out anything else to do."
But Ms. Wait, president of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, thinks altering the Constitution is a prescription for disaster.
Rather than voting for an amendment, she believes, lawmakers "should be willing to make the hard choices now" about how to balance the budget.
"If they aren't willing to do that, then they shouldn't vote for it."
Their disagreement is of more than academic interest.
With their experience and expertise, they are among the most respected voices in Washington on budget matters.
And each side is counting on their credibility to help sway undecided lawmakers as the hotly contested battle draws to a climax.
The amendment, now being debated on the Senate floor, faces an uphill fight despite its immense popularity with the public.
Supporters, who include Republicans and a smaller group of Democrats led by Sen. Paul Simon of Illinois, need a two-thirds majority, or 67 votes, if all 100 senators are present.
Preliminary counts suggest that Mr. Simon now has roughly 60 votes, while the bill's chief foe, powerful Democratic Sen. Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, has about 30.
If Mr. Simon somehow wins the needed two-thirds majority, the House is expected to pass the amendment as well and send it to the states for ratification.
But just this week, two previously undecided senators, Democrat Barbara Mikulski of Maryland and Republican Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, joined the camp opposed to the amendment.
And adding to the bill's difficult path, it still faces 20 or more proposed changes, most of them hostile, before a final Senate vote that is expected next week at the earliest.
Moreover, the debate comes at a time when the White House case against the constitutional amendment is beginning to sound like a case against balancing the budget at all.
Although President Clinton pushed through a deficit-reduction program last year and promises that his health-care initiative would restrain future deficits, in recent speeches he has all but ruled out raising taxes and trimming Social Security or Medicare benefits -- all of which would have to be considered as part of any further deficit-reduction plan.
The last time the federal government ran a surplus -- $3.2 billion -- was in 1969.
Coincidentally, that was the year that Ms. Phillips, now 52 years old, started working for the House GOP research committee.
It was the first of many jobs, including a stint on the Ways and Means Committee staff, trying to get a grasp on the issue of burgeoning entitlements payments.
Eventually, Ms. Phillips says, she tired of briefing congressmen who would speak knowledgeably in private about the need for slashing the budget, and then pursue deficit-swelling pork legislation for their district.
"I worked it from the inside, and after a while I ceased to be a true believer," she says.
"When it came time to take the votes, they weren't there."
After 23 years of those fights, she began saving press clippings on the Concord Coalition, launched by former GOP Sen. Warren Rudman of New Hampshire and former Democratic Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts.
When they offered her the job of executive director, she leapt at the chance.
Named for the town where regular folks turned back the Redcoats in the Revolutionary War, the coalition has credibility that some others in the pro-amendment camp lack because it has devised an actual plan to cut the deficit to zero by the year 2000.
The plan has all the hallmarks of a serious effort: It would be painful for everyone.
It would achieve the goal mostly through whacking Social Security benefits for anyone with an income above $40,000.
Tax increases would account for a third of the proposal, including a 50-cents-a-gallon gasoline tax.
It's just one plan, they say, to demonstrate that it can be done.
But absent a constitutional amendment, Ms. Phillips says, lawmakers will never be able to impose such discipline on the spending process.
"What in the world is going to happen to move the political process?" she asks.
Sen. Simon is fond of pointing out that since the amendment was defeated by one vote in 1986, the federal debt has more than doubled, to $4.4 trillion from $2 trillion.
Like Ms. Phillips, Ms. Wait, 51, says that her time on Capitol Hill left her highly skeptical of congressional backbone when it comes to the deficit.
As legislative director on the Senate Budget Committee from 1977 to 1981, she often served as the committee staffer on the Senate floor as members debated various programs that required spending.
"Senators would come up to me and say, `Can we do this?
Is this in the budget?' " she recalls.
Usually her answer was no, but she was struck by how often it was asked -- and how often the money wound up being voted anyway.
With that background, she was a natural to join the Citizens for a Responsible Budget in 1981, formed by, among others, future Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan.
She works full time to keep an eye on budget shenanigans, and with citizen groups who look at serious ways to reduce the deficit.
Her biggest fear, however, is that Congress will pass the amendment, and immediately dissolve into a procedural mess.
Whose economic assumptions would be used to forecast spending and receipts?
What if they were wrong?
Who would have standing to assert that they were wrong?
What would happen if the budget gets out of balance?
She argues that, if an amendment passed, those questions and a million more would insure that the federal budget ultimately lands in federal court, the answers to be provided by judges serving on the bench for life.
Ms. Wait also notes that there may be times when it might be sensible to run a small deficit -- times of war, or economic slumps.
"It's inappropriate to enshrine a particular fiscal policy in the Constitution," she says.
Besides, she says, there are other ways to ensure a balanced budget without tinkering with the law.
Testifying before the Senate in the mid-1980s, she proposed other procedural mechanisms.
Her favorite: a rule whereby any vote on legislation that would increase the deficit would be preceded by a separate vote "to bust the budget."
She recalls Senate Republican Leader Robert Dole of Kansas laughing off the idea as pie-in-the-sky, but says she'll pitch a similar idea again when she testifies this week.
For all their disagreement over the constitutional amendment, Ms. Wait and Ms. Phillips share the worry that some of the steam may have gone out of the balanced-budget cause.
Ironically, the reason may be the deficit-reduction law that the Democratic Congress and Democratic administration pushed through last year.
The fiscal 1994 deficit is projected to be $165.1 billion, down from the $234.8 billion that was forecast before last year's new spending cuts and taxes.
The result, the two women fear, is that lawmakers -- and the public -- may become complacent.
When it comes to cutting the deficit, Ms. Phillips predicts, "The line that's going to be put out far and wide is that we did that last year."
Ms. Wait adds sarcastically: "God forbid we have a deficit lower than $200 billion."
