Reuters Holdings PLC is moving to expand dramatically in the U.S. with its agreement in principle to acquire Quotron's electronic stock-price data business from Citicorp.
Reuters, which sells electronic news and financial-trading services, is already the largest global provider of foreign-exchange data and automated currency dealing.
The Quotron acquisition would make it the world's leader in providing stock-price data as well, analysts say, and could put pressure on Reuters rivals in the electronic financial-information business.
Although Quotron has long been a financial headache for Citicorp, which has been seeking to sell it, the business will strengthen London-based Reuters in a region where it has traditionally been weak.
"This acquisition looks set to turn Reuters from an also-ran in the U.S. to a clear market leader" in stock-price data, said Alistair Smellie, an analyst at Lehman Brothers International Ltd. in London.
"They've long targeted the U.S. equity market for growth, and now they've finally done something definitive about it."
Although Citicorp and Reuters would not disclose the price Reuters will pay for Quotron's market-data services, it is believed to be minimal.
In fact, Reuters said Citicorp would pay for "certain operating costs" associated with closing the deal.
Citicorp has been trying for some time to sell Quotron, which has about 45,000 information screens in the U.S. Despite its well-known name in the securities industry, Quotron has been an albatross since Citicorp bought it with much fanfare in 1986 for about $630 million.
It was a component of Chairman John S. Reed's plan to turn Citicorp into a full-service, global financial-services company -- a plan long since jettisoned.
A Quotron spokesman acknowledged that the business has been losing market share in the past two to three years, but he wouldn't give details.
The presence of Reuters seems likely to reassure current customers.
"Fundamentally, it makes Quotron strong again," said David Longobardi, an executive editor of Inside Market Data, a New York newsletter covering the market data industry.
"It gives them a deep-pocketed parent."
The deal, which is subject to regulatory approval and the signing of a definitive agreement, would increase Reuters's share of U.S. market for stock-price data to about 30% from only 3%.
The purchase would also give Reuters the top position globally in stock-price data, with about one-quarter of the market, ahead of Automatic Data Processing Inc., Roseland, N.J., which has an estimated 20% share.
Analysts speculated that Reuters could use Quotron to sell its other information and automated-trading services to U.S. stock brokerage firms, a market it hasn't penetrated as much as it would like.
Eric Philo, an analyst with Goldman Sachs & Co. in New York, said, "The other players in the market must be watching this deal very closely, especially ADP, one of the biggest competitors.
This is already a mature competitive business, and this will make it tougher yet."
Mr. Philo said he believes ADP currently has operating margins of about 6% or 7%.
Less affected, analysts say, will be such financial-information providers as Bloomberg L.P.'s Bloomberg Financial Markets and Dow Jones & Co.'s Telerate.
Bloomberg's terminals provide not only raw quotes but also interpretations and news, while Telerate is a much bigger supplier of bond-market information than stock data.
Bloomberg executives declined to comment on the Reuters-Quotron deal.
A spokesman for Dow Jones said, "We aren't in this business of selling equities quotes to the brokerage industry, and we weren't interested in buying Quotron, which was shopped to us -- and everybody else -- for a long time."
Dow Jones also publishes The Wall Street Journal and Barron's.
"Quotron was a clear leader in this business just a few years back, but we've passed them to become the market leader," said Arthur Weinbach, executive vice president of ADP.
"We were the first to add intelligent workstations, terminals that do everything a PC does, when Quotron was still selling dumb terminals" that only list stock quotes.
"We believe we are still more sophisticated and our service is better," he added.
ADP, which also is a major player in the market for business payroll services, says it has about 84,000 terminals installed in brokerage houses.
Mr. Philo, the Goldman Sachs analyst, estimates that some 180,000 such terminals are currently installed in the U.S. market overall, including brokerage houses.
Chris Munro, an analyst at Hoare Govett Investment Research Ltd., said the Quotron acquisition should help Reuters further penetrate the market for automated equities dealing through its Instinet subsidiary, which serves institutional investors.
Instinet was bought by Reuters in 1986 and reported revenue of $73.1 million for the first half of 1993, compared with $42 million a year earlier.
The Reuters move was made through the company's wholly owned Reuters America Holdings Inc. unit.
A Reuters spokesman declined to discuss the company's strategy for the Quotron business until the deal is final.
In trading in London, Reuters shares closed at #18.55 ($27.89), up 30 pence.
The sale doesn't include Quotron's foreign-exchange business, know as FX Trader, which Citicorp said it will retain.
ADP acquired Quotron's international equities business in Europe and the Far East, and its Securities Industry Software Corp. unit a year ago.
Reuters has been cash-rich for the past several years.
At the end of July, it repurchased 5.84% of its shares, using about half the roughly #700 million ($1.05 billion) it had in surplus cash.
