China's human-rights record has the U.S. all riled up, but many Chinese like Steven Wang wonder what the fuss is about.
Sitting in his prospering antique shop, Mr. Wang muses that life these days is pretty good.
"China might not be as free in some areas compared to the U.S., but it's freer than some other countries," says the 38-year-old entrepreneur.
"To be able to preserve a basic livelihood, to get together with friends and discuss issues, to talk about the newest economic and cultural developments -- that's what life is about and it's enough," he adds.
For many Chinese, who experienced starvation and political paranoia under the rule of Mao Tse-tung, life has become increasingly comfortable, and much freer, under paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Economic reforms have loosened ideological controls and reduced the Communist Party's role in the private lives of its people.
Wealth-increasing opportunities are sparking a new individualism.
Many Chinese are puzzled by Washington's demands that China improve its human-rights situation or face revocation of its Most Favored Nation trading status in June.
"Why is the U.S. always going on about human rights for China?" asks one Chinese worker.
"No one cares about this issue."
To be sure, the Chinese enjoy a growing sense of personal freedom only within rigid borders.
Political dissent is not permitted.
Most appear content to focus on making money for now.
But it seems inevitable that prosperity will eventually bring political activism, and the government isn't taking any chances.
Recently, it has launched crackdowns on media, religion and some cultural activities.
The depth of Beijing's distrust was shown by the roundup last week and over the weekend of China's famous dissident Wei Jingsheng and several others.
Mr. Wei's detention, which lasted more than 24 hours, was probably part of an effort to ensure order ahead of the National People's Congress opening March 10.
But coming just a week before U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is due to arrive to discuss China's human-rights record, it shows China's determination to keep the lid on dissent at all cost.
Another dissident, Zhai Weimin, who served a 3 1/2-year sentence for his pro-democracy activities, was arrested on Sunday.
Responding to the arrest of Mr. Zhai, State Department spokesman Michael McCurry said, "There is certainly a pattern of detentions that, as the secretary has already said, we find troubling and which certainly casts a pall over the secretary's coming visit" to Beijing.
In another sign of Beijing's fear of dissidents, it barred five U.S. journalists who were making a groundbreaking visit to a labor-reform camp last week from seeing any jailed activists in person, perhaps fearing what the dissidents might say.
Political activism aside, almost anything else goes in China.
A Chinese vice minister says his teenage daughter tunes in to Voice of America radio broadcasts three times daily -- and he listens, too.
At a recent party, People's Bank of China vice governor Zhou Zhengqing danced with employees in the central bank's cavernous new dance hall, which has modern disco lights and large speakers.
Taxi drivers curse China's top leadership over corruption and inflation, while Chinese intellectuals debate among themselves over the fate of the country.
Perhaps the main reason for the more relaxed atmosphere is that values have changed.
Mr. Deng's philosophy stressing efficiency over ideology has made capitalism all the rage and socialism passe.
China's keepers of ideology -- the party, military and government -- are often kept busy setting up companies and pursuing materialist goals.
The ideological vacuum has become so serious among the younger generation that Beijing has launched a nationalism campaign to instill values in Chinese youths.
The waning role of the danwei, or work unit, has also added to the growing sense of individual freedom.
In the past, all Chinese were attached to a work unit, which determined not only promotions, salaries and housing, but also whether they could get married or travel.
The unit kept each worker's dossier, which listed biographical as well as political and ideological information.
Now an increasing number of Chinese work outside the work-unit system, going into business for themselves or foreign companies.
As an entrepreneur, Mr. Wang must rely on himself to make a living, but at the same time he's free of the controls of a work unit.
"No one cares where I go, no one cares what I talk about.
It's very free," says Mr. Wang, whose company generated 150,000 yuan ($17,232) in profit last year.
Even those who belong to work units enjoy increasing freedom from meddling by the unit's officials.
One Beijing university professor who is in charge of his work unit says he still must approve marriages of colleagues.
"I just ask a few questions and say, `Fine, go ahead, it's your own business.'"
Although he approves of the trend toward less interference, "Sometimes I think people are too free," the professor sighs.
He cites one example of a colleague who collects his pay but refuses to show up for work.
"Before, this would have been forbidden, but now I can't do anything about it.
People are only interested in how much money you will pay them."
Many government departments still hold weekly meetings, but they rarely focus on ideology.
Meng Defu and colleagues at his district-level government office meet weekly.
"We study some Deng Xiaoping thought, but mostly it's all economics or topics like the new company law.
The demand is that all cadres learn about the market economy," he says.
A new individualism among Chinese is also finding expression in appearances.
Instead of trying to blend into China's anonymous masses, Chinese are now trying to stick out.
On one recent Saturday night, two Chinese women sporting fur coats, big hair and red lipstick swept into a crowded local restaurant.
Their boyfriends followed proudly, as heads in the restaurant turned to stare.
People are also more willing to speak their minds.
Many grumble loudly about official corruption, double-digit inflation and some of China's unpopular leaders.
Most Chinese opt to live within the society's invisible boundaries and concentrate on getting ahead.
"The U.S. says China has human-rights problems, but we feel we have freedom," says Sun Shidao, a 51-year-old Bank of China deputy manager who owns his own apartment and electrical appliances, including television, videocassette recorder and computer.
"The Communist Party has done OK; they've shown they can lead, and they continue to raise the standard of living."
Mr. Wang sees no point in dwelling on politics.
"It's too far away from us.
We of the thirty-something and forty-something generation feel we should do things, not waste time and talk about the government doing such-and-such a thing today or the Ten-Year Plan having this or that problem," he says.
