The Marshall Plan had three things today's Western attempts to aid the East don't have.
It had a headquarters -- the Talleyrand mansion in Paris.
It had $13 billion -- an enormous amount in 1948.
And the Marshall Plan had a plan.
The European Recovery Program went beyond the physical rebuilding of nations devastated and bankrupted by two world wars.
Its ultimate goal, only partly revealed by Secretary of State George C. Marshall at the Harvard commencement of 1947, was to meld Western Europe into an integrated trading bloc to serve as a bulwark against the Soviet Union.
As such, it was the most successful -- and, some say, most invasive -- use of sheer economic power in American history.
After 1989's revolutions and the 1991 Soviet coup attempt, calls for a new Marshall Plan briefly took up space on the opinion pages.
One Austrian bank calculated that investing a comparable 1% of the gross national products of Western nations over three years would cost $134 billion a year for Eastern Europe and $230 billion for the former Soviet Union.
Germany has sent similarly huge sums to its own exCommunist east, but the rest of the West has been in no mood to match it.
It has its reasons.
First, the U.S. at the close of World War II was wallowing in trade surpluses.
Today, the West has money to lend, not to burn.
And if it had, the East would have more trouble putting it to use than France, Italy, Britain and Germany ever did.
The Marshall Plan donated dollars to those capitalist countries, which sold them to their surviving traders for local currency.
The dollars bought imports, mainly from the U.S.
The local currency built factories, diked the Zuyder Zee, drained Sardinia's swamps and created jobs in the tradition of the New Deal.
As living standards improved, Western Europe's weak centrist governments fended off what seemed an imminent takeover by radical leftists, with Stalin close behind.
By 1950, industrial production was 25% higher than in 1938, and the Communist threat had ebbed.
The East today needs capital just as badly.
It also needs the laws, institutions and expertise to spend it well.
A plan to provide all that would cost as much, and demand more mental exercise than Mr. Marshall's.
The West might have set its mind to devising one, had it known four years ago that hardship would deepen in the East and that Communists and nationalists would threaten to rise again.
But the Cold War was over back then.
Without an enemy to fear, the West didn't feel impelled.
