Century Communications Corp. expects fiscal third-quarter growth in revenue, cash flow and subscribers to be in line with its second quarter.
Bernard P. Gallagher, president and chief operating officer, said he sees the growth even though the cable television and cellular telephone company is still assessing the costs of continuing regulation, including a 10% decline in regulated rates, along with new expenses from the earthquake in Southern California.
In the fiscal second quarter, ended Nov. 30, the company's cable revenue rose about 5% from a year earlier because of new subscribers and new services, as well as an expansion of nonsubscriber revenue, particularly advertising, Mr. Gallagher said in an interview.
Advertising revenue is up nearly 40% this fiscal year.
Cash flows from cable TV operations are also up about 5% or 6% in the quarter.
Century posted a 10% increase in revenue in the second quarter to $94.5 million.
The company had a net loss of $9.5 million, or 12 cents a share, in the quarter.
In the year-ago third quarter, Century had a net loss of $11 million, or 15 cents a share, on revenue of $85.4 million.
Mr. Gallagher expects the company to continue to report losses for the next few years.
He declined to predict the size of the loss for the fiscal third quarter, which ends Feb. 28.
Because the company has accumulated its cable systems through acquisitions and is subject to purchase-accounting rules, it must depreciate capital spending and amortize acquisition costs over periods averaging 10 years.
This creates substantial losses in the company's income statement.
Thus, investors tend to look at nontraditional financial-statement measures, concentrating on cash flow, for instance, rather than earnings.
Century operates 55 cable television systems in 24 states and Puerto Rico, with the largest system in the Los Angeles area.
The company also owns about 55% of Centennial Cellular Corp., a cellular phone concern that operates 13 systems, mostly in Michigan, Indiana, Virginia, California, Arizona and Texas.
That business, still in its early stages, is growing dramatically, Mr. Gallagher said.
Cellular revenue has been rising more than 30%, while cash flow in those operations was up more than 40% for the second quarter.
"We're not disappointed in our operations given the fact they've been turned upside down a couple of times" because of changes in regulations, including rate regulation, Mr. Gallagher said.
