Members of Congress return today to hear President Clinton's State of the Union message.
We're going to explain why so many of them will look comfortably smug tonight.
The professional House administrator who was hired to sweep out the rancid patronage system that led to the House Bank and Post Office scandals has just quit.
He says he wasn't allowed to do his job.
House "reform" efforts appear more and more to be a sham.
Retired Lt. General Leonard Wishart was hired to run the House's internal operations in late 1992 after an exhaustive year-long search by a head-hunting firm.
A veteran of 34 years in the Army, he had held a variety of top management positions.
However, within weeks he learned that the House's petty fiefdoms make those of the Pentagon look like a model of cooperative simplicity.
One of Mr. Wishart's main goals was to get the politics out of such scandal-ridden entities as the House Post Office and payroll offices.
The last House administrator was convicted of fraud involving the House Bank, which was finally closed.
But Mr. Wishart couldn't implement any further reforms unless a House oversight committee first approved them -- by a unanimous vote.
That high hurdle allowed Congress's barons to continue patronage-as-usual.
Rep. Charles Rose, chairman of the House Administration Committee, simply declined to surrender control over the House's information systems, even though Members had voted in 1992 to give responsibility for them to General Wishart.
Rep. Rose, a key designer of the House's incumbent-protection machine, successfully resisted.
He insisted that since the transfer of the information systems had been made by the last Congress, that decision wasn't binding on this Congress and Members should keep direct control of all computer and data systems.
General Wishart was powerless to stop him.
Indeed, he was constantly reminded that Members of Congress are interested in the appearance of reform but not the reality.
Last October, he learned that two House employees had been given bonuses without his knowledge.
The last straw may have come in November when the oversight committee he reported to deadlocked 2 to 2 on approving his new personnel policy.
Rep. Rose and Rep. Bill Clay, chairman of the House's civil service committee, cast the two no votes.
On January 10, Mr. Wishart wrote Speaker Foley to announce he would be clearing out his desk within two weeks.
A military man to the end, he has refused media interviews.
But his letter makes clear his frustration with those who blocked his reforms.
"Unfortunately, I believe others have different agendas and my usefulness to you is at an end," he wrote Speaker Foley.
He noted that "the situation . . . is not likely to change. . . .
It appears that some individuals have begun to make me the issue, thus undermining the credibility of the office."
But even his stunning resignation wasn't enough to shame House leaders into following Mr. Wishart's advice.
In his letter, he recommended a former U.S. Postal Service executive be named as his replacement.
House leaders ignored this suggestion and instead named Mr. Wishart's deputy, who is unlikely to have any more luck bucking the House's legislative Caesars than he did.
Those potentates are even now plotting to subvert one of the few reforms that's been proposed by a Joint Committee on the Operation of Congress.
It wants to cut down on the House's bewildering array of 150 committees and subcommittees, many with overlapping jurisdictions.
Its suggestion: Close 19 subcommittees and limit Members to six committee assignments.
But the Congressional Black Caucus opposes any changes because that might mean fewer chairmanships for its Members.
"Among the problems I think the House has, too many committees is not one of them," says Eleanor Holmes Norton, the District of Columbia's delegate.
Joseph Califano, who served as a top aide to Lyndon Johnson and in Jimmy Carter's cabinet, disagrees.
"Many Members are more loyal to the interests behind their committees than to their constituents," he told CSPAN.
To combat this, Mr. Califano wants presidents to have a line-item veto.
Last year, the public had high hopes that the 112 House freshmen -- representing one-fourth of all Members -- would shake up the place.
Instead, most have become House broken and settled for table scraps dangled over their heads by the leadership.
General Wishart's resignation is the latest evidence that change will come only if voters conduct a thorough House cleaning at the polls, or impose term limits that restrict the ability of House leaders to perpetuate their dynastic rule.
