The short interest ratio is the number of days it would take to cover the short interest if trading continued at the average daily volume for the month. or more.
American Home Products makes Advil.
Its shareholders need it.
Investors in the Madison, N.J., drug and food company have endured a painful, 31% slide, as the stock has tumbled to 59 1/2 on Friday from a peak of 86 1/4 in late 1991.
But although the slump may have been excruciating for American Home Products' long-time shareholders, it also means new investors can swoop in and buy the stock at a bargain price, some money managers say.
The shares now languish at 13 times 1993 earnings of $4.73 a share, with a yield of 4.9%.
"For this company to sell at a discount to the market is ridiculous," says Donald Yacktman, manager of the $153 millionasset Yacktman Fund.
Mr. Yacktman notes that American Home Products has an enviable record.
The company has raised its dividend for 42 consecutive years.
At year end, its balance sheet was brimming with $2.2 billion in cash, while its debts totaled $864 million.
But those virtues have been overlooked as the market has soured on drug companies and grown skittish about the value of brand names.
"Despite the fact that they have a strong cash flow, a modest price and a good dividend yield, everybody is looking at a doomsday scenario," says Warren Isabelle, a portfolio manager with Pioneer Group.
"It's really been death to be in any of these drug companies."
American Home Products is a big seller of both prescription drugs and over-the-counter brand-name medicines like Anacin, Dimetapp and Robitussin.
In addition, the company got 11% of its revenue last year from sales of Chef Boyardee and other food products.
Bruce Baughman, co-manager of the Franklin Rising Dividends Fund, recently sold his stake in American Home Products.
"It's still a good company," he says.
"But I can see a lot of challenges to the profit margins."
Like other pharmaceutical companies, American Home Products faces increasing pressure to hold down its prescription-drug prices, Mr. Baughman notes.
In addition, the company's over-the-counter medicines are facing stiff competition from lower-priced store brands.
"There used to be resistance to store brands," Mr. Baughman says.
"But that's been worn down.
My wife won't buy the branded product if she can buy the store brand.
It's a matter of principle with her."
But Yacktman Fund's Mr. Yacktman thinks that the allure of store brands will wane as the economy continues to recover and incomes rise.
"As real disposable income goes up, people will buy branded products over house brands and generics," Mr. Yacktman says.
Last year, American Home Products spent $278 million to buy back 4.5 million shares, leaving 310 million shares outstanding as of Dec. 31.
The company could repurchase an additional 5.5 million shares under a share buyback program that was authorized by directors in 1992.
"The biggest challenge for the company is finding a use for its cash," Mr. Yacktman says.
"At these prices, one of the best uses would be to buy back stock."
Efforts to hold down drug costs will do less damage to American Home Products than to other drug companies, argues L. Roy Papp, co-manager of the L. Roy Papp Stock Fund.
American Home Products doesn't "have a lot of very high-priced drugs," he notes.
Mr. Papp figures that, because of cost-containment efforts, "the earnings growth rate of this company, which had been 9% for the past five or 10 years, will go down to a lower level.
But we still think they'll grow at around 7%.
If you have a 7% return from growth, and a 5% dividend, that's a total return of 12% a year.
That's not the moon.
But when short-term interest rates are 3.5% and long-term rates are at 7%, it looks attractive."
Analysts are looking for American Home Products' earnings to rise 6% in 1994, to $5.01 a share, according to First Call.
For 1995, analysts estimate that earnings will climb an additional 7%, to $5.38.
That means that American Home is trading at less than 12 times estimated 1994 earnings and at barely 11 times forecasted 1995 profit.
Mr. Papp thinks the stock is an especially good investment for conservative investors.
"I hate to call it a widows-and-orphans stock," Mr. Papp says.
"But it has some of those characteristics."
