The U.S. and Japan have tentatively settled several important issues in their dispute over cellular telephones, and the two sides appear headed toward a compromise that would avert U.S. sanctions against Japanese goods.
Although differences remain, an agreement would signal compromise at a critical time in relations between the U.S. and Japan, and would be a boost to Motorola Inc.'s effort to expand in Japan.
It could, however, hurt business for another big U.S. company, American Telephone & Telegraph Co., whose officials have been warned that they could lose work in Japan under current terms of the talks.
In another apparent effort to ease trade tensions with the U.S., Japanese officials met with General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co. executives in Detroit and promised to make it easier for them to export autos to Japan.
As previously reported, Japanese Transport Ministry officials have already decided on steps that will help Chrysler Corp. sharply boost exports of Jeep Cherokees to Japan.
The Clinton administration has turned up the heat in recent weeks, threatening to impose trade sanctions if Japan doesn't open its market to U.S. companies.
Last week, President Clinton renewed a tough trade measure called Super 301 that allows the U.S. to levy sanctions against countries it deems unfair trading partners.
Japanese officials said Japan is close to terms with the U.S. over increasing the number of cellular telephone relay stations and channels available to Motorola, which has complained the Japanese market is too closed.
Motorola officials in Tokyo, however, sought to damp speculation that a deal is close.
"It could all go up in smoke," said one official.
"We don't have this great amount of confidence that everyone else has.
We still think that sanctions are a distinct possibility."
An official at Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications said that IDO and Motorola have almost reached an agreement, but that the two companies still must "finalize" their discussions.
Japanese officials said Japan is close to agreeing to have IDO Corp., a closely held Japanese cellular carrier, open 159 relay stations for the Nagoya-Tokyo corridor by the end of 1995 for Motorola's system of phone service.
That would mean that Motorola would have a total of about 350 stations in Japan, and provide Motorola part of the expansion that it's seeking.
The Japanese officials said the two sides are also close to agreement on increasing the number of channels Motorola would get.
Motorola says it had 2,700 channels at the end of last year in the Tokyo-Nagoya region, with another 2,800 being developed.
The company has asked for 16,100 channels, which could handle 450,000 subscribers, by the end of 1995.
An official said Japan is close to agreeing to the U.S. demand.
Japanese officials warned, however, that the terms would be a costly venture for IDO and that the company would have to delay its plans to switch to digital service from analog, a venture that was to involve AT&T.
Jim McGann, an AT&T spokesman, said, "The Japanese government has informed us that they are going to instruct IDO to not go forward with their plans to convert to digital.
What we are trying to do now is trying to analyze the situation fully, and try to analyze how we're going to be affected by this."
The Japanese officials said Japan is also close to agreeing to freeze IDO expansion of Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp.'s cellular-phone system.
NTT is also a partner of IDO's, and Motorola has been seeking the freeze on the grounds that IDO has been swinging purchases to NTT.
A U.S. congressional official familiar with the talks said Japan is moving to keep the U.S. from issuing a preliminary list of Japanese products on which the U.S. would impose punitive tariffs.
The U.S. could issue that list next week, which would be about a month after the U.S. alleged that Tokyo had violated a 1989 agreement in which it promised to provide "comparable" market access to its cellular-phone market.
In an interview, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor took a cautious but optimistic tone.
He said, "We've made progress, but there isn't an agreement."
He added: "There is agreement on some issues but not all."
Motorola spokesman Tim Kellogg acknowledged, "Talks have been moving in a positive direction," but said the company won't discuss any concessions wrung from the Japanese until the negotiations are completed.
He noted Motorola stands to gain as much as $300 million in exports to Japan if it has comparable market access.
In the dispute, Motorola claims that it is being shut out of the heavily populated Tokyo-Nagoya corridor.
Japan's telecommunications ministry paired Motorola with IDO.
Motorola claims that its partner mostly pushes NTT's technology and has wanted Japanese government assurances that it would promote Motorola's system.
Japan argues that it has already given special treatment to Motorola by allowing it to use a different technology in most of Japan, and that the company is seeking to build its business to a level that took NTT more than a decade to establish.
In meetings at GM and Ford, Japanese officials said Japan's Ministry of Transport will next month establish an office in the Japanese Consulate in Detroit to help U.S. auto makers obtain a permit allowing them to export vehicles to Japan without submitting each vehicle for individual inspection, Japanese officials told the auto makers.
Today, as reported, Japanese officials will present Chrysler with a "type certificate" for Jeep Cherokees, certifying all Cherokees as roadworthy and not in need of individual inspections.
"All the necessary procedures will be carried out in the U.S.," said Kenichi Ando, director of the Japan External Trade Organization's automobile department, "so there will be no need for manufacturers to send sample vehicles to Japan."
Ford hopes to use the procedure to win a type certificate to export a right-hand-drive version of its Probe, which is built in the U.S. on a Mazda chassis.
GM will try to use the process to expedite its previously announced plan to export 20,000 Chevrolet Cavaliers a year starting in 1996 to Japan, where they will be sold through the Toyota Motor Corp. sales network.
Mr. Ando said the decision to visit Detroit was made within the past eight days.
It appears the meeting is in response to growing trade tensions between the two countries, but Mr. Ando said he could not comment on "political" matters.
Ford and Chrysler executives said that the new effort is helpful, but they said nonetheless that Japan still has more regulatory barriers to auto imports than any other country.
Mr. Ando took issue with that and said that the Big Three simply had not made a serious effort to sell in Japan.
"Many Japanese companies have branch offices in Ann Arbor Mich. just to get emission approval from the U.S. environmental office there," Mr. Ando said, "but on the other hand there are no U.S. branch offices set up just for getting type certification in Japan."
But thanks largely to the soaring value of the yen, and growing productivity of U.S. auto makers, the Big Three are beginning to take the prospect of exporting to Japan more seriously.
Last year, Ford lowered some of its prices in Japan by 15% to 20%, the company said.
"Now the Big Three have very competitive products," Mr. Ando said, "and they are motivated."
Michael J. Ybarra contributed to this article.
