Hunched over an array of brightly colored maps, Richard Matzke, head of Chevron Corp.'s international exploration unit, plots potential pipeline routes that one day could transform the company's Tengiz oil project in Kazakhstan into a smaller version of Saudi Arabia.
The pipeline in the former Soviet republic could also complete Chevron's strategic transformation from cautious domestic plodder into successful global risk-taker.
But, as in most corporate makeovers, America's third-largest oil and gas company is becoming aware of a wide and possibly perilous gap 'twixt plan and reality.
Taking the pipeline in one direction would route it through the turf of the region's most treacherous underworld bosses.
Another path would take it through pockets of fierce ethnic fighting and maybe even through Iraq or Iran.
The obvious solution, to hook into neighboring Russia's existing pipeline system, may cost a czar's ransom or be politically impossible.
"Somewhere there is going to be a toll booth," Mr. Matzke says with a sigh.
"There is always a price to pay."
San Francisco-based Chevron has decided to pay that price.
But, more than others in Big Oil, it has had to change its ways to do so.
Internally, the once-complacent company is moving to instill a more entrepreneurial culture with less central control.
Globally, it is determined to grow by gambling on risky but potentially high-return megaprojects from the steppes of central Asia to war-ravaged western Africa.
Its goals: to more than double its world-wide reserves -- and to gain Wall Street's respect.
Watching "big playing fields opening up all around the world" finally persuaded Chevron it couldn't afford to rely on "the very restrictive set of opportunities here in the U.S.," says David O'Reilly, vice president of strategic planning.
The turning point came three years ago, when top managers gasped at budget requests laid before them.
Annual profit was diving below $1 billion, while divisional executives blithely churned out wish lists geared to a company earning twice that much.
Ever since then, Chevron has been shrinking its domestic investments and slashing operating costs -- essential moves in view of a global oil glut that has depressed prices to a five-year low.
It has put more than $5 billion of assets on the block in the past few years, chopped its payroll more than 20% (to 42,000) and eliminated most company-owned gasoline stations in the East.
Although Chevron remains the No. 2 natural-gas producer and largest marketer of petroleum products in the U.S., its new strategy has set its traditional spending patterns on their head.
Chevron operates far fewer domestic oil and gas properties than it had just five years ago.
Three out of four exploration dollars are going overseas, almost double the pre-1989 percentage.
Even Chevron's historic downtown San Francisco office building is on the market.
While all Big Oil is going through change, Chevron has had to go further, faster to become competitive.
Content in the 1980s to rely on fields in the Gulf of Mexico and the Southwest, it consistently had the highest cost for producing a barrel of oil in the U.S.
The industry viewed Chevron as slow and stodgy.
After buying Gulf Oil Co. in 1984, it waited too long to cut overhead and then was too timid in eliminating marginal operations as the energy business sank.
Until a few years ago, top managers had to approve even relatively piddling $1 million outlays.
Now, Chevron has reported five straight quarters of operating earnings above $500 million.
In early January, it gave employees $115 million in bonuses and took out newspaper ads to trumpet achieving its goal of providing the greatest return to shareholders among major U.S. oil concerns, based on total dividends and stock appreciation over the past five years.
Dividends have increased six times in six years, and the stock is up about 25% from two years ago.
Just days after the board proposed a 2-for-1 stock split, Chevron closed yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading at $93.25, down 12.5 cents on the day.
Chairman Kenneth Derr sees even brighter days ahead.
Except for the U.S., he says, "every country in the world is doing everything" possible to develop its oil resources.
"Growth opportunities for international oil companies have never been greater."
But Chevron faces stiff competition abroad.
Every major oil company is looking there.
Pace-setters such as Exxon Corp. and Royal Dutch/Shell Group have greater financial resources and more diversified world-wide interests.
Chevron's strategic shift reflects geological reality and a thirst for crude oil.
When critics demand to know why the company has turned its back on domestic exploration for much riskier venues, the usually amiable Mr. Derr turns bitter, reeling off a list of U.S. wildlife refugees and offshore areas that can't be developed because of environmental obstacles.
"Did you ever try to do business in Santa Barbara County?" he snaps.
"We took a bigger exploration and production write-off there than we took anywhere else."
Having invested $2.6 billion to develop the Point Arguello field off the coast of Santa Barbara, Chevron and its partners have been fighting opposition from local politicians and environmental groups since 1980.
In many ways, Chevron's focus today harks back to earlier glory, when luck and perseverance earned it the first Western foothold in Saudi Arabia in the 1930s.
For a pittance, its geologists negotiated a huge drilling concession.
Six consecutive wells were unsuccessful.
But after five years of work, the seventh hole was a gusher that changed the Mideast forever and catapulted Chevron into the major leagues of international oil production.
It still buys about 13% of its oil from Saudi fields.
Chevron is making bold forays today even though it is still haunted by a disastrous, nearly $1 billion investment that it had to abandon in Sudan nearly a decade ago.
As that country slid into anarchy, nearly 900 miles of pipe and the equipment to lay it rusted at staging areas while guerrillas killed some members of Chevron's construction crew.
Not a barrel of oil was ever pumped.
Only recently has the company deleted references to the ignominious project from internal briefing papers.
"We aren't going to have any more Sudans," Mr. Matzke vows, noting that no country accounts for more than 25% of the company's annual overseas investment.
Yet with so much at stake, Chevron can't abandon projects because of political uncertainties.
To keep production going in Nigeria, which has had three governments in seven months and an elected president who hasn't taken office because of civil strife, Chevron will have to spend a quarter of a billion dollars a year "as far into the future as we can see," Mr. Matzke says.
In Angola, three mortar shells exploded inside the company's northern complex a few weeks ago, injuring a worker and forcing an evacuation until government paratroopers chased away the attackers.
Earlier, the company's work force for offshore wells in Zaire had been relocated to the Angola site after a shooting spree.
So far, production in both countries is on schedule, and Chevron says working with various factions should keep the oil flowing.
Despite unrest in Africa and elsewhere, Chevron's executives predict a nearly 30% jump in its foreign production from current levels by the late 1990s.
The company is giving its on-the-scene people more authority.
When Secretary of State Warren Christopher made a brief stop in the Kazakh capital, Chevron's local manager, Morley Dupre, gave him a long briefing urging more U.S. diplomatic pressure to gain Russian cooperation.
Managing directors in each country cultivate U.S. diplomats and local officials.
Chevron executives are crisscrossing the globe peddling a wide range of technology, drumming up consulting contracts and trying to launch small-scale ventures, in the hope of eventually getting larger ones.
In Angola, they give the cash-starved government advice on lining up international financing.
In Russia, they help refineries turn out higher-grade lubricants and suggest ways to set up a network of service stations.
"If you don't start talking to people and do a little bit of business," Mr. Derr says, "you're probably never going to do the bigger business."
Sometimes, common sense dictates a lower profile.
When Chinese officials complained to Chevron and its partners that too many highly paid Western engineers were managing an offshore project, only Mr. Matzke's crew got the message; the others balked at giving up the image that goes with a permanent presence.
Chevron, deciding that earning China's goodwill was more important, pulled Western employees out -- and it has gotten a steady stream of small favors and promises of future assistance from the Chinese.
But well-thought-out strategies sometimes come up against the harsh realities of producing crude abroad.
At Tengiz, which is operated as a 50-50 joint venture by Chevron and the Kazakh government, temperatures can top 130 degrees in summer and plunge to 30 degrees below in the winter.
The mud is deep enough to suck the boots off unsuspecting visitors.
Railroad cars jammed with giant electric generators are the only dependable source of power.
Even if everything works perfectly in such a hostile environment, it can take a decade to start earning profits.
Meanwhile, contracts and currencies can change daily at the whim of officialdom.
"The gap between law and reality is huge," says George Mistuloff, a former consultant for U.S. companies in Kazakhstan and nearby areas.
"Your guarantees, quite frankly, are only as good as your personal relationship with the people who happen to be in charge at the moment."
Although Chevron says its spending in the barren Kazakh countryside is proceeding slowly, it has already laid out $300 million and been tied up for seven years in negotiations to gain access to a prize that dwarfs Alaska's renowned Prudhoe Bay.
The company has agreed to finance everything from schools and clinics to state-of-the-art processing plants.
But the funding spigot won't be opened further without real progress in marketing oil.
"We really can't control much else in these high-risk deals," Mr. Matzke acknowledges.
"So if we lose Tengiz, we don't go into the tank.
If we succeed, we're in heaven."
Heaven must wait.
Nearly all the existing Tengiz wells that Chevron inherited under its contract had to be plugged or reworked to make sure they wouldn't explode.
Output is a mere 30,000 barrels a day, less than a quarter of what the company expected to ship by mid-1994.
Russia, which currently swaps Tengiz oil for crude that Chevron can export from a Black Sea port, refuses to accept additional barrels from the landlocked field unless Chevron spends substantial sums, not specified in the contract, to upgrade pumping stations and other facilities.
The Kazakhs themselves have occasionally held down Tengiz production for internal political reasons.
Mr. Derr concedes that Chevron is "going through holy hell" to keep the project on track.
But almost in the same breath, he stresses that Chevron must find a way around the obstacles.
"It's just absolutely fantastic that we are in business in Kazakhstan" ahead of competitors, he says, marveling that Chevron has come this far.
"We're selling more oil from the former Soviet Union than anybody else."
