When Microsoft Corp. recently announced its plan to acquire Softimage Inc., a leader in the market for specialty design and animation software, investors in Softimage's main rival, Toronto-based Alias Research Inc., ran for the hills.
Shares of Alias plunged 14.5% on the news of Microsoft's $130 million acquisition proposal, as investors panicked at the possibility of competing with the computer industry giant.
The stock dropped from $18.125 a share to $16.25 the day after the Microsoft acquisition proposal was announced, and has since fallen further, closing Friday at $15.50, off 12.5 cents, on the Nasdaq stock market.
"It's a knee-jerk reaction, but an understandable one," said Leonard Brecken, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co. in New York.
"It's a bit of a shock to wake up one morning and find you're competing with a giant like Microsoft" instead of just small Montreal-based Softimage.
But what looks like a nightmare could become a dream come true for Alias investors, some analysts argue.
These bulls believe that Alias actually could emerge as a winner from the proposed Microsoft-Softimage alliance, due to a strong product line and the possibility that at least some of Softimage's attention will be diverted away from the high-end graphic design software market and toward lower-end solutions for Microsoft.
"I'm telling my clients that it's a gift, it's a wonderful opportunity," Charles Finnie, general partner at Volpe, Welty & Co., a San Francisco-based investment dealer, said of the drop in Alias's share price.
"Microsoft appears to have little interest in entering the exotic niche market where Alias and Softimage now compete," Mr. Finnie says.
"They {Microsoft} appear to be positioning themselves for the day when they can apply the animation technology to their own low-end products."
Alias had begun to draw positive attention from analysts and investors before the Microsoft bombshell.
The stock rose from a 52-week low of $6.50 to a high of $19.25 in January, as the company's earnings prospects brightened and it became clear that a new management team brought aboard two years ago had succeeded in turning the company around.
In the year ended Jan. 31, 1992, Alias, hit by soaring costs, accounts receivable that stretched to 120 days and high debt levels, reported a loss of $17.4 million, or $3.26 a share.
When Robert Burgess, the new president and chief executive officer, took up his job, there wasn't enough cash on hand to meet the payroll.
By the following year, management had trimmed costs by 60%, and the loss on continuing operations fell to $8.4 million from $17.4 million.
For the fiscal year just ended, analysts estimate earnings reached 38 cents a share, and expect them to jump to between 60 cents and 70 cents a share in the year ending Jan. 31, 1995.
Alias's products also have caught on in a big way.
Its animation software has been used in a number of Hollywood productions, including last year's hit movie, "Jurassic Park."
Sales of Alias's animation software nearly trebled last year, Mr. Burgess said in an interview in December, and Alias has won new business over competitors such as Softimage.
The fate of Alias's latest product for the high-end industrial design market, StudioPaint V1.0, will be an important indicator for analysts like Oppenheimer's Mr. Brecken.
So far, few industrial designers have been keen to swap their pencils and paper for a computer, and Mr. Burgess calculated that only about 10% of design work currently is automated.
But Mr. Brecken says that if the "revolutionary" StudioPaint, which allows designers to sketch a design freehand onto a computer and then converts the drawing into a three-dimensional model, catches on, it will offset any pricing problems in the more competitive animation software market and translate into even stronger growth for Alias.
"If in the next quarter I see some definitive signs of life in that design market, and see the year-end earnings are strong, then I'll be looking at upgrading my rating on the stock," Mr. Brecken said.
He cut his rating to "market performer" from "analyst buy" the day the Microsoft-Softimage pact was announced, as the stock was near his short-term price target of $18 a share.
Rising rates caused another choppy session, pushing small-company stock prices modestly lower in "double-witching" trading.
But smaller issues outdid their larger counterparts.
Traders said the monthly expiration of stock and index options as well as sell programs created across-the-board volatility, but those factors typically hit big, cyclical issues hardest.
The Russell 2000 Index fell 0.83, or 0.31%, to 264.05, after reaching an intraday low of 263.71.
The Nasdaq Composite Index lost 1.39 to 788.85, although at its worst level it was down to 784.77.
Declining issues beat advancers, 1,698 to 1,421, on Nasdaq National Market volume of 247,928,600 shares and total volume of 300,634,000 shares.
