Federal officials are trying to change key terms of a $4.6 billion contract for air-traffic-control modernization that Loral Corp. is acquiring by buying an International Business Machines Corp. unit.
The contract, handled by IBM's Federal Systems Division, has been plagued by delays and cost overruns.
Transportation Department officials say they want to add financial penalties if Loral doesn't meet budget and schedule targets.
"This matter is undergoing intense scrutiny, and there are serious problems with it, and we want to make sure that in any new contractual relationship our concerns are addressed," said Stephen Kaplan, the top lawyer for the Transportation Department.
Loral, New York, announced its $1.57 billion acquisition of Federal Systems Division on Dec. 13, the same day the Federal Aviation Administration announced that the air-traffic overhaul would produce another $1.2 billion in unforeseen costs.
Of that, $700 million was attributed to IBM's piece of the project.
The FAA has been reviewing its relationship with contractors, even as IBM and Loral push to close the deal.
It is unlikely the review will threaten the deal, but it could increase Loral's costs or risks.
Loral's acquisition of the IBM division is expected to pass the government's antitrust review.
But federal officials also must approve the transfer of individual contracts to the new company, under a legal process called "novation."
The Defense Department, which provides the bulk of Federal Systems' business, will take the lead on that review; it has agreed to pursue the air-traffic contract changes, according to Transportation Department officials.
They said the review could take several months.
The Defense Department is unlikely to do anything that would threaten the deal, given the Pentagon's efforts to encourage consolidation among defense contractors.
And it would be unusual for the Pentagon to use novation to force major changes in a contract.
Still, government officials could well use the process to sort out uncertainties over who is liable for the $700 million in unexpected costs.
Loral said in December the question of new costs is "open to interpretation."
Yesterday, a Loral spokesman said only that the company "is working closely with FAA, and we are prepared to bring all the necessary resources to add value to this important program."
The spokesman said that "it is premature to address contract particulars at this time, and we have had no such discussions."
Loral is a maker of military electronics systems.
The $17 billion program to overhaul the nation's air-traffic-control system has encountered so many problems that the Clinton administration is now pushing to take the project out of the FAA's hands and create a new government corporation to run it.
IBM's portion of the project, which is intended to bring new computer workstations to 20 control centers nationwide, has been the focus of much of the criticism.
Transportation Department officials say the current contract gives IBM bonuses for completing portions on time, but few penalties for failing to do so.
In December 1992, the FAA threatened to withhold payments in order to force IBM to speed up the project.
IBM, Armonk, N.Y., has said that until recently it didn't devote enough top managers to the project, which produces 10% of Federal Systems' revenues.
Transportation Department officials say they are seeking assurances from Loral that its senior management will keep a close eye on the project.
Jeff Cole in Los Angeles contributed to this article.
