Orders to U.S. factories rose for the fifth consecutive month in December, a further sign of strength in manufacturing that could spill over into this year.
The Commerce Department reported new orders for all manufacturers rose 1.2% in December to $266.02 billion from $262.77 billion the previous month.
"Basically the economy is going great guns right now," said Merrill Lynch economist Bruce Steinberg.
Durable goods posted robust 2.1% growth in December, about the same as the 2.2% estimate in a preliminary report last week.
This increase comes on the heels of 2.2% growth in November and 2.6% in October.
Orders for nondurable goods gained 0.2% in December, the department said.
New orders for the whole year were up 5.9% to $3.069 trillion.
Orders for durable goods accounted for most of the year's growth, rising 8.7%, while nondurables grew only 2.9%.
Orders of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft went up 6.2% in December, continuing a seven-month climb.
For the full year, these orders were up 15.4%.
The report "means we had strong investment and will be able to compete more effectively by improving labor productivity and the quality of goods," said Kurt Karl, an economist for WEFA Group.
Separately, the Federal Reserve said it will release revisions today on its industrial production and capacity utilization figures dating back to 1990.
Some analysts are expecting the revisions in capacity utilization over the period to be substantially downward.
That would suggest inflation is well under control, as high utilization figures are often associated with production bottlenecks and price increases.
The Fed's most recent report, for November, showed industry operating at 83.0% of capacity.
Also yesterday the Labor Department said initial claims for unemployment benefits soared last week, probably because claims were held down the previous week by cold weather and the Martin Luther King holiday.
Claims last week shot up 59,000 to 422,000 -- the highest since July 1992 -- from a revised 363,000 the previous week.
The four-week moving average, considered a better indicator of labor market trends, rose to 377,250 from 361,000 the week before.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here are the Commerce Department's latest figures for manufacturers in billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted.
