The sky didn't fall, markets didn't crash, and no one in Congress or the MIT economics department tore his garments.
None of this happened last week even though Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan announced that he's a gold bug.
We point to these remarkable non-events because for years, even decades now, gold has been the four-letter word of government finance.
Central banks may store gold in their vaults as reserves, and gold may be the one thing that no one ever throws away, but we were nonetheless all supposed to believe this was behavior rooted in 19th-century superstition.
So Mr. Greenspan deserves credit for the courage to admit that he and his Fed mates take gold seriously.
More precisely, Mr. Greenspan said that he considers the price of gold to be "a very good indicator" of future inflation and thus a useful star by which to guide monetary policy.
This is news.
It suggests that Mr. Greenspan is searching for guideposts rooted in something real, something more than seat-of-the-pants judgments or economic theories.
This search might, if it's pursued with some consistency, produce a new era of economic growth with low inflation.
Most Americans don't remember it, but zero or low inflation was the norm as recently as the early 1960s.
The postwar Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates that prevailed then provided monetary stability and helped the world economy grow like it never had before or since.
Bretton Woods wasn't a perfect gold standard but it was a reasonable proxy; ever since it collapsed amid U.S. mismanagement in the early 1970s, the world's central bankers have been searching for a new lodestar.
First the Fed hewed to the "Phillips Curve," which postulated a tradeoff between inflation and unemployment.
But instead this produced only more of both -- stagflation.
Paul Volcker stepped into this breach in 1979 and announced the Fed would watch the growth of the money supply -- M1, M2, and so on.
But the M's turned out to give so many false signals that first Mr. Volcker and then Chairman Greenspan abandoned them in favor of what has since been mostly ad hoc, albeit mainly successful, steering.
In his testimony last week, Mr. Greenspan seemed to be taking a large step toward more permanent monetary guideposts.
First he buried the Phillips Curve.
("What appears to be a trade-off between unemployment and inflation is quite ephemeral and misleading.")
Then he ditched the M's.
("The signals they have sent in recent years have been effectively jammed by structural changes in financial markets.")
So what does he steer by?
"The price of gold, which has been especially sensitive to inflation concerns," said Mr. Greenspan, adding that "the exchange rate and the term structure of interest rates can give important clues" as well.
In short, the Fed is now looking to prices in the real world for guidance, especially those prices that tend to give signals of future inflation.
This surprised New York Rep. John LaFalce, who asked if gold prices weren't just a product of "mob psychology."
"I don't think so," Mr. Greenspan replied.
"Gold is a different type of commodity because virtually all of the gold that has ever been produced still exists.
And therefore changes in the level of production have very little effect on the ongoing price, which means that it's virtually wholly a monetary demand phenomenon."
"So it's a store of value measure which has shown a fairly consistent lead on inflation expectations and has been over the years a reasonably good indicator," he continued.
"It does this better than commodity prices or a lot of other things."
All of this is especially relevant now because some politicians are wondering why the Fed has begun to raise interest rates even though the consumer price index seems contained.
But, as Mr. Greenspan observed, the CPI is like "looking through the rearview mirror."
Meanwhile, the price of gold had been flirting with $400 an ounce before the Fed interest-rate increase on Feb. 3.
Some other commodity prices have been flashing even stronger inflation signals; Mr. Greenspan's endorsement of gold comes at a moment when it is a moderate choice.
Our own worry has been that Mr. Greenspan and the Fed may have waited too long to raise rates, and thus an inflation rebound could already be inevitable for 1995 and 1996.
Our point last spring was that by showing determination to head off inflation early, the Fed could prevent even bigger interest-rate increases later.
Wayne Angell was saying something similar inside the Fed before his term as a governor expired earlier this month.
In any event, Mr. Greenspan's candor last week has at least given all of us a new standard by which to judge Fed performance in the future.
We'll be watching.
