The bond market took another wild ride yesterday.
But unlike recent sessions, Treasury securities recovered from early declines and ended with slight price gains.
Early in the day, prices fluctuated widely as buyers were scarce.
The benchmark 30-year bond, for example, traded from a low of 92 7/32 to a high of 93 14/32.
But the price edged up 1/8 point by day's end, or $1.25 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 93 10/32.
As a result, the yield, which moves in the opposite direction of price, fell to 6.77%, down from Tuesday's 6.78%.
Yields on other benchmark Treasurys also fell slightly.
The selling that has driven yields sharply higher in recent weeks simply exhausted itself, traders said.
And with the market increasingly illiquid and with important data on the labor market due out tomorrow morning, traders opted to start closing out positions.
Overall, sentiment remains bearish.
The session began ominously, with prices sharply lower following heavy selling overseas.
Indeed, in trading overnight Tuesday, the 30-year bond changed hands as low as 91 14/32.
Much of the selling pressure stemmed from the beating that non-U.S. government bonds have taken, especially in the German, Japanese and British markets.
The sell-off in European bonds surprised many investors, who were betting that weak European economic growth would spur continued declines in interest rates there.
But those investors -- especially huge leveraged players -- have been disappointed.
As the market was awash in rumors of losses among some big securities dealers, speculation continued that hedge funds were bailing out of positions to raise cash.
"There is a type of liquidity crunch going on to the extent that banks are restricting their lines of credit to hedge funds, forcing them to liquidate positions," said Kathleen Camilli, chief economist at Maria Fiorini Ramirez Inc.
Market participants said most of yesterday's buying was from players reversing arbitrage plays or closing out short positions.
In a short sale, a trader bets that prices will fall by selling borrowed securities in anticipation of buying the issues back at a lower price and pocketing the difference.
Institutional investors remained unwilling to buy despite falling prices and higher yields.
Money managers said they are unlikely to commit new cash to the bond market until it proves it can hold steady for an extended period of time.
Traders are now looking ahead to tomorrow's February employment report.
Forecasts center on a rise in nonfarm payroll employment of about 150,000.
That would follow a rise of 62,000 in January.
"A lot of damage has been done," said Marcello Frusctaci, a trader at Daiwa Securities Inc.
"But the worst seems to be over for the time being, and now we're going to wait and see how the numbers come out."
Hanging over the Treasurys market is continued uncertainty concerning when the Federal Reserve will again raise interest rates.
Traders essentially have thrown down the gauntlet to the Fed, saying that unless the Fed acts soon to raise rates, inflation fears will spiral and long-term interest rates will head still higher.
Bond investors despise inflation because it erodes the value of their fixed-income securities.
They seek higher interest rates as a hedge against future, heightened inflation.
"The bond market is signaling the need for another Fed move," said Michelle Colley Laughlin, economist at Sanwa Securities.
On Feb. 4, the Fed raised the federal funds rate, which is the rate at which banks lend each other cash, to 3.25% from 3%.
Some traders say the Fed may need to raise the funds rate to 3.75% to quell concerns that it's fallen behind in the fight against inflation.
Meanwhile, the hedge funds might have more on their minds than than just inflation jitters.
Joseph Liro, chief economist at S.G. Warburg & Co., says those funds would have to pay a liquidity premium to get out of positions in European markets.
"So they are selling a market that is more efficient -- the U.S. market -- as a way to hedge their positions overseas," he said.
Ontario Hydro, a Canadian utility, became the first issuer to sell a Canadian dollar-denominated floating-rate global note, as it increases the amount of floating-rate debt it has outstanding.
The utility sold one billion Canadian dollars (US$740 million) of floating-rate global notes, which are guaranteed by the Province of Ontario.
Otherwise, new issue activity was light.
CIT Group Holdings, jointly owned by Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank and Chemical Banking Corp., sold $150 million of debt in two parts.
Meanwhile, the Industrial Development Bank of India postponed a $200 million issue, citing market conditions.
Trading in the junk-bond market was active, with prices down two points early in the session, or $20 for a bond with a $1,000 face value.
However, prices recovered slightly and closed down one point.
Investors reportedly have begun pulling funds out of high-yield mutual funds, traders said.
As a result, fund managers sold debt to fund redemptions, traders said.
Activity in the investment-grade market was light, with prices following Treasurys.
Yield spreads relative to Treasurys were firm to 0.05 percentage point wider, traders said.
Ontario Hydro's global offering, designed to be easily bought and sold in the world's major markets, was priced at 99.64.
The coupon will float 0.08 percentage point above three-month Canadian Banker's Acceptances, a benchmark short-term rate that stood at 4.15% at pricing.
The coupon resets every three months.
John Mulligan, Ontario Hydro's acting treasurer, said the utility launched the issue despite weak market conditions because "floating-rate notes meet investors' needs when interest rates are backing up on them."
The issue was nearly 75% sold yesterday and should be fully sold in the next few days, he said.
Proceeds will be used to fund debt maturing this year.
The deal was managed by Merrill Lynch & Co. and Wood Gundy Corp.
Ontario Hydro plans to take advantage of short-term interest rates and sell more floating-rate debt this year, Mr. Mulligan said.
About 9% of the utility's C$35 billion outstanding debt is floating.
Syndicate officials said about 50% of the issue so far sold went to European accounts, which are more familiar with floating-rate securities.
North American and Asian investors bought the remainder.
Canadian interest was strong.
The issue may face a rough ride in the U.S.
"You have to be bullish on the Canadian dollar to buy into this thing," said one Canadian economist.
He said many foreign investors fear that the Canadian dollar will fall.
Ontario Hydro's debt is rated double-A-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and double-A-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
Sellers attacked municipal bonds once again yesterday, but they seem to be having a little sympathy toward Denver's popular airport revenue bonds despite yet another delay in the opening of the city's new international airport.
The losses of the Denver bonds this week are largely attributed to the general market malaise, not to the postponement.
Denver officials announced earlier this week that the airport opening has been put off until May 15.
The delay will generate bond-related postponement costs of an estimated $30 million that are to be covered by UAL Corp.'s United Airlines and Continental Airlines.
The yield for the 6.75% of 2022 airport revenue bonds, one closely watched issue, has risen to about 6.65% from 6.5% late Tuesday.
There is $3.5 billion of Denver airport revenue bonds outstanding.
Separately, more than $400 million of munis were priced the session, despite the market's continued weakness.
A Smith Barney Shearson group set yields for the Westchester County, N.Y., Industrial Development Agency $113 million 1994 Series A refunding bonds.
Following a repricing to attract buyers, yields range from 4.45% in 1998 to 5.75% in 2009.
Though faring better than Treasurys as both markets fell in early trading, mortgage prices in late trading slightly trailed their government counterparts.
As the U.S. markets opened, Treasurys were posting losses from overseas trade, and mortgages were only mirroring about three-quarters of those losses.
But as the session wore on, Treasurys caught occasional bid from short-covering and from investors moving out of stocks.
Mortgages fell behind and never caught up.
But there's a bright spot, traders say: It allowed underwriters to price new real-estate investment-conduit securities.
When mortgages cheapen, or "widen," relative to Treasurys, the Remic underwriting profit margin widens.
All four of the deals announced yesterday were backed by securities from the Federal National Mortgage Association.
Collateral included 6 1/2%, 7% and 7 1/2% securities, as well as principle-only strips from outstanding Remic trusts.
All told, $905 million in new bonds came out.
In late trading, the 7% securities for March delivery were off 2/32.
Ginnie Maes were at 99 17/32, Freddie Mac Golds at 99 24/32, and Fannie Maes at 99 18/32.
The 10-year Treasury note, which is a benchmark for these mortgage issues, was up 1/8 point at 97 6/32 to yield 6.25%.
In the asset-backed market, Lehman Brothers Inc. brought an unusual offering of securities backed by subordinate certificates of three previously issued Household Finance Corp. home-equity-loan transactions.
Household Finance is a unit of Household International Inc.
It was changes to the Investment Company Act of 1940 authorized by the Securities and Exchange Commission in late 1992 that enabled Lehman to repackage the lower-rated, securities outstanding for triple-A rated bonds, says Martin Harding, a Lehman senior vice president.
Mr. Harding says the new structure enabled the bank to provide investors with floating-rate paper, which has been highly desired as a defensive move against rising rates.
THE COUPON on Ontario Hydro's 1 billion Canadian dollar (US$738.9 million) offering Wednesday will float at the threemonth Canadian bankers' acceptance rate.
Yesterday's Credit Markets column incorrectly said the coupon would be 0.08 percentage point higher, which was the yield when the issue was reoffered at a price of 99.64.
