Despite protests from the White House, the Congressional Budget Office is expected to recommend today that President Clinton's health-care plan be counted as part of the federal budget, congressional and administration officials said.
The CBO wouldn't comment.
But the White House, stung last week by criticism of its plan from business groups, braced for more political fallout from the anticipated CBO decision.
And Republicans seized on the expected development as further evidence that the proposal is in trouble.
"This is a real body blow," said Rep. John Kasich (R., Ohio), ranking Republican on the House Budget Committee.
The expected decision was first reported by USA Today.
The ultimate impact of the CBO's recommendation, which director Robert Reischauer is expected to disclose in testimony before the House Ways and Means Committee, isn't clear.
Treating the health-care plan as part of the budget could mean that spending on insurance policies by federally established health alliances would be counted as federal outlays, and premiums they collect from employers and individuals would be counted as receipts.
The administration insists that the plan overall wouldn't expand the deficit in the short run, and would narrow it in the long run.
What Republicans want most dearly is for Mr. Reischauer to label mandated insurance premiums, which would run up to 7.9% of payroll for large businesses, as taxes.
Mr. Reischauer isn't expected to go that far, however.
If the CBO defines the premiums as something else -- Medicare premiums, for example, are now classified simply as "receipts" to offset government health spending -- the GOP argument would become more complicated.
The CBO only makes recommendations to Congress, and its analyses turn on technical factors impenetrable to most lawmakers, not to mention ordinary Americans.
But Mr. Clinton himself has enhanced the CBO's influence by citing it as an impartial arbiter of fiscal disputes.
Hoping to blunt bad news, administration officials and congressional Democrats said they expect the CBO to buttress the president's estimates of his plan's financial impact.
In addition, Mr. Clinton's allies on Capitol Hill dismissed the development as a short-term public relations coup for the GOP that will quickly fade.
"Republicans are going to make hay for 24 hours, and then it isn't going to matter," said one Democratic leadership aide.
White House officials, for their part, said they will continue to focus on the purpose of the so-called employer mandate -- to guarantee health coverage for all Americans -- and not the technical accounting of it.
"This debate should be about providing every American with guaranteed private health insurance that can never be taken away," said White House spokesman Robert Boorstin.
"We don't want to be trapped by score-keeping issues when the health of the American people is at stake."
Still, the anticipated CBO decision is yet another blow to a White House plan that was battered last week by the Business Roundtable, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers.
It may further enhance the attractiveness of an alternative offered by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.), which wouldn't impose insurance premiums on employers.
But liberals may embrace the analysis as a step toward erasing the distinction between Mr. Clinton's plan for "guaranteed private insurance" and a government-run "single-payer" alternative.
"If they say it's on budget, the administration will be unhappy because they are trying to say this is not a big government program and is all free enterprise," said Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark (D., Calif.), who heads a key health subcommittee.
With the CBO analysis behind them, Mr. Stark added, lawmakers can move beyond technical analysis and "write a bill."
