Contrary to former Ambassador L. Paul Bremer's assertion (editorial page, Jan. 14), this administration has not neglected the threat posed by international terrorism.
In fact, countering the terrorist threat is one of the global issues that has been a central focus of the State Department, and it is one of my chief responsibilities.
The actions we have taken against state-sponsored terrorism include the following:
-- We used military force to send an unequivocal signal to Saddam Hussein when it became clear that Iraq was behind the plot to kill former President Bush.
-- We have made clear to the Syrian government that until it stops all support for terrorist groups, it will remain on the "terrorism list," a designation that restricts foreign aid, military sales and World Bank loans.
-- We added Sudan to this list of international pariahs after it persisted in allowing Iranian and other terrorists to use its territory as a safe haven and training ground.
-- We fought for and obtained tighter mandatory sanctions against Libya in the United Nations in the face of continued Libyan intransigence and culpability for the bombing of Pan Am 103.
The U.S. continues to believe that still stronger measures, including a world-wide oil embargo, should be enacted if Libya continues to defy the international community.
We remain determined to ensure the perpetrators of these acts of terrorism are brought to justice.
The families of the victims in the murderous Lockerbie bombing and other acts of Libyan terrorism deserve nothing less.
We will continue to work closely with our friends and allies to track down terrorists and bring them to justice.
We offer specialized anti-terrorism training to friendly foreign countries that face terrorism at home.
Finally, contrary to the assertion that we have downgraded our counterterrorist effort, we have proposed that the counterterrorist coordinator's role be assumed by an assistant secretary of state and that oversight be assigned to a new undersecretary for global affairs.
We will remain committed to maintaining an effective international counterterrorism policy and to increasing our ability to ensure the safety of Americans and American interests world-wide.
Timothy E. Wirth
