Brokerage firm Chatfield Dean & Co. settled with the Securities and Exchange Commission a civil case involving its trading, sales and supervisory practices.
The company agreed to pay $750,000 in civil penalties, and seven individuals, including the firm's two top officers, also were fined and penalized.
The firm and individuals didn't admit or deny charges.
The SEC case follows a disciplinary proceeding by the National Association of Securities Dealers in December that ordered the firm to repay customers $1.9 million, and fined the firm $685,000 to settle charges of stock manipulation and other violations.
A number of executives also were fined and disciplined in that proceeding.
In the SEC settlement Chatfield President Sanford D. Greenberg was fined $100,000 and suspended for six months.
Following his suspension, Senior Executive Vice President Robert L. Lemon will be suspended in any supervisory capacity for six months and fined $50,000.
The firm noted the suspensions will be served sequentially.
In the settlement, Chatfield agreed to retain as consultants former SEC Chairman David S. Ruder and former SEC General Counsel Daniel L. Goelzer to implement recommendations to improve trading, sales and supervisory compliance practices.
Mr. Ruder has been working with the brokerage firm since April 1992.
Mr. Ruder said the firm's current sales practices, mark-up policies and compliance environment "are all of very high quality."
The company also said it eliminated commission structures that rewarded a broker for selling one product over another.
The SEC settlement requires Chatfield to record all telephone conversations and retain them for five years.
Chicago Branch Manager Kevin C. Grom was fined $75,000 and barred, with a right to reapply after three years.
Englewood, Colo., Branch Manager John K. Watton was fined $50,000 and barred, with a right to reapply after two years.
Englewood Assistant Branch Manager Anthony G. DeCamillis was fined $25,000 and barred, with a right to reapply after one year.
William R. MacCallum, head trader, was fined $50,000 and barred with a right to reapply after one year.
Former Vice President of Compliance Kenneth S. Bernstein was fined $50,000 and barred in certain supervisory capacities with a right to reapply after two years.
