The head of the International Monetary Fund warned "it may not be easy" for Russia to agree to the economic reforms necessary to unlock billions of dollars of IMF and private financing.
Michel Camdessus, the IMF's managing director, used an unusual meeting with reporters to send a firm message to the Russian government and to deflect growing criticism that the IMF has done too little to press economic reforms on Moscow.
"We consider it vital to speed up the stabilization and reform process in Russia to create the necessary preconditions for sustained growth and improved living standards," Mr. Camdessus said.
"We all know that without adequately strong monetary and budgetary policies, no efforts to reduce inflation and stabilize the ruble will be successful for long."
He noted that lower inflation is a precondition for attracting official aid and private investment that Russia needs to build a strong, market-oriented economy.
Mr. Camdessus spoke against a background of increasing concern in Washington and Europe that Russia is moving in the wrong direction.
Worsening economic conditions in Russia have produced a backlash against the monetary and budgetary discipline that's at the heart of IMF adjustment programs.
The new parliament elected in December is less committed to Western-style restructuring, and several leading reformers have recently left the government.
An IMF team arrived in Russia this week to start negotiations on aid.
The immediate issue is whether Russia can impose enough discipline on its economy to win the release of $1.5 billion in IMF funds.
The government wants the money to pay off budget arrears.
But an acceptable reform program could also unfreeze billions of dollars of additional IMF funds to help stabilize the ruble and create the conditions to attract the private investment necessary to help Russia rebuild its dilapidated energy, mining, manufacturing and agricultural industries.
"We don't go to Moscow with a pre-established list of things they must do," Mr. Camdessus said.
But he ticked off the key requirements: lower inflation; a consistent pace of structural reform leading to a market economy based on world prices; the generation of more resources for unemployment benefits, pensions and other social safety nets by diverting money from industrial subsidies; a "national consensus" for reform; and appropriate international support.
Mr. Camdessus expressed particular concern about inflation, which is currently running at a monthly rate of about 20%, up from 12% in December.
"We must have inflation going down.
We must have a credible budget," he said.
"They would like to put emphasis on nonmonetary" methods for controlling inflation, he said.
"If that means budget restraint, that would be music to our ears."
However, he said, "We're hearing about aid to specific sectors," which would mean more, not less government spending.
The Russian reform effort is the biggest, most complex job the IMF has undertaken.
In dealing with Russia, the IMF has been called both too harsh and too timid.
"We are the scapegoat," Mr. Camdessus said.
"We are the convenient target for criticism.
We must live with that."
Mr. Camdessus noted that the West has disbursed $38 billion of the $55 billion it has promised to Russia since 1992.
Most of the rest of the money is being held back by the IMF and the World Bank until conditions stabilize in Russia.
But it is private investment, not official aid, that ultimately will finance the rebuilding of Russia.
With stable economic conditions, the rate of return on investment in Russia could be extremely high, Mr. Camdessus said.
