CBS did an excellent job with the women's Super G. It showed the runs of 12 skiers from top to bottom (or top to spill).
Even for those who knew that Diann Roffe-Steinrotter's time had held up for the gold medal, the taped coverage brought home the tension of an athlete who has to ski first and then wait to see if anyone else skis faster.
Coverage ended with simultaneous tape of the gold and silver medal winners as they took several key gates, providing a vivid demonstration of why one was faster than the other.
There has been a price to pay for all that high-quality videotape, however.
Cameramen often have to set up hours before an event begins, and they wind up spending extended stretches in the Norwegian cold.
Doctors have treated several cameramen for frostbitten fingers.
Coverage of Tonya Harding on Tuesday night took on the tone of one of those ghost stories invented to scare children around a campfire.
Tonya's coming closer and closer, CBS showed us with tape of her departure from Portland, then her departure from Seattle.
"She's over the Atlantic," viewers were told later.
Not since the approach of the killer bees ...
On Wednesday morning, Harry Smith kept up the "Tales of the Crypt" atmosphere, telling viewers that interest was high as the women's figure-skating competition "creeps closer."
Mr. Smith, seizing an early lead in the contest for Olympic bad-taste medal of the day, went out of his way to bring up the sad fact that U.S. luger Cammy Myler's brother has cancer.
He pretty much locked up the medal by adding that Ms. Myler had consulted Dan Jansen for advice on how to cope with the pressures of competition and a cancer-afflicted sibling.
CBS microphones are picking up interesting remarks from athletes.
Ms. Roffe-Steinrotter was charming in telling her father by trans-Atlantic phone that: "I told you guys not to come and now it's my own damn fault."
Canadian Lloyd Eisler, who along with Isabelle Brasseur won the bronze medal in pairs skating, was less charming in remarking as the judges' scores were posted for their performance: "I don't give a rat's a -- ."
CBS seems to have taken to heart continued complaints it has received over Prodigy Services Co.'s on-line "chat" forum with CBS personnel.
Among other things, users have complained about bantering commentary.
Yesterday, Lori Labadie wrote that Tuesday night's coverage had improved because it contained "a lot less yackety-yak."
Rob and Trish Howland saw room for improvement: "Between the commercials, the `up close and personal' pieces and the `happy talk,' we see less of the Olympics than we see of CBS."
Still, the Howlands added, "Your Pairs coverage of the last group was great!
{Scott} Hamilton knows his stuff."
But the improvement hasn't stemmed some subscribers' threats to switch to TNT, boycott Olympic sponsors, and tune their satellites to pick up Canadian broadcasts.
On Tuesday night, with the pairs figure-skating finals as the big draw, CBS was watched by 27.3% of the nation's 94.2 million TV households, according to A.C. Nielsen Co.
That was the fourth-highest-rated prime-time Winter Olympics broadcast in history.
ABC, with its popular sitcom "Roseanne" in the lineup, mounted the strongest competition, drawing 14.0% for the night.
NBC drew 10.0%.
For the first four nights of the Games, CBS has averaged 24.8%, well above the 18.6% it guaranteed advertisers.
