A new study suggests a controversial pharmaceutical-industry practice of giving physicians money is effective in influencing their prescription-drug recommendations, even in the face of "managed care" controls such as drug formularies.
The study found that physicians who requested hospital approval of specific drugs were much more likely than other physicians to have accepted funds from drug companies to pay for travel, speaking, or research expenses.
In the study, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, Mary-Margaret Chren and C. Seth Landefeld examined the interactions with drug companies of 40 "case" physicians who had recommended specific drugs be added to a hospital's formulary, the institution's list of approved drugs.
They were compared with 80 randonly selected "control" physicians who hadn't made such requests.
The researchers found the two groups of physicians didn't differ in their frequency of exposure to drug companies' promotional activities, such as visits from drug-company representatives.
But the case physicians were much more likely to have accepted money from drug companies to speak at educational symposia, and were somewhat more likely than their control counterparts to have accepted money from the companies to pay for their personal travel or lodging to attend symposia.
They also reported sharing meals worth more than $10 paid for by drug companies more often than did control physicians.
The case physicians were also much more likely to have performed research sponsored by drug companies.
As federal funding for medical research has become more difficult to obtain, physicians have become more dependent on funding by the pharmaceutical industry, Dr. Landefeld said.
The study's results suggest that traditional drug-company marketing directed at physicians may still be effective in the managed-care market, where formularies are widely used to contain costs.
Many pharmaceutical companies have been shrinking their sales force in the belief that promotional activities directed at physicians aren't effective when institutions increasingly regulate physician-prescribing practices through formularies.
In the study, however, all but six of 52 requested drugs were added to the formulary, including 20 drugs classified by a hospital pharmacist as having little or no advantage over drugs already on the formulary.
Another 13 added to the formulary were classified as having modest advantage.
Dr. Landefeld said, "We would like to believe that the medical profession will act on these sorts of data and ethical issues and take the high road."
But he suggested third-party payers may want to develop strict guidelines aimed at minimizing or eliminating physician relationships with pharmaceutical companies.
Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program provides a model for such policies, he said.
Dale Kramer, director of materiel services for Kaiser's Northern California region, said Kaiser tries to separate formulary and prescribing decisions from industry influence.
It limits access of drug-company detail people to physicians and runs a program to provide independent assessments of drugs.
Drs. Landefeld and Chren are on the staff of the 874-bed University Hospitals of Cleveland, where the study was conducted, and on the faculty of Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine in Cleveland.
