GRANDPARENTS ARE spending more time with their grandchildren, both in child care and for fun.
One bit of evidence comes from a huge, continuing study financed by the National Institute on Aging that is gathering information on the health, work and economic situation and family relationships of over 13,000 Americans born between 1931 and 1941.
Drawing on the results, Georgetown University demographer Beth Soldo finds that 69% have grandchildren and that almost 44% of these grandparents spent 100 or more hours caring for a grandchild or grandchildren during the year preceding the survey.
Moreover, the average time spent in grandchild care was a whopping 659 hours, which amounts to more than 82 eight-hour days.
Women were about 2 1/2 times more likely than men to be the caretakers and were averaging from 15 to 20 hours a week, even if they themselves were also employed.
A different survey by Roper Starch Worldwide indicates grandparents are also having a lot of fun with the kids.
A little over one-third of grandparents had taken grandchildren to regular restaurants during the month before the poll, and a similar proportion had taken them to fast-food places.
One-third reported going shopping with grandchildren during the month, and over one-fifth had taken them on a trip or to movies, sports events, museums and other places.
All percentages were appreciably higher than in a similar poll five years earlier.
Roper notes that today's grandparents are "younger, healthier, livelier and more financially secure" than previous generations of older Americans, and that the most active grandparents tend to be those between 45 and 59 years old.
It finds that grandfathers are still less involved than grandmothers but are doing more than they used to, particularly buying gifts for the youngsters, taking trips with them and taking them to movies, shows and athletic events.
OUT-OF-WEDLOCK childbearing substantially reduces a teenager's chances of eventual marriage.
Yale sociologist Neil Bennett, Columbia economist David Bloom and Princeton economist Cynthia Miller analyzed four large national surveys that had gathered information on the childbearing and marital history of the respondents.
Women who had had a nonmarital child as teenagers were two to three times less likely to have married by the age of 35 than comparable teenagers who hadn't had an out-of-wedlock kid.
Did poor marriage prospects increase the chances the teenager would have an out-of-wedlock child, or did the out-of-wedlock child make her a less appealing marriage prospect?
All the data points to the latter explanation, the researchers assert.
For example, one study found that nearly 85% of nonmarital births to teenagers were reported as unplanned and unwanted.
Another inquiry asked whether the teenager expected to be married within five years.
Five years later, a far higher proportion of those who answered affirmatively and then didn't have out-of-wedlock births were married than of those who answered affirmatively but then had an illegitimate child.
"For most women," the study concludes, "nonmarriage is the consequence, not the cause, of their nonmarital childbearing."
This result has disturbing implications for the future, the three academics conclude.
The continuing increase in births to unmarried young women becomes especially ominous, they say, when taken together with the extremely high poverty rates for households headed by never-married mothers.
FEDERAL WORKERS are more highly educated and older than the U.S. work force at large.
An analysis by the Congressional Budget Office says that 83% of the government's 2.3 million civilian employees -- including Congress, the courts and the executive branch -- are in white-collar jobs.
About one-fourth are classified as administrative, a little over one-fifth as professional and just under one-fifth as technical.
The rest are mostly clerical.
In all, 850 occupations are represented.
CBO notes that the proportion of professional and administrative jobs has been increasing steadily as federal work demands have grown more complex.
In 1980, about 37% of the government's civilian workers held such jobs, but by 1992, this figure was up to 48%.
Educational qualifications have increased commensurately.
In 1980, 28% of all federal civilian employees had a bachelor's degree or higher, and this rose to 36% by 1992.
The comparable figure for the national work force in 1992 was about 27%.
Citing General Accounting Office figures, CBO says the government work force also is relatively old and definitely aging.
In 1990, about 74% of federal workers were 35 or older, up from 66% in 1976.
In comparison, only 53% of workers outside the government were 35 and older in 1990.
Federal personnel managers believe the average age of the federal work force will continue to rise, CBO adds, bringing an unusually large number of retirements around the turn of the century.
POOR YOUNG MEN growing up in areas near a four-year college get appreciably more education than those who don't have a college nearby, Princeton economist David Card reports.
His investigations suggest that the presence of a local college serves not only to lower the cost of higher education but also to raise poor families' perception of the economic value of a college degree. . . .
Elderly suicides by far favor guns over other possible methods, according to researchers from the University of Illinois School of Social Work.
They say this holds for both men and women, though men are about six times more apt to use guns than women are.
