Persistent worries about interest rates and slumping European bond markets Friday battered shares on the Continent.
London stocks fell sharply on fears of higher U.S. rates.
Frankfurt prices fell on continued disappointment that Germany didn't lower key rates last week.
Tokyo stocks retreated Friday on profittaking ahead of a three-day weekend in Japan.
The market is closed Monday for a national holiday.
In Hong Kong, heavy selling of blue-chip shares pushed the benchmark index down 4%.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.85, down 0.63, reflecting drops in European and Asia/Pacific markets and an increase in markets in the Americas.
Oil drilling stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 118.56, up 2.96, or 2.56%, with Global Marine of the U.S. posting a 5.56% gain in its local currency.
Home construction stocks trailed, at 140.88, down 3.02, or 2.10%, with Bandar Raya Developments of Malaysia sliding 9.28% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index slumped 37.6 points to 3218.1.
The FT 30-stock index slid 23.6 points to 2542.7.
Volume was 609.4 million shares, compared with 659.7 million shares a day earlier.
Anxiety about U.S. interest rates was intensified by news of a meeting called Friday between U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and President Clinton.
Though a Fed spokesman characterized the session as routine, direct meetings between the central bank chief and the president are rare.
This caused investors in London to speculate that the Fed may tighten monetary policy again.
The London market also was socked by severe weakness in British bond markets and the expiration of a stock-index futures contract.
Still, some stocks recovered a bit after Wall Street posted early gains.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index dropped 19.45 points to 2155.61, ending the week with a 2.5% gain.
Dealings were dominated by expirations on the German futures and options market.
News of the Clinton-Greenspan meeting in the U.S. also made the Frankfurt stock market jumpy.
In Paris, stocks tumbled 1.2% on profittaking after interest-rate cuts failed to materialize last week.
Many disappointed participants trimmed their positions after the German central bank cut a minor interest rate less than expected and the French central bank acted similarly earlier in the week.
In Amsterdam, prices closed broadly lower because of slumping European bond markets, which were driven down by worries about the U.S. political situation and an increase by a U.S. bank in its prime rate.
In Milan, the market, including shares traded electronically, dived 1.8% in thin activity on selling ahead of the weekend and coming Italian elections and on pressure because of the depressed Italian bond futures market.
In Madrid, prices slipped, hurt by declining bond prices across Europe; the market recovered from lows late in the day as futures-related trading lifted prices ahead of the Friday expiration of the March futures contract.
In Stockholm, shares fell 1.2% in a lackluster session; rising bond yields, poor performances in major markets abroad and concern about a large number of new stock issues on the Swedish bourse combined to damp investor sentiment.
In Zurich, stocks declined 1.5%, battered by interest-rate worries; the Swiss bond market was weak, and news of the Clinton-Greenspan session added to the Swiss stock market's bearishness.
In Brussels, prices closed mixed as fears of higher long-term interest rates and selling on other Europe bourses reversed Belgian equities' early gains.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which fell 85.61 points Thursday, declined 122.71 to 20469.45, near the day's low of 20440.14.
First-section volume was estimated at 450 million shares, down from 571.8 million shares a day earlier.
Declining issues edged out advancers 561-471.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which fell 4.74 points Thursday, edged down 1.29 to 1647.24.
Selling by dealers and corporations and dumping of Nikkei futures by investment trusts more than offset buying by foreign investors, who snapped up multimedia issues, exporters and large-capitalization issues, though profit-taking and selling by dealers left these sectors mixed.
In Hong Kong, activity was the busiest in two weeks, as the key index fell for the fourth straight session, to end at late-November levels.
The index, which has fallen in seven of the past eight sessions, fell 7.8% last week, pushing it down 23% this year.
Among the hardest-hit sectors, utilities skidded 4.7%, financial stocks sank 4.5% and real-estate issues fell 4.4%.
Investors acted on their worries about higher interest rates in the U.S. and Hong Kong, as well as the possibility that China won't retain favorable U.S. trading status.
The pessimism was fed by rumors that Morgan Stanley, a U.S. investment bank, had reduced its Hong Kong holdings and advised its clients to do the same.
Morgan Stanley's Hong Kong office recently issued a report saying the blue-chip index could fall sharply, but it also described factors that could make the market surge.
In Seoul, stocks slipped on widespread sentiment that the market may not gain ground for a while because of the South Korean government's tight monetary policy.
In Singapore, shares dived in early trading but partly recovered to close 2.3% lower in thin, panicky dealings; institutional investors in Hong Kong sparked the selling, and funds in the British territory that sought to raise cash dumped Singapore holdings, and nervous domestic investors jumped onto the bandwagon.
In Kuala Lumpur, equities slid 2% in light trading, hit by sustained selling in blue chips, though Malaysian government-linked institutions bought some blue chips, braking the market's drop.
In Manila, shares sank 2% because of heavy profit-taking and by selling in the telecommunications sector.
In Bangkok, stocks tumbled 1.6% in light trading as the market's recent bear run continued and prices were pressured by declines on regional bourses.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
