Canberra, Australia -- Quick quiz: What do Stonehenge, Beijing and Canberra have in common?
Hint: It's not the quality of the nightlife -- there's plenty to do in Beijing of an evening.
Answer: All were planned according to a sacred geometry, inspired by cosmological symbolism and geomantic wisdom.
It's just that no one ever noticed this about Canberra before.
All anyone ever noticed about the Australian capital was that it was clean and boring.
The city was born following federation in 1901, when the new nation needed a capital.
Neither Melbourne nor Sydney would concede this honor to the other.
So the government chose some sheep paddocks between the two and staged an international competition for a civic plan.
The winners were an American architect and student of Louis Sullivan, Walter Burley Griffin, working with his wife, Marion Mahony Griffin, who'd worked for 11 years in Frank Lloyd Wright's studio.
Their design was intended to make Canberra, in Walter Griffin's words, "a city not like any other city in the world . . . an ideal city."
Even those who find Canberra unspeakably yawnsome acknowledge that it does represent some sort of prosaic ideal.
Residing in little suburban garden communities, Canberrans today make their daily commute to the neat urban center over perfectly maintained and uncongested roads.
It appears, however, that the old great-place-to-work-and-raise-a-family was not quite the ideal that the Griffins had in mind.
They had a grander, loftier vision.
Yet until Peter Proudfoot, a Sydney-based architecture scholar, started sifting through Marion Griffin's unpublished, four-volume "Magic of America," no one realized the Griffins had not meant for Canberra to be just another turn-of-the-century City Beautiful.
In "The Secret Plan of Canberra" (University of New South Wales Press, 120 pages, $21.30) Mr. Proudfoot argues that instead, the Griffins were thinking Rome, Beijing, and even the new Jerusalem.
They were thinking omphalos (cosmic peaks) and caput mundi (center of the world).
They were thinking Hellenistic theaters.
They were also thinking feng shui (Chinese geomancy).
They saw that Canberra had five mountains in similar layout to the Five Sacred Mountains of China.
The Griffins apparently were early 20th-century forerunners of people who cure with crystals.
They dabbled in Eastern religions and the proto-New Age cults of theosophy and Swedenborgian mysticism.
Quite sensibly -- they were dealing with politicians and bureaucrats, after all -- they didn't talk about this much in public.
They guarded their secrets, in Mr. Proudfoot's words, like "medieval master masons."
But in the end Marion decided to write them all down in her voluminous treatment of the Griffins' career in America, Australia and later India.
In their vision, Canberra would become one of the great capital cities of the world.
Public monuments would complement the spiritual forces already present in the land to create the perfect setting for democracy, on the model of ancient Rome.
But a funny thing happened on the way to the Forum.
Politicians, bureaucrats and civic-planning bodies plagued by tight budgets and infested with bourgeois English notions of landscape prettification forced successive modifications to the Griffins' original plan.
One result is that today, one point of a sacred triangle symbolizing liberty, equality and fraternity rests on Capital Hill, and the second on City Hill behind the Canberra Theatre.
The third, however, sits inelegantly in a parking lot for defense bureaucrats.
Elsewhere, geomantically challenged trees obscure vital vistas.
Readers may wonder whether the thus distressed feng shui has affected the quality of political debate in Canberra ("You're a scumbag!"
"No, you're a scumbag!"
"Order in the House!").
On the other hand, Mr. Proudfoot contends that American architect Romaldo Giurgola's design for the new Parliament House, completed six years ago, responds to the geomantic principles underlying the Griffins' original plan.
The internal architecture echoes the lines of the Vesica, a sacred symbol of early Christianity.
The building's ramped hemicycles suggest the protective Azure Dragon and White Tiger forms of feng shui.
They also recall Roman theater temples.
The relationship of the building to Capital Hill evokes "the Greek city, where the city form is seen against the sacred mountain."
The author contends that "Giurgola is largely unaware of the ancient regime to which he is responding."
Yet he also implies that Mr. Giurgola purposefully "draws a veil over the true nature of the Parliament House design in his writing . . ."
Unlike the Griffins, Mr. Giurgola is alive and presumably at the end of a fax line somewhere.
Why didn't the author ask him about it directly?
Unfortunately, this is a bit typical of the speculative nature of the entire book.
Though it may fall just short of persuasive, "The Secret Plan of Canberra" is nonetheless an intriguing and entertaining read, and you'll never call Canberra boring again.
Ms. Jaivin lived in Canberra for six years before fleeing to Sydney.
