Why can't the Germans be more like the Dutch?
As they search for ways to reduce their country's painfully high unemployment, now running at 9%, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and other German political and business leaders have been taking an envious look at how their small neighbor manages to spread the work around.
"If we only had the same number of part-time jobs as in the Netherlands, we would have two million more people working," Mr. Kohl declared in a recent television interview, one of several in which he has raised the subject of part-time work.
To drive home his argument, Mr. Kohl has also pointed out that roughly one third of all Dutch workers are in part-time positions -- the highest rate in the industrialized world.
By contrast, only 16% of German workers -- and 18% of Americans -- have such jobs.
Encouraging more people to work less may seem like an odd way to prod an economy out of recession.
But, with more than four million unemployed, the German government has latched on to it.
The concept has won converts in the private sector, too.
In January, Volkswagen AG implemented a four-day workweek in order to save 30,000 jobs.
Even so, such an approach to work-sharing can be controversial because it tends to reduce the hours of those with full-time jobs.
For example, the IG Metall union representing workers in the engineering and metalworking industry is threatening a strike because it can't agree with employers on how to redesign the workweek.
To increase the attractiveness of part-time work, the German cabinet approved measures giving more security to workers who trade in a full-time job for shorter hours.
Now, a worker who loses a new part-time job within three years of taking it is guaranteed the unemployment benefits of a full-timer.
To get the ball rolling, the government committed itself to increasing the number of part-time jobs in the federal administration.
In the best tradition of German consensus-building, Bonn is entreating German employer groups and unions for support.
A publicity blitz is also planned to encourage individuals who are inclined to work less to take the plunge and to urge employers to be more flexible.
Part of the problem is that unions have traditionally concentrated on the interests of full-time workers, and have rarely addressed the issue of job protection for part-timers.
Employers have maintained that part-timers ultimately cost firms more, even though some studies have debunked this.
Although most experts believe that Germany will inevitably move to more part-time work, sparking enough change to dent the unemployment rate soon seems a tall order.
The Dutch, for example, spent more than a decade purposefully revamping their labor market.
In addition, job insecurity in a recession does not encourage individuals to take chances, and surveys show that the unemployed really want full-time work.
Because of the country's highly regulated labor market, says Juergen Schupp of Berlin's German Institute for Economic Research, "There is a group of people that want to work more, to earn overtime," and they might soak up many of the new job offers.
And while executives of Germany's employer groups may welcome the idea of change, actual managers, adds Dr. Schupp, still "just can't imagine it will work."
