As president of the Central Ohio Council of Investment Clubs, LaVonne Raney is determined to keep out the infidels.
Only those committed to buying stocks for the long haul, the cornerstone of investment-club philosophy, qualify, she believes.
"I tell the new clubs to start small and make new people visit twice before inviting them to join," says the 77-year-old Columbus investor.
"They need to understand they are on trial and not in for a quick hit."
She herself has been investing since the late 1950s.
But as interest in investment clubs surges, the infidels are slipping in -- if not in central Ohio, then across the land, where the National Association of Investors Corp. keeps tabs on 11,300 clubs with a total of 245,000 members.
That's up from 7,600 clubs with about 145,000 members just two years ago.
A number of the new clubs represent a different breed from the diligent, comparatively staid, traditional investment club.
They are more like the "go go" investment funds of yesteryear, out to cash in quickly and willing to take bigger risks.
Rex Carlson and five of his friends, for instance, started the Puget Sound Strategies Investment Club in July and recently took a 22% gain in their first stock, Las Vegas-based Boyd Gaming Co., after only three days.
Now they think they have found "another outstanding opportunity to make a nice spike" in Cyrix Inc., a semiconductor-chip company, says Mr. Carlson, a 35-year-old Seattle accountant.
Also more aggressive than the typical investment club is Triple F, formed at the end of 1992 by George O'Brien, a Dallas real-estate agent in his late 40s, and 13 former colleagues at a technology company.
Triple F "looks around for issues of speculation," he says.
Current investments include Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., which is being bought out by Viacom Inc., and several biotechnology stocks.
While Mr. Carlson and Mr. O'Brien insist their members are only playing with money they can afford to lose and will be buyers if the market stumbles, not all newcomers may act the same.
The risk, say market professionals, is that many first-time investors, whether in mutual funds, on their own or as part of investment clubs, may throw in the towel and flee the market at the first signs of trouble.
In their small ways, they then would be exacerbating a market decline.
Kenneth Janke, president of the National Association of Investors Corp., is equally concerned about people founding or joining stock clubs simply because savings-deposit interest rates are so low.
He sees such people as potentially fickle investors who will bolt the market if the threat of inflation returns and the stocks they bought for yield, such as utilities, take a tumble.
"It scares me to death," says Mr. Janke, who has been with the organization for 34 of his 59 years.
"I'm concerned about the man or lady who joined three months ago and may be very sorry they got involved.
They don't realize that the loss of principal can be part of the mix."
Mr. Janke remembers October 1987 when the market plunged but his members "kept on buying."
He expects many of the new club members wouldn't be as steadfast if there were a repeat of the '87 slide.
"They're different," Mr. Janke says.
"The new people are coming into the market for the wrong reason."
The right reason, according to investment-club literature, is to search out proven growth companies, like Philip Morris Cos. and Merck & Co., selling at or below their five-year average price/earnings ratios and stick with them.
The P/E ratio is the share price divided by the company's earnings per share.
The idea is to hold on and buy more shares, even if the price declines, as long as the five-year horizon remains bright.
With monthly investments ranging from $10 to $100, club members accumulate shares slowly.
Over time, this approach has generally paid off well, with more than 60% of the clubs showing lifetime annual returns that have equaled or exceeded Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.
Most clubs, however, lose money during their first two years.
The average club, which has 12 members, has a portfolio valued at about $89,000.
The investment clubs' national association, based in Royal Oak, Mich., helps new clubs get started by providing handbooks on organizational and bookkeeping procedures as well as forms to follow with ways to calculate five-year growth potential and other research tips.
It also has a program making it easy for clubs to buy single shares in companies, entitling the club to receive their annual reports and quarterly mailings.
Indeed, most of the new clubs formed since the 1987 market break are firm followers of the association's creed.
Carol Clark and 17 of her friends in the Kansas City, Mo., area set up the International Funny Money club a year ago.
"We wanted to get educated about investments so we could be in charge," she says.
In the past, she explains, the women's husbands had made such decisions.
The club's monthly meetings are all business, Mrs. Clark notes, as members report on their research assignments and discuss which stocks to buy and sell according to national association's guidelines.
"These are not light and fluffy moments," she says.
"It's not our intent to make a few thousand and jump out of a stock unless that is the sell price we had established."
The group's research prompted it to buy stock in McDonald's Corp., the hamburger chain, and Newell Co., which is in the housewares and stationary business.
The group is ahead on its McDonald's investment but slightly behind on Newell, both of which it continues to buy.
New Yorker John Ryan, 73, another new club founder, isn't as patient.
Like Mr. Carlson and Mr. O'Brien, he represents the new breed of investment club member.
"I sold when I should have bought and bought when I should have sold," he says.
The $12,000 he and his two sons have invested during the past two years is doing only slightly better than the savings-deposit rates they abandoned out of frustration.
Mr. Ryan, who is retired and lives in Manhattan, hopes to take a long successful ride with the club's favorite investment, Spaghetti Warehouse Inc.
But he wavers on what he might do if inflation heats up and interest rates continue to rise, perhaps crimping the Garland, Texas, restaurant chain's plans to open 10 new sites this year.
"That would make me real nervous," he says.
