Some homeowners who haven't been able to refinance their mortgages are finally getting a chance.
Taking advantage of new Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and Federal National Mortgage Association programs, many lenders are refinancing homes that have declined in value.
Some lenders are also willing to refinance homes for owners who have lost income or maybe even missed a few payments.
"If borrowers have done everything they can to keep their home, we're going to help them," says Walter C. Klein Jr., chairman and chief executive of PNC Mortgage Corp. of America, a Vernon Hills, Ill., unit of PNC Bank Corp.
The help comes not a moment too soon.
Mortgage rates have been rising since last fall, and the climb steepened last month after the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates.
But compared with a few years ago, mortgage rates are still quite low, and many homeowners could save hundreds of dollars a month by refinancing.
The average on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage is now 7.74% according to HSH Associates, a Butler, N.J., firm that tracks mortgage rates nationwide.
That's up from 6.83% in October but only slightly higher than 7.57% a year ago.
"At this time last year, people were clawing each other's eyes out to get those rates," says Paul S. Havemann, vice president of HSH Associates.
The Mortgage Bankers Association of America, a Washington, D.C., trade group, estimates that there is still about $250 billion of mortgages outstanding with rates higher than 10%.
Officials say many of those who haven't refinanced live in parts of the country where property values have plummeted in recent years.
There could be as many as 750,000 homeowners in such situations, estimates David Lereah, chief economist for the Mortgage Bankers Association.
"A lot of mortgage companies are now focused on that group as a target," he says.
Typically, lenders limit the size of a mortgage to 80% or 90% of the value of the home.
But under the new Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae programs, borrowers can refinance up to 95% of a home's value.
For some hard-pressed homeowners, that can mean the difference between being able to refinance or being stuck with an older high-rate mortgage.
Take someone who bought a $200,000 home four years ago, borrowing $160,000 at 10%.
Refinancing the nearly $156,000 balance into a 7.5% mortgage would reduce monthly payments by more than $350.
But if the home is now valued at $172,000 or less, a decline that is conservative in parts of the Northeast and California, lenders generally wouldn't approve a new mortgage.
But a lender under the new Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae programs could refinance the $156,000 balance even if the home's value were as little as $164,000.
Lenders like the programs because they are better off receiving regular payments on a 7.5% mortgage than partial payments or nothing at all on a 10% loan.
They also avoid the costs of foreclosure.
While these programs are limited now, many in the mortgage industry expect them to expand.
"We think there's a real benefit to everyone," says Bruce Wood, director of mortgage credit policy for Freddie Mac.
Not everyone qualifies, however.
Freddie Mac, for example, which finances mortgage lending by buying loans from financial institutions, requires that refinanced mortgages be debt it currently owns.
Mortgages generally must be less than about $203,000.
Lenders often have strict credit standards.
"We're looking for a customer who's perfect in every way except they've lost equity," says Rick Cossano, executive vice president of Countrywide Funding Corp.
Countrywide, of Pasadena, Calif., will refinance 100% of a home's value under certain circumstances, though Mr. Cossano acknowledges that the firm has written very few such "no equity" loans.
But lenders are sometimes willing to bend.
PNC Mortgage recently began a pilot program, limited to its existing customers, that will allow some homeowners who have missed as many as six mortgage payments to refinance into a lower rate loan.
PNC is looking for "creditworthy borrowers" who may have been through a divorce, had medical problems or lost a job, which forced them to miss some mortgage payments, Mr. Klein says.
The PNC program is starting in Chicago and initially will be limited to urban homeowners whose loans are backed by the Federal Housing Administration.
PNC plans to expand into other cities later this year and eventually to cover the company's entire loan portfolio, says Mr. Klein.
Low-equity and no-equity loans generally require mortgage insurance, which can add several hundred dollars a year to the cost of the loan.
Interest rates may be a little higher than average, too.
At Countrywide, for instance, borrowers would pay one-eighth to a full percentage point more, Mr. Cossano says, depending on the amount of equity.
Under PNC's program, a higher rate would cover closing costs and any escrow shortages.
Homeowners who don't qualify for these specific programs still may be able to refinance into a lower-rate mortgage, lenders say, especially if they don't want to borrow more than the current outstanding balance.
The first step usually is to talk to your current lender, who can tell you whether you qualify for the Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac program and about other options that may be available.
It may be worth it to call others, too.
"I would encourage people not to get discouraged," says Stephen B. Ashley, chairman and chief executive of Sibley Mortgage Corp. in Rochester, N.Y., and president of the Mortgage Bankers Association.
"Lenders are willing to work with them."
