Pittsburgh abruptly postponed a $45 million competitive municipal-bond sale last week when officials learned from their auditors that the city's budget deficit was far larger than anticipated.
The delay was instructive in terms of heightened sensitivity to muni-disclosure issues and relevant to the debate over the relative merits of competitive vs. negotiated municipal-bond sales.
Pittsburgh's new mayor, Tom Murphy, stressed in a populist campaign the need for the city to abandon its reliance on negotiated bond sales that provide business for only a few, and "to bring more people to the table" with competitively bid bond sales.
In the previous four years, the city and two of its authorities sold some two dozen bond issues totaling over $800 million via negotiated sales.
PaineWebber Inc. was lead underwriter on the biggest share of these negotiated transactions, followed by Lazard Freres & Co.
Pittsburgh's bond sale was postponed the day the bonds were to be sold.
The announcement came at virtually the same time that the Securities and Exchange Commission was acting in Washington to improve disclosure in the muni market and stressing the disclosure duties of bond issuers.
SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt and other SEC officials have been touting competitive bond sales as less conducive to insider abuse and influence-peddling than negotiated sales.
Pittsburgh's auditor, KPMG Peat Marwick, was preparing the city's audited financial statement from fiscal 1993 when it made a preliminary finding that a budgetary shortfall of some $5.6 million carried over from fiscal 1992 had grown to about $27 million by the end of fiscal 1993, according to Mayor Murphy's spokeswoman, Judy Kelly.
Rowan Miranda, Pittsburgh's budget director, said the new deficit information was highly significant to the bond market and that the city had no choice but to make that information known and postpone the bond sale.
Bond proceeds were to be used, among other things, to repair streets ravaged by the winter.
Pittsburgh's financial adviser, Myles Harrington of Butcher & Singer, said the city would have "assumed enormous liabilities" if it sold the bonds after disclosing the new deficit projections and the bonds later were downgraded and bondholders incurred losses.
Some members of the bond community said that if this had been a negotiated sale, the underwriting team's timing flexibility and presale "due diligence" investigation could have spared the city the embarrassment of having to yank its bond offering at the last minute.
But Mr. Harrington said city officials feel strongly that competitive sales are the best way to go.
He also said due-diligence fact-finding is the same under both methods right up to the sale.
City officials initially said the bond sale would be rescheduled in four to six weeks.
But Mr. Harrington said it will have to wait until the audit is completed on May 1.
He said the three bond-rating agencies that rated the city's bonds as "A" have indicated they will await the final audit results before deciding what, if any, steps to take.
