Of all the tantalizing glimpses of the hermit kingdom of North Korea, Billy Graham's may be the most tantalizing of all.
For the American evangelist, who just concluded a visit to Pyongyang at the invitation of the North Koreans, President Kim Il Sung isn't the demon he appears to be to the rest of the world.
"He can be tough, but he has a tender place in his heart," Mr. Graham said in an interview Thursday.
No saint ever spoke more kindly of any sinner.
And while an unsaintly reporter prays she may be forgiven for thinking less charitable thoughts of the man who rules with an iron fist the most totalitarian nation left on earth, it is nevertheless notable that Mr. Kim would use a man of God to convey a message to President Clinton.
Mr. Graham won't say what that message is, but he characterizes its tone as "positive."
An aide to Mr. Graham was to deliver the message to the White House Friday.
Mr. Graham also carried a private message from Mr. Clinton that Mr. Kim found "very interesting."
The reclusive North Korean president is seen in public about as often as China's Deng Xiaoping, and rumors about the state of his health abound.
At a news conference in Hong Kong, Mr. Graham described Mr. Kim as "vigorous and in good health."
A growth on his neck that other visitors have reported (and that doesn't show up in the carefully staged photos that leave the country) has been there "both times I've been" in North Korea, said Mr. Graham.
"My strong impression was that he continues to be the dominant figure in North Korean political and social life."
Besides the political topics that Mr. Graham won't divulge, the two men also discussed Mr. Kim's early exposure to Christianity.
As a boy, the young Kim went to church with his mother, who was a Christian.
An early influence on his life from about age seven was a Korean Presbyterian minister.
Mr. Graham preached in the church that Mr. Kim built in memory of his mother near his boyhood home in Chilgol, on the outskirts of Pyongyang.
Stories of the influence of Christianity on his early life are detailed in Mr. Kim's unfinished autobiography, which Mr. Graham praises as the "easiest memoir or autobiography I've ever read."
"It reads like a novel," he says.
"You can't put it down."
Mr. Graham is up to volume four, which ends just before the Korean War.
None of this is to say that religious freedom exists in North Korea.
Quite the contrary.
It wasn't until the late '80s that Mr. Kim permitted three churches to be formed -- two Protestant, one Catholic -- as well as some small congregations that meet in private homes.
Stephen Linton, a Columbia University Korea scholar who is traveling with Mr. Graham, says North Korea officially places the number of Christians at about 10,000.
This compares with the 25% to 50% of the South Korean population estimated to be Christian.
Korea has a long history of Christianity.
Before World War II, at the time the 81-year-old Mr. Kim was growing up, Pyongyang was the center of missionary activity in Asia, where it was known as the "Jerusalem of the East."
(Mr. Graham's wife, Ruth, who is the daughter of missionaries in China, went to high school in Pyongyang.)
All that changed in the late '40s, when Kim Il Sung, backed by the postwar Soviet occupiers of the North, became president and outlawed religion.
Many Christians fled South.
Billy Graham is in Asia on one of the crusades that have taken him to more than 180 countries or territories.
Four rallies in Tokyo last month drew about 120,000 people in a country where only about 1% of the population is Christian.
Numbers are uncertain, but Christianity appears to be winning converts in much of Asia.
China has about 60 million Christians.
And Mr. Graham says Christianity is growing rapidly in Thailand, a Buddhist country, as well as in predominantly Islamic Malaysia.
There is a resurgence of Christianity in Vietnam, which has about five million Catholics now, compared with 1.5 million in 1975.
Fundamentalist Protestantism is catching on in the Philippines, which is overwhelmingly Catholic.
Mr. Graham attributes the growing interest in his religion in part to the rapid changes that Asians are experiencing in their cultures, economies and politics.
"The old traditions have been changing," he says.
"There's a void."
At the same time, he sees a link between Christianity and freedom.
"Christianity does teach freedom," he says.
"God through the Bible teaches freedom of choice in everything."
Speaking of the troubled relations between the U.S. and North Korea, Mr. Graham said, "I believe the North Korean people and their leadership want to move beyond the rhetoric of the Cold War and find a permanent solution to the problems that separate us."
At about the same time that he was uttering these words in Hong Kong, a statement of an entirely different tone was heard from Pyongyang, apparently in response to the resolution passed by the Senate Tuesday urging Mr. Clinton to send tactical nuclear weapons back to South Korea if the impasse with Pyongyang continues.
The official Korean Central News Agency carried a commentary Thursday that said in part: "If the U.S. takes a stance of pressure against us, our reaction will be a hundred times stronger and it will be carried into practical action. . . .
We cannot sit back and watch the maneuvers of the U.S. to isolate and stifle us."
If these hostile words don't sound like those of the man Billy Graham met, perhaps it's because President Kim isn't as sure of himself as he once was.
With age can come wisdom.
In speculating on why President Kim called on him as a messenger, Mr. Graham said, "Some of his early experiences may be influencing him now."
It's impossible to see into the heart of any man, much less that of a man who has spent a lifetime isolating himself and his people from the world and from God.
Yet Billy Graham has a way of touching the hearts of men and women everywhere.
If he can touch the heart of one reclusive old atheistic Communist who listened to the word of God with his mother, the world will be better for it.
Ms. Kirkpatrick is assistant editor of the Journal's editorial page.
