Biogen Inc. named James R. Tobin president and chief operating officer in a move to strengthen management as the company plans a transition from research to production and sales of biologically engineered drugs.
Mr. Tobin, 49 years old, until recently held the same posts at a company with 60 times Biogen's revenue -- Baxter International Inc., Deerfield, Ill.
His posts at Biogen were formerly held by James L. Vincent, 54, who remains chairman and chief executive.
Mr. Tobin's appointment completes an eight-person management team installed by Mr. Vincent, who was hired in 1985 to turn around a money-losing venture, which he has done.
Biogen, Cambridge, Mass., has amassed $300 million in cash from royalties on pharmaceuticals based on its biotechnology discoveries.
It now wants to become a pharmaceutical concern itself, making and selling products based on its research.
Biogen is counting on the medical-industry experience of Mr. Tobin, who resigned last month from Baxter in a disagreement over corporate strategy, to make the transition a success.
"At Baxter I've worked my way up from flunky to the top," said Mr. Tobin, who reports to his new job next month.
"I've started up new products, worried about FDA approval and done just about every aspect of things that need to happen at Biogen."
The company has tentative plans to set up a sales staff next year of 150 to 200 to market new drugs to hospitals, Mr. Tobin said.
Biogen's revenue now comes from royalties from companies that make and sell its drugs under license.
Its two mainstays -- a hepatitis B vaccine and alpha interferon, used against cancer and hepatitis -- have been windfalls for licensees SmithKline Beecham PLC and Schering-Plough Corp.
Mr. Vincent estimated that the two drugs had combined sales of more than $1.5 billion last year.
Armed with a healthy balance sheet -- and with two promising drugs in clinical trials -- Biogen hopes to join biotech companies such as Amgen Inc. and Genentech Inc. that manufacture and sell products that they have developed.
Biogen has said it expects earnings of about 90 cents a share for 1993, a drop of 20% from a year-earlier $1.12 a share.
It attributes the decline to the costs of clinical tests.
Revenue is expected to climb to $150 million, he said, up 11% from a year-earlier $135.1 million.
While Biogen's licensing agreements with SmithKline and Schering continue into the next decade, Mr. Vincent said the company will make and market its next two products, expected to reach the market in the next two years.
The drugs, beta interferon, for the treatment of multiple sclerosis, and Hirulog, a blood-clot dissolver, are in the final phases of clinical tests.
Mr. Tobin will "be in charge of the company's products from R&D to clinical trials to sales and distribution," Mr. Vincent said.
Potential markets, analysts say, are substantial.
About $500 million in anticoagulants are sold annually, while analysts think sales of beta interferon for multiple sclerosis could hit $1 billion.
But Biogen will have to displace drugs currently in use, and new competitors in each category.
Chiron Corp., Emeryville, Calif., received FDA approval late last year to market its version of beta interferon against multiple sclerosis.
And Hirulog will compete with a similar drug from Switzerland's Ciba-Geigy.
Earnings in the next few years are likely to be volatile as a result of costs of new-product introductions, which include 5A8, an AIDS antibody agent.
Already Biogen has warned analysts that it expects earnings this year to be flat or down from 1993.
"The soft-tooth nature of future earnings is due to an aggressive marketing plan," Mr. Vincent said.
"But we're a revenue-driven company. . . .
Most of our investors want us to swing for the fence."
