In his 1959 "two cultures" essay, C.P. Snow portrayed scientists as altruistic seekers of knowledge to alleviate suffering.
Today that image seems as dated as atomic-powered airplanes.
The notion that science is driven by lofty motives isn't merely wrong, it's impractical, Barry Werth suggests in "The Billion-Dollar Molecule" (Simon & Schuster, 445 pages, $25).
To the book's central figure, scientist-entrepreneur Joshua Boger, altruistic motives are "infinitely less powerful, less trustworthy, less useful" than selfish ones.
Science is so demanding that only those driven by the unalloyed pursuit of fame and fortune can hope to succeed.
The workaholic researchers Dr. Boger hires after he leaves drug industry leader Merck & Co., to form Vertex Pharmaceuticals, aren't out to save the world but "to bash their competitors, to think themselves divine, to win, and to avoid the terrible, deathly anguish of losing."
Their arena is one of biotechnology's hottest areas: "rational" drug design.
The method is based on growing knowledge of how diseases work at the molecular level.
Scientists study culprit molecules' structures, then synthesize compounds with just the right complementary shapes to stick to them and gum up their works.
It's a lot speedier than the traditional screening of thousands of compounds, which Dr. Boger disparages as a "monkeys with typewriters" approach.
Mr. Werth's entertaining chronicle of Vertex's first four years follows Dr. Boger and his 30-something scientists as they seek a drug to block misdirected immune-system attacks in organ-transplant rejection, rheumatoid arthritis and other disorders.
The jeans-clad alchemists also hope to turn paper into gold -- their stock options will be worth millions if they can capture the market for a better immune suppressant.
But it turns out to be far from the orderly process Dr. Boger conjures up for potential investors.
Early on he is infuriated to learn that one of Vertex's outside scientific advisers, a Harvard chemist, is mounting a rival effort to draw up molecular blueprints for the same sort of drug -- and worse, may collaborate with competing companies.
After months of back-breaking labor, the Vertex team is stunned to discover that their assumptions about how a target molecule functions are wrong, and that much of their work is, therefore, potentially useless.
Eventually the company, bogged down in its pursuit of an immune suppressant, plunges into work on an AIDS treatment -- a research minefield Dr. Boger originally swore Vertex wouldn't enter.
Mr. Werth makes the most of these vicissitudes, weaving them into a lively narrative of clashing egos, grand gambles and frantic scrambling after renown and riches.
Both the corporate scientists and their academic rivals are obsessed with winning, and they continually fret that the competition will publish a critical finding first.
In Mr. Werth's apt analogy, they are "like the crew of a submarine in enemy waters."
They "grimly hunker down at their stations, sweating anxiously, listening, awaiting the next depth charge" unleashed by enemies in technical journals.
The soul of Vertex's new drug is Dr. Boger's good-humored hubris.
"We really should be doing something together," he says, after a big drug company he courted as a deep-pockets partner, sends him packing.
"We have similar arrogance levels.
Arrogance doesn't bother or impress us.
We understand arrogance."
One of the book's most interesting subtexts is the gap between Wall Street perceptions and biotech realities.
Investors don't want to hear how science really proceeds, jerking in fits and starts down countless blind alleys.
They prefer reassuring stories about steady progress, and Dr. Boger's cocky self-confidence readily enables him to give them "the impression of a sure thing" -- even as his top lieutenant half-jokingly labels Vertex's pitches "blue smoke and mirrors."
When Vertex's underwriters seek to scale back its initial public offering because of a skittish market, Dr. Boger overrules them and presses his own board to buy enough Vertex shares to make the offering fly.
The arrogance pays off.
Since going public at $9 in 1991, Vertex has prospered and, based largely on its promising AIDS work, closed yesterday at $18.25.
Mr. Werth bags a host of telling anecdotes in his trek behind the scenes of the biotech business.
But unfortunately his book ends before Vertex reaches clinical tests, perhaps the toughest and most interesting phase of drug development.
Mr. Werth does track a prominent surgeon's clinical work with a drug related to Vertex's project, but the episodes seem parts of a different book artificially grafted onto the Vertex story.
In the end, Mr. Werth's insistence that winning is everything in science seems to overcorrect for past idealizations.
No doubt scientists are just as competitive as the rest of us.
But surely their motivations also are as complex as those in other callings.
Mr. Werth's scientists seem a little unreal -- utterly fixated on bashing the competition, they are all anxious work and no play.
Isn't there something besides the lure of winning a billion dollar research race, one wonders, that explains why they do it.
Perhaps answers lie in motives Mr. Werth minimizes, such as curiosity and compassion.
Mr. Stipp covers science for The Wall Street Journal in Boston.
