Federal prosecutors and lawyers for Rep. Dan Rostenkowski plan to meet next week to review allegations that could lead to his indictment on corruption charges.
That meeting will be the first of what may be several, after which U.S. Attorney Eric Holder will decide whether to accept what people familiar with the case say will be a probable staff recommendation to seek an indictment of Mr. Rostenkowski.
Once prosecutors tell Mr. Rostenkowski's lawyers they plan to seek an indictment, a grand jury wouldn't be asked to do so until three weeks after that communication.
Attorney General Janet Reno would also have a chance to review Mr. Holder's decision.
That means an indictment, if there is one, could be four to five weeks away.
The timing is crucial, not just to the Chicago Democrat's future, but also to President Clinton's efforts to restructure the nation's health-care system.
If indicted, Mr. Rostenkowski would be required by House rules to step down as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, which is playing a central role in shaping the president's program.
Final committee action on the Clinton health program, strongly supported by Mr. Rostenkowski, isn't expected until mid-to-late May.
A Rostenkowski indictment certainly is possible before then.
That would leave one of Mr. Clinton's most powerful congressional allies without the power of the chairmanship.
People familiar with the case say Federal Bureau of Investigation agents and staff attorneys in Mr. Holder's office who have worked on the Rostenkowski case for two years believe he should be prosecuted, but a final decision hasn't been made.
A grand jury has subpoenaed several years of Mr. Rostenkowski's financial records to investigate allegations that he put people on his congressional payroll who did no work and participated in a scheme to swap office stamps for cash at the House Post Office.
Mr. Rostenkowski's lawyer, Robert Bennett, said he's "confident that no decisions have been made yet and we will be given full opportunity to respond to any concerns at the completion of the investigation."
After Mr. Bennett is informed of a decision to prosecute, there would be a three-week period during which he may try to persuade Justice Department officials to change their minds, a courtesy prosecutors and defense lawyers say is not uncommon in cases of this type.
