French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur dropped his controversial youth employment bill yesterday, once again backing down in the face of street protests.
After yielding successively in recent months to the separate demands of angry airline workers, followed by the demands of teachers and parents, and then fishermen, Mr. Balladur has this time given way to students.
Student and labor unions took to the streets to protest the decree because it would have allowed employers to hire youths at less than the minimum wage in exchange for a certain amount of job training.
For the moment at least, the unions' refusal to grant any leeway in loosening France's rigid labor laws leaves Mr. Balladur with few weapons to attack unemployment, which stands at 12.2% and which the government has identified as its main priority.
Mr. Balladur's aides insisted yesterday that the prime minister's decision to drop the decree wasn't a retreat.
"Mr. Balladur is not giving up.
If the decree is not accepted, then he must find another solution," said one of his advisers.
Mr. Balladur said in a statement yesterday that the decree, known as the "contrat d'insertion professionelle," or CIP, will be suspended while a new government task force -- including employers, workers and students -- looks for an alternative.
As small consolation for abandoning the CIP after repeatedly vowing that he wouldn't retreat, Mr. Balladur saw one of his less controversial ideas come to fruition.
This was Tele-Emploi, a temporary television channel devoted to employment issues commissioned by the prime minister last November.
The state-financed channel has a 65 million francs ($11.4 million) budget for its three weeks on the air.
The government's decision to abandon the CIP is primarily due to growing nervousness among French political leaders that the nation's exasperation over record unemployment and sluggish economic growth could cause the student demonstrations to spill out of control.
Even the French national employers' union CNPF failed to back Mr. Balladur in defending the CIP.
