John Sculley isn't alone.
When Mr. Sculley, former chairman of Apple Computer Inc., joined Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. last October, he was offered a million-dollar salary and options to buy 18 million shares of its stock over five years.
Fully exercised, they would have given him roughly 25% of the business.
But when he announced his resignation yesterday, Mr. Sculley hadn't exercised any of his options and hadn't earned a cent from his huge stock-option package.
Like Mr. Sculley, corporate executives are increasingly being offered stock options as a big part of their compensation packages, when they're hired to revive struggling companies of all sizes.
Options are a good way to deflect investors' ire at sky-high salaries; they put corporate leaders and shareholders "on the same hunk of ground," says John Robson, former CEO of G.D. Searle & Co. who now serves on four corporate boards.
But "there are dozens of cases where people came in with significant option packages and for one reason or another left before they the packages ripened."
Stock options can account for up to 80% of a senior executive's compensation package in a turnaround or similarly risky situation, says Jude Rich, chairman of compensation consultants Sibson & Co. in New York.
Five or 10 years ago, he adds, "it would have been between 40% and 60%.
It has definitely gone up."
By contrast, chief executive officers of Fortune 100 companies derived 29% of their total pay packages from stock options last year, up from 17% in 1987, according to an analysis by Pearl Meyer & Partners Inc., a compensation-consulting firm in New York.
For executives, the growing reliance on stock options means "there is no soft landing for failure," says Mark H. Edwards, managing principal at iQuantic Inc., a San Francisco pay-consulting firm that specializes in high-technology companies.
"The Sculley case is a good case in point.
He walks away with zero in option profits -- along with a damaged reputation."
Lee Iacocca pioneered the practice in 1978, when he took the helm of Chrysler Corp. -- and insisted on an initial salary of only $1 a year.
He also received options to buy 400,000 shares of Chrysler common stock at about $11 each.
When he turned the company around, he earned more than $40 million in profits by exercising his options, according to one estimate.
A Chrysler spokeswoman declined to confirm that figure.
Mr. Iacocca retired as Chrysler's chief executive in December 1992.
Other executives also have profited from exercising options when their corporate revival efforts boosted a company's stock price.
When Lawrence Bossidy became chairman and chief executive of AlliedSignal Inc. in the summer of 1991, he was given options to buy 250,000 shares along with his $1 million starting salary.
Mr. Bossidy, widely credited with AlliedSignal's recent turnaround, earned $664,075 from exercising options on 25,000 shares during 1992, the Morris Township, N.J.-based conglomerate says.
But sometimes, there is no payoff from big stock-option packages at ailing companies.
Richard W. Miller was hired to revive the computer maker Wang Laboratories Inc. but ended up overseeing its bankruptcy-law proceedings.
He resigned in the winter of 1993 after three years as Wang's chairman and chief executive -- without ever exercising a single one of the two million options he got with the job.
The Lowell, Mass., company emerged from bankruptcy protection last fall.
Similarly, James Wavle received options to buy 510,000 shares during the five years that he ran Centocor Inc., a Malvern, Pa., biotechnology concern.
The former Warner-Lambert Co. senior executive, recruited in 1987, tried to transform the slow-growing company into a major pharmaceutical maker.
But the transformation didn't work and Mr. Wavle resigned in April 1992 without exercising a single option.
Many other executives are still sitting on their options, counting on their companies' turnarounds.
Louis V. Gerstner Jr., hired last spring to run International Business Machines Corp., received options for 500,000 shares in his compensation package.
Eastman Kodak Co. offered George Fisher, its new chairman and chief executive, options to buy 750,000 shares.
Last December, compensation consultants valued Mr. Fisher's option package at about $13 million to $17 million.
The Spectrum situation is unlikely to diminish ailing companies' affinity for executive stock options.
"I am sure Sculley will walk around the block and come up with something very sweet in the future," says Judith Fischer, publisher of the newsletter Executive Compensation Reports.
And his next deal will likely involve plenty of stock options, she adds.
Udayan Gupta contributed to this article.
