Every day, nine people in the U.S. die because they can't get an organ transplant.
The reason, says a Boston consulting group, isn't a lack of public awareness, and it isn't a shortage of donors.
It's hospitals themselves.
"The organ shortage is a public health crisis with a cure," says Michael Evanisko, president of the Partnership for Organ Donation, a nonprofit group that studies and makes recommendations to hospitals about improving their organtransplant systems.
Organ shortages are a result of improved medical techniques that have led to a rapid increase in transplants.
In 1993, more than 15,000 people received transplants of hearts, livers, lungs, kidneys and pancreases.
But today more than 34,000 people await transplants.
And while they wait, many die.
The medical establishment blames the organ shortage on a lack of public awareness.
Last year, there were 4,800 organ donors, but experts say roughly 8,000 potential donors were missed -- enough to ease, if not eliminate, the nation's shortage.
To increase awareness, a public-service advertising campaign, to be launched in April, will urge people to become donors and tell their families of their wishes.
But officials at several organ banks and hospitals believe the ads focus on the wrong people.
"Ninety-nine percent of the people you educate will never end up in a donor situation," says William DeJong, adjunct lecturer at the Harvard School of Public Health.
"Training has to focus on the professionals, not the public."
That is what the Partnership for Organ Donation has been trying to do.
The group was founded in 1990 by management consultants from Corporate Decisions Inc. who became interested in the problem while conducting an organ-donation study for a pharmaceutical client.
At the invitation of hospitals, the partnership will study hospital files of patient deaths, examine the current systems for organ transplants and suggest ways of improving them.
The group is funded by the Department of Health and Human Services, organ banks, hospitals and pharmaceutical companies that make transplant-related drugs.
Since 1990, partnership researchers, in collaboration with the Harvard School of Public Health and several organ banks, have examined more than 40,000 medical records from 100 hospitals, hunting potential organ donations that were missed.
They found that hospitals often do a poor job of identifying potential donors and often fail to inform the local organ bank of a potential donor.
In addition, doctors frequently bungle the task of requesting the donation.
For example, in 20% of the cases the partnership studied, a doctor raised the issue of organ donation at the same time he or she first informed the family that the relative was brain dead.
In those cases, 75% of those asked say no, according to a Harvard study.
"A lot of doctors use organ donation as a way to get the message home, to force the issue that the person is dead.
And that's not good," says Holly Franz, a former organ bank nurse-coordinator who now works for the partnership.
But if hospitals "decouple" the donation request, making sure it isn't made until the family understands and digests the idea of brain death, the consent rate can triple.
All told, early notification of organ banks and decoupling the request have doubled the number of donors in hospitals that have tried the partnership's program.
In Pittsburgh, Brian Broznick, executive director of the Center for Organ Recovery and Education, hired three phone operators for a total of $70,000 a year and told hospitals in his service area to call whenever death was imminent for any patient, even a 100-year-old cancer victim who obviously wouldn't be a donor candidate.
The organ bank found hospitals were screening out too many potential donors by incorrectly assuming they were too old or sick, though there are some absolute exclusions, such as testing positive for the AIDS virus or having some types of active infections or cancers.
Only patients who die from brain injuries, and are supported by ventilators, are potential organ donors.
But when there is even a slight chance for a donor, one of Mr. Broznick's coordinators is dispatched.
The result?
Phone calls grew from 300 a year to 15,000.
And in two years, procurement is up 75%.
"We're missing 85% of the donors in the country, for God's sake," Mr. Broznick says.
In New York City, after a partnership study of seven hospitals found 50% of the potential donors were missed, the New York Regional Transplant Program decided to take a hard-nosed business approach to the problem.
The organ bank is hiring eight people with marketing backgrounds, instead of nursing degrees, to launch a program of "hospital development."
Despite its successes, so far only 68 hospitals have participated in the program -- fewer than 2% of the nation's hospitals.
"A lot of people think hospitals do about as well as hospitals can do," says Mr. Evanisko.
The University of Kentucky Medical Center in Lexington had a dismal organdonation record, which it attributed to poor public attitudes.
"We were blaming it on the eastern Kentucky culture -- a lack of education, lower income levels, et cetera," says trauma surgeon Steve Johnson.
"We had every reason in the world why UK had a consent rate of 20%."
After examining every death in the hospital for two years, the hospital staff and the partnership concluded that it took too long to declare brain death.
So the protocol for declaring brain death was updated to meet current medical standards, waiting times were cut, and doctors were allowed to act quickly on conclusive test results.
As a result, the process was reduced to hours from days.
The hospital also changed its approach.
The organ bank was called in sooner, allowing a nurse-coordinator to be on hand early to help explain donation to families.
Organ-bank coordinators get better results than doctors, the partnership's research has shown.
In addition, the hospital trained doctors who work with potential donors to make sure the process gets decoupled.
And the hospital established a "donor council," which reviews all deaths monthly for potential donors and examines how each case was handled.
If a mistake was made or the process not followed, specific doctors or nurses can be targeted for extra training.
The results: The number of donors jumped to 28 in 1993 from six in 1990, while nationally, the number of donors rose only slightly over the same period.
The number of potential donors identified at UK almost doubled, and the consent rate rose to 48% from 18%.
"The problem was us, not the public," says Dr. Johnson.
The wait for organs in Kentucky is now considerably shorter than in the rest of the nation (four to six months for kidneys, compared with 18 months nationally).
"For organ donation to succeed," says transplant surgeon Bruce Lucas, "it needs to be regarded not as an extraordinary effort, but as an integral part of health care."
