In a settlement with Texas regulators, Prudential Securities Inc. agreed to be temporarily suspended from opening up new brokerage accounts in Texas, and to pay the state $1.5 million.
The unusual accord, which follows a six-month investigation by Texas into the partnership-sales practices of Prudential's most troublesome branches, marks one of the rare times regulators have suspended new-business activity of a major brokerage firm.
The settlement caps a broad investigation by federal and state regulators into allegations of improper partnership sales at Prudential.
Texas was the only state that didn't participate in Prudential's October settlement of fraud charges brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission and 49 state regulators.
In that accord, Prudential agreed to pay each of the states $500,000, in addition to setting up a reparations fund for investors of at least $330 million, without admitting or denying wrongdoing.
"The key message here is that major Wall Street firms will be treated in the same fashion as smaller brokerage houses," Denise Voigt Crawford, Texas securities commissioner, said in an interview.
Prudential, the nation's fourth-largest securities firm, still faces investigations of current and former executives by the SEC and the Manhattan and Dallas U.S. attorneys' offices, as well as Texas and other state securities regulators.
Prudential, a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, agreed to the Texas settlement without admitting to or denying the allegations.
The settlement discussions were contentious, partly because Texas regulators were demanding the temporary suspension of business, people familiar with the matter say.
The $1.5 million payment includes $500,000 as part of the broader federal and state regulatory settlement.
"While this agreement imposes some stringent sanctions for past practices, the firm's day-to-day business activities with its more than 90,000 Texas accounts will not be affected," Hardwick Simmons, Prudential Securities president and chief executive officer, said.
"Most importantly, this agreement with Texas means all 50 states are now parties to our global settlement, and allows us to move forward with the business of the firm."
Prudential also said that the Dallas district attorney's office "has said it will not pursue" the firm as part of a separate investigation into Prudential's partnership practices.
"However, the firm will continue to work closely with the district attorney's office concerning that office's inquiries into the activities of former employees."
Under the settlement, Prudential agreed to be suspended from "soliciting, offering or selling securities in, into or from the state of Texas to new customers for a period of five consecutive business days."
The accord also prevents Prudential's North Dallas branch office from engaging in the same activities for 20 business days.
Prudential said the two periods will run concurrently, starting Jan. 31.
It is extremely unusual for regulators to issue orders restricting customer activity at brokerage firms.
Last year, four PaineWebber Group Inc. branches weren't allowed to open any new brokerage accounts for one month, under a settlement with the SEC.
It wasn't surprising that Texas decided to pursue its own case against Prudential.
The Dallas branch was among the biggest sellers of partnerships in the nation; brokers there have been accused of, among other things, unauthorized trading, unsuitable trading and churning, or trading securities to generate excess commissions.
The Texas settlement "is probably justified by the fact that what existed there represented a microcosm of the array of problems facing the firm in other places throughout the country," said J. Boyd Page, an attorney in Atlanta representing clients with claims against Prudential.
Improper activities at Prudential's North Dallas office have cost investors millions of dollars, people familiar with the case said.
In the October civil complaint filed by the SEC, the agency accused Prudential of failing "to reasonably supervise two of the firm's top producers" employed in the Dallas office.
The agency's settlement order cited one broker in the Dallas branch office -- identified as J. Frederic Storaska by people familiar with the matter -- for operating "his own `department' within the office where he engaged in trading in customer accounts without their authorization, entering large purchase orders for . . . limited partnerships in the accounts of certain clients at the end of each month."
Mr. Storaska has denied wrongdoing.
As part of the Texas accord, Prudential agreed to launch a formal educational program for its brokers to prevent further securities violations, make detailed quarterly reports to the Texas commissioner on the program and cooperate with the state in its continuing investigation of brokers.
Any violation of the Texas order -- or the broader federal and state settlement -- within two years would "constitute grounds" for the filing of a civil administrative action that could cause Prudential's broker license to be revoked in Texas, regulators said.
