The Massachusetts treasurer's office barred Merrill Lynch & Co. from a lead underwriter's role in forthcoming bond sales by the state, citing "the unresolved controversy" following allegations of impropriety by the state inspector general's office.
Merrill was among five firms selected last week as part of a senior managers' group to handle bond issues.
The others were CS First Boston Corp., Goldman, Sachs & Co., Morgan Stanley & Co. and PaineWebber Inc.
Goldman Sachs was named lead underwriter.
As reported, Merrill's dealings with Massachusetts, the District of Columbia and other municipal issuers are under investigation by federal and state officials who are examining Merrill's ties to Mark S. Ferber, the former head of Lazard Freres & Co.'s Boston office.
In addition, Massachusetts Inspector General Robert Cerasoli has alleged that Mr. Ferber and Lazard had an undisclosed fee-splitting contract with Merrill at a time when he was advising the state water resources authority on which firms to select as underwriters.
Merrill was designated as lead underwriter for several of the authority's bond offerings before Mr. Cerasoli's findings.
Mr. Cerasoli also has alleged that Merrill received information on the water authority from Mr. Ferber that was supposed to be confidential.
Mr. Ferber has denied the inspector general's assertions.
James Wiggins, a Merrill spokesman, said the firm "absolutely and categorically states that it is false" that Merrill got any information that wasn't also given to all other firms.
He also said the inspector general "mischaracterized the nature of the contract we had with Lazard" and has never given Merrill a chance to respond to his findings.
He added that Merrill is "pleased to serve as a senior manager in the commonwealth's upcoming bond offering, and we look forward to resolving any outstanding issues with the regulators."
Explaining its decision to limit Merrill's participation, the Massachusetts treasurer said that while "it is not the role of the treasurer's office to determine legal liability . . . the office feels duty bound to exclude any firm which might raise public concern or lower public confidence" through its performance of a lead role.
The treasurer's office added that while "this decision entails the risk of treating that firm unfairly and of losing its superior capabilities . . . under the current circumstances, these concerns are outweighed by the public interest."
The first transaction to be handled by the new group is a $500 million refunding transaction, the treasurer's office said.
