In her Dec. 15 letter responding to my Dec. 6 editorial-page piece "A Scopes Trial for the '90s," Eugenie Scott claims that Prof. Dean Kenyon and I misunderstand the nature of science.
What she means, of course, is that we understand it -- and its current arbitrary prohibitions -- all too well.
The Kenyon case underscores a fact that Dr. Scott and others in the full-time evolution lobby would prefer not to face: highly qualified colleagues now contest her rigidly materialistic view of science.
Instead of responding to this challenge, Dr. Scott simply reasserts her methodological credo -- all scientific explanations must be materialistic -- as if that should settle the matter.
Yet questions of appropriate method must be debated every bit as much as competing theories.
Origin-of-life scientists must now decide whether theorists are free to follow evidence wherever it might lead or whether they may consider only certain kinds of explanations, as Dr. Scott insists.
This debate will not go away.
With recent developments in probability and complexity theory, the detection of intelligent design has already entered science proper.
NASA's $100 million search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) is based upon the ability to detect the statistical and mathematical signature of intelligently encoded messages.
To Prof. Kenyon, the presence of biochemical messages and a corresponding molecular grammar in the cell strongly suggest a prior intelligent design.
He may be wrong or he may be right.
What is certain is that his argument is based neither on ignorance nor religious authority.
Instead, he has made an inference from biological data informed by a sophisticated consideration of the informational sciences.
It no doubt serves the purposes of Dr. Scott and Dr. Hafernick at SFSU to portray Prof. Kenyon as a religious fundamentalist unwilling to revise dogma in the face of new evidence.
By now it must be clear that it is their fundamentalism, not Prof. Kenyon's, that is on trial.
Stephen C. Meyer, Ph.D.
Spokane, Wash.
Dr. Scott mentions that "theoreticians . . . rely on materialist explanations: they are doing science."
Her case against Prof. Kenyon, if put into syllogistic form, goes like this:
1. To do science is to rely on materialist explanations.
2. Prof. Kenyon does not rely on materialist explanations.
3. Prof. Kenyon does not do science.
What, then, do these guys do who tell us that matter is energy?
Do these guys -- A. Einstein & Co. -- pave the way for "materialist explanations"?
Or do they leave behind materialist explanations as if they were 19th-century fossils?
Thomas Jukes, in his Letter to the Editor, writes that Dr. Kenyon's arguments for intelligent design "presuppose the existence of a Creator and are therefore religiously biased."
This sounds good, but it doesn't do justice to Prof. Kenyon's experience.
Dr. Kenyon, Mr. Jukes concedes, was once "an acknowledged expert on evolutionary theory" and a "world class scientist"; but "These encomiums are long out of date," for "about 16 years ago Kenyon became preoccupied with religious concepts of biology ("intelligent design"). . . ."
It is clear that Dr. Kenyon could not have earned his prior reputation with this crowd had he not presupposed a materialist explanation.
Note the chronology.
Dr. Kenyon's materialist presuppositions antedated his sudden -- spontaneously generated? -- preoccupation with "intelligent design."
This suggests that Dr. Kenyon did not come to "religious concepts" by way of religious presuppositions; he came to "intelligent design" by examining his materialist bias -- while doing science.
In a piece entitled "The Religious Spirit of Science," Albert Einstein wrote that the scientist's "religious feeling takes the form of a rapturous amazement at the harmony of natural law, which reveals an intelligence of such superiority that, compared with it, all the systematic thinking and acting of human beings is an utterly insignificant reflection."
Fraser, Mich.
Included in Dr. Scott's criticism of Prof. Kenyon is one of his books, "Of Pandas and People."
Dr. Scott says: "Prof. Kenyon claims in `Pandas' that `two completely hybrid {sic} individuals could produce offspring exhibiting the complete range of possible skin colors,' a statement breathtakingly ignorant of genetics. . . ."
The book's statement is correct, and no more controversial than saying two mutts could have light-furred, dark-furred and spotted puppies.
Dr. Scott further charges that the statement explains for the reader "how the great range of human skin colors could arise from Noah and his family."
This assertion is false.
The book has nothing to say about Noah, his flood, or any other biblical matter.
