ONE OF THE downsides of using a laptop computer on the road is that it can be a real pain to make sure it contains the same programs and data files you'd normally use on the desktop computer at the office.
Before a trip, you have to load up the laptop with all the files you need from your regular desktop PC.
And when you return, you have to reverse the process, dumping all the new and revised files you created on the laptop back into your main personal computer.
When only a few items are involved, you can simply copy the relevant office files onto a floppy disk, pop it into the laptop and copy the files from that floppy onto the laptop's hard disk drive.
But in many cases there are too many files and programs to fit onto one or two floppies.
And the newest, lightest laptops don't even have built-in floppy-disk drives.
Now Traveling Software of Bothell, Wash. -- the leading maker of file transfer software -- has introduced a new product, called Laplink Wireless, that lets you simply beam files at high speed, "Star Trek"-style, from computer to computer, through the air.
It's not as simple as it sounds -- nothing is in the wonderful world of computers -- but it's a real step forward from current file-transfer methods.
For years, power users have solved the file-transfer problem with an inexpensive utility program from Traveling Software called LapLink.
LapLink lets you connect the two computers with a cable, and then move large numbers of programs and data files between them at speeds much faster than can be achieved by copying files to and from floppies.
It displays side-by-side lists of the contents of the two machines, so you can pick and choose which files to copy from one machine to the other.
In effect, it creates a tiny, temporary two-computer network for mass file transfers.
LapLink has been a blessing for those who know how to use it.
It's great not only for laptops, but for setting up new desktop computers with the needed programs and files.
And the latest version can even work over phone lines.
BUT LAPLINK ISN'T exactly for novices, or even most average, nontechnical users.
It is an old-style program, not tailored to Microsoft's Windows system.
It requires a firm understanding of the IBM-compatible PC's primitive system for naming disk drives and the directories of files within them.
It forces you to understand the complex dynamics of the connectors on the back of the machine and then makes you squeeze behind and under desks plugging in the cables (yellow for parallel ports, blue for serial).
Even after relying on LapLink for years, I still swear at it now and then.
So Traveling Software has just brought out a new version of LapLink that aims to make the process much easier.
The software is a simplified Windows program that makes use of icons and of the familiar (if limited) Windows file manager to move files between two machines.
Best of all, the cables have been eliminated.
The new $300 LapLink Wireless links two machines using tiny radio modules that connect to each computer and shoot files between them through the air at distances up to 30 feet -- even through walls.
I've tried it, and it works.
The radio transmitters, called AirShare units and made by National Semiconductor, weigh just three ounces and are smaller than a pack of cigarettes.
They plug into the serial port on each machine and can draw power in several ways.
On a desktop machine, it's best to use the included AC adaptor.
On a laptop, you can use a snap-on battery pack, which takes a common nine-volt battery, or you can hook the AirShare into the laptop's mouse port, which provides enough juice to run it.
WITH ALL THESE connections, the AirShare can dangle irritatingly from a laptop, so Traveling Software supplies little Velcro strips that let you stick it onto the side or back of the machine.
The built-in software doesn't have as many features as regular LapLink, but it's easier to use.
For instance, to activate the connection, you just click on a picture of a light switch labeled "on" and "off."
The program automatically seeks out the other AirShare-equipped computer and establishes the link through the ether.
Once connected, you can manually move files around or use an automated utility called Synchro Plus, which synchronizes the files in any section of a hard disk so each machine has the same versions of the same files.
You can even print a file that's on the laptop wirelessly, using a printer connected to the desktop machine.
Because of the antiquated design of IBM-compatible PCs, even LapLink Wireless can involve some tricky fiddling with serial port configurations in order to plug in the AirShare transmitters.
You may even have to temporarily remove another device, like a modem, that normally occupies a serial port.
And you may have to experiment with the best locations for the transmitters, and the best of the three radio channels they provide, to get the clearest wireless connection -- especially over a distance or from another room.
For those reasons, LapLink Wireless isn't something absolute computer novices would find easy to use.
But it should make traveling with a laptop easier for most other users, even those who aren't technically adept.
Now that I have it, I'm thinking of using those old yellow and blue cables as fashion accessories, or maybe bungee cords.
The possibilities are endless.
