London stocks dived 2.2% yesterday, hurt by a slew of bearish factors including British futures, U.S. economic data and a French monetary move.
Other European bourses chalked up heavy losses, widely spurred by fears of higher U.S. interest rates.
Frankfurt equities dropped 1.8%, pushed down by rumors and technical factors.
Paris prices sank 1.9% in reaction to a stingy French interest-rate cut.
Tokyo shares jumped 2.2% Thursday, after investors were cheered by a news report, later denied, about exchange rates between the Japanese and U.S. currencies.
But many Asian bourses slumped because of varying domestic factors.
Hong Kong stocks tumbled 3.1% after the British colony's legislature endorsed electoral reforms, prompting another Chinese threat to dissolve the government after the 1997 takeover.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.63, down 0.19, reflecting lower American and European markets and higher Asia/Pacific markets.
Fishing stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 80.05, up 3.70, or 4.9%, with Nippon Suisan of Japan posting a 6.7% gain in its local currency.
Media/broadcast stocks trailed at 150.12, down 4.79, or 3.1%, with Cablevision Systems of the U.S. sliding 7.8% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index sank 74.4 points to 3267.5, just 1.7 points above the intraday low; only one FT 100 issue ended higher.
The FT 30-stock index plunged 50.3 points, or about 2%, to 2528.1.
Volume was 754 million shares, compared with 822.4 million shares a day earlier.
Stocks were pulled lower by a tumbling British bond market, slumping stock-index futures and bearish comments on inflation.
Furthermore, a report on durable-goods orders in the U.S. showed strength in that economy, increasing London market fears that interest rates may rise.
Meanwhile, the French central bank cut an interest rate less than expected, and the final blow to London stocks came when Wall Street opened significantly lower.
Despite the broad-based pressures, the equity market didn't experience panic selling, which occurred in capital markets, attributed to U.S. hedge funds.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index skidded 37.38 points to 2090.29, expanding this week's drop to more than 61 points.
Sentiment was soured by a false rumor of a putsch in Russia, a weaker March DAX futures contract, a soft bond market and weak European stock markets.
In Paris, stocks were sent reeling as already pessimistic investors were extremely disappointed about a small lending-rate reduction by the Bank of France, which had been expected to loosen monetary policy since a similar move last week by the German central bank.
In Amsterdam, prices were slammed down 2% by weak Dutch corporate earnings reports, shuddering bourses in Europe and New York, heightening concern about Russia's political stability, and a weaker dollar.
In Milan, the index that includes electronically traded issues slumped 1.6%, partly on renewed expectations of higher U.S. interest rates.
In Madrid, shares dropped 1.6%, dragged down by weaker European stock and bond markets.
In Stockholm, prices plunged 2.2% in line with the European trend and on mounting worries about rising interest rates and Russia's political situation.
In Zurich, the market lost 2.3%, mainly on disappointing Swiss corporate developments, as well as weak bond markets.
In Brussels, stocks lost 1% because of worries about higher U.S. interest rates and a slight rise in long-term Belgian rates.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index zoomed up 423.65 points to 19765.48, near the day's high of 19792.28.
In trading Friday, the Nikkei index fell 82.01 points to close the morning session at 19683.47.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 470 million shares, up sharply from 274.4 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers overwhelmed losers, 975-94.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues surged 29.77 points, or 1.9%, to 1607.62.
A report in the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, that U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen indicated to Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa last month that the U.S. would accept an exchange rate of about 110 yen to the dollar, caused a brief dollar rally Thursday in currency dealings.
Then as the dollar fell back, stocks remained buoyant, indicating surprising demand for shares despite currency developments.
Market volume also swelled as Thursday was the first day of trading for March settlement, which made it easier for Japanese securities houses to buy shares for their own accounts.
The Nikkei held on to most of its gains despite a mid-afternoon drop after a Finance Ministry official said Japan and the U.S. hadn't agreed on a dollar-yen exchange-rate target, but the official didn't confirm or deny the Bentsen-Hosokawa report.
The remarks caused the yen to tumble, pushing stocks down, but buying quickly resumed, also fueled by the formation of investment trusts Friday.
In Sydney, prices fell almost 1%, with industrial and banking issues leading the retreat.
Stocks were pressured by a weaker bond market as fears continued about a rise in interest rates, and by a weak Wall Street on Wednesday; some selling resulted from stock options' expiration.
In Hong Kong, investors considered the revival of poor Sino-British relations as a reason to sell shares, and signs that Britain and China remain unreconciled in their views on the colony triggered stocks' dive, though turnover remained extremely weak.
Despite two sessions of gains, the main index has fallen 3.6% this week and 12% this year.
Following the Hong Kong legislature's approval of the first part of an electoral reform plan early Thursday morning, the second and more controversial part of the initiative to broaden democracy is to be introduced.
In Singapore, shares slumped 1.6%, on dissatisfaction about the previous day's government budget proposals, such as a smaller-than-expected cut in the property tax rate.
Though blue chips fell, speculative stocks were bought, and the benchmark index recovered some losses.
In Taipei, equities dived 1.7% in tepid trading, after heavy selling by foreign funds the previous day added to investors' worries about the short-term market and helped trigger the unexpectedly large and broad-based drop Thursday.
In Manila, shares sagged 1.3% in light trading, as the market remained in a consolidation.
In Seoul, stocks retreated 1.9% on growing concern that draining of liquidity by the South Korean central bank will make stocks less attractive than bonds.
In Mexico City, stocks recovered from a 3% intraday loss to finish higher as buyers grabbed bargains with the market down almost 14% since posting a record high Feb. 8.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
