QVC Inc. has turned to a veteran of Madison Avenue to lead its charge into the infomercial business.
QVC, of West Chester, Pa., named Robert J. Perkins, once a top executive at the Chiat/Day ad agency, to the post of president of QDirect, the unit QVC formed last month in a corporate restructuring to produce infomercials and other direct response ads.
Most recently, the 42-year-old Mr. Perkins was a senior vice president at PepsiCo's Pizza Hut, overseeing marketing and advertising.
Rather than run infomercials on its own home-shopping channels, which include QVC and the more upscale Q2, the company plans to show them on broadcast stations and other cable networks.
Infomercials are part of QVC's plan to build its name and the electronic retailing market by going after households that don't currently receive the QVC shopping channels on their cable systems.
"It would be a mistake to view this just as QVC's entry into infomercials," says Mr. Perkins.
Just as Pizza Hut followed consumers everywhere they went, from airports to their own living rooms, so QVC plans to hunt down new customers, Mr. Perkins said.
The company will buy media time outright, he said, but will also try joint ventures with cable networks and retailers.
QVC couldn't have picked a more competitive time to get into the business.
Gross sales of products and services sold via infomercials were up 20% last year to about $900 million, according to the National Infomercial Marketing Association.
Big marketers have discovered the infomercial, not just as a direct sales tool, but also an effective way to increase store sales, too.
Consequently, the cost of infomercial time has increased 15% to 20% in the last few years, estimates Katie Williams, chief executive of Williams Television Time, one of the largest buyers of infomercial media time.
The increase, combined with an increasingly fragmented cable audience as new channels proliferate, has cut into the profitability of the infomercial business.
Producers are now spending more money to make their sales pitch to a shrinking number of people.
Although about 85% of infomercials fail to sell many products, QVC says it has a distinct advantage.
It can test products on its shopping channels and then create infomercials only for the winners.
The company is currently airing in the Philadelphia area infomercials for three products that sold well on the shopping channels: the New Miracle Mop, the Roly Kit rolling storage-chest, and QMI engine-oil treatment.
The infomercials are set to air nationally March 28.
But some executives caution that what works on a home-shopping show won't necessarily work on infomercials.
"There are very few home-shopping successes that work as infomercials," says Greg Renker, co-founder of the infomercial company Guthy Renker Corp., in which Ronald Perelman's MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings recently bought a stake.
On shopping shows, products are shown at a fast clip and bought as impulse items.
But in infomercials, purchasers are seduced by a full 30-minute sales spiel, including demonstrations and testimonials.
Nonsense, says QVC, pointing out that a line of skin-care products that actress Victoria Principal first sold via infomercials is now doing fine on QVC's home shopping channels.
Mr. Renker, whose company produced those infomercials, cautions, "The same doesn't hold true in reverse.
People inherently don't trust infomercials.
But the shopping channel is a trusted retailer."
Douglas Briggs, who heads up all of QVC's electronic retailing businesses, says the venture won't cannibalize QVC's own shopping channels, which reach about 45 million U.S. households.
Just 8% of those households have ever ordered merchandise from QVC.
"There are literally hundreds of thousands of companies out there with great products that don't know how to bring them to the market," says Mr. Briggs.
"Let's say maybe 10 million people bought something by TV.
If someone else can enter the business, it expands the category.
These people will shop from everybody."
Philip Morris Cos.'
Miller Brewing Co. said it will put T-shirts into specially designed cans of Miller Lite beer in a summer sales promotion set to start on Memorial Day.
The promotion is a variation on a disastrous summer promotion that Coca-Cola Co. tried in 1990, putting cash into "MagiCans" of soda.
The promotion was scrapped after some consumers claimed they drank foul-tasting water from the winning cans.
The T-shirts will illustrate the odd pairings of sports, such as "full contact golf," shown in TV commercials for Miller Lite, created by agency Leo Burnett.
About one in 50 cans will contain the shirts in states where such a practice is legal, the company said.
In all, the company plans to give away 500,000 shirts.
Ad Notes. . . .
ACCOUNT: Sara Lee Foundation, a unit of Sara Lee Corp., awarded the Wonderbra account to TBWA Advertising Inc. of New York for a "multimillon dollar national marketing campaign."
Earlier this year, TBWA launched a provocative ad series for Wonderbra in the United Kingdom.
