Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin unveiled his new cabinet and tried to reassure the world that his revamped lineup will stick to a policy of free-market reforms.
But Finance Minister Boris Fyodorov's decision to quit the cabinet, after much soul-searching, is likely to weaken the new government's reforming zeal.
At a news conference, Mr. Chernomyrdin gave details of the new cabinet roster, which was worked out in private talks between the prime minister and Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
The two believed that a reshuffle was necessary following the poor showing of pro-reform candidates in last month's parliamentary elections.
Mr. Chernomyrdin, a cautious former industrial boss, selected a like-minded former "apparatchik", Oleg Soskovets, to serve as his first deputy premier.
Below Mr. Soskovets are three deputy premiers, Anatoly Chubais, Yuri Yarov and Alexander Zaveryukha.
The inclusion of Mr. Chubais in the upper echelon should give Russia's reformers some cause for optimism.
Mr. Chubais will retain control over privatizing Russia's state industries, a process that has proceeded rapidly during the past two years despite stiff political opposition.
But Mr. Fyodorov's absence is likely to be felt strongly.
The prime minister offered to reappoint Mr. Fyodorov as finance minister, but Mr. Fyodorov said he would take the job only if both Mr. Zaveryukha, a former collective farm director, and Central Bank chairman Viktor Gerashchenko were removed from their posts.
When those demands weren't met, he quit.
In a televised interview last night, Mr. Fyodorov explained that he felt he couldn't work effectively in the new cabinet.
"Attempts are being made to stop the course of reform and even to move backward," he said.
Mr. Fyodorov said he didn't want to serve in a government "when all my time will be taken up struggling against Gerashchenko or somebody else."
Mr. Fyodorov leaves an impressive legacy.
His supporters credit him with helping to end the days of cheap credits for state enterprises.
Moreover, he was an important psychological force, constantly reminding his cabinet colleagues that budget spending and inflation had to be controlled.
His efforts helped bring inflation to 12% in December from 30% a month earlier.
The question now is whether the Chernomyrdin administration can keep a lid on cheap-credit allocations in Mr. Fyodorov's absence.
The brash Mr. Fyodorov doesn't think so.
He predicted that, without his presence in the government, inflation will rise again to 30% a month by April.
He also predicted that the ruble, which strengthened somewhat Thursday to close at 1,553 to the dollar, will plummet by the end of the year to 12,000.
Mr. Chernomyrdin was more sanguine.
He played down the role of any individuals in his cabinet, saying that reforms were "irreversible" despite the loss of two key reformers this week.
(Russia's reform architect, Yegor Gaidar, resigned Sunday from his posts of economics minister and first deputy premier.)
Mr. Chernomyrdin indicated obliquely the pace of reform might be slowed, but also outlined several policies that show a commitment to further reform.
He called for stimulating private investment and entrepreneurship and for closing unprofitable producers, a step that Mr. Gaidar failed to carry out.
Mr. Chernomyrdin identified controlling inflation as his No. 1 task.
"We have no illusions," he said.
"There will not be the kinds of easy credits that would bring a spiral of inflation."
By relying primarily on "nonmonetary" methods, Mr. Chernomyrdin predicts he can bring the monthly inflation rate, after a temporary spurt, to about 8% to 9% by the end of the year.
Those nonmonetary methods, he indicated, will focus on promoting competition as a means to bring prices down.
He promised to lift certain "artificial" import barriers to allow a freer influx of foreign products to compete with domestically produced goods.
But controlling inflation will be a challenge as long as Mr. Gerashchenko continues to head the Central Bank.
Although he is just one of many players responsible for Russia's inflationary woes, he maintains a critical, semi-independent role in the process.
Unlike most other central bankers world-wide, Mr. Gerashchenko interprets his function as helping to keep industries afloat, rather than simply protecting the currency.
In a decree yesterday on the government's reorganization, Mr. Yeltsin officially reappointed the Central Bank chief.
Succeeding Mr. Gaidar as economics minister will be Alexander Shokhin, a moderate who isn't likely to push radical reforms.
Most recently, Mr. Shokhin has been responsible for handling negotiations on Russia's debt and on its relations with foreign lending institutions.
