EUROPEAN UNION countries offer more incentives to U.S. start-ups.
At the peak of the 1980s high-tech boom, a slew of U.S. technology companies set up operations in Europe, attracted by low-price loans, generous grants and subsidies and tax breaks.
But most were units of such corporations as Hewlett-Packard, National Semiconductor and Sun Microsystems.
Now, smaller technology-oriented companies are venturing abroad.
Attracting them are corporate tax rates as low as 10%, grants to train workers and buy capital equipment and in some cases even rent-free factories.
In some countries, such as the Netherlands, venture capital funds are chipping in with equity capital.
Minneapolis start-up ATS Medical says it expects to receive nearly $500,000 in government assistance to build its fledging heart-valve manufacturing operations in Glasgow, Scotland.
ATS received a big relocation grant from Locate in Scotland, the British government's investment agency for the country.
It also received grants to purchase capital equipment and train the nine workers it employs at its Glasgow operations.
The U.S. companies create jobs and bring new technology to European nations.
The Americans, in turn, gain an easy entry into a market that still has trade barriers for non-European firms.
"Many companies realize they can't efficiently supply the European market because of tariffs and quotas," says Finn Gallen, vice president of Industrial Development Agency-Ireland in New York.
U.S. businesses also see the 12 EU countries as ideal bases for marketing to the rest of Europe, says Thomas Schansman, area director of the Netherlands Foreign Investment Agency in New York.
With expansion capital scarce in the U.S., especially for manufacturing and building facilities, many small companies increasingly are "finding it cheaper to locate in a European country and do business there than export from the U.S.," he says.
And many European governments and regions, like France's Alsace, are bending over backward to help.
The Dutch, for example, will organize fact-finding trips for small companies, assist in selecting a manufacturing site and find sources of debt and equity capital.
If companies agree to locate in certain areas, the Netherlands will even finance up to 15% of the investment.
Ireland provides grants of up to 45% of a project's fixed cost and will throw in a rent-free factory for up to seven years at certain locations.
AN ENTREPRENEURIAL program in New York is going national.
Preparing for Profit was established three years ago to help small service companies, especially those run by women and minorities, win contracts from public agencies.
It has worked so well that its sponsors -- New York City's Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the accounting firm Coopers & Lybrand and Fiorello H. LaGuardia Community College -- plan to offer similar programs in other cities.
The partnership is considering Chicago, Los Angeles, Dallas and Pittsburgh, says Julian Alssid, director of economic development at La Guardia Community College.
"What we've learned in the program here can be useful to others in other cities," he says.
The New York program consists of four six-hour Saturday sessions in which city bureaucrats, accountants, lawyers and others walk entrepreneurs through the rigors of contract bidding.
More than 500 entrepreneurs have participated, officials say.
Course graduates report that the number of business contracts they have received has risen more than 150%.
"It helped me establish a very useful network of professional contacts," says Teresa Johnson, president of Complus Computer Solutions, a New York provider of computer training and services.
Before taking the course, she says, she hadn't applied for any big city projects because she felt "there was no way I could compete with the big guys."
Her training helped her win government orders, and her company's 1993 revenues nearly doubled from a year earlier to $300,000.
She expects this year's sales to top $1 million because of a $500,000 contract to train MTA executives on IBM computers.
DESPITE THEIR reputations as capitals of small business, Charlotte, Atlanta and Raleigh-Durham don't make the grade for entrepreneurial women.
These cities lack networks of businesswomen and a concentration of women-owned businesses, says Working Woman magazine.
"Greater numbers of women in a city mean more visibility, which trans lates into the power to draw resources," says the magazine in its annual listing of the 10 best cities for women small-business owners.
The top 10 are: Boston; New York; Columbus, Ohio; San Francisco; Philadelphia; Chicago; Indianapolis; Los Angeles; Baltimore and San Diego.
Boston was called a "high-tech brain trust whose women-owned businesses are the fastest-growing and most prosperous" of the 10 cities on the list.
MANY ENTREPRENEURS are creating small, regional custom cable-shopping shows.
Max Music of Denver plans a four-hour music video show featuring related products.
HomeTown Shopping Show of Hermosa Beach, Calif., says its 16-month-old show, which features products and services of local entrepreneurs, can reach about 750,000 viewers. . . .
Jackson Mitchell of Santa Barbara, Calif., a producer of goat milk and goat-milk products with $6 million in annual revenue, says sales rose more than 10% in the past month, as consumers, worried about the BST hormones that were recently approved for cows, switched to the bearded beast's beverage.
