International media-research firms are stepping up their activities in China.
In an interview this week, Frank Polashock, a managing director of Dun & Bradstreet Corp.'s A.C. Nielsen Co., said he plans to sign agreements over the next three weeks with 30 of China's top television stations.
Those accords, Mr. Polashock says, will lead to the formation of a national service in China to rate programs in terms of the number of viewers they attract.
At present, most ratings in China are provided by individual television stations.
That has raised concerns among advertising executives about the reliability and consistency of the data.
In an effort to fill that gap, several international market-research firms have entered the market.
Frank Small & Associates Ltd., based in Sydney, Australia, tracks media habits in China on an ad hoc basis.
In March, however, it will release the first monthly results of its new comprehensive study of consumer habits, which includes TV viewing.
Survey Research Group, based in Hong Kong, measures general TV viewing, print readership, advertising spending and sales of consumer goods in China's major cities.
It will release results of a four-week study of Shanghai TV-viewing habits within the next two weeks.
Nielsen's Mr. Polashock said he expects the introduction of a national ratings service will lead to a sharp increase in ad spending in China by American and European companies.
He argued that a reliable and independent source of data will make advertisers more comfortable with the market.
Many advertising and marketing executives in Hong Kong disagree.
"That's totally off the mark," says Ron Cromie, general manager of the China division of WPP Group PLC's J. Walter Thompson Co.
"Clearly, already international brands are being fairly heavily advertised in China, particularly fast-moving consumer goods.
All the more reason for the ratings service," he says.
"But I don't think a lack of a ratings service has kept people back from spending."
As China's economy has boomed in recent years, ad spending has ballooned.
Survey Research estimates that $1.15 billion was spent by local and international companies to advertise their goods and services in China in 1993, up 400% from 1989.
Saatchi & Saatchi Co. predicts that ad spending in China will mushroom another 72% by 1996.
Already, ad spending is growing faster in China than anywhere else in the world.
