The besieged middle class continues to be good copy, with new books still rolling out nearly a decade into the current brooding cycle.
(The latest: "Silent Depression.")
The mood clearly has political as well as market resonance.
Michael Dukakis scored points with it and Bill Clinton probably got elected president on its intensity.
But really, a lot of it is what writer Jonathan Rauch called "whining" in a review of one of the angst-ridden volumes last year.
A half hour's search at a UCLA library turned up 20 works on the middle-class plight going back to the Great Depression, when there really was something to complain about.
The latest batch builds on the infamous dropoff in average U.S. real personal income dating back to 1973, although an earlier spate of attention followed the 1968 presidential race.
Time magazine crowned the middle class "Men and Women of the Year" in 1970.
It makes marketing sense to commiserate with your customers.
Fortune magazine late last year looked at "Upper-Middle-Class Woes" in an article whose examples rather detracted from the seriousness of the proposition.
This is the same publication that in 1969 wrote of a "housing crisis" that was "spreading to the white middle class and even to quite affluent families."
(Fortune wasn't always so far off the mark.)
Today's typical tract on the middle class is written by an academic or journalist with a sermon in store about Reaganism and unbridled capitalists.
In an earlier age, the same sort would have been decrying the sterile acquisitiveness of bourgeois life.
To be sure, the Ross Perot phenomenon shows this discontent is not limited to intellectuals, but the wellspring of popular sentiment may be found there.
In the short run, the notion that the middle class is put upon has had results the left must regret: It has innoculated those of us in that income group from most of the increased taxes that our newfound advocates might like to levy in order to effect the New Deal-style redistribution that always is their true devotion.
That's a subject for another day, however.
What about the quality of life for the "middle class"?
The group I have in mind is a notch or two above the statistical median.
It is urban or suburban, largely professional or managerial, but also incorporating many wannabes in support positions.
Those who were in unionized manufacturing are demonstrably worse off today than when they ruled the world markets.
But most others are better off -- even if they don't realize it.
Maybe the couple that a colleague of mine recently saw on a transcontinental flight would consider themselves to be pinched in the middle.
They seated themselves in business class (perhaps using frequent-flyer miles, which didn't exist a generation ago).
They sent their two (misbehaving) kids back to the coach section, with their nanny.
Nannies, au pairs, personal day-care providers: However you want to describe this institution, it is a new one for those of us who grew up since World War II.
The propriety of so raising children aside, it can be a bigger time saver than grandma was.
Even those of us who have an occasional housekeeper are employing a service that would have been an unthinkable luxury to our parents.
But then, we're gone from home a lot more, and not just to do office toil.
We take more trips, even if they're short ones (how was your last cruise?), and participate in or watch more leisure events (the ranks of golfers, for example, doubled in the '70s and '80s).
We definitely gamble more.
And dine out, too, sampling a range of cuisines that few of our forebears could have even pronounced.
Finally we spend more time media-bound: The Bureau of Labor Statistics finds that "urban wage and clerical consumer units" spent a larger share of their dollars on entertainment and reading in the late 1980s (6.1%) than in the early 1970s (5.3%) or any time before.
Body, facial and hair care all take time and money, but don't more partake now?
Of course, we buy bottled water at more than $1 a pop, even though the stuff from the tap is getting better all the time.
(Yes, we do pay a lot for pollution controls.)
We eat more uncanned produce and drink fresh-fruit juices instead of sugary punch, and when we do imbibe wine or beer, which is less, it isn't the bulk stuff it was in the '60s.
Even coffee is now an event.
Cable TV (or satellite) is an added expense for most people, but compare the reception to yesteryear's, let alone the range of programming.
Talk is cheap, as long as it's long-distance, which used to cost so much you kept conversations brief.
Our (multiple) phones, faxes, computers, CDs, video and audio systems, alarms?
Only when we visit a backward corner of the world are we reminded of what life used to be like for us.
Now most of that electronic stuff is even in our cars -- sorry, vehicles -- now.
And nearly every one of us has something of our own to drive: U.S. survey data show nearly one car for every person of driving age.
The home we live in may cost more today (although in California and the Northeast, less than it did five years ago) but it probably has more rooms than the one we grew up in.
In 1988, 42% of new homes had more than 2.5 bathrooms, almost double the percentage in 1978.
Don't you remember sharing a sink or shower, maybe even a bedroom?
Not many middle-class youngsters these days suffer such privations, based on the complaints I've heard at a summer program where I've taught high-schoolers forced to live in an early '60s dormitory.
I guess they're particular about the clothes they wear, too, though you might not know it.
Back home, they, like the rest of us, probably drop beaucoup bundles at the dry cleaner, which in an earlier day was reserved for one's better suits and silks.
Starting with their high-tech strollers, we baby 'em in this income bracket.
To Little League and piano lessons have been added myriad other fee-based activities.
And we uniform the future stars and shoot pictures (or videos) of them as never before.
Looks are important.
Rare is the middle-class youngster (or adult) who doesn't get help for imperfect teeth or bad skin.
By the time they reach prom age, they're ready to put on the Ritz themselves.
Once upon a time, limousines were for weddings if you were lucky.
To maintain our own youth, we have health clubs, workout gear, whirlpools and the like that only the resort crowd once enjoyed.
And there's therapy for the mind, too.
Before the 1970s, that was more something for the Woody Allens of the world.
Anxiety is probably up, as we worry more about workplace changes.
But life is richer now, no matter what we read at the bookstore.
Baseball attendance (avg. per game)
Sources: Nat'l Assoc. of Realtors, HUD, Major League Baseball
