United Technologies Corp. said it will issue two separate classes of stock in its automotive unit in a move that would help it raise gross proceeds of $791 million to $830 million.
The Hartford, Conn., company said it will use the money to reduce debt, increase its dividend and expand its other businesses.
The offering will consist of as many as 19.6 million shares of UTA Class A common stock.
The company said the Class A shares are expected to give it between 40% and 44% equity interest in the automotive unit, United Technologies Automotive, or UTA.
But United Technologies will retain control through an issue of Class B common stock, which will represent between 56% and 60% of the equity interest of UTA.
United Technologies will have the power to elect 80% of the directors of UTA.
United Technologies' automotive unit, based in Dearborn, Mich., had an operating profit of $111 million on sales of $2.38 billion in 1992.
The division makes electrical and interior-trim components.
Robert F. Daniell , chairman of United Technologies, said the markets, customers and product offerings of the automotive division "are outside of the core aerospace and building-systems businesses" of the parent company.
He said the stock offering "provides United Technologies with an opportunity, given current market conditions, to unlock a portion of its investment in UT Automotive."
The offering will consist of 17,800,000 shares of UTA Class A common stock and an over-allotment option for the underwriters to buy as much as an added 1,780,000 shares.
The company said it has applied for listing the stock on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company said the offering price is expected to be between $22 and $24 a share.
At those prices, proceeds to the company would be between $431 million and 470 million, less expenses related to the offering.
In addition, UTA will pay $360 million in dividends to the parent company prior to the stock offering.
The company said the Class B stock provides it the flexibility to retain a controlling interest in UTA or to distribute all or a portion of its remaining shares in the unit.
The company said that if it decides to divest itself of its equity in the unit that it would do so through public offerings or private placements or possibly through a tax-free dividend to United Technologies' shareholders.
The company said the current management will continue to operate at the automotive unit and that the offering won't affect employee benefits and contracts.
The company said it has filed a registration statement governing the offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission and that it would offer the stock after it becomes effective.
Lehman Brothers, Salomon Brothers and Lazard Freres will act as managing underwriters for the offering.
United Technologies closed at $65.50, up 87.5 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
