One of his chimneys "fell through the roof" and smashed his library, but author Ray Bradbury was putting a positive face on the Los Angeles earthquake.
"It's already improved our lives.
We're throwing out a lot of books that we've been keeping for 30 years."
Lest any reader of "Fahrenheit 451" think that one of L.A.'s premier bibliophiles had torn a binding of his own in the tremor, the 73-year-old Mr. Bradbury explains that the discarded volumes went to others and not to scrap.
His typewriter also was a temporary casualty, but the science-fiction and screenwriter was spared the worst of it last week.
In the tidied up parlor of his home in the Cheviot Hills neighborhood between the Fox and former MGM studios on the city's west side, he was touting the "frontier feelings" that arise when "a lot of people are cleaning out their lives."
I visited Mr. Bradbury after the quake because of his autumnal emergence as a muse on urban life and in particular on the course of the city where he's lived for nearly 60 years.
His essays and talks have influenced planners and developers in L.A. and elsewhere.
With the local canvas now partly cleared, what might we see?
"We'll go back to being fools," he says, referring to the automobile, which this L.A. oddity has never learned to operate.
Most everyone else is upset about sundered freeways.
"I was hoping they'd all be destroyed this week, without hurting anyone," he admits.
"Freeways are full of unnecessary drivers.
I describe them as an attractive nuisance.
Most people that are on them at any one hour shouldn't be there."
Part visionary, part curmudgeon, Mr. Bradbury is a man of grand opinions.
Just what you might expect in a storyteller, and a nice break from the usual run of L.A.'s busily talking heads.
I anticipated the sally against the car culture.
Mr. Bradbury has campaigned for "rapid transit" for 30 years.
Of course, now that a subway is finally being built in Los Angeles, he thinks they got it all wrong, with a route that snakes along dense but dull corridors.
Monorails linking activity centers are what he wants.
Mr. Bradbury insists that Angelenos were forced into their affair with the auto by a denial of cheap transit options.
Yet he acknowledges the suburban urge, which the car has encouraged.
His daughter and her family moved across the Ventura County line several years ago.
"It'll be easy to get in to the city-45 minutes," someone told him.
But as others get the same idea, treks are prolonged and in such situations life's rhythms change and marriages may suffer.
Fortunately, a dynamic economy adapts as well.
Jobs follow the people or technology makes it possible to work from where you are.
But Mr. Bradbury's heart is in the city, in keeping it bustling and livable.
He praises the European capitals, especially Paris, where he and his wife now spend a couple of months a year.
He says he'll walk 10 miles a night along its cafe-lined streets.
That is the atmosphere he wants to implant all over the Los Angeles basin.
His basic scheme is to bring dozens of eateries, several cinemas and a few bookstores together in one fell swoop, to create "gather and stare" places -- preferably open-air, for which the Southern California climate is ideal.
Crowds create sociability and enforce etiquette as long as criminals are kept at bay, he says.
The idea would be to have such spots in each of the L.A. area's 80 "micropolises," Mr. Bradbury has written, so that the locals who've been driven away by unimaginative "downtowns" will enjoy getting "lost" in their own environs.
He hopes that corporations, working with entrepreneurs, will bring such projects into being; he has little faith in governments or chambers of commerce to do so.
He remembers his youth in then-vibrant Hollywood, when the street scene allowed a Depression-poor boy to encounter his dreams.
But Mr. Bradbury has no such nostalgia for 1960s Southern California, which some people regard as its golden age.
Its uninspired commercial strips and lack of center started him on his second career as a "master of the obvious."
His "obvious" notions have taken root in several L.A.-area locations in recent years, sometimes in the work of architect Jon Jerde, who's written that Mr. Bradbury "understands the essential spirit and parts of the city as no other."
Mr. Jerde's projects have been more in the vein of shopping malls than traditional city blocks, but Mr. Bradbury says this may be necessary where public authorities have lost control.
"You have to build a medieval city," observes the author.
"The Westside Pavilion {a revived complex near his home} is run by a whole new set of lords in their castle, and the evil peasants are outside somewhere.
And you let the good peasants in.
It's a substitute for a real city."
The earthquake itself may not have broken much ground for more of the Bradbury touch -- although pedestrian paths with lights and carts are not the worst idea for seismically sensitive turf -- but the despair that seems to grip so many in town may do the trick.
One positive omen is the increasing connection between the entertainment industry, with its theme-park ventures, and the retail world.
Mr. Bradbury was an early enthusiast of the Disney model.
"Disneyland is a civilization, and it's improved the world," he says.
"I knew Walt, and I defended him against the snobs in New York.
And ever since, the mayors of the world have come into Disneyland to learn how to re-create their cities."
Cleanliness, quality and fun, and never mind a little ersatz.
Mr. Bradbury likes the South Street Seaport in New York -- he says he won't go anywhere else to eat in the Apple.
He shows no deference to urban derelicts.
"You get three dozen homeless, and a thousand people are kept out."
He's also on a kick against graffiti, proposing in a letter to the Los Angeles Times a coordinated citizen paint-over of vandalized walls, something he says he's tried himself.
And he wants illegal aliens out.
Immigration at current levels, says this son of a Swede, "is going to destroy California."
The millions now here legally must be taught English.
(So, who's going to bus tables at the scores of new cafes along the Rue de Bradbury?)
I ask him again if the quake will be enough to jar L.A. onto a new path.
It will take an "atom bomb," he responds.
But seriously, he thinks he's gaining some listeners, including the new mayor, Richard Riordan.
Right now, the best tonic might be humor.
He recalls a story (apocryphal, it turns out) about political idol (and L.A.-born) Adlai Stevenson, whose Illinois farmhouse burned in 1938.
Stevenson, by this version, gathered his clan about the ruins and said, "OK, go get the marshmallows."
