It doesn't get any better than this.
A steadily growing economy, low interest rates and low inflation, and corporate coffers filling with cash are all combining to give stock prices a heady boost.
And if the bulls are right -- and they have been for the past three years -- the good times will keep on rolling right past 4000 on the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
"I'm expecting the market to rally to 4200 in the next three months," says Don Hays, director of investment strategy at Wheat, First Securities/Butcher & Singer in Richmond, Va.
And Mr. Hays's predictions pale beside the ebullient forecast of Edward Yardeni, chief economist at C.J. Lawrence Deutsche Bank Securities Corp.: "My mantra is, 5000 on the Dow by 1995."
Of course, the climb may well be interrupted.
The history of the current bull market looks more like a staircase than a straight line, with sharp, fast gains followed by periods of stagnation.
Indeed, yesterday the market dropped 15.2 points, primarily as a result of profit-taking after four consecutive record days.
There is even the possibility that some unforeseen event could trigger a downturn in prices, perhaps by as much as 15%.
Some analysts figure that by sheer dint of its age -- at 39 months one of the oldest bull markets ever -- this one is overdue for a dip.
But few believe the rally is at its end.
The three-year-old bull market that has carried the industrial average up 63% since October 1990 has been driven principally by an unprecedented decline in interest rates.
Short-term rates have dropped during that period to 3% from 7.4%.
Long-term rates, hovering at just above 6%, are at the lowest level since the Treasury began issuing 30-year bonds in 1977.
Those declines have unleashed immense financial forces.
Even conservative investors have fled low-yielding bank deposits for the greater returns of stocks.
Millions of homeowners have refinanced their debts and gained extra spending power.
And corporations are enjoying the lowest borrowing costs in decades.
"The drop in long-term interest rates is probably the most important factor in the current bull market," says Sung Won Sohn, chief economist at Norwest Corp. in Minneapolis.
It isn't just cheap money that has propelled the stock market higher.
The massive restructurings that many companies have undergone since the last recession have been paying off, too.
Leaner companies are producing more with less, fattening their bottom lines even though the economy had been growing anemically, at least until the end of last year.
Even once-beleaguered General Motors Corp. is looking relatively prosperous these days.
Yesterday, GM's stock hit an all-time high of $59.50 a share, adjusted for splits.
Now, many economists believe the combination of low rates and restructurings is poised to fuel a powerful recovery.
As the economy gains momentum, they say, companies will see sales and revenues rising, plumping up profits.
Those profits, in turn, will be the linchpin in a further sustained climb in stock prices.
"The fundamentals of the U.S. economy look healthier than they have in years," says Alan Sinai, chief economist at Lehman Brothers Inc., the investment banking unit of American Express Co.
"The combination of corporate efficiencies and rising sales will fuel the next stage of the bull market that will go on for a long, long time."
Even if the Dow does take a sudden nose dive, it won't be a lasting one, he and others insist.
A market correction would give all the bears who have been on the sidelines for the past few years a chance to say, "I told you so."
They would then probably move into the market, providing a floor under any decline, economists say.
"There's the mood and the money out there to bring in sideline cash if there's a correction," says Alfred Goldman, director of market analysis at A.G. Edwards & Sons in St. Louis.
The greatest danger to the rosy stock-market outlook is too much of a good thing -- an economy that grows at a torrid pace.
If that happens, the Federal Reserve would almost certainly clamp down on the nation's money supply to head off inflation.
Less likely, but equally dangerous, is a slumping economy that slips back toward recession, burdened by higher taxes or declining consumer confidence.
What investors are hoping for is a Goldilocks economy -- not too strong and not too weak, but just right.
"It's a delicate balancing act, but the economy seems to be doing a good job of walking that fine line," says Mr. Sohn of Norwest.
The rally in the Dow industrials since the beginning of the year is being driven by two things: expectations of strong fourth-quarter profits in coming weeks and rapidly receding worries that the Fed will begin forcing interest rates higher.
Analysts peg economic growth in the just-ended quarter at 4.2%, the fastest since the fourth quarter of 1992, according to Blue Chip Economic Indicators, a Sedona, Ariz., newsletter that tracks economic forecasts.
The nation's auto makers, for instance, enjoyed healthy sales as 1993 drew to a close.
Analysts expect GM, Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. to post robust gains for the period, and their stock prices have reflected those expectations.
The auto makers' prosperity has already had a ripple effect.
The steelmakers that furnish the raw materials for cars, and the railroads that haul the finished autos from factories to markets, are both expected to profit.
USX-U.S. Steel Group, a major steelmaker, has seen its stock price gain nearly 20% in the past three months.
And CSX Corp., a railroad that carries hundreds of thousands of GM cars, has gained 11% in the same period.
Few economists expect growth to continue at the vigorous rate of late 1993.
Nor do they want it to.
The spurt of growth last quarter had sparked fears that the inflation bogeyman was about to emerge after years of hibernation.
Anxious bond investors, who fear nothing as much as they do inflation, began demanding higher and higher interest rates to offset expected inflation.
Now those fears are subsiding, and interest rates are returning to their previous levels.
"People got carried away with inflation expectations in the last few months," says Abby Joseph Cohen, a strategist at Goldman Sachs & Co.
"On the basis of a robust fourth quarter, people were extrapolating strong growth this year, and raising unwarranted fears about inflation."
Surprisingly enough, long-time bears, most of whom have badly lagged the performance of their more optimistic colleagues, aren't discouraged by the market's recent run to new records.
They just argue that the market is that much closer now to the inevitable fall that they have been predicting for years.
"It's a compulsive gambling mania out there," says Charles A. Allmon, a money manager and veteran bear with more than 70% of his portfolio in cash.
"The gambling rehabilitation centers will have a lot of candidates in the end."
The crux of the bear case has been that stock prices have gotten far ahead of corporate and economic fundamentals.
The bears' favorite arguments are that stock prices (averaging 24 times per-share earnings) are dangerously high, and that the amount of money a stockholder earns from corporate dividends (2.7% at current rates) is dangerously low.
The pessimists argue that those indicators always return to their historic averages -- stock prices at about 14 times earnings and a dividend yield of about 4.4%, according to financial services firm Birinyi Associates -- either through rising earnings and dividends, or through falling prices.
Clearly, the bears are betting on a fall.
Backing up that argument, Alan Newman, an analyst at H.D. Brous & Co. and one of the grizzliest of bears, notes that investors are now rushing to own stocks of big, blue-chip companies.
The flight to big stocks is a sign that institutional investors, particularly mutual funds, are preparing for the worst, he contends: Those are the stocks that are easiest to sell when panic sets in.
"We hear `Taps' playing loud and clear," he says.
To be sure, the bears have been dead right regarding some sectors of the stock market.
In 1993, anyone holding tobacco or pharmaceutical stocks took a sound thumping.
Those sectors finished the year down 26% and 11%, respectively.
That pattern has repeated itself in other sectors.
While the market itself hasn't plunged into any wholesale declines, it has been undergoing what some analysts call "rolling corrections" for the past few years.
Once a sector has been thrashed by heavy selling, the sagging stock prices lure the inevitable "bottom fishers," investors hellbent on finding bargains.
Their buying, at least until now, has stopped the sector's slide and provided a cushion to protect the overall market.
One of those bottom fishers is Kent Simons, co-manager of Neuberger & Berman's Selected Sectors fund.
"For well over a year, stocks and stock groups have corrected independent of the market, and we don't have any problem finding stocks we think are attractive," he says.
"The market is like the weather: If you don't like the prices this week, wait a week."
Overall, though, the majority of investors expect a robust year of profit growth and dividend increases in 1994.
Investment professionals point to some encouraging trends.
The number of companies boosting their dividends in 1993 was the highest since 1989, according to Standard & Poor's Corp., and the number of companies increasing their payouts was 23% higher than in 1992.
Even if stock prices rise fast enough to keep the dividend yield below the psychologically important 3% threshold, analysts aren't worried.
"The yield has been under 3% for two years now and stock prices just keep going up," points out A.G. Edwards's Mr. Goldman.
Earnings have been rising at a double-digit pace for the past two years, and many analysts expect that rate to accelerate this year.
According to I/B/E/S, a firm that tracks analysts' earnings estimates, 1994 profits for the companies included in S&P's 500-stock index should climb about 18% from 1993 levels.
Cash, the critical fuel that drives stock prices higher, appears to be in ample supply.
Cash levels at stock mutual funds in November, the latest available data, totaled $58.5 billion, down a little from October levels but considerably larger than the $43.4 billion on hand a year earlier, according to Investment Company Institute, a mutual-fund trade group.
Money may be coming home this year, too.
If 1993 was the year that American investors discovered the huge profit potential in foreign markets -- they bought a record amount of foreign stocks, mostly via mutual funds, last year -- 1994 may be the year they learn the hard lesson of volatility.
Already this year the Hong Kong, Malaysian and Mexican stock markets have given investors thorough, albeit short-lived, beatings.
Some analysts figure that getting roughed up overseas may persuade some of the less adventurous investors to come back to the relative stability of the U.S. market.
"There's less enthusiasm for the idea that foreign stocks are the place for money managers to put their new money," says Richard Hoey, chief economist and a portfolio manager at Dreyfus Corp.
"In part, that's what is bolstering our market."
Mr. Hoey says he recently cut back holdings of Malaysian, Philippine and Singapore stocks and put the money to work here, instead.
Finally, there is the prickly matter of investor psychology.
In the sometimes paradoxical world of the stock market, a goodly dollop of bearish sentiment is often a bullish sign.
That is because pessimists have been hoarding their cash.
Eventually, the reasoning goes, they will break down and begin buying, pushing prices up.
Despite the recent run to record levels, Mr. Goldman of A.G. Edwards estimates that roughly half of investment advisers are bearish.
"In 33 years of studying the markets," he says, "I've never seen a market hit a top when half of the pundits were bearish."
