New York -- One hears horror stories about Russian orchestras these days, but nothing quite prepared me for the encounter with one on a recent flight from Warsaw to New York.
The players obeyed practically none of the rules.
They smoked in nonsmoking sections, lighting up at takeoff and landing.
They passed around bottles of vodka they had brought with them, popped out of their seats the second the wheels hit the ground and were surprisingly casual toward their instruments.
When a violin case tumbled out of a prematurely opened luggage bin on landing, there were gales of laughter.
The crew was at its wit's end.
The orchestra turned out to be the St. Petersburg Philharmonic, until recently the finest in Russia, and though its manners may no longer inspire much confidence in its musical discipline, it still ought to have been the perfect band to play Alfred Schnittke's First Symphony.
Mr. Schnittke is the Russian composer who has most dramatically chronicled the decline and fall of the Soviet Union.
That symphony, written in 1974, is an epic study in chaos, political disillusionment and sheer stylistic dissipation.
A collage of musics from all eras and styles, with large helpings of jazz thrown in, and some of the most momentous climaxes in symphonic literature, it mirrors the apocalyptic vision that artists had of Soviet society at the time but were generally forbidden to express.
The St. Petersburg Philharmonic did not, of course, play the Schnittke on its tour.
It is a capitalist orchestra now and Tchaikovsky sells better, even though Mr. Schnittke has gone on to become the best-known Russian composer since Shostakovich.
Over 40 compact discs devoted exclusively to his music have been released in the past decade.
And even without any help from the armies of Russian musicians now scouring the West in search of hard currency, Mr. Schnittke's music has had an extraordinary winter in the U.S.
The National Symphony, which commissioned the Sixth Symphony from Mr. Schnittke for its tour to Moscow last fall, gave the American premiere of the work, under Mstislav Rostropovich, in Washington and New York last month.
A few days later, the New York Philharmonic, hosting Mr. Schnittke as its composer-in-residence for a week, introduced a Seventh Symphony conducted by Kurt Masur.
That was followed by the American premiere of Mr. Schnittke's wicked "Faust" Cantata, a real orchestral and choral bash from 1984, by the American Symphony Orchestra under Leon Botstein.
Elsewhere Schnittke's music is currently being played by groups ranging from university ensembles to the Philadelphia Orchestra and the Guarneri Quartet.
The Orchestra of the Beethovenhalle Bonn will conclude its U.S. tour at Lincoln Center Monday night, with Vladimir Feltsman as soloist in Mr. Schnittke's Piano Concerto.
Indeed, Mr. Schnittke, who is now far less played in Russia than he was when he was frowned upon by the Soviet government, thrives mainly thanks to Western and emigre Russian musicians.
The composer has himself moved to Hamburg, leaving behind Russian audiences eager to escape from the chaos all around them into a newly pervasive pop culture.
Unfortunately, however, all of this has taken its toll on Mr. Schnittke.
His health may be partly responsible; he has suffered two strokes and serious heart disease, and looks older than his 59 years.
But for whatever reasons, his two new symphonies were dispiriting affairs, although not inappropriate responses to the hapless conditions of current Russian musical life.
Both are exceedingly spare.
The Sixth consists of phrases that start promisingly but quickly peter out into nothing.
In the Seventh, phrases are similarly clipped and sparse, but here the contrapuntal lines accumulate into fuming clusters and stop, as if stuck.
This is, in both symphonies, music made up of a string of false starts; the composer no longer seeming to have any place to go.
Mr. Schnittke, who spent a week in New York for the symphony premieres, is just as reticent as his current music.
He will do almost anything to avoid an interview or photo session, and he prefers to forestall any questions with as few unrevealing words as he can get away with.
He described the difference between his two new symphonies only by noting that the Sixth has three movements, the Seventh, four.
Not all Mr. Schnittke's recent music is quite so dispiriting.
On an excellent new Sony CD there is the first recording of his robust Piano Trio, but that happens to be a reworking of an earlier string trio.
A new string quartet, the Fourth, on the latest EMI disc from the Alban Berg Quartet, is nearly as grim as the new symphonies.
Mr. Schnittke is hardly alone in this floundering.
Though the best known, he is part of a once-remarkable group of former Soviet composers, including Sofia Gubaidulina, the Estonian Arvo Part and the Georgian Giya Kanchelli.
All of them resisted official Soviet pressure and wrote powerfully direct, often spiritually charged, profoundly intense music unlike any that was being written elsewhere in the world.
Messrs. Part and Kanchelli moved in the direction of an archaic minimalism; and Mr. Part, whose best works have an elegant, heartfelt, Gregorian spirituality, has developed a cult New Age following.
Ms. Gubaidulina has a highly developed sense of instrumental color and structural ingenuity.
But all of them have emigrated to Germany and are writing, it seems, music that is a pale reflection of the works they wrote under communism.
Ms. Gubaidulina, for instance, had her Fourth String Quartet premiered by the Kronos Quartet at Carnegie Hall last month, and it will be included in its soon-to-be-released new Nonesuch recording.
It is a short, beautifully written atmospheric piece, but it breaks no new ground and seems of slight ambition compared to her earlier works.
One former Soviet composer has, however, remained in St. Petersburg and continues to write tough, riveting music.
She is still practically unknown here, and is only now becoming known at home.
Unlike the emigre composers, who were officially discredited but still had their work performed in the Soviet Union, Galina Ustvolskaya, a former pupil of Shostakovich, has had to wait decades to get many of her more potent pieces played at all.
Finally she can be heard on two new CDs, and her work turns out to be some of the angriest music of all time.
One of the CDs, on the Dutch Etcetera label, is highlighted by a furious Grand Duet for cello and piano from 1959; the other, on the Hat Hut label out of Switzerland, includes a 1964 Duet for violin and piano that alternates between wispy threads of sound and violent outbursts, as well as other startling music.
But nothing quite matches the sheer outlandishness of Mr. Schnittke's First Symphony, and there is a new recording of that, too.
It is on BIS performed by the wacky Swedish conductor, Leif Segerstam, who can be infuriatingly grandiose in Mahler or Sibelius, but who happens to offer an appropriately extravagant ticket to this high-spirited musical apocalypse.
Some day, perhaps, when pressures ease on the unruly St. Petersburg Philharmonic, we will be able to hear what they make of this work which so perfectly suits their temperament.
