Pity the poor traveler as portrayed by American Express.
For years, hapless globe-trotters in American Express Travelers Cheques' advertisements have been mugged, burglarized while showering, and preyed upon by cunning pickpockets.
Now, in a major strategic shift, American Express is showing off its traveler's checks in a less ominous, much lighter manner.
It is the first new campaign in 20 years for the standard American Express traveler's checks.
For the past two years, the company has concentrated on ads trumpeting a "Cheques for two" brand extension, which allows two individuals to share the same checks.
The new television commercials from WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather are scheduled to begin airing tonight on the major broadcast networks, except for Fox, and on cable networks such as A&E, CNN, CNBC and Lifetime.
The ad budget is $15 million.
The ads focus on lost-and-found departments in Washington, Bermuda and Paris and the routine items, ranging from shoes to video camcorders to wallets, that turn up.
Each ad is humorous, beautifully filmed and highlighted by graphics that recall postcards of an era when traveling was considered exotic.
Missing from the ads are suspicious-looking characters, befuddled tourists, and actor Karl Malden, who appeared in many of the company's advertisements for two decades.
The abrupt change in emphasis reflects internal research showing that the traveler-as-victim ads were no longer effective, says Julie Newton Cucchi, Ogilvy's senior vice president and creative director.
"The ads had outworn their welcome. . ." says Ms. Cucchi.
"They reminded people of an unpleasant fact, and it sounded abrasive and lecturing with a lot of finger waving."
In some ways, it's surprising that American Express would bother to advertise its Travelers Cheques at all, because the company dominates the category, estimated at $64 billion in world-wide sales, according to the Nilson Report, an Oxnard, Calif., newsletter on the credit card and traveler's check industry.
Spencer Nilson, publisher of the newsletter, estimates that American Express has a commanding 45% share.
Furthermore, there is little advertising from the competition, which includes Interpayment Services in New York, the world's largest issuer of Visa Travelers Cheques.
There is also scant, if any, advertising from BankAmerica and Barclays, which joined forces in 1990 to issue traveler's checks.
Nevertheless, says Margaret Simonetti-Kelly, vice president of Travelers Cheque Marketing, American Express must keep reinforcing its existing users as well as attracting new ones.
The company's lost-and-found ads look authentic -- even though the only thing actually lost in the commercials is reality.
The lost-and-found employees are actors.
And the commercials were filmed in a studio, not at actual locations.
One commercial, spotlighting Washington, begins with a bespectacled gentleman saying, "I run the lost-and-found here in Union Station."
He says the capital's train station attracts 60,000 visitors daily.
"A lot of them lose things."
One item, which he describes as "spooky," appears to be an urn that may well contain the remains of someone who was cremated.
"We lose all types of things here in Washington, D.C.," he concludes.
"We even lost a baseball team once."
The actor in the Bermuda ad suggests that perhaps the Bermuda Triangle is the reason that so many items are lost on the island.
And Paris, says an actress in the third commercial, is like "Champagne. . .it goes straight to your head" -- which may explain the carelessness afflicting visitors to the City of Lights.
Even Louis XVI lost something: his head, she says.
Traveler's checks in the new ads are lost, not stolen, which sends a less downbeat message, says Ms. Simonetti-Kelly.
That, however, wasn't the only tactic explored for this campaign.
Other concepts tested with consumers included the way travelers can use the checks to stay within their budgets and the number of establishments that will cash the checks.
Research showed that consumers related best to the relatively innocuous act of losing something.
The initial three commercials are meant to establish the look and tone of the campaign in consumers' minds.
Once that is accomplished, Ms. Cucchi says, other far-flung locales can be used.
Actual cities weren't even mentioned, or hinted at in the older ads with Mr. Malden.
"We didn't want travelers to associate a crime with particular cities because of our ads," says Ms. SimonettiKelly.
American Express hopes the new campaign, which will likely be extended to other countries, will enjoy the same longevity as the scarier, "It could happen to you" ads.
To guarantee a long run, American Express and Ogilvy may fine-tune the advertising.
For instance, future ads might focus on one specific item that is lost.
The potential with that approach would be as limitless as the hodgepodge of stuff cramming lost-and-found departments around the world.
Says Ms. Cucchi, "It'll be a long time before this concept is exhausted."
Former Los Angeles Dodger Don Newcombe has sued Adolph Coors Co., agency Foote Cone & Belding Communications, and Sports Illustrated publisher Time Inc. over a print ad for Killian's Red Beer, seeking more than $100 million in damages.
Mr. Newcombe, a recovering alcoholic who is an activist against alcohol abuse, says the beer ad makes unauthorized use of his likeness and "conveys racially derogatory connotations."
It appeared in the Feb. 14 issue of Sports Illustrated.
The suit was filed in Los Angeles Superior Court.
A Coors spokesman said the company had received assurances from Foote Cone that the image "didn't represent an identifiable person."
The spokesman noted, "We respect the concerns raised by Mr. Newcombe.
We're hopeful they can be resolved by Foote Cone and Mr. Newcombe."
Time and Foote Cone said they hadn't received copies of the complaint and declined to comment.
At issue is an ad with an image of a pitcher on the mound, wearing a plain white uniform with number 39 on the back.
The headline: "Most of all, it's always been a game about color."
Mr. Newcombe, one of the first black pitching stars in major league baseball, wore number 36 when he pitched for the Dodgers in the 1950s.
Nonetheless, he says the image is an altered version of a photo of him published in a 1950s-era article entitled, "Will Negroes Dominate Baseball?"
Mr. Newcombe's lawyer, Joseph Iacopino, said he thinks the ad was created by altering Mr. Newcombe's photo to change the 36 to 39, the number worn by another former Dodger, Roy Campanella.
Mr. Campanella's picture also appears in the old article.
Citing the ad's headline and a reference to "watching my team whitewash their rivals," Mr. Iacopino said he considers it "a sick, private joke," subtly recalling the alarmist tone of the old headline.
A Coors spokesman denied that there was any racial content to the ad.
He said Killian's advertising, including the tag "Ask for it by color," has long referred to the beer's red hue.
"Such an accusation . . . is an insult and can only be seen as self-serving," the spokesman said.
New television ads for the New Yorker that sound like a stream of consciousness and resemble Woody Allen's vision of Manhattan began airing last night to spotlight the magazine's special "At the Movies" issue, which goes on sale today.
The half-minute commercial is the first effort from Berlin Wright Cameron, the Omnicom Group ad agency for the weekly publication, which is owned by Advance Publications Inc.
"Do you understand the machine that creates your illusions?
Is black cinema an art form or a marketing ploy?
Why is this woman a black-and-white photo of Marilyn Monroe smiling?
Whatever happened to the `A.V.' guy from your high school?
Do you have two-and-a-half bucks?" asks the monotone announcer, who is actually Andy Berlin, chairman and chief executive officer of Berlin Wright.
"The New Yorker.
The answers are inside."
Shots include cabs weaving through traffic, a newsstand on Central Park West and the outside of a movie theater that appears to be the Ziegfeld on West 54 St.
The spot will be short-lived, appearing only through tomorrow on stations in New York and Los Angeles; it will appear on "Late Show with David Letterman" and "Today" as well as network evening newscasts.
The objective of the campaign, says Thomas Florio, president of the New Yorker, is to "raise questions of what is in the magazine this week and what will set the conversational agenda."
The strategy is to produce similar ads whenever New Yorker editor Tina Brown publishes a one-theme, special issue, or when she wants to highlight one article.
"There are a lot of young and educated people ready to buy the New Yorker," says Tony Wright, the agency's president.
"These ads are aimed for newsstand sales.
Hopefully, subscriptions will follow."
