In June 1992 Russian President Boris Yeltsin, after a sojourn with George Bush at Camp David, met with congressional leaders at the Russian Embassy.
As he was talking with Democratic congressional leaders Thomas Foley and George Mitchell and their Republican counterparts, Bob Michel and Bob Dole, the Russian leader noted, almost casually, that "we are all looking forward to President Bush's re-election."
Not quite, interrupted Speaker of the House Foley, telling a surprised Boris Yeltsin that while everybody likes George Bush, some not only weren't "looking forward" to his re-election but didn't think it would happen.
The anecdote is of little consequence except to show how stunningly naive Mr. Yeltsin is about American politics.
More significant, however, as President Clinton sits down for talks in Moscow today, is that it just may be that the Clinton administration has been similarly naive about Russian politics.
The administration considers its Russian policy a shining success in a sea of foreign policy problems.
The strong showing of neo-fascists and communists in last month's parliamentary elections may have shocked the Clintonites, but it didn't change their self-congratulatory posture.
The chief architect of this policy, Russia expert and former Time magazine editor Strobe Talbott, newly designated as deputy secretary of state, has won fawning reviews from most of his former colleagues in the diplomatic press corps.
Yet the administration clearly underestimated the economic disaster in Russia; it's still unsure of how to spend much of the $3 billion it got Congress to appropriate for Russian aid last year; the Russians shamefully have been given a veto over some security arrangements in Eastern Europe, and our policy rests almost exclusively on Boris Yeltsin.
Most of the administration talk about economic progress there is a mirage.
In a country with no modern history of markets, it's not surprising that when you start eliminating central planning what you get is a black, not a free, market.
Russia, as Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan noted in a speech earlier this year, lacks the "rudimentary institutions," most prominently a legal system, to convert to a market-based system, meaning that any transition is likely to be "significantly stretched out."
The physical infrastructure, notes Wellesley College Russia expert Marshall Goldman, is dreadful: More than 70% of all Russian factories are models of inefficiency, with work forces of more than 1,000 employees.
The predictable result is rampant inflation and negative growth.
The Russians, the line goes, are terrific at converting steel into scrap.
One prominent economist, after spending time in Russia, concluded there's one solution: Send 150 million people away for a few years, raze the country and start from scratch.
This makes the debate about economic shock therapy in Russia -- after the parliamentary elections Mr. Talbott was said to advocate more therapy and less shock -- a false choice.
The advocates cite Poland as a success.
But Poland has a history of markets: More than three-quarters of the farms there never were collectivized, and there was a smaller but not insignificant retail market.
The therapy -- with-less-shock proponents ignore the example of Ukraine, which makes Russia look good.
Thus the inescapable conclusion is that economically as well as politically, what the U.S. does will have, at most, a marginal effect, which raises questions about why we're pouring billions of dollars into this mess.
Most of the $3 billion appropriated in 1993 lies in limbo.
One preliminary plan called for 15% of the money earmarked for military housing relocation to be set aside for local Russian housing officials.
Congressional experts pointed out that this would constitute nothing more than a payoff; in a tight fiscal climate at home few Americans will cotton to spending millions of their tax dollars to bribe corrupt Russians.
Similarly, there's widespread speculation about huge ripoffs by the ubiquitous "consultants."
The simple fact is that Russia is an economic midget, ill-equipped to receive large amounts of outside aid.
Trade is a pretty decent measure of economic standing and the U.S. has more commerce with 38 nations; Russia ranks behind Denmark and slightly ahead of Costa Rica.
While Strobe Talbott proclaims Russia as our top foreign policy priority, Bill Clinton says economics is the pre-eminent international issue; there's a conflict.
It's also incongruous that a country so economically decimated is an imperialistic threat, notwithstanding its history.
For the foreseeable future, Russia may be a nuisance, sometimes even a dangerous one, to its newly independent immediate neighbors, but the possible re-emergence of a super-power threat is ludicrous.
Someday Russia, with considerable resources, may be an important country again.
But that hardly rests solely on Boris Yeltsin's success, as the administration would have you believe.
The Russian leader is a brave man.
He thrives on crises.
But he shows much less talent for the coalition crafting or constituency building essential to governance; indeed, he seems more like American politicians who thrive on running for office but are restless serving.
It's dicey to so totally base policy on this one man.
There still are important issues.
This third-rate country has 25,000 nuclear weapons.
Mr. Talbott, and top Defense Department officials, deserve credit for negotiating a nuclear pact with Ukraine; let's hope it will stick.
It's essential that further dismantling and destruction of nuclear weapons take place in Russia and other former Soviet states.
We ought to give whatever money it takes to facilitate that.
The U.S. also ought to remove barriers to Russian exports and help fund and launch new businesses as opposed to trying to privatize bloated existing structures.
But when President Clinton, as he did the other day, predicts that Russia is on the way to again becoming "a very great nation," it's a delusion.
In the same session with columnists, the president suggested that it would be good to tailor the administration's Russian policy to a slogan that would fit on a bumper sticker: "I think our slogan would be there needs to be more reform and more social service support -- more attempts to build a safety net to deal with the consequences of reform, but not an attempt to slow down the reform effort. . . .
Then if you said therapy, then you'd have all kinds of other ambiguous things you could get in there."
The president may need not only a better slogan but a more realistic policy.
