When the earthquake knocked out the power to Amgen Inc.'s sprawling headquarters complex last month, backup generators here instantly kicked in to keep the biotechnology company's two blood-cell growth drugs flowing without a hiccup.
But Amgen has had less success preparing investors for a different kind of natural phenomenon -- the slowdown in its once explosive growth.
After 12 years that saw a tiny biotech boutique mushroom into a global pharmaceutical company with $1.37 billion in 1993 revenue, Amgen this year is looking for more modest revenue growth in the "double-digit" range.
After company officials shared this view with securities analysts during a conference call last week, the analysts translated it into a revenue growth projection of roughly 15% -- more in line with growth at traditional drug companies such as Pfizer Inc. or Merck & Co. than at biotech's bellwether.
After analysts broadcast their lower 1994 sales and profit projections, disappointed investors rushed for the exits.
Since Feb. 1, when market jitters began to spread in the hours before the analysts' call, Amgen shares have fallen about 14% from $48.75 a share, a $900 million loss in market value.
Yesterday, Amgen closed at $41.75, down 50 cents in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
The shares are down 85% since late 1992, when the Clintons began to attack high drug prices, sending pharmaceutical and biotech companies' stocks into a tailspin.
"Amgen isn't living up to the vision of unlimited growth that people want," says Teena Lerner, a Lehman Brothers analyst and longtime Amgen booster.
"The new reality is that Amgen is a company with a more conventional profile, but still very respectable growth of between 15% and 16%."
The immediate concern is that sales of Amgen's Neupogen drug, a cancer treatment used as an adjunct to chemotherapy, aren't rising as quickly as expected.
Furthermore, its probable next new product, consensus interferon for treatment of hepatitis C, is still at least two years away and isn't a clear winner.
And most galling to Amgen, some former employees and other critics charge that the company is suffering from creeping bureaucracy and the loss of talented scientists.
"I wouldn't agree with that assessment," retorts Gordon Binder, chairman and chief executive officer, in an interview from Switzerland.
"There was a time when the CEO knew the names of all the employees' spouses and children; those times are gone, never to return.
But the fundamentals of our culture are still in place."
Some outsiders agree that Amgen is doing exactly what it should be at this stage: building its long-term commercial base.
By "partnering" with such smaller biotech companies as Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. and closely held Sugen Inc., Amgen is "re-energizing itself and staying focused," says G. Steven Burrill, senior adviser to Ernst & Young's high-technology and life sciences practice.
Amgen is trying to reassure Wall Street that any near-term Neupogen weakness will be made up by greater-than-expected sales of its other drug, a red-blood cell stimulator called Epogen.
But long term, Epogen growth is severely constrained by an old licensing agreement that gives Amgen's nemesis, Johnson & Johnson, rights to most potential new markets such as treatment of the AIDS disease.
Amgen receives royalties from J&J's sales of the drug, sold under other brand names in the U.S. and Europe as a treatment for other diseases.
Amgen's market is restricted to the roughly 140,000 U.S. patients receiving kidney dialysis treatment.
By contrast, Amgen has kept most rights to Neupogen, sold in the U.S. and many foreign countries, including Canada, Australia, and throughout Europe.
The spread of new high-dose chemotherapy cancer therapies has spurred demand for Neupogen, which dominates its market with a 93% share, Amgen says.
Last year, Neupogen sales grew 32% to $719.4 million, of which a quarter are outside the U.S. Epogen sales climbed nearly 16% to $586.9 million.
Many drug companies, including Amgen, blame the health-care reform debate for discouraging physicians from using expensive new drugs.
At a cost of more than $100 a day, Neupogen can add $6,000 to $7,000 to a chemotherapy treatment, and Amgen calculates that less than a third of patients who could benefit from Neupogen are getting it.
But medical oncologists believe the health-care debate is only part of the story.
It's true that doctors are being forced to think harder about cost effectiveness, even of "revolutionary" drugs such as Neupogen, says Cary Presant, president of the California Cancer Medical Center in West Covina, Calif.
"But Neupogen usage also could fall as doctors learn more about which patients can benefit most from the drug, and when the most appropriate times are to use it," he says.
Amgen hopes that Neupogen growth will spurt again in 1996, based on results of continuing human tests designed to prove the drug's effectiveness as a powerful new antibiotic.
Neupogen "would look very much like a new product" if it were approved for infectious disease, Mr. Binder says.
Since Amgen began testing Neupogen for this broad use, the enthusiasm of some analysts has waned as they learned of competitive drugs under development.
Competition is also a concern with consensus interferon, which some critics denigrate as a "me-too" product.
"The data aren't compelling enough to show that it is that much more potent against hepatitis C than alpha interferon," the current therapy, says Larry Bloom, a Dillon, Read & Co. analyst.
Some analysts believe that Amgen's next best shot at another home-run product is brain-derived neurotrophic factor, or BDNF, a brain-nerve growth factor that is considered a promising future treatment for Lou Gehrig's disease, Alzheimer's, and Parkinson's.
"This will be bigger than Epogen or Neupogen," with sales starting as early as 1996 and reaching $2 billion by the year 2000, Mr. Bloom predicts.
Profit would be split with Regeneron, a Tarrytown, N.Y., biotech company that is Amgen's partner in developing BDNF and another molecule.
Amgen spent $255 million, or 17% of total revenue, on research and development last year, including a big chunk on outside collaborations.
Those outside efforts cheer some Amgen critics, including former employees.
To succeed, biotech companies "need to entertain new ideas and I don't think that situation exists at Amgen.
There isn't really a support for creativity," says Krisztina Zsebo, one of the more prominent scientists to leave Amgen.
Dr. Zsebo, discoverer of the stem cell factor molecule, left two years ago and is now vice president of product development at Cell Genesys Inc., a Foster City, Calif., biotech concern.
Amgen is still attracting capable scientists, but they are people who "like working for a young Merck, who don't have to take a chance," says W. Neal Burnette, a molecular biologist who left Amgen a year ago to start his own company.
"Amgen needs to develop a new type of intrapreneurship so it can approach the dynamism that it had in those early days that led to those two blockbuster drugs.
If it can, maybe we'll see those days again."
