General Electric Co. and a unit of the De Beers group were indicted by a federal grand jury on charges they conspired to fix prices of industrial diamonds in world markets.
The criminal indictment, which capped a 2 1/2-year Justice Department investigation, charges that midlevel officials of GE and De Beers exchanged proposed price lists for industrial diamonds in Europe in 1991 and 1992.
Also indicted by the grand jury were Peter Frenz, head of General Electric's industrial diamond business in Europe, and Philippe Liotier, a midlevel executive in the De Beers group.
No top-level officials at either GE or De Beers were named.
The indictment, filed in federal district court in Columbus, Ohio, represented a stunning reversal for GE.
Just two days ago, the former GE executive, Edward Russell, who had touched off the whole Justice Department investigation with his allegations of price-fixing, had retracted all his charges.
He also dropped his own whistle-blower lawsuit against GE in federal court in Cincinnati.
GE, based in Fairfield, Conn., has a Superabrasives division in Worthington, Ohio, which makes synthetic diamonds used in industrial cutting tools.
De Beers mines diamonds in Africa and makes synthetic diamonds in Europe; both are used in industrial tools.
De Beers is also famed for running the international cartel that fixes the prices of diamond gems, controlling the vast majority of diamond sales in the world.
GE, in a statement issued following the indictment, said that "there has been no antitrust violation by GE or by GE employees.
GE will litigate this case and is confident it will prevail at trial."
De Beers couldn't be reached for comment after the indictment, but earlier in the day, a company spokesman in Johannesburg, South Africa, reiterated the company's earlier denials of any collusion with GE.
"We are very competitive with GE," he said.
Messrs. Frenz and Liotier couldn't be reached for comment.
De Beers does business just about everywhere in the world except in the U.S. De Beers has refused to cooperate with the Justice Department investigation, Justice Department officials say.
The accusations by Mr. Russell, the fired GE vice president, had focused on a top GE official flying to London in 1991, allegedly to arrange a price-fixing scheme.
But the Justice Department investigation soon turned in a different direction.
The Justice Department investigation concentrated on midlevel executives of the two companies.
According to the indictment, GE's Mr. Frenz, based in Germany, provided Mr. Liotier, an official of a De Beers unit called Diamant Boart in Belgium, with advance information on GE's future price lists.
The indictment states that De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. of South Africa and De Beers Centenary AG of Switzerland, with linked corporate ownership, control companies that both produce industrial diamonds and purchase industrial diamonds to make industrial tools.
The De Beers unit indicted was De Beers Centenary of Switzerland.
The De Beers unit purchasing diamonds in order to make tools is Diamant Boart, the indictment says.
Industry executives say Diamant Boart is GE's biggest customer for synthetic diamonds in Europe.
"Frenz of GE provided the GE future pricing information to Liotier of Diamant Boart under the pretext and cover that Liotier was receiving the information for the sole benefit of Diamant Boart, an industrial diamond customer, rather than for the benefit of the industrial diamond manufacturing interests of . . .
De Beers," a competitor, the indictment says.
Mr. Liotier reciprocated, providing GE through Mr. Frenz advance information on De Beers industrial diamond prices, the indictment adds.
The indictment specifies that in November 1991, Mr. Frenz faxed to Mr. Liotier GE's plans for certain price increases.
The indictment says the plans hadn't been circulated among GE management and hadn't been finalized, and GE had directed that the pricing plans not be disclosed to customers even when finalized.
A month later, the indictment continues, Mr. Liotier provided Mr. Frenz data on De Beers' future prices, and Mr. Frenz then faxed this data to GE Superabrasives' international sales manager in Ohio.
Mr. Frenz's cover memo on the fax sent to Ohio, according to the indictment, stated: "Liotier of Diamant Boart . . . informed me about planned price increases of De Beers effective early 1992.
The attached information was given to him confidentially.
Please treat the information carefully. . . .
Liotier is supporting a price increase and would like to know by Dec. 18, 1991, at 18:00 hours European time whether GES (GE Superabrasives) is going to follow."
In January 1992, GE did announce price increases, the indictment states, and in January and February 1992, De Beers distributors also announced price increases.
On Feb. 18, 1992, the indictment adds, Mr. Frenz faxed to Mr. Liotier a confidential internal GE memo to reassure De Beers that GE had increased certain list prices in accord with the list Mr. Frenz had previously sent to Mr. Liotier.
Yesterday, GE cited the fact that Mr. Russell, who triggered the Justice Department investigation, had now withdrawn his charges.
GE added that the government "is now trying to salvage its effort by bringing a wholly circumstantial case of indirect price-fixing that's without merit."
It said Mr. Frenz, the European GE employee indicted along with GE, acted "properly under antitrust compliance practices in receiving competitive information from a customer . . . and forwarding it to the pricing decision makers."
Mr. Frenz, GE added, "had no pricing authority."
It said that GE Superabrasives employees in Worthington, Ohio, who had pricing authority "at all times acted unilaterally in pricing decisions."
GE said that list-price differences between GE and De Beers industrial diamonds were in fact "greater" after the pricing action cited in the indictment.
In comparable saw diamond products, for instance, average differences in list prices "tripled," GE said.
Industrial diamonds are a $600 million a year industry, dominated by GE and De Beers.
These synthetic diamonds are used in cutting, sawing and other machining tools for road construction, auto manufacturing, mining and oil drilling.
For GE, industrial diamond products accounted for 0.5% of last year's revenue of $60 billion.
Under the one-count indictment, brought under the Sherman Antitrust Act, the maximum penalty for a corporation would be a fine of $10 million, or twice the financial gain from the crime or twice the loss to victims, whichever was greater.
For an individual, the maximum would be three years in jail and a fine of $350,000, or twice the perpetrator's gain or victim's loss, whichever was greater.
