Two months after Michael J. Conway was ousted as chief executive of America West Airlines, he has been hired as a consultant by an investment firm seeking to gain control of the airline.
His new employer, New York money manager Michael Steinhardt, hopes Mr. Conway can shore up the $200 million bid he's leading to buy the Phoenix carrier, which is in bankruptcy proceedings.
If successful, Mr. Conway would avenge his ignominious departure -- he was fired on New Year's Eve -- and could once again run the company he helped create in 1983.
The move is the latest twist in a bitter corporate saga for control of the nation's ninth-largest airline -- once considered a loser but now a profitable enterprise.
Mr. Steinhardt's offer to Mr. Conway underscores his resolve in winning a bidding war against a deep-pocketed rival.
And it provides another opportunity for Mr. Conway to continue his acrimonious feud with America West's chairman, William A. Franke, a Phoenix turnaround specialist who joined the company in 1992 at investors' behest.
Mr. Franke and the 10-member board, which he controls, support a $220 million bid led by Fort Worth, Texas, investors David Bonderman and James Coulter, who have said they will keep current management.
U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Robert Mooreman will determine the winning bidder -- and thus decide which strong-willed executive prevails.
Mr. Conway's reappearance doesn't surprise associates.
"Mike started that airline with two other people, and it's his life," says Juan O'Callahan, an aviation consultant and former America West board member.
The 48-year-old Mr. Conway is an accountant whose trademark has been tenacity.
His face reddens during arguments, and he drives home points with four-letter words.
A plaque in his America West office read: "Thank you for holding your breath while I smoke."
Mr. Conway is still smarting from his dismissal.
"If I drove America West into bankruptcy, why did the board keep me there until I got the company into record profits?" he asks.
A spokesman for Mr. Franke said he had no comment on Mr. Conway's new position.
Mr. Conway says he wants to help America West emerge from Chapter 11, where it has operated for 2 1/2 years, but he has no guarantee that he will run the carrier if Mr. Steinhardt's bid succeeds.
Charles Davidson, a partner at Mr. Steinhardt's firm, says Mr. Conway was hired because of his industry insights.
Mr. Steinhardt's bid "absolutely" won't be affected by the losses that the funds he manages have suffered in recent weeks in world markets, says Gary Fragin, a general partner of Steinhardt Partners.
"One thing has nothing to do with the other.
We are very liquid here."
But Mr. Conway may be riding a losing horse.
Last week America West's board unanimously selected the bid led by Messrs. Bonderman and Coulter, principals in Air Partners L.P., which has a 28% stake in Continental Airlines.
It also has the backing of America West's equity committee and certain secured creditors.
Mr. Franke says he expects the bid to be approved by the bankruptcy court.
But Mr. Steinhardt's bid is backed by unsecured creditors.
Their support is critical for a reorganization plan to be approved, although Judge Mooreman could confirm the Bonderman-led plan if he believes it will pay all creditor claims.
Mr. Conway says an alliance with Continental will result in a loss of identity for America West because of the Houston-based carrier's size -- it has four times the revenue of America West.
He notes that Continental is losing money.
"If new routes open up," Mr. Conway asks, "who will get them -- Continental or America West?"
A spokesman for Mr. Bonderman says: "It's our intention to keep America West independent and give management control; that's exactly what happened at Continental."
Mr. Conway's alliance with Mr. Steinhardt prompted sharp comment from foes.
Doug Combs, who helped organize his fellow America West pilots in their successful drive to join the Airline Pilots Association, says Mr. Conway's mismanagement galvanized their efforts.
"Why doesn't he just buy dynamite and throw it into corporate headquarters?"
Mr. Combs asks.
But Mr. Conway has supporters.
After he was fired, 42 America West managers signed letters of protest to the board.
Mr. Conway notes America West's turnaround came in the two years he was chief executive; 1993 earnings were $37.2 million.
Previously, he was president and chief operating officer.
"As CEO, I did a lot of tragic things that had to be done," Mr. Conway says, referring to 3,500 layoffs, pay cuts and fleet reduction.
"But 11,000 jobs were saved.
Now America West is positioned better than at any time in its history.
And at the very point when investors get interested and come to the dance, to be summarily dismissed . . ."
He concludes: "The job is unfinished."
