President Clinton's new budget raises the possibility of sharp changes in bank regulation in order to reduce potential future risks to the financial system.
The changes include new accounting standards that would require banks to value their assets at market, rather than historical, prices.
This change has been recommended by the General Accounting Office, but is opposed by the banking industry and the Federal Reserve Board.
In addition, the budget suggests that extremely healthy banks could bolster their income in the face of mounting competition by underwriting the distribution of equity securities and insurance.
This expansion of bank powers would require a repeal of Depression-era laws that separate the banking and securities industries.
Both these suggested changes are discussed, but not actually proposed, in a volume of analysis that accompanies the budget Mr. Clinton sent to Congress yesterday.
They go well beyond previously stated administration positions.
The renewed health of the banking system is generating a budget windfall, but the administration warns that a failure in the fast-paced financial-derivatives market could cause future budget strains.
Agencies that insure bank and thrift deposits will take in $36.6 billion more than they pay out in the five years starting in fiscal year 1995, which starts next Oct. 1, the budget notes.
With bank and thrift profits running at record levels, financial failures are down sharply from several years ago.
Collections from deposit-insurance premiums and the sales of assets of failed banks and thrifts will run sharply higher than costs to the funds.
But the budget warns that the health of the banking system faces possible challenges, including potentially a jolt from a bank failure tied to problems in the market for derivatives.
These are complex hedging instruments that banks, brokers and their customers use to defray the risk of changes in interest rates, stock prices, foreign-exchange rates and commodities prices.
"The difficulty of overseeing these transactions, when coupled with the moral hazard created by deposit insurance, presents an opportunity for abuse within the banking industry" that could lead to losses that "increase the exposure of the federal government to deposit insurance claims," a budget analysis says.
All bank regulators are beefing up their supervision of the multitrillion dollar derivatives market, and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen recently created an interagency group, including the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodities Futures Trading Commission, to monitor derivatives.
The budget also notes that bank income could be squeezed by rising interest rates and by tougher competition from mutual funds, securities firms and other nonbank competitors.
Aside from allowing sound banks to underwrite securities and insurance, the budget repeats the administration's view that banks should be allowed to operate nationwide branch systems.
