Auto makers recalled 11 million vehicles in 1993, the most since 1977, to fix a range of defects.
Included in the recalls were some of the most popular vehicles in the U.S., including some with sterling reputations for quality such as the Honda Accord, the Ford Taurus and the Chevy pickup.
But the recalls also hit brands with shakier quality records: Volkswagen, Hyundai, Audi and Jaguar -- all of which recalled more than twice as many vehicles as they sold last year.
Because of problems with its popular pickup trucks and midsized vans, General Motors Corp. alone accounted for more than four million of the vehicles recalled.
"We sell the most," a spokesman says, adding that GM's two largest recalls were for vehicles designed more than a decade ago.
The same is true for Ford, whose two big recalls of Tauruses and pickups accounted for most of its recalls.
"I don't really want to relate it to quality," says Jerry Burt, Ford's recall manager.
"There were a couple of problems that covered high-volume products over multiple model years."
When recalls are figured as a percentage of vehicles sold, Honda Motor Co. topped the list of the six largest auto makers, recalling about 250,000 more cars than it sold last year.
The recall came after Honda had already recalled 900,000 vehicles in 1992 for the same problem: gas leaks in older cars that can cause fires.
The industry's recall total of 11 million vehicles last year was up sharply from 10.1 million in 1992 and 9.7 million the year before, according to Auto Service Monitor Inc., an Ohio-based consulting firm.
It was the highest level since 1977, when 12.9 million vehicles were recalled, says Noland Harris, founder of the Auto Service firm.
But automotive engineers and analysts bristle at the suggestion that the near-record number of recalls means vehicles are declining in quality.
"Part of it is simply due to the fact that vehicles are becoming more complex," says Francois J. Castaing, chief engineer at Chrysler Corp.
"There is no mystery.
Computers and electronic systems are more complex, and we have more complicated safety systems."
Already this year, Chrysler has had a run of recalls.
It has recalled its new Neon twice, even though the car just went on sale Jan. 1.
But last year, the auto maker recalled only 424,690 vehicles.
"We've been doing pretty well over time," says Mr. Castaing.
He says the 1993 total was less than half the number of vehicles Chrysler recalled in 1992.
As a percentage of sales, Chrysler performed best among the Big Three, recalling only 20% of the number of vehicles it sold while both GM and Ford recalled more than 80%.
But some analysts caution that Chrysler could be hurt by this year's recalls.
"The time to be alarmed is when -- early in the product cycle -- there is a series of recalls," says George Hoffer, a professor of business at Virginia Commonwealth University.
"A product can get tagged as a lemon, and then anything bad about it gets magnified."
By contrast, Mr. Hoffer says, last year's recalls of 1986-1993 Ford Tauruses and 1986-1987 Honda Accords haven't hurt the vehicles' images much because they have been on the road for years and already have good reputations.
Recalls do hurt makers like Audi and Hyundai, both of which have seen their sales plummet in recent years, partially because of poor quality reputations.
"There's a perception that recalls correlate with overall vehicle quality," Mr. Hoffer says.
Audi recalled 159,000 vehicles in 1993 and sold less than one-tenth that number -- only 12,528.
Hyundai, meanwhile, sold 108,796 vehicles but had to recall 515,000 1986-1989 Excels with manual transmissions.
The transmissions sometimes jam, causing the vehicles to stop suddenly.
But despite the embarrassing glitches that accounted for many recalls, some analysts say the large number of recalls last year results from a growing concern for quality, not a growing number of problems.
"Quality has improved for everybody," says J. Ferron, a senior partner at J.D. Power & Associates, an automotive consulting firm.
He says that auto makers have learned that they can increase customer loyalty by handling a recall well and are becoming more aggressive about recalling vehicles.
"The increase in recalls says more about auto makers' overall attitude toward customers," Mr. Ferron says, "than it does about vehicle quality."
