Japan's political chaos took its toll on the Tokyo stock market.
Shares tumbled 4.3% during Monday morning's session, hurt by Friday's unexpected rejection in Parliament of legislation to reform the nation's political system.
The sharp selloff reflected the cloudy outlook for further economic stimulus in the country, and some analysts said the new uncertainty surrounding political reform could trigger continued selling.
The most pessimistic of them said the benchmark Nikkei 225-stock index could fall 15% or more before the market reaches bottom.
Stock prices had risen on Friday; the parliamentary vote came after the market closed.
The selling began at the start of trading Monday, and by the end of the morning session the Nikkei average stood at 18471.25, down 836.18 points from Friday's close.
The turnabout was all the more wrenching because prior to Monday, the stock market had risen 11% since the start of the year.
Foreign-fund managers had piled in, confident that Japanese politicians would pass the political-reform legislation, thus clearing the way for billions of dollars in sorely needed economic-stimulus spending.
How far the market falls may depend on whether some kind of economic-stimulus package can be cobbled together.
Some analysts expect the political turmoil to delay any economic measures for several weeks.
"There's a 70% chance there won't be a political compromise" in Parliament, said Shigeru Akiba, director of yen-equity trading at UBS Securities Ltd.
If an election is called, he said, the market "is headed down."
Not everyone was as bearish.
"We'll probably lose 500 to 1,000 points on the Nikkei, and then people will sit back and decide what they want to do," said Mark Fawcett, a fund manager with Indosuez Gartmore Asset Management (Japan) Ltd.
Indeed, a few brave souls said any decline could present a buying opportunity.
"An event like this really tests the underlying strength or weakness of the market," determining whether the recent rally was justified by something more than expectations of additional government spending, said Peter Tasker, adviser to Kleinwort Benson International Inc.
"If there were fundamental forces driving the market higher" since the start of the year, Mr. Tasker said, "it won't go down too much, and maybe bounce back by the end of the week.
If not, it will fall and keep going."
Even bears such as Einosuke Yoshino, senior vice president of Capital Management, aren't giving up on Japan altogether.
Although the fund manager said, "I can't take a constructive attitude about the market for two months," he added that his company "will buy when it's cheaper."
He thinks the Nikkei could bottom at about 16400 before then.
For weeks, Tokyo brokers had bragged of taking in more overseas orders than they could place.
In the wake of Friday's unexpected vote in parliament, "the market will definitely move lower, but there are willing buyers who missed the boat," said Kathy Matsui, strategist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities (Japan) Ltd.
"Foreigners are still positive" about the Japanese market, Mr. Akiba said, "provided there's no snap election, and some kind of economic package.
We've even seen a few foreign buying orders at Friday's prices."
The foreign buying may come up against a formidable amount of Japanese selling, however, as companies look to their March 31 book closing.
With economic stimulus now likely to be delayed, companies may rush to take profits while stock prices are still high.
In Friday's trading, prior to the parliamentary vote, the Nikkei average rose 123.51 points, to 19307.43.
Friday's first-section volume was estimated at 450 million shares, down from 562 million shares Thursday.
Gainers outnumbered decliners, 633-424.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of first-section issues, which added 9.64 on Thursday, advanced 19.12 points, or 1.2%, to 1569.91.
London share prices rose on strong economic data and some technical trading, while Frankfurt equities sank under pressure of profit-taking in a nervous market.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 114.56, up 0.18, reflecting an increase in Asia/Pacific markets and drops in markets in the Americas and Europe.
Heavy-construction stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 93.21, up 1.82, or 2%, with Sumitomo Construction Co. of Japan posting a 7.5% gain in its local currency.
Toy stocks trailed, at 91.78, down 2.40, or 2.6%, with Electronic Arts Inc. of the U.S. sliding 4.7% in local currency.
Most other major Asian and Pacific markets finished higher on Friday.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 Index climbed 14.2 points to 3484.2.
The FT 30 Index gained 9.4 to 2668.5.
Volume totaled 979.9 million shares, off from 1.11 billion on Thursday.
Shares were jolted upward by a report that Britain's gross domestic product rose 0.7% in the fourth quarter from the third quarter and was up 2.5% from a year earlier, slightly more than expected.
The government also reported that the December growth in the M-4 money-supply measure exceeded market estimates.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index of blue-chips, which fell 18.18 points on Thursday, dropped 40.59 points.
Investors were disappointed by the German central bank's decision Thursday to leave key German interest rates unchanged.
The market was also skittish as players adjusted positions for Friday's "double witching," the final trading day for options on stocks and stock futures.
Other European markets were mixed.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
