The Internal Revenue Service is planning to audit as many as 200 municipal-bond issues and is trying to keep the effort from rattling investor confidence in the muni market.
"The mere fact that an audit is under way could have a spill-over effect on the ability of an issuer to sell new bonds," said Marcus Owens, the IRS official spearheading the agency's initiative to beef up municipal-bond enforcement.
The plans for audits were disclosed by Mr. Owens on Monday at an American Bar Association gathering in Houston.
Yesterday he elaborated on the agency's new approach to muni enforcement at a meeting here of the Government Finance Officers Association.
He said the audits aim to assess the level of voluntary compliance with laws and regulations governing tax-exempt bonds.
Separate audits will address specific suspected problems, said Mr. Owens, who added that 30 such audits already are under way and that the IRS has another 100 or so leads or complaints regarding suspected problem issues that need to be looked into.
Mr. Owens said the agency will strive to limit problems for bond-issuing jurisdictions whose bonds are being audited.
He noted that the tax code's penalty for noncompliance is to declare the bonds taxable and that the by-the-book remedy is for the agency to tax bondholders.
He said this is "a fairly drastic step," but one that the IRS "has taken and will take again."
But the favored alternative to taxing bondholders, the IRS official said, is for the agency to enter into settlements with issuers of "bad" bonds.
Under such agreements, the IRS receives certain funds and agrees to leave bondholders unscathed.
To limit any adverse spill-over effects from the disclosure of an audit, Mr. Owens suggested that the IRS and the issuer could make it clear up-front to bondholders and potential investors that any tax problems identified during a bond audit would be remedied by a settlement, not by taxing bondholders.
Mr. Owens said the IRS is committed to having "a very real" enforcement program and the random audit of up to 200 muni issues is needed to get a statistically reliable understanding of the level of voluntary compliance.
He said the IRS won't disclose the existence of specific audits, but noted that securities law considerations may force bond issuers to disclose they're being audited or that word of the audit could be leaked.
And he said some investors could shy away from bonds of a jurisdiction being audited by the IRS.
The IRS "has the assurance of bond lawyers that everything is just fine" in terms of muni-market compliance, Mr. Owens said.
But he added that he takes such assurances "with a large grain of salt."
He explained that criticism of the IRS's previous muni-enforcement efforts by the General Accounting Office and the desires of IRS Commissioner Margaret Richardson led last summer to a complete reordering of the agency's muni-enforcement efforts.
"We are minding the store now," said Michael Bailey, an IRS official who accompanied Mr. Owens, adding that "there are very significant dollars at stake."
