Three Indonesian business groups plan to invest up to $900 million in a Jakarta apartment complex consisting of 48 towers of 24 stories each.
The groups plan to build the Kemayoran Golf Apartments on a site that was once part of a former airport in northeastern Jakarta near the Java Sea.
The groups signed a cooperation agreement Wednesday with the state agency overseeing development of the site.
The apartment complex will join an existing trade exhibition hall in what the agency calls Kemayoran New City.
The three investors are PT Kemayoranland, part of the Napan Group; PT Sari Orchid Parama of the manufacturing and finance-based Gadjah Tunggal Group; and PT Amcol Agungpermana, which distributes Sony products in Indonesia.
Napan Group, which has a property arm, is led by businessman Henry Pribadi, who has other ventures with timber tycoon Prajogo Pangestu and President Suharto's second son, Bambang Trihatmodjo.
The Amcol director who signed Wednesday's agreement, Sugianto Kusuma, is also a co-investor with Mr. Bambang in a company appointed by the government to own and manage Indonesia's new generation of Palapa communications satellites.
J.F. Ma'roef, executive director of PT Kemayoranland, said plans call for the investors to each build 16 towers in the Kemayoran Golf Apartments project.
He said each group will likely invest about $300 million and that construction should begin in early 1995.
Within five years, he said, all of the towers, totaling more than 5,000 units, should be completed.
One Jakarta property consultant said the complex is "awfully ambitious" and "it's very hard to see how that many units will be taken up."
Mr. Ma'roef agreed the project is ambitious, but predicted demand for the apartments "will be strong."
Jakarta's property market, particularly for apartments, is growing with many smaller projects already under construction.
The Kemayoran Golf Apartments investors expect that Indonesia will soon finish amending land laws to allow foreigners to own apartments.
Apartment living is not popular with Indonesians, but Mr. Ma'roef said it is becoming accepted because of traffic problems.
He said financing plans for the apartment project are being made, but no details were available.
