In recent years, the ubiquitous Energizer Bunny interrupted commercials for such "products" as Alarm! soap, Darnitol pain reliever, and Rottenbrau beer.
The joke is on the consumer in those ads, because the products don't exist.
Now, the pink and white creature is popping up in an unusual print advertisement for a real product: Coca-Cola's diet Coke.
It marks the bunny's first appearance in a legitimate ad for a product other than Eveready batteries.
Teaming different products in a single ad is unconventional.
When it happens, however, the products usually are related.
Woolite detergent, for example, crops up in advertisements for apparel, such as Perry Ellis menswear.
And increasingly, food products feature more than one brand name, a practice known as co-branding, such as Fat Free Cranberry Newtons from Nabisco shown with Ocean Spray cranberries.
But the diet Coke ad, which is appearing in April issues of Sassy and Seventeen magazines, is unorthodox and risky.
In fact, the two-page ad could confuse the casual reader.
What is being advertised?
A battery, or a soft drink?
At first glance, it isn't clear.
The use of the five-year-old bunny is also questionable because the bunny's appeal seems to be waning.
Says Allen A. McCusker, president of Canaan Parish Group, a marketing firm in New Canaan, Conn.: "It doesn't make any sense.
Diet Coke wants to capitalize on an icon that is passe.
And they're placing it in teenage magazines, where fads fade the fastest."
Video Storyboard Tests, a New York company that ranks the popularity of commercials through consumer polling, says the Eveready bunny ads dropped out of the Top 10 last year for the first time since 1989.
"I think consumers are fed up with the bunny," says David Vadehra, president of Video Storyboard.
Diet Coke marketers say the inclusion of the bunny is part of its overall advertising strategy to show how its beverage can be enjoyed during the day for refreshment.
The ad features a diet Coke vending machine on a beach.
Although the bunny is walking away from it, footprints leave the impression that the cotton-tail animal, wearing his trademark sunglasses, stopped for a diet Coke before continuing on his way.
(The bunny doesn't hold a can of the beverage in his paw.
And there isn't a garbage can visible.
One can only hope that the bunny isn't a litterbug.)
"As soon as we saw the ad from Interpublic Group's Lowe & Partners, it was thumbs up," says Nancy Gibson, diet Coke's world-wide brand director.
"We don't think people will be confused.
The ad forces you to stop and study it."
A can of diet Coke and the slogan, "This is Refreshment," appear in the lower right-hand corner.
Still, some experts on brand marketing are puzzled by the partnership.
"I'm surprised that the leading soft drink company has to resort to leveraging other people's icons," says John Lister, chief executive officer and creative director of Lister Butler, a New York consulting firm.
The bunny ad is just one of a flurry of print ads from diet Coke.
The strategy mirrors that of the television campaign, which has seven different spots.
Ms. Gibson says there will ultimately be about a dozen diet Coke print ads, each tailored to different demographics and magazines.
For instance, an ad for the New Yorker will feature a cartoon showing a man riding in a taxi while reading the magazine and holding a caffeine-free diet Coke.
The humor lies in the cab driver's polite attitude.
Another ad, produced especially for Glamour, mimics the magazine's "Do's and Don't's" column that features fashion highlights and flubs.
Other ads will appear in such diverse magazines as National Geographic, Architectural Digest, Rolling Stone and YM.
Diet Coke is aggressively advertising to try to reverse declining sales.
According to the publication Beverage Digest, diet Coke had a 7.1% share of the soft-drink market in the four-week period ended Jan. 16, a drop of one-tenth of a percentage point, compared with the same period a year earlier.
Diet Pepsi's share, in comparison, dropped two-tenths of a percentage point to 5% in the same period.
Diet Coke marketing executives decline to comment on their ad budget.
However, it is said to be in excess of the $60 million that Competitive Media Reporting says the brand spent in 1992.
The bunny ad may be used in a worldwide campaign, including some countries where the beverage is called Coke Light.
The ad is a win-win for Eveready, which didn't have to pay for the added exposure.
The products don't share the same ad agency.
While diet Coke ads are produced by Lowe & Partners; Ralston Purina's Eveready Energizer is handled by Chiat/Day.
This outside employment for the Energizer Bunny may not be the last time that diet Coke borrows a character.
"There are some other concepts along this line," says Ms. Gibson.
"There are other icons we're considering."
She declines to be specific.
Who knows?
The day could come when Tony the Tiger, the Pillsbury doughboy or even the Coke Classic polar bear will take the Energizer bunny's place.
And that day may come sooner than diet Coke realizes.
In new Energizer ads, a plot is afoot to knock off the bunny.
For some people, that day couldn't come soon enough.
Pundits who predicted that Tonya Harding had no future in advertising were wrong.
Tower Records is featuring a photo of the controversial figure skater in New York newspaper ads for Tower Clearance Outlet stores.
Next to Ms. Harding's picture is a cartoon balloon saying, "Unbeatable bargains that will bring you to your knees. . . ."
Other pun-heavy lines include: "Knee jerk reaction genuine reductions" and "The final blow."
The ad, appearing in the Village Voice and NY Press weekly newspapers, ends with a groaner of a tagline: "Better leg it down to the Tower Clearance Outlet, or you'll be skating on thin ice!"
Produced without Ms. Harding's cooperation, the ad was meant as a "topical" attention-getter, says Louise Solomon, a copywriter for Tower, a unit of MTS Inc., Sacramento, Calif.
"We don't want to offend anyone.
It's just a way of presenting something jolly and interesting.
I hope she feels the same way."
While Ms. Harding couldn't be reached for comment, her attorney, Dennis Rawlinson, isn't amused.
"We're experiencing a number of negative ads where her likeness, or name, is used in a negative light," Mr. Rawlinson says.
"To the extent that that type of advertising is being published, we're considering appropriate legal action against the parties involved."
Carillon Importers, a unit of Grand Metropolitan, said it has selected eight ad agencies to make final pitches for the $10 million-plus Stolichnaya account.
They include Mullen Advertising, of Wenham, Mass.; and seven New York shops: Ad Store; Ayer; Berenter Greenhouse & Webster; Saatchi & Saatchi's Campbell Mithun Esty; Gigante Vaz & Partners; Margeotes Fertitta & Weiss; and Waring & LaRosa.
The old Calet Hirsch & Ferrell agency previously handled the Stolichnaya account, which went into review shortly before its U.S. distributor, Monsieur Henri Wines Ltd., lost distribution rights to Carillon.
Carillon is the former distributor of Absolut vodka.
Ad Notes. . . .
TOMMY MOE: Electro Brain International Corp. and Olympic champion Tommy Moe are close to signing a contract under which Mr. Moe would endorse a sports-simulation video game, Tommy Moe's Skiing and Snow Boarding Winter Extreme, officials of the Salt Lake City company said.
The game would be compatible with Nintendo's Super NES system.
WHO'S NEWS: Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson named William Cella, 43 years old, executive vice president, broadcast and programming.
Mr. Cella was previously a vice president at ABC overseeing sports sales.
ABC is a unit of Capital Cities/ABC.
