Troops already were massing around Tiananmen Square on the night when a foreigner came to see Han Dongfang, a young worker facing jail for his part in the 1989 pro-democracy protests in Beijing.
"A lot of people will see to it that you don't just disappear," the foreigner promised Mr. Han.
Robin Munro kept that promise.
The activist with the U.S.-based human rights group Asia Watch began tracking Mr. Han's fate soon after the Tiananmen protests were suppressed.
His reports on Mr. Han's treatment in prison -- the beatings, the stabbings with acupuncture needles, the tuberculosis infection left untreated -- prompted an international outcry.
In early 1991, China backed down and freed Mr. Han.
Mr. Munro immediately arranged for an American physician to deliver a suitcase full of prescription drugs to him in Beijing.
"Whenever I think back to my time in prison, I feel like saying: `Robin, could you imagine what might have happened to me if we hadn't met that night?'" says Mr. Han, who now lives in exile here.
It was a typical performance by the 41-year-old Scotsman, whose tenacity and detailed knowledge of China's dissidents have made him one of the most effective -- and controversial -- campaigners for human rights in Asia.
At a time when human-rights concerns loom large over Sino-U.S. ties, his crusading helps shape the China-policy debate in Washington, where congressional hearings on China's human-rights record open this week.
A 1991 report he co-wrote helped draw U.S. customs scrutiny of China's exports of prison-made goods.
Harry Harding, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank, credits him with "one of the best, if not the best," reconstructions of the Tiananmen crackdown.
"We have a very high level of confidence in Robin," says Rep. John Porter, co-chairman of the U.S. Congressional Human Rights Caucus.
"When we get the latest information on China from him, we pass it along to others in Congress."
Mr. Munro got his start in human-rights work as an exchange student in China in the late 1970s, when Chinese friends were sent to prison for taking part in the "Democracy Wall" movement -- the first dissident campaign of note in 30 years of communist rule.
His first-hand knowledge makes his reports particularly poignant.
Testifying to a U.S. congressional panel last year, Mr. Murno sketched in moving and intimate detail the life of Xu Wenli, a Democracy Wall founder and one of Mr. Munro's friends who had spent 12 years in jail by then.
Skeptics wonder if Mr. Munro's passion for the cause and its people might cloud his judgment.
Some also question his focus on the negative amid improvements in China's overall quality of life.
A spokesman for China's foreign ministry says Asia Watch's reports on China are characterized by "deep prejudice."
A man who speaks of anguish and suffering with understated emotion, Mr. Munro sounds more at ease talking about the dissidents -- his "cases" -- than about himself.
"I have 2,000 names of people who disappeared, people who got 15-year prison sentences for putting up one poster.
My job is to put it all on the record," he says.
That job places him in the middle of a U.S. foreign-policy dilemma.
President Clinton has said that China must make significant progress on human rights if it is to retain its most-favored-nation trading status.
But MFN, which grants tariff concessions to major U.S. trading partners, can cut both ways.
Stripping China of it could hurt American business and consumers, while damaging Sino-U.S. ties on a broad front.
That points to an uphill fight for Asia Watch, which wants President Clinton to target China with limited trade sanctions if it fails to meet his human-rights demands.
A division of U.S.-based Human Rights Watch, a global watchdog funded by donors such as the Ford and Carnegie Foundations, Asia Watch is counting on the expertise of Mr. Munro, its Hong Kong-based director.
Mr. Munro's office is a small, dimly lit apartment that looks down on a street market.
Around him are cabinets crammed with letters from dissidents and copies of Chinese court documents.
Mr. Munro earns what he terms a modest salary.
He lives with his Taiwanese girlfriend on Lamma, an islet isolated from Hong Kong's main urban areas, passing his free time singing and playing his guitar.
A physician's son whose goal in life was to be a China scholar, he caught his first glimpse of the country in 1977.
In the wake of the Cultural Revolution, Deng Xiaoping, then on his way to supreme power, had called for a "liberation of thought."
He got an outburst of it, the best appearing as posters on a stretch of wall in central Beijing.
From its emergence in 1978 to its final suppression in 1981, Democracy Wall was an intellectual event with a relatively limited impact on the nation.
One of the more memorable occasions came one cold night in January 1979.
Mr. Munro was staying with a correspondent for Britain's Daily Telegraph.
Summoned to the wall by an anonymous call, the two men peered at hundreds of posters in the dark, not knowing what to look for.
As Mr. Munro recalls, "We were starting to feel frantic and very cold when a voice came to us from behind some bushes.
`Human rights this way, please,' it said, and in very good English, too."
Their guide had vanished by the time they reached the spot.
There, freshly pasted on the wall, was a "19-Point Human-Rights Declaration" by Ren Wanding.
At a time when all talk of human rights was prohibited, the young accountant declared free speech, thought and autonomy for ethnic minorities to be inalienable rights.
His transgression earned him four years in jail.
The West would hear from him again.
In a 1988 letter to the New York Times, he pleaded for freedom for imprisoned dissidents.
In January 1991, at the age of 45, he began serving a fresh seven-year term for dissident activity.
Seeking out the Democracy Wall people, Mr. Munro gradually gained their confidence.
He was especially close to Mr. Xu, a soldier-turned-electrician who brought together the brightest dissidents to publish a journal called the April 5th Forum.
A lucid writer, Mr. Xu thought China's best hope lay in a phased transition toward U.S.-style, two-party politics.
Mr. Munro sat in on editorial meetings, debating Mr. Xu and cheering him on.
Mr. Munro left China in late 1979.
As his friends got rounded up one by one, he dropped his academic career to join London-based Amnesty International, which monitors rights violations.
He switched in 1989 to Asia Watch, which does more than monitor.
Applying pressure on China, it lobbies intensely.
It opposed, for example, China's recent failed bid to host the Olympic Games.
Asia Watch depends heavily on evidence of human-rights violations gathered by Mr. Munro.
He was so precise in Mr. Han's case that physicians consulted by Asia Watch in the U.S. were able to tell that the dissident had contracted tuberculosis.
Prison doctors had misdiagnosed the illness as Legionnaire's disease.
Some of Mr. Munro's Democracy Wall friends haven't been as fortunate as Mr. Han.
Mr. Xu, arrested in April 1981, was released only in May 1993, on the eve of President Clinton's decision to extend MFN for a year.
His time in prison has been exceeded only by one Democracy Wall colleague, Wei Jingshan, who had dared to mock Mr. Deng as "an autocrat at heart."
Mr. Wei spent 15 years in detention, regaining his freedom in September 1993 during China's campaign to host the Olympic Games.
Mr. Munro says their fate has weighed on him through the years.
In September 1979, when he was about to leave China, Mr. Xu asked whether he thought the democracy movement had any future.
Mr. Munro replied confidently that he believed it would succeed.
In 1989, as a group of young Tiananmen protesters put the same question to him, he said: "I don't know, I'm a foreigner.
It's not for me to say."
