Maybe the world is watching the wrong Russian reform.
The economic side is troubling; the political side is seriously disturbing.
In the columns alongside (see related article: "Trials of a New Russian Dissident" -- WSJ Feb. 4, 1994), J. Michael Waller describes the current trial in Moscow of Russian scientist Vil Mirzayanov, who is accused of revealing "state secrets" regarding production of a new Russian chemical weapon called Novichok.
Compliance with chemical weapons treaties aside, the Mirzayanov trial raises questions about the integrity of Russia's legal processes, about the role of the former KGB in Russia today and about who controls the military complexes.
This trial, however, isn't the only echo being heard from the Soviet past.
A lot of Russians are issuing "diktats" these days, reminding the world that a significant part of that society's leadership remains untouched by post-Communist reform, or for that matter, by the ordinary rules of civility and decency.
A few examples:
Vladimir Zhirinovsky went storming through the Budapest airport yesterday, demanding that a Hungarian airliner to Moscow wait for him because "I am a deputy of the Russian parliament!"
When the airline staff wasn't impressed, he threatened to punish them when he becomes president of Russia.
He gently described the airport as a "whorehouse."
At the same time in Moscow, that other great reformer, Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, was banning the Russian press from further coverage of cabinet meetings.
He no doubt wants to spare Russian voters from the idiocies likely to be uttered by some of his recent appointees.
The arrogance that interests us most came from Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev.
He was visiting Georgia, now part of Russia's neo-imperialist designs.
Mr. Grachev used the occasion to tell NATO how to conduct itself.
NATO, you will recall, is the alliance that at its summit a month ago went to great pains not to offend Russian sensibilities.
It timidly bowed to Russian demands that it not grant NATO membership to Russia's former Warsaw Pact satellites.
In Georgia, Mr. Grachev told those same nations that if they see Bill Clinton's "Partnership for Peace" program as an intermediate step toward full NATO membership, they had better forget it, because "we will not support it."
So we have Mr. Zhirinovsky and Mr. Grachev, in their own ways, reasserting the Brezhnev doctrine.
That crude fiat held that the Soviet empire was sacrosanct and that all Moscow's subjects would remain subjects for all time.
It didn't work out that way, but that was mainly because Balts, Poles, Czechs and Hungarians were brave enough to rise up against the rotten regime in Moscow and expose its fundamental weakness.
So why should the West be so tender today in trying to protect the sensibilities of these former imperialists?
Instead of pacifying them, this approach is clearly having the opposite effect, emboldening them to issue ultimatums to the states that were once under their control.
Mr. Grachev also said that Russia "would like" (intends?) to keep troops in the TransCaucasus republics, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev gave a speech last month suggesting that Russia might not even withdraw troops from the Baltic states.
He later backed halfway down after a ruckus from Washington.
These are the kinds of sensibilities that Mr. Clinton and his fellow NATO summiteers were trying to protect.
Could they have done worse if they had invited the Baltic states, Poland, Hungary and the Czech and Slovak republics into NATO, telling the Russians that it was none of their business?
What was the point, anyway, of accepting the idea that Russia still has de facto control over these sovereign nations?
Or as Henry Kissinger wondered in a recent, severe critique of the administration's Partnership for Peace: "If Russia can veto NATO membership now when it is in need of economic support, what will it veto when it has been strengthened through reform and American economic assistance?"
We are tempted to ask if someone in the State Department is still trying to preserve Mikhail Gorbachev's Soviet empire.
The point is that by treating Russia as a hegemonic power, the West is causing the Russians to believe it themselves and to try to take maximum advantage of the invitation.
Mr. Clinton and Russian policy mastermind Strobe Talbott were warned about this by people who know much more about the Russians than Mr. Talbott will ever know.
They are the Poles, Balts, Czechs and Hungarians who lived under Russian hegemony for 40 years.
They know that there still are a lot of bullying Zhirinovskys in the Russian power structure.
(Back in October, incidentally, Senator Bill Bradley asked Mr. Talbott to raise the issue of scientist Mirzayanov with the Russians, with no visible results.)
If Mr. Clinton isn't too busy directing his energies at "domestic" policy, he might want to review foreign policy, a subject he hardly touched in his State of the Union address.
If the U.S. and its allies don't stand up to Russia, they will be hearing more bold diktats in the days ahead.
