Metallgesellschaft AG Chairman Kajo Neukirchen said the German conglomerate's huge losses in fiscal 1993 continued into the fiscal first quarter of this year.
But in his first major public appearance since taking over in December, Mr. Neukirchen made a strong bid to restore public confidence in Metallgesellschaft and pave the way for a shareholders meeting in Frankfurt tomorrow, at which management will seek approval of a 1.4 billion-mark ($818 million) capital increase.
"We have to start from the ground up," he said, adding that management is still in the process of figuring out what needs to be done.
He also pleaded with the public not to "hang the bearer of bad news."
On the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, Metallgesellschaft rose 6.50 marks, or 3.7%, to 182 marks in a declining market.
On Monday Metallgesellschaft shares dropped around 10%.
Metallgesellschaft, the 14th largest industrial group in Germany, was pulled back from the brink of bankruptcy early this year by a massive 3.4 billion-mark bailout plan hammered together by creditor banks and shareholders.
The capital infusion that the company is seeking tomorrow is part of that rescue operation.
The company's staggering 1.87 billion-mark pretax loss in the fiscal year ended last September was largely attributable to losses from speculative oil-trading deals made through Metallgesellschaft Corp. of the U.S. under the aegis of former Chairman Heinz Schimmelbusch, Mr. Neukirchen said.
Mr. Schimmelbusch and his management-board colleagues were dismissed in December for allegedly failing to adequately inform the supervisory board of the business problems.
Public prosecutors are currently investigating the exmanagers' actions.
In the first quarter of fiscal 1994, the exposure from the problematic oil contracts on the New York Mercantile Exchange resulted in a further 1.5 billion marks in losses, Mr. Neukirchen said.
However, he said, hedges had now been put in place to limit future losses, and the process of unwinding U.S. oil positions has gone "faster than expected."
First-quarter pretax profit was 64.6 million marks excluding losses from oil-trading, he said.
That would create a full group first-quarter pretax loss of about 1.4 billion marks, Mr. Neukirchen said.
