Consider one example of how the money is being spent: Last year, about 95% of Russian television viewers saw this flash of capitalist enthusiasm.
A camera closes in on a cluster of schoolchildren in a playground.
"My dad is a shareholder in a whole biscuit factory," trumpets a young boy.
"So there!"
For most Russians, commercials like this, produced by Sawyer/Miller Group, a Washington consulting concern, were the first visible evidence of the U.S. billions that have begun to flow to Russia as part of a three-year aid package approved last year.
And for many, the expensive, flashy TV campaign could be the last.
For though the package is outwardly generous, in reality little of the money is targeted toward easing the economic strains of ordinary Russians.
Instead, reflecting notions that Russia needs expertise, not handouts, the program seeks to stretch aid dollars by teaching Russians how to privatize their industries and cobble together a free-market economy.
This may work in the long run.
But short-term, it is galling to many Russians, who find the U.S. attitude both patronizing and stingy -- while enriching scores of U.S. consultants who are pocketing between 50% and 90% of the money in a given aid contract.
With cash-starved Russians trying to jump-start their fledgling businesses and economy -- and antireform politicians gaining ground -- "we don't need 90% of technical-assistance money going to American experts," says Aleksandr A. Jitnikov, head of a Russian commission coordinating foreign aid.
Some U.S. policy experts share those concerns.
Marshall Goldman, a Russia specialist and professor at Wellesley College, recently told the Senate Banking Committee that Russian aid in the hands of U.S. consultants and "beltway bandits" benefits Russians "minimally, if at all."
He added, "I look for a scandal down the road that's going to upset the American taxpayer."
Aid to Russia, already under criticism because of waste and meager results, faces new pressures in the wake of this week's spy scandal, in which Moscow is alleged to have paid a U.S. intelligence official for secrets.
Yesterday, lawmakers called for a freeze in U.S. aid to Russia until Moscow cooperates with the U.S. in assessing the damage from the affair, including withdrawing from Washington a number of Russian diplomats said to have been involved.
Ironically, though, any attempt to punish Moscow by freezing the aid pipeline would mainly hurt the droves of U.S. consultants who are delivering the assistance.
With so much aid money involved, there has already been a veritable feeding frenzy in the Washington.
The Agency for International Development, or AID, which is overseeing the bulk of the U.S. package, says 1,200 consultants applied to get into the program, a record for the 33-year-old agency.
The American helpers don't come cheap.
Sawyer/Miller got $7 million to put together its ad campaign promoting privatization on Russian television.
Mark Malloch Brown, who oversaw the effort in Moscow, also did some self-promotion in Washington.
He requested that AID pay him $1,150 a day, not the $320 that he was getting, according to documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act.
AID refused.
It allows consultants in Russia no more than $380 a day, which rises to about $800 by figuring in pension benefits and overhead.
-- KPMG Peat Marwick assembled and manages five huge clusters of consultants that garnered $98 million in contracts to help privatized businesses.
-- Burson-Marsteller, the public-relations giant, is getting up to $15 million for various schemes to promote private enterprise.
One of its jobs involved sending teams on predawn treks to collective farms near Nizhni Novgorod in central Russia to press the benefits of privatization to milkmaid brigades.
-- Haglar Bailly, an Arlington, Va., consulting firm, won a $20 million contract by lashing together 34 subcontractors, including four different law firms.
"We need a lot of redundant capability" because exact tasks haven't been worked out yet, explains Neils DeTerra, a vice president.
The firm plans to help privatize Russian utilities and encourage them to install U.S.-made equipment.
At the same time, it hopes to spawn a viable Russian private-sector consulting operation that can then win contracts from other foreign aid providers, such as the World Bank.
-- Citizens Network for Foreign Affairs, an agribusiness trade association, was hired by AID to help pick firms to advise Russia's farm sector.
It went on to pick eight of its own members to receive $23.4 million in AID money.
AID quickly ratified the group's choices, which included Monsanto Co., Grand Metropolitan PLC's Pillsbury Co. unit, ConAgra Inc., W.R. Grace & Co. and Cargill Inc.
The Russian backlash is predictable.
Some Russian officials are beginning to flex their authority by exercising veto power over contracts awarded to U.S. concerns.
Russia's Privatization Center, for example, scaled back the AID contracts awarded to Sawyer/Miller after Russians began questioning the wisdom of its TV-advertising campaign.
"All of my friends were saying, `Why are you putting those stupid ads on TV?'" explains Maxim Boycko, the 34-year-old economist who runs the center.
Mr. Boycko also was upset that the U.S. firm hadn't hired Russian experts to help plan the project.
Sawyer/Miller says it believes it lived up to its contracts, but the matter has raised eyebrows among other U.S. consultants, who recognize that the Russian agency is the funnel for about $90 million of aid money each year.
The contrast of struggling Russians and well-paid U.S. consultants is sharpest at Moscow's Radisson-Slavianskaya Hotel.
One recent evening, a string quartet was performing in the marble-floored lobby as a crowd of American businesspeople -- many of them aid consultants -- dined and drank in pampered splendor.
In the freezing darkness nearby, a hundred or so elderly men and women milled about in dirty slush, each trying to sell passersby a prized belonging -- a bottle of vodka or perhaps a favorite pair of shoes.
This is exactly the kind of dichotomy that architects of the Marshall Plan, the postwar project that rebuilt Europe, avoided by deliberately playing down the role of U.S. consultants.
James M. Silberman, an 80-year-old World Bank consultant and architect of the Marshall Plan's technical-aid package, recalls that planners found it more effective and cheaper to bring 26,000 European business and social leaders to the U.S. to learn rebuilding skills, which they then brought back to Europe.
The notion of big-spending, well-paid U.S. consultants raking in aid "was resented then and it is resented even more now," Mr. Silberman says.
AID's tilt toward American consultants is rooted in the agency's belief that Americans can best deliver capitalist expertise to a country with few native notions of free enterprise.
But there is also a political component.
Backers of a generous Russian aid package found it easier to win votes for the plan by convincing Congress that, by being generous to the Russians, it would be helping American business, too.
"One of the ways we get congressional support for the program is that it does help American jobs and American businesses," says Ambassador Thomas W. Simons Jr., who oversees AID's Russia program for the State Department.
He plays down the resentment and the strength of antireform Communist and fascist movements in Russia.
"Everyone in Moscow these days is alarmist," he says, adding that the Russia aid program is delivering aid five times faster than a normal one.
What is indisputable is that the U.S. consultants seem to come in layers.
World Learning Inc., a Brattleboro, Vt., firm that has worked on AID's Africa programs for 20 years, was hired -- with AID money -- to teach the art of writing AID grant proposals to 200 U.S. volunteer groups eager to provide help to the former Soviet Union.
In addition, the firm won a contract to vet proposals on building a "social safety net" for the newly unemployed.
"People were calling saying where's the money?
How can we get into it?" recalls Margo Minnini, the firm's senior program officer.
Although Russian volunteer groups wanted to participate, World Learning picked only American concerns, with much of the money going to big name enterprises like the United Way, the U.S. Red Cross and the YMCA.
Most took on Russian partners.
But Russian groups lacking American partners didn't make the cut.
Size and clout matter, even among the U.S. bidders.
Take Citizens Network for Foreign Affairs, the agribusiness association, which lists former Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci as chairman of its executive committee.
By letting the trade group include some of its largest members in the program, AID figured it could make its money go further.
"We're leveraging over $100 million," explains one AID official, noting that the companies had already sunk that much in various Russian private ventures.
The trade group's president, John H. Costello, declared recently that "the former Soviet Union does not need foreign aid the way we delivered it in the past.
They want partners who can work with them in a sustainable fashion to improve the food system and create economic opportunity."
While these partnerships are designed to create "pockets of efficiency" among emerging Russian companies, they also use taxpayer funds to help American businesses expand in Russia.
One of the pockets getting the money belongs to Pillsbury's Green Giant unit, which already had invested in a project to grow, can and sell its peas in Russia.
Under its $3 million AID grant, Pillsbury will teach a Russian cooperative how to grow peas to Green Giant specifications -- while enlarging its presence in the potentially huge Russian canned-food market.
No one has gotten a bigger slice of the program than KPMG Peat Marwick.
To help newly private firms manage the various challenges of free enterprise, KPMG wired together J.P. Morgan & Co., Bain & Co., Bechtel Corp., Land O' Lakes Inc. and Young & Rubicam's Burson-Marsteller unit, among others.
Exactly what this all-star agglomeration will do for Russia hasn't been fully specified -- and that shows another peculiarity of the U.S. aid program.
In trying to commit money quickly, AID uses a device known as an "indefinite-quantity contract," which leaves the details of a particular project to be determined later by Mr. Boycko, on the Russian side, and AID officials in Washington.
IQCs, as they are called, require an "omnibus contractor," a firm like KPMG that can handle the heavy accounting requirements that come with AID money.
Layers of subcontractors are then folded in.
KPMG's expanding Moscow operation is housed in tastefully refurbished offices in a former Communist Party office.
The firm figures that after the AID funds run out, it will have a strong client base here.
"This is a huge market," explains Peter Jovic, the partner in charge.
The accounting firm has trained more than 200 Russians to do the books for banks and big government-run companies.
But Russians won't see much of the AID money that flows through the firm, Mr. Jovic adds.
"The AID money is almost exclusively for consultants who fly in and out."
Still, the Russians have figured out how to redirect some aid to social needs.
Mr. Jitnikov, for example, sold donated U.S. equipment and food for rubles that he used to complete Russia's first germ-free maternity hospital in Saratov, 200 miles southeast of Moscow.
"People in Russia know about this program," he says.
"It is not experts coming from the U.S. to investigate what is going on here.
It is real support."
Supporters of the aid package as designed contend that some AID projects are already producing tangible results as well.
Price Waterhouse, which snagged $34 million in contracts, set up a system to sell Russians shares in several thousand newly privatized companies.
Now the Russians are pressing the firm to design a registry system and a Russian securities and exchange commission.
And a 10-man team from Boston Consulting Group spent three months struggling to help a privatized vegetable wholesaler in Perm manage its markets and inventories.
They found stores in the gritty, industrial city in the Urals starved for vegetables, yet the wholesaler was floundering in rotting piles of beets and cabbages.
Even after the consultants introduced sales commissions and other Western incentives, not much changed.
"They bought into everything we said on a theoretical level, but there was still a psychological barrier," explains Martin Reeves, the BCG team leader.
Then BCG, which AID is paying $1.7 million for this and other privatization missions, discovered it had brought one of the problems with it.
The workers suspected the consultants were fixing up the business to buy it and become absentee bosses.
So the BCG team put on old clothes and led the Russians on a day-long cleanup of a stinking warehouse.
"That seemed to do it," explains Mr. Reeves.
Now fresh cabbages, even kiwi fruit, are showing up on the shelves in Perm.
These bright spots don't offset the disillusionment felt in Russia, whose companies are eligible to bid on U.S. AID contracts but are consistently shut out.
Most have little experience in grant writing and find themselves unable to comply with arcane accounting regulations, or to meet AID's unprecedentedly tight 30-day deadline for filing grant applications.
Nowhere is the disappointment more acute than in the aid targeted for nuclear disarmament -- a field where Russians have considerable unemployed expertise.
There was much excitement in Russia when Washington unveiled a $1.2 billion program to help dismantle Russia's aging nuclear arsenal and re-employ its scientists in civilian research.
The Russians thought much of the money was coming to them, but it hasn't.
So far, the Pentagon, which runs the program, has contracted for $754 million of U.S. goods and experts.
Defense officials say it was Congress's suggestion to use Americans where "feasible"; they have taken the admonition a step further by making it a "guiding tenet."
John H. Birely, assistant secretary of defense for atomic energy, recently told a group of cheering defense contractors that one of the program's goals was to show Russians "the spirit of free enterprise."
One proposal getting serious consideration: spending $60 million to build copies of Russian railway tank cars in a U.S. plant for export to Russia.
Nearly everyone agrees that the cars, needed to haul corrosive rocket fuel, could be built much more cheaply in Russia.
Vadim A. Simonenko, a shy, smiling man who heads the theoretical division at Chelyabinsk-70, a formerly secret Russian base where nuclear warheads are designed, seems resigned.
"What we have learned is that the Americans have a great tendency to keep this money in their own country," he says.
