Buying a great company when its industry is on the rocks is a time-honored money-making strategy for long-term investors.
They have a chance to do it now in St. Jude Medical, a few bold money managers and analysts say.
St. Jude is the country's leading maker of mechanical heart valves.
It has superb profit margins, recently 43% of sales.
Over the years, it has shown terrific earnings growth of about 40% a year; that has slowed to about 10% lately.
The St. Paul, Minn., company has a big hoard of cash (about $350 million) and no debt.
Yet investors apparently assume that St. Jude's glories are in the past.
The stock sells for a mere 12 times the past four quarters' earnings.
It closed Friday at 27 3/4, unchanged, on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
That's quite a comedown for a stock that had soared close to 700% in four years to reach a peak of 55 1/2 two years ago.
The 50% fall in two years isn't unusual for medical stocks, many of which peaked in January 1992.
Cost cutting by corporations and insurance companies has bruised the group; so has President Clinton's proposal to change the nation's health-care system.
"I think people are really terrified of anything with the word `medical' in it," says John Buckingham, research director at Al Frank Asset Management in Santa Monica, Calif.
"By scooping these stocks up now and sitting on them for three to five years, we think we'll be amply rewarded."
Chicago money manager Harris Associates, which has one of the best stock-picking records in the business over the past five years, has bought the stock heavily.
"This is a very well-run company with a superb product," says John Raitt, an analyst and partner at Harris.
"They have lots of cash, and lots of free cash flow."
Detractors argue that St. Jude may have been a great growth stock in the past, but that the big growth is behind it.
Of 23 analysts who follow the stock, 17 rate it "neutral," according to Zacks Investment Research.
On Wall Street, "neutral" is often a code word for "sell".
"They've kind of run into a buzz saw," says David J. Lothson of PaineWebber.
"I think there clearly has been a slowdown in utilization of valves. . . .
It's a judgment call on when the procedure needs to be done."
With cost cutting in vogue, he anticipates fewer elective heart-valve replacements.
And if some version of the Clinton health-care plan passes, he thinks the bodies that will control health-care spending may weigh valve replacements against other health needs, such as malnutrition, AIDS and trauma care.
Moreover, Mr. Lothson says, St. Jude's tax rate will go up nearly five percentage points through the loss of tax benefits from manufacturing in Puerto Rico.
And one of its rivals, CarboMedics, won approval in September to sell heart valves in the U.S.
Joel Zimmerman of Lehman Brothers also is neutral.
"We would expect to see the number of procedures stabilize or even decline" in the U.S., he says.
Abroad, growth rate is better, but the price per valve (about $3,800 in the U.S.) is sometimes lower.
Analysts fret, too, about St. Jude's stated intention to make a major acquisition.
Any company acquired would naturally be in the medical field, which analysts view as a mine field of explosive uncertainties.
But Edward L. Mutch of Piper Jaffray, one of the few brokerage-house bulls on St. Jude, says investors have let their fears balloon out of proportion.
"The whole medical-device sector is oversold," he says.
"I suspect one year from now we'll be looking back and saying investors really made some good money" in St. Jude and other medical-device stocks.
Stephen L. Wilson, chief financial officer at St. Jude, says the world-wide market for heart values (about $490 million annually) is growing perhaps 8% a year -- 5% in units and 3% in price increases.
"Clearly in the U.S., there is pressure on both those numbers," he says.
The company hopes to supplement its highly regarded mechanical valves with an improved animal-tissue valve soon.
But it is also counting on an acquisition -- probably this year -- to rekindle growth.
"We want to take all the cash generated by the heart valve business and put it to a better use than investing in two-year municipal bonds," says Mr. Wilson.
"Health care has been so badly maligned. . . .
It is an absolutely marvelous industry."
Arnold Douville, a portfolio manager at Munder Capital Management in Birmingham, Mich., thinks St. Jude might acquire the medical-device business of Eli Lilly.
Mr. Wilson says "there would certainly be a level of interest" in the Lilly units, but he has had no indication that those businesses are for sale.
