Harcourt General Inc. is considering the sale of its insurance businesses as part of a plan to streamline the company and focus on publishing.
The move follows a spinoff of Harcourt's movie-theater business to shareholders last September.
The insurance businesses, with $330 million in assets, could sell for $400 million or more, analysts said.
Harcourt, whose $3.66 billion in annual revenue comes primarily from publishing and specialty retailing, acquired the insurance businesses as part of its purchase of publisher Harcourt Brace in November 1991.
The insurance businesses, which primarily underwrite individual life, health, accident and credit insurance policies, and sell annuity products, contributed $548 million to Harcourt's 1993 revenue, and $70.9 million to operating profit, including $27.7 million in capital gains.
In fiscal 1993, ended Oct. 31, Harcourt General had operating profit of $314.3 million.
Martin Romm, an analyst at CS First Boston Inc., said a sale of the insurance companies would be a positive step, because Harcourt doesn't intend to enlarge the businesses.
"A sale would convert the businesses to cash.
The market will give Harcourt credit for that," Mr. Romm said.
Harcourt General said last December it might sell the operations if an attractive publishing acquisition came along that required additional funds.
The company wasn't free to sell the insurance unit until November 1993 because of tax considerations and pledges that it made to state insurance commissioners at the time of the Harcourt Brace acquisition, it said.
Peter Farwell, a Harcourt spokesman, said that while the company is looking aggressively for investment opportunities in publishing, no deals are pending.
The insurance businesses, based in Orlando, Fla., include Federal Home Life Insurance Co., PHF Life Insurance Co. and the Harvest Life Insurance Co.
HARCOURT GENERAL Inc.'s insurance businesses have $3.2 billion in assets, not $330 million as stated in an article in yesterday's Business Briefs section.
(WSJ Feb. 16, 1994)
