THE DEVELOPMENT of urban minimills that process recycled paper could fill a key marketing gap.
Several companies are discussing the building of small mills close to urban areas to take advantage of growing demand for recycled paper products.
By locating close to major recycling centers and aftermarkets, the smaller mills could take advantage of lower transportation costs.
Hoffman Environmental Systems, Green Bay, Wis., touts a no-discharge water system that would make urban locations more feasible.
Paper mills, which are generally located closer to virgin timber supplies, usually require a large body of water for paper processing.
A consortium of three companies, including Hoffman, plans to begin building the urban mills this year.
Beloit Corp. would construct the minimills and Ogden Projects would operate the facilities.
The mills would recycle paper used in making corrugated-cardboard boxes.
Part of the recycling minimill program, however, presents a bit of a quandary for some environmentalists.
In some instances, the companies want to link the mills to incinerator plants, thereby taking advantage of cheap energy costs.
Several environmental groups say incinerators discourage recycling efforts and emit harmful fumes.
Still, William Whitman, senior vice president at Ogden Projects, sees several benefits to the minimills.
"Because they're already in the urban area, they have tremendous transportation-cost advantages, and the zero-water discharge concept will also ease environmental problems," he says.
"It looks economically feasible, and in some ways, it seems that if we don't do this, somebody else will."
Others are getting involved, too.
Sithe Energies, a New York-based independent power producer, recently contracted to sell power to a linerboard-recycling plant being built by Beloit near Oswego, N.Y.
"In this country, the large paper companies remain largely committed to virgin paper, but their consumers aren't committed to virgin paper," says Roger Hoffman, president of Hoffman Envirnonmental.
"We plan to take advantage of that gap in the market."
WIND POWER is surging in cold-weather areas as icy hurdles are cleared.
Most of the wind-power advances in the U.S. have centered on warmer-climate areas.
Advocates, however, are interested in the energy potential of the chillier upper Midwest, sometimes called the "Saudi Arabia" of wind power.
But cold-weather wind farms face different obstacles than desert wind farms.
Frigid temperatures can affect machinery, and ice buildup on the blades can cause stoppages.
"We've learned that certain components, such as machinery lubricants, had to be modified for the colder weather," says Edward Neuhauser, a specialist concentrating on renewable resources at Niagara Mohawk Power, Syracuse, N.Y.
To combat icing problems, turbine blades are painted black to absorb more sunlight.
Sometimes, the turbines will go through rapid stop-and-start sequences or operate at irregular rates to shake off ice buildup.
The promise of cold-weather wind power has piqued interest throughout the northern tier of the country.
In Minnesota, a state known for its brutal winters, Northern States Power, St. Paul, plans to build a wind farm in the southwestern region of the state.
New England Electric System joined a consortium to develop a wind farm in Maine, and in Vermont, Green Mountain Power already is operating a small wind project.
"Two years ago, we would have talked about Hawaii and California," says Michael Marvin of the American Wind Energy Group.
"But now, we have an entire string of projects in cold, snowy areas."
Still, wind power remains a small element of the nation's power portfolio, making up about 0.1% of the country's installed capacity.
WASTE-TREATMENT researchers are exploiting new thermal techniques.
Several companies are working on methods to break down hazardous waste into reusable elements to avoid the traditional "burn, landfill or do nothing" approach.
Most of the new thermal technologies don't burn the waste, but instead create high-heat environments to break down chemical compounds.
Titan Technologies, Albuquerque, N.M., uses catalysts to break down tires into oil, carbon black and ash.
"Flames never touch the tire," says Ron Wilder, chief operating officer of Titan, which has a prototype plant in Bradley, Okla., and is building two plants in South Korea.
The company's process uses the emitted gases from the tires to fuel the heating process, thereby eliminating emissions problems, he says.
Titan's technology could help deal with the nation's vast tire-waste problem, which is partially addressed now by shredding tires and putting them in road-paving mixtures.
But environmentalists express concern about the disposal of the ash and the quality of the end products, such as carbon black, which is often used in shoe heels.
Several other companies push specialized waste solutions, including Molten Metal Technologies, Waltham, Mass.
The company uses molten metal baths to break down hazardous wastes into their elemental parts.
Zapit Technology, Santa Clara, Calif., uses electron beams to break down contaminant molecules in soil, air and ground water into carbon dioxide, water and salt.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL Defense Fund offers a citizens-series pamphlet on LUST (leaking underground storage tanks). . . .
Vitamin D alchemy: Rochester Institute of Technology professors receive federal and state grants to try to turn milk cartons into ethanol.
