After posting record sales and profits in Latin America for 1993, General Motors Corp. is doubling capital spending there in a bid to seize market leadership from Volkswagen AG.
"We had an elephant" of a year, said Richard C. Nerod, GM vice president for Latin America.
Without disclosing figures, Mr. Nerod said in an interview that GM's net income in Latin America for 1993 "substantially" surpassed 1992's record of $209.5 million.
The figures exclude Mexico, which GM considers part of its North American operations.
Thanks to economic recovery, trade liberalization and other factors, the region has been a bright spot in the world auto industry, with the U.S. market in a slow recovery and Europe in deep recession.
In the first half, GM attributed a 30% gain in overseas auto-operations earnings to spectacular results in Latin America.
GM's vehicle sales in Latin America soared 39% last year, to 406,000 units, Mr. Nerod said.
He added that dollar sales were up "substantially more" than that because GM was able to sell more higher-priced vehicles than in 1992.
Mr. Nerod also attributed higher profitability last year in Latin America to tight cost controls, higher plant productivity, efficient new-model launches and modest investment in newvehicle programs.
The 1993 results still left GM No. 2 in the region, with about 18% of the market, compared with VW's 21% or so.
In outlining his plans for the next five years, Mr. Nerod said: "We want to become No. 1 by the end of that period," though he cautioned that "we won't do anything crazy to do that."
Mr. Nerod said GM plans to more than double capital spending in the region over the next five years, to about $2 billion.
He said those funds will be internally generated, coming on top of expected dividends back to the parent company.
The money will go into modernized product lines and additional assembly capacity in Argentina, Brazil and elsewhere, he said.
"The investment we are looking at is to sustain our position" in the face of expected new competition, Mr. Nerod said.
Such Japanese car makers as Toyota Motor Corp., Nissan Motor Co. and Honda Motor Co. are expected to beef up their Latin American operations, he said, adding that new competition from low-cost Korean imports is also likely.
Consequently, GM's Latin American operation will have to offer fresher products more frequently than in the past, Mr. Nerod said.
Latin American units of the world's car makers have often continued selling some models -- such as the Chevrolet Chevette and the VW Beetle-long after discontinuing them elsewhere.
With stiffer competition, "we can't do that anymore," Mr. Nerod said.
For this year , Mr. Nerod is forecasting a slight easing of the total Latin American market -- including Mexico -- to 2.5 million or 2.6 million vehicles, compared with last year's record 2.8 million sales.
But he predicted that the market would resume its expansion and hit 3.2 million units by 2000.
