PepsiCo Inc. is expected to announce today plans to put freshness dating on its soft-drink packages, an issue that has generated considerable debate within the beverage industry.
The anticipated move by Pepsi, the food and beverage concern based in Purchase, N.Y., would follow limited tests of the concept last year.
As with freshness dating found on milk or bread, the company printed container labels in test markets with the words: "Best taste if consumed by" a certain date.
Pepsi, according to trade publication Beverage Digest, has found that the vast majority of consumers in test markets could tell the difference between fresh and stale drinks and appreciated the freshness dating.
Some industry sources have said the emphasis on freshness dating will appeal to customers as a result of the attention given to new nutritional label requirements.
Pepsi is also expected to introduce a national ad campaign for the strategy.
Pepsi declined to comment on today's planned announcement.
One attraction of the freshness dating for Pepsi is putting new life into the diet-drink segment, which has posted lackluster sales in recent years.
In 1993, Diet Pepsi volume fell 0.6% and overall diet drinks lost 1.2% in market share, according to the Maxwell Consumer Report.
Coke has also tried to draw attention to its diet cola, with a new advertising campaign this year, as well as a redesigned package.
Still, many within the soft-drink industry oppose highlighting a negative that many consumers don't usually considerthat the artificial sweetener used in diet drinks, aspartame, can lose its sweetness over time.
In Atlanta, a Coca-Cola Co. spokesman said Coke's test of consumer reaction to freshness dating showed it to be a "nonissue."
Coke workers rotate products on store shelves by using freshness codes printed on the packages; but the company has no current plans to make its freshness dates an issue for consumers.
A spokesman at Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Cos. said the company "never gets complaints" about freshness problems, adding that soft drinks are sold so quickly that there is no problem with them losing flavor.
Still, Coke and other beverage companies have said they would consider adding prominent freshness dates to soft-drink packages if it became a big enough issue with consumers.
Industry officials said many Pepsi bottlers oppose the move.
Some bottlers fear they will incur the cost of turning over products unnecessarily, industry officials say.
And bottlers aren't sure the initiative will be a big boost to sales, industry officials say.
"If the consumer finds this a great big ho hum, you've wasted time and money, and you've taken your eye off the ball," said Harry Hersh, president and chief executive officer of Pepcom Industries Inc., a Pepsi bottler in Raleigh, N.C.
