Merck & Co.'s Martin J. Wygod told a group of analysts that the premier drug maker would change from "one of the highest margin pharmaceutical companies to one of the lowest" because of its acquisition of Medco Containment Services Inc.
Other Merck officials hastened to temper the Medco chairman's characterization after an analysts meeting on Friday, but the dramatic statement drove home the point that Merck is changing into a very different company to respond to a rapidly changing pharmaceutical market.
A couple hundred analysts braved a raging blizzard to attend Merck's five-hour explanation of its business strategy, chiefly regarding Medco, the mail-order pharmacy and managed-care company it bought last year.
In his first public presentation as a Merck executive, Mr. Wygod was clearly the focus of analysts' interest both as Medco's architect and as the most talked about contender for Merck's chairmanship after P. Roy Vagelos retires in November.
In January, Merck said it was merging Medco into a new unit, called Merck-Medco U.S. Managed Care Division, which also included Merck's existing managed care business.
Mr. Wygod was named head of the U.S. and Canadian prescription drug operations, which include the new division.
To help analysts understand the financial implications of Merck's new strategy, he described a "deflationary" pharmaceutical environment where profits are driven by market share, rather than by margins.
Judy C. Lewent, Merck chief financial officer, said Medco's 9% pretax margin will erode Merck's 35% margin, but only to the level of other pharmaceutical companies.
Margins are an obsolete financial indicator, she added, and agreed that market share and cash flow will be the new measures of success.
Mr. Wygod said Medco is aggressively going after new business to expand its market share: The number of people participating under Medco programs has grown by 19% to 38 million since the merger was announced in July.
To win new business from health plans, for which Medco manages pharmacy costs, the company has been developing capitation and other risk-sharing agreements, Mr. Wygod said.
Capitation comes in various forms, but generally the supplier such as Merck-Medco agrees to charge a health plan a per-person fixed rate per month or per year, regardless of the amount of drugs the health plan actually uses.
Mr. Wygod added that capitation will be one of the most rapidly growing types of agreements with health plans over the next five years.
In another sign of how much things have changed, Merck officials said the company is giving generic drugs a prominent place in the Merck product lineup.
Generic drugs will play a central role in Merck's overseas strategy, said Jerry T. Jackson, executive vice president of Merck's overseas business.
Despite strenuous efforts to control drug costs, most countries haven't used generic drugs to any meaningful extent, he said.
As Merck takes its Medco strategy abroad, it will use generics to show the cost-reduction possibilities, he said.
Dr. Vagelos said the company plans to raise its research and development spending by 12% to $1.3 billion, in part to pay for outcomes research, which managed care customers are demanding to determine the cost-effectiveness of a drug.
Edward M. Scolnick, Merck's research head, updated the status of drugs in development, including Fosamax, the osteoporosis treatment the company plans to submit for government approval next year.
A host of other prospects, including drugs to treat migraines, asthma, and AIDS, were partially unveiled with the promise of more details at an April analyst meeting devoted to research.
As Merck outlined its strategy for the coming years, analysts continued to wonder how other companies would respond to the changing marketplace, where powerful managed care buyers are putting pressure on prescription drug prices by demanding discounts.
Talk of an alliance between drug companies dominated a Pfizer Inc. analyst meeting earlier in the week.
And, amid a rally in McKesson Corp. shares, speculation swirled that the big drug distributor, which owns PCS Health Systems Inc., was an acquisition target of a drug company or consortium of companies.
PCS, which services about 45 million people, is Medco's chief competitor.
Moreover, McKesson owns one of the largest drug wholesalers in North America.
"We can be a very valuable partner to. . .any drug company or consortium," a McKesson spokesman said.
But, he adds, "We believe we're building a company for the future.
We have excellent long-term prospects and we intend to pursue our vision as an independent company."
He declined to discuss rumors of a merger or alliance in the works.
Industry executives and analysts acknowledge that companies are exploring acquisitions and other alternatives to respond to Merck-Medco and the marketplace upheaval.
Investment bankers and consultants have to stand in line to pitch merger and other ideas to drug companies, one investment banker said.
"We get a sense there's a lot of confusion among the manufacturers," said an industry official.
