Jake Bramhall can identify the make, model and number of cylinders of any passing car, but he can't tell the difference between stewed tomatoes and tomato paste.
In recent weeks, Mr. Bramhall, a 25-year-old management consultant who lives in Montclair, N.J., has also brought home the wrong brand of cranberry juice and bought Charmin instead of Scott toilet paper.
Mr. Bramhall rates a "C minus" in grocery shopping, according to his wife, Elaine Morales.
"He comes back with candies, just like a little kid."
While more men are pushing shopping carts these days, many like Mr. Bramhall show little aptitude in the supermarket and display markedly different purchasing behavior from women.
The supermarket "is still a woman's world," says Mona Doyle, president of Consumer Network Inc., a Philadelphia consumer-research concern.
For all the talk of changing roles in today's society, she says, "old stereotypes are what drive the numbers."
Consumer experts say many women view the supermarket as an arena where they can exercise their skills in getting the best value for their dollar.
"How good a supermarket shopper you are is still part of women's self-esteem package," Ms. Doyle says.
According to a study conducted last year by the Food Marketing Institute, 93% of the women judged sales or money-saving specials as "very" or "somewhat" important, while 84% of men did.
For men, being a lousy shopper "is part of a kind of macho image," says Steve Barnett, an anthropologist and principal with Global Business Network who has studied men's shopping behavior.
The attitude is "`I can't shop well.
I do it if my wife makes me do it,'" he says.
Mr. Barnett divides male shoppers into two categories: "lost in space" (they wander around in a disorganized state) and "demons of efficiency" (they rip through the aisles as quickly as possible).
"Men don't look for things on sale or make price comparisons," says Mr. Barnett.
While women will watch items being checked out to make sure they are charged the right price, men "kind of vague out during the checkout process."
Although male shoppers still are a definite minority, their numbers are rising.
According to a 1993 report by Progressive Grocer magazine, 19% of the men surveyed said they were the primary grocery shopper, compared with 14% in 1988.
Paco Underhill, managing director of Envirosell Inc., which studies consumer behavior, estimates that as many as a third of the shoppers on an average weekend are men.
Judging by their shopping lists, men aren't particularly interested in the necessities of life.
A study by Information Resources Inc. found male shoppers devoting more of their baskets to beer, cupcakes, ice cream and hot dogs than women.
"Men tend to buy sweet items or snacks -- especially younger men shopping in convenience stores," says a spokeswoman for Philip Morris Cos.'
Entenmann's baked treats.
Women buy more cottage cheese, refrigerated yogurt and salad dressing.
Women also buy more personal-care and cleaning products than men, particularly facial and toilet tissue and laundry and dish detergent.
According to Information Resources, single men buy more low-calorie soda than single women.
As for single women, they buy more refrigerated bacon, mayonnaise and white sugar than single men.
Marketers speculate that these ingredients are often used in recipes that women shoppers are more apt to try.
When it comes to brands, male shoppers are a horror for marketers.
Because they are less interested in bargains and tend to buy on the run, men are more likely to grab a big-name brand than women.
Yet at the same time, many male shoppers -- particularly married ones -- pay little attention to which name brands they use at home.
"I don't look at brand names," says James Petherbridge, a 34-year-old shopper who is single and who works for the Internal Revenue Service.
Studying the snack shelves for that evening's dinner of tortilla chips and dip, he adds: "It's what hits me at the moment."
The produce department, which usually lacks brand names, can present particular problems.
In one supermarket recently, three male college students approached several women to find out whether their cantaloupe was ripe.
"If it's an unusual item, I'm not going to know what it is," says Mr. Bramhall, the management consultant.
"Like a leek -- what's that?"
Not surprisingly, such uncertain male shoppers are susceptible to suggestion.
Kids who go to the store with their dads can get away with murder.
"It's easier to talk dad into buying something than mom," says Mr. Underhill, recalling one instance when the father chose one shampoo while his young daughter grabbed another brand.
"Who do you think won?" he asks.
Male shoppers have a predilection for making numerous last-minute grocery stops rather than planning ahead and buying everything at once.
According to the Information Resources study, single male shoppers visited the supermarket 99 times in a year while single women went to the store 80 times.
The difference is even greater for families headed by men: 103 trips a year vs. 83.6 for families headed by women.
Without a woman in their lives, many men say they live day to day.
Jay Adams, a single 32-year-old New York stockbroker, waited patiently in the "10 items or less" line with bananas and orange juice ("my morning regimen"), Haagen-Dazs ice cream ("my evening regimen") and a single roll of toilet paper ("insurance -- I'm not sure I have any at home").
"If I had somebody regimenting my schedule, I would be more organized," he says.
The tendency for male shoppers to make 11th-hour dashes to the market makes them particularly susceptible to impulse purchases like potato chips and cookies.
"You know the old saying, `Never shop an an empty stomach'?" says Ed Russell, director of market research services for Campbell Soup Co.
"Men tend to do that more."
It's likely that some of the differences will fade as men shop more frequently and women shop less.
Indeed, some busy working women already shop a lot more like men than their mothers did.
Molly Lucas, a public-health administrator prowling the aisles of a New York market for that night's dinner, says, "Sometimes I get ambitious and make a big list and buy a lot of things, but then it all sits in the fridge and rots."
Average expenditure by single men and single women in selected supermarket categories during the 52 weeks ended Aug. 22, 1993.
Source: Information Resources Inc.
