Freezing weather in much of the northern half of the U.S. and reaction to the Los Angeles-area earthquake helped push oil prices up.
Initial assessments by oil companies were that their Southern California refineries and pipelines were largely undamaged by the earthquake.
But several plants and numerous pipelines shut down either because they lost power or as part of precautionary measures that kicked in under emergency plans.
Market participants said the possibility that several main pipelines will remain closed for more than a few days added somewhat to their bullishness yesterday.
But most were waiting for more complete damage reports before initiating much quake-related trading.
The unusually cold weather spurred most of the activity.
In particular, demand for heating oil surged, which also lifted crude oil prices.
The icy temperatures also sharply boosted natural gas prices.
The weather has been so extreme that technically oriented traders have had to give up on their charts in recent days.
Light, sweet crude oil on the New York Mercantile Exchange climbed back above $15 a barrel.
The February contract surged 32 cents a barrel to $15.10; it traded as high as $15.29 a barrel.
A number of U.S. oil companies raised the price they pay for crude at refineries by 50 cents a barrel.
Heating-oil futures have gained nearly six cents a gallon in the past week.
Heating oil for February delivery settled yesterday at 52.67 cents a gallon, up 1.41 cents.
Also providing support to petroleum prices was an agreement among the creditor banks of the troubled German company Metallgesellschaft AG over a bailout package.
Fears eased that the company's U.S. unit, MG Corp., a major player on the New York Merc, would be forced to liquidate large positions.
The natural gas futures contract for February delivery surged 9.2 cents to settle at $2.36 per million British thermal units.
ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices fell as temperatures failed to reach levels that could damage Florida's orange crop.
At New York's Cotton Exchange, orange juice for March delivery was down 5.55 cents to $1.0815 a pound."
After this week, the frost season is basically past," said Judith Ganes, analyst for Merrill Lynch.
"The majority of freezes have occurred between Christmas week and the third week of January.
From here on out, any losses to the crop wouldn't be that great.
This is the beginning of the big sell-off, the annual event in nonfreeze years."
Sandra Kaul, analyst for Smith Barney Shearson, said the market also is being pressured lower by concerns that Brazil's orange-juice crop may not have been damaged as badly by dry weather and disease as had previously been thought.
PRECIOUS METALS: Buying by dealers and commodity funds in a thin holiday market pressured gold futures prices higher.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for February delivery was up $2.10 to $392.20 an ounce.
Analysts said healthy demand for gold futures contracts continues despite the fact that gold is now trading at the upper end of its recent $365-to-$390 trading range.
Many analysts have predicted that gold soon will test the $400-an-ounce level, but each time prices have neared that level recently gold producers have bid prices down by aggressively selling gold futures contracts.
