North Sea crude-oil production has jumped almost 25% from a year ago, an increase that is a major headache for the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, which meets Friday in Geneva.
Several new oil projects have combined with technological advances to boost North Sea crude-oil output to 5.1 million barrels a day, industry experts say, one million barrels more than the 1993 first quarter's daily rate.
"It's a spectacular amount of oil to come onto markets all at one time," said Lawrence Goldstein, president of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation in New York.
"It's certainly more supply than OPEC would like to see."
And the growth in production won't come to an end until October, when North Sea output will peak at a record 5.5 million barrels a day, according to Mari Buglass, a North Sea expert with Smith Barney Shearson Ltd. in London.
Maintenance efforts, which necessitate closing production platforms on a rotating basis, will mask some of those increases through the summer.
Experts believe that, including scheduled and unscheduled closings, average North Sea output for 1994 should jump by almost 18%, or 700,000 barrels a day, over 1993.
North Sea production peaked at 3.72 million barrels a day in 1987, then slid to a low of 3.55 million barrels daily in 1989, according to Wood MacKenzie Consultants Ltd., a group based in Edinburgh, Scotland.
Output was expected to continue to decline.
And indeed, major fields there are mature, and output will ultimately wane.
But improvements in technology -- specifically, new ocean-floor pumping techniques -- are extending the life of some existing fields and making the commercialization of smaller satellite fields viable.
And higher oil prices just a few years ago sparked plans to start new development.
Indeed, output began rising slowly in 1990.
Then, a number of new fields came on line ahead of schedule, causing the recent sudden gush of oil from that sector.
Although another swell of North Sea production is unlikely after this one, output should remain at the new higher level for a period of years.
Plans by London-based British Petroleum Co. to kick up development efforts in a previously unworked area of the North Sea west of the Shetland Islands could help to keep output high, as well.
The unexpected flood of oil from the North Sea has been particularly irksome to OPEC.
Entreaties by the group's oil ministers to all non-OPEC producers, but especially to North Sea operators, to slow their output growth have been unsuccessful.
And although there are many issues facing the fractious organization at its meeting in Geneva, the additional supplies of North Sea crude will make deliberations over whether to reduce the group's production ceiling of 24.5 million barrels a day even more difficult.
Industry experts, such as Ashland Oil Inc.'s chief economist, Cyrus Tahmassebi, say OPEC needs to cut production by at least one million barrels daily -- the same amount as the North Sea surge -- in order to boost crude-oil prices beyond $16 a barrel from recent $14 levels.
Adds Peter Gignoux, head of Smith Barney's petroleum desk in London: "North Sea production has been one of the key components keeping oil prices down."
OPEC, meanwhile, believes cutting its production would be a mistake, specifically because of growing non-OPEC output.
Members of that group -- especially the biggest producer, Saudi Arabia -- don't want to cede market share to other producers and seem inclined to suffer lower prices in order to hold on to a larger slice of the pie.
OPEC prognosticators are counting on increasing oil demand to eventually remedy lower prices.
The bulk of the new fields came on late in 1993 and mostly in the United Kingdom portion of the North Sea.
Al Stanton of Wood Mackenzie Consultants says 15 of the 22 new fields are located in U.K. territory.
U.K. North Sea output is expected to increase 25.6% this year to average 2.5 million barrels a day.
