Insurance companies, which initially cheered the Clinton administration's plan to revise the Superfund law, now fear a new tax in the plan will do little to ease their costs for cleaning up hazardous-waste sites, now estimated as ultimately costing as much as $200 billion.
The administration's plan to revise the Superfund law, scheduled to be released today, proposes what's expected to be a $3.1 billion assessment over five years on companies that write commercial property and casualty insurance.
The money would go into a trust fund that companies with pollution liabilities can tap for part of their clean-up costs.
The industry had supported the trust fund concept because it could slash legal fees, which are one of the biggest costs now associated with cleaning waste sites.
But upon further analysis of the Clinton plan, insurers worry that the changes might be worse than the status quo.
That's because the administration would allow polluters to sidestep the trust fund and sue the insurance companies to pay the entire clean-up costs, as they do now.
"I'm pessimistic about the proposal at this point," said John Arlington, senior counsel for the American Insurance Association, a leading industry trade group.
Insurance companies fear polluters with weak court cases would tap the trust fund and get more money than merited by their legal position.
Meanwhile, polluters with strong court cases would sue and get more money than they could from the trust fund.
"It's that escape hatch that is so difficult to calculate," said John Mascotte, chairman of Continental Corp.
Continental and other insurers are now trying to make those calculations, figuring whether they would pay more or less under the Clinton plan than they do now.
Their findings could determine whether the insurance industry decides to support or oppose the administration bill.
"There's a distinct possibility that the remedy will cost more than it currently costs," said David Farmer, a vice president for the Alliance of American Insurers, another insurance trade association.
Insurance experts say another issue is whether the trust fund will have enough money to pay all the clean-up costs.
The average Superfund site costs about $25 million to clean.
If the fund runs dry, Washington could impose an even higher tax on the insurance industry, said John Snyder, senior vice president for A.M. Best Co.
No bigger issue faces the property and casualty insurance industry than pollution claims, said Kidder Peabody & Co. stock analyst Steven Gavios.
He believes the ultimate costs for the insurance industry will range from $100 billion to $200 billion in pretax dollars over the next several years.
That's a staggering amount for an industry with annual net income of $10 billion to $15 billion.
By comparision, the insurers paid a total of $22 billion on hurricane and other catastrophe claims during the entire 1980s.
Some insurers are likely to fail because of pollution claims, Mr. Gavios estimates.
"But stronger players will be in a much better situation," he said, after the pollution issue is behind them.
Most of the pollution claims made against insurers arise from general liability policies written in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s.
Insurers have tried to deny payment, arguing that they never envisioned pollution claims and the strict environmental laws.
Policyholders have responded by suing the insurance companies and, in about half the cases, they've won.
The administration's plan will try to streamline the process by creating a no-fault system in which the polluters would tap the trust fund for part of their clean-up costs.
The amount they're eligible to receive would depend on the history of claims disputes in their states.
In states where 60% of the cases have been won by the polluters, the polluter could apply for a 60% recovery.
Where polluters won only 20% of the cases, they would be eligible for a 20% recovery.
The proposal does contain one significant concession to the insurance industry, however.
If one of its policyholders chooses to use trust fund money to clean up a site, the fund will indemnify the insurer from claims by other policyholders who polluted the same site.
A.M. Best's Mr. Snyder added that well-run insurers, which are far along the road to settling their biggest pollution claims, might fight the trust fund approach because it would put them into the position of bailing out insurers that are less well managed.
"You could have companies at odds over this issue," he said.
