William Ford and Don Edwards, two liberal champions of education and civil rights, are the latest in a series of retiring lawmakers whose departures will change the face of the House and bring a new generation of Democrats to power.
After the large turnover of the 1992 elections -- in which 110 new House members were elected-rank-and-file lawmakers seem almost unnerved as an additional 38 of their colleagues have resigned or said they won't run again this fall.
Mr. Ford, a Michigan Democrat and chairman of the Education and Labor Committee, and Mr. Edwards, the dean of the California delegation and ranking Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, are two of the most prominent.
And their announcements -- within hours of one another yesterday -- dramatize the pace of change in committees with influence over health, telecommunications and banking legislation.
The 66-year-old Mr. Ford, first elected in the Lyndon Johnson landslide of 1964, remains a major player on health care this year.
But the next Democrat in line, Rep. William Clay of Missouri, is a less effective leader who has hurt himself by his tempestuous style.
On the Judiciary Committee, the 79-year-old Mr. Edwards is the very picture of the reasoned, dignified lawmaker, and as the chairman of the civil and constitutional rights panel, he is the third subcommittee chairman to announce his retirement.
Only this week, Rep. Bill Hughes (D., N.J.), chairman of the subcommittee on intellectual property and judicial administration, said he will leave after this year.
And Rep. Romano Mazzoli (D., Ky.), who gave his name to landmark immigration legislation in the 1980s, has said previously he won't seek another term.
The immediate result is to expand the influence of such younger members as Rep. Mike Synar, an ambitious, populist-style Oklahoman, who at 44 years old, next year would rank only behind Chairman Jack Brooks of Texas and John Conyers of Michigan.
With major telecommunications legislation pending, Mr. Synar will have power bases in both the Judiciary and Energy and Commerce committees, where the retirement of Rep. Al Swift (D., Wa.) creates new opportunities.
The same pattern is repeated in the Banking Committee, where the ranking Democrat, Rep. Steve Neal, last week announced he won't seek re-election in North Carolina.
Mr. Neal's decision opens up the powerful financial institutions subcommittee, which he now heads.
Once-junior Democrats such as Rep. Barney Frank of Massachusetts or New York Rep. Charles Schumer are positioned to expand their power.
"I think it's time to go, and go on my terms," Mr. Ford said in announcing his retirement on the House floor.
When Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) rose minutes later, Republicans jokingly invited him to retire as well.
But for both sides, the spate of announcements brought a certain melancholy to the first day of a new session, for which many had come to the floor to eulogize their late Speaker Thomas O'Neill Jr.
"He Rep. O'Neill added a humor and personal touch that has been in short supply since he left," said Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.).
Mr. Rostenkowski could be caught in the undertow himself, given a grand jury investigation here and a crowded primary field back home in Chicago this spring.
