President Clinton, buckling under intense bipartisan pressure, called for the appointment of a special counsel to look into his controversial investment in Whitewater Development Co.
White House aides said the president's turnabout was a political judgment: If something weren't done to quiet the clamor over Whitewater, none of the president's other priorities would be heard.
In recent days, even Democratic lawmakers were asking the president to open his failed real-estate investment to more scrutiny.
"We still know the Clintons didn't do anything wrong," asserted White House aide George Stephanopoulos, adding that the president's call for Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint a special counsel was "rewarding irresponsible allegations."
But at a news briefing where the president's decision was announced, he added, "This controversy is becoming too much of a distraction."
Confronted with the president's request, Ms. Reno reversed her opposition to such a move, saying: "Sometimes we have to go beyond what is generally appropriate simply to assure people that we have gone the extra mile."
Ms. Reno added that she hadn't talked to anyone in the White House yesterday about the president's request.
A department spokesman said she read the letter in which the White House asked her to name a special counsel only five or 10 minutes before it was made public.
The attorney general said the special counsel would be appointed "as soon as possible," but didn't say whom she whould choose.
The special counsel will report to Ms. Reno but operate independently of the Justice Department.
The counsel will have the power to issue subpoenas and, if necessary, convene a grand jury.
But even as the administration was moving toward calling for a special counsel, a step Mr. Clinton resisted for weeks, Republicans on Capitol Hill said they wanted more.
GOP leaders in the House and Senate said they would seek to create special committees that would plumb the many mysteries that still swirl around the failed Arkansas real-estate company.
"In my view, appointment of a special counsel doesn't take away our responsibility in Congress," said Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole of Kansas.
"We need to determine the answers to all the questions that have been raised.
We must meet our responsibility, just as the executive branch must meet its responsibility."
The issue won't die with the president's announcement.
While the White House said Mr. Clinton would turn over his Whitewater files to a special counsel, he still doesn't intend to give them to any congressional committee or to the public at large.
"Gosh no," Mr. Stephanopoulos said in the interview.
The special counsel's report, he said, would be the vehicle to clear the air on the matter.
The president had previously agreed to turn over his Whitewater documents to the Justice Department, which is looking into the Arkansas company as part of a broader inquiry into Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, a failed Little Rock, Ark., thrift owned by James McDougal.
Mr. McDougal was a business partner of Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton in Whitewater in the 1980s and was a political supporter of Mr. Clinton when he was Arkansas governor.
Ms. Reno wouldn't define the scope of the independent counsel's investigation.
The existing probes by department officials will continue until the appointment of the special counsel, who will decide whether to use the current investigators, the department spokesman said.
A variety of accusations and suspicions have arisen about the dealings of Mr. McDougal and the Clintons, including questions about tax payments and interference in bank regulation.
Mr. Clinton has steadfastly denied any wrongdoing.
"The most important thing to me and the most important thing to the American people is I'm completely relaxed about this, because I didn't do anything wrong except I made a bad business deal," Mr. Clinton said Tuesday in an interview with CBS News.
Specifically, the Justice Department is looking into whether Mr. McDougal used Madison Guaranty to divert money into Whitewater improperly.
There also have been allegations that in the mid-1980s Madison paid certain campaign and other debts of the Clintons, which is a questionable practice.
The thrift has been declared insolvent, and federal taxpayers have had to pick up an estimated tab of $50 million to protect depositors.
Some members of Congress have criticized the president for arranging to have the Justice Department issue a subpoena that would protect the Whitewater documents from public dissemination.
The White House also has been slow in disclosing the whereabouts and disposition of the documents, some of which were quietly removed from the office of Deputy White House Counsel Vincent Foster after his suicide in July.
The White House staff was divided over how to handle the issue.
Privately, Mr. Stephanopoulos and White House Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty argued for broad disclosure and the appointment of a special counsel in order to silence critics.
But senior aide Bruce Lindsey, with the backing of Mrs. Clinton, maintained for a long time that the issue was private and that the Clintons hadn't done anything wrong.
Disclosure would create more, not fewer, political headaches, they believed.
But with Democrats such as Senate Finance Committee Chairman Daniel Moynihan of New York joining in calls for a change of policy, the White House bowed to the inevitable.
Adding to the pressure, congressional Democrat leaders told the White House this week that the Democrats simply had no convincing reply to Mr. Dole's public call for a special prosecutor.
Although White House aides painted the president as reluctant to change his mind, Mr. Clinton had all but made up his mind in Europe on Tuesday night.
He chose to sleep on the matter before deciding to call for a special counsel.
Separately, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. is investigating whether Mrs. Clinton's former law firm misled the agency regarding the firm's dealings with Madison Guaranty, the Associated Press reported.
In 1989, the Rose Law Firm was paid $400,000 by the FDIC to sue the auditors of Madison Guaranty.
Rose had earlier represented Madison in an effort to win approval from Arkansas regulators for a recapitalization effort.
Federal conflict-of-interest regulations generally prohibit contractors from representing the government in thrift-failure cases where the same law or accounting firm represents or once represented the failed S&L.
The FDIC probe, which is separate from the Justice Department's criminal inquiry, seeks to learn whether the Rose Law Firm was forthcoming about its ties to Madison, the AP reported.
Joe Davidson contributed to this article.
