Nobody should be surprised by the ambivalence with which Americans contemplate the Clinton Administration's decision to lift the trade embargo with Vietnam.
The war has come to be viewed as an outright U.S. defeat, at least in the sense that it failed to spare South Vietnam the rigors of a Communist takeover.
Among sophisticates, it's been the fashion for some while to poke fun at the "domino theory," the notion that a Communist walkover in Vietnam could have provoked successive attacks on Thailand, Malaysia and the rest of Southeast Asia.
The same school explains away the bloody triumph of communism in Cambodia by blaming it on the Americans.
Indeed, there's still a body of opinion that believes that the American involvement in Vietnam was an evil enterprise from the beginning.
We favor the lifting of the embargo, but not as a way to bury the past or the America that fought in Vietnam.
The war was waged not wisely but for honorable purposes.
In moving to a new phase of U.S.-Vietnamese relations, we hope that America's policy-makers will continue to do what they reasonably can to advance the cause of freedom for the people of Vietnam and Asia generally.
For in this part of the world, the war's legacy looks rather different.
It was widely understood in those days that Asia's future was indeed up for grabs.
Young nations were just finding their sea legs, and leftist ideologues saw a ripe opportunity to commandeer these unsteady societies and march them off at gunpoint (with Moscow and Beijing supplying the guns) to the laboratory for bizarre social experiments.
In that respect, America's staunchness laid the foundation for the region's prosperity today.
This does not need much explaining to Asia's people, though perhaps to Americans.
Whatever their relevance to the challenges of the next century, the remarkable staying power of leaders such as Lee Kuan Yew in Singapore, Suharto in Indonesia and even Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines bears testimony to the fears and hunger for stability derived from so many years of living dangerously.
The same concerns gave birth to regional bodies like Seato and Asean, both founded with the specific aim of resisting communism.
And of course, the U.S. Navy is still a welcome and comforting presence, though Asian politicians try not to admit it too loudly.
The question remains, what to do about Vietnam?
By all means, let there be mutually satisfying trade between the U.S. and Vietnam.
Economically, American businesses can judge their own risks.
Politically, as with China, trade with the West can only be subversive of the established order.
It is bound to spread knowledge of the outside world.
It produces prosperity, something communism has not, and helps to reawaken among oppressed people the habits of independent thought and personal initiative.
Over time, history suggests, economic growth results in greater respect for human rights and democracy.
To be effective, though, these purposes need to be kept in mind.
In particular, trade need not be accompanied by diplomatic hypocrisy and the full panoply of government-to-government payola.
The kind of largesse routinely dished out by U.S. AID, the Export-Import Bank and the multilateral lenders would just flow into the coffers of the Hanoi regime, as indeed it already has.
This is dubious enough as an economic proposition.
As politics, it's worse.
The flow of money and credit merely becomes fuel for the sort of corruption and favor-dispensing that allows Communist regimes to retain their grip on life long after even their own cadres have abandoned belief in anything but keeping themselves in power.
Similarly, the U.S. and the rest of the world's democracies should not depict trade as a stamp of approval for despotic regimes.
In lifting the embargo, indeed, President Bill Clinton has offered the worst of all possible reasons.
He says he's motivated entirely by concern for resolving the fate of missing servicemen, and that on this issue Hanoi has turned more reasonable.
He runs an enormous risk that history will prove this a delusion if not a lie.
Not even Jane Fonda can still harbor illusions about the moral qualities of the clique in Hanoi, not after hundreds of thousands of Vietnam's own people risked horrifying deaths at sea to escape its tyrannical rule.
The Hanoi regime must know a great deal about the missing servicemen, but has dished out information in a cynical bargaining game, no doubt patting itself on the back for exploiting what must be regarded as Western sentimentality.
These are the same Vietnamese leaders who calculatedly set up their own Viet Cong allies in the South to be decimated in the Tet offensive, thus dispensing with colleagues who might be an inconvenience after victory.
The Western media naturally took the Viet Cong "sacrifice" as a measure of the Communists' moral commitment, but you don't exactly have to ransack the archives to find that the North Vietnamese took a more cynical view.
So, while it seems highly unlikely that U.S. soldiers and airmen are still being held, there's still a world of mystery embodied in the phrase "died in captivity."
America may have been on the war's losing side, but it remained the richest, most powerful nation in the world.
Certainly it's possible that some of its POWs learned or suffered things while in Communist hands that Hanoi would prefer that the American people and government never find out about.
Does anybody doubt that the North Vietnamese Communists were capable of staging the murder of troublesome prisoners?
There also remains the unanswered question of whether some prisoners were shipped to the Soviet Union and what unpleasant fate overtook them there.
While some of our most heroic former prisoners dismiss these concerns, they are by no means the province merely of distraught families, con men and kooks.
George A. Carver Jr., the CIA analyst whose estimates were repeatedly vindicated during the war, has spelled out his suspicions on these pages ("The POW Drama," May 20, 1993).
And former national security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski has raised the possibility of a "Katyn massacre" of retained prisoners.
For those with a taste for detail, John Corry has a long report in the new American Spectator.
President Clinton showed what we hope was sincere sensitivity to the concerns of the MIA-POW families in the way he announced the embargo repeal.
Despite this, Hanoi will do all that it can to bill his initiative as a badge of respectability.
Principle has not always been apparent in Clinton foreign policy.
By welcoming a propagandist for the Irish Republican Army, he has antagonized good British friends in order to throw a sop to the Irish lobby in the U.S. Senate.
His embrace of Boris Yeltsin has lately come at the expense of the newly independent ex-Soviet subject nations, which now wonder if Washington plans to acquiesce in the resurrection of the U.S.S.R.
On Vietnam, again, the problem is not so much what Mr. Clinton did as the way he tried to explain it.
His own relationship to this complex legacy remains ambiguous, to put it charitably.
No doubt he wants to put Vietnam behind us, and him.
But it would be reassuring if he could recognize that America fought the war partly to secure the freedom and hopes for prosperity of the Vietnamese people, and that while the U.S. did not achieve this goal it hasn't forgotten it.
Honoring the sacrifice of those who fought in Vietnam does not require a perpetual, self-defeating embargo.
But it does require trying to develop relations in ways that bring closer the freedom that the Vietnamese might already enjoy if the war had ended differently.
