As acquisitions go, Homestake Mining Co.'s purchase of International Corona Corp. in 1992 was anything but celebrated.
Many industry analysts said it was doomed to fail, and one even compared it to the ill-fated LTV-Republic Steel merger, which resulted in a long spell in bankruptcy court.
They have been proved wrong so far.
Homestake's purchase of Corona seems to have solved the two gold-mining firms' biggest problems and given Homestake a new lease on life.
"Corona had more debt than it could afford and Homestake had high-cost production," says Peter Steen, the former Corona president who is now president of Homestake.
"What the merger did was give us a good chance to start over."
Because Homestake had very little debt, about $123 million, at the time of the acquisition, it was able to absorb Corona's $227 million long-term debt and still maintain a moderate debt-to-equity ratio.
Today their combined long-term debt has been trimmed to $283 million.
And combining with Corona gave Homestake the chance to put Mr. Steen, a well-respected operations man, at the helm, where he could start to attack Homestake's operational problems.
Homestake, which completed the acquisition in July 1992, has cut production costs, even at its oldest and least-efficient mine, and drastically trimmed its corporate overhead.
It has come up with a development plan for Eskay Creek, its northwestern Canada gold mine, that satisfies metals analysts and has trimmed away its small, inefficient properties.
In spite of severe cuts in its exploration budget, which required closing 12 of its 15 world-wide exploration offices, the company has turned up one of the most promising gold prospects in the U.S. in decades.
Further surprising analysts, Corona's entrepreneurial, risk-taking style and Homestake's conservatism have blended successfully.
While Homestake has refused to shed its stodgy aversion to futures markets and other price-protection tools, it has adopted a Corona-like adventurousness in exploration, striking out in new territories, such as South America, that it had always shunned in favor of safer, but less promising, climes.
"A year ago I was very skeptical" that Homestake could cut costs and boost earnings, says Marc Cohen, analyst at Kidder Peabody.
"But they're making positive progress."
In 1993, the company reported net income of $52.5 million, or 38 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $175.8 million, or $1.31 a share in 1992.
The 1993 results included a write-down of $12.8 million and a gain from the sale of small mining properties of $17 million.
The 1992 loss included write-downs of $130.3 million and a loss from restructuring expenses of $48.4 million.
The company, of course, still faces difficult challenges.
First and foremost, it must keep finding gold, and a lot of it, to be able to maintain its production.
Its Eskay Creek development will require overcoming some tough transportation and weather hurdles.
And Congress may slap a royalty on metals mined on government land, which could render its latest gold find uneconomic.
Homestake faced its most difficult task even before it bought Corona, improving its namesake mine in Lead, S.D.
At the time, the Homestake mine was still using mining methods developed 117 years earlier when the ore body was huge and rich.
But as the ore body narrowed, those methods didn't work as well.
And attention to safety had slipped.
To fix the mine, Mr. Steen brought back a former mine manager, Al Winter, who had a record of working well with the rank and file.
Mr. Winter redesigned the mining plan to target higher-grade material, raising the grade of ore sent to the smelter to about 0.225 ounce per ton from about 0.17 ounce per ton.
He also closed the least-productive sections of the mine.
As part of a new safety program, supervisors were given a safety checklist that required them to check equipment and passageways, ensure all work was being done safely and perform one act of safety (such as more safely positioning equipment) at the beginning of each shift.
As a result, accidents per 100,000 man-hours declined to 4.18 in 1993 from 6.51 in 1991 in the mine.
In the mill, the rate fell to zero last year from 5.42 in 1992.
And, as safety improved, so did productivity.
The work review at Homestake still isn't over, Mr. Steen says.
But already, the company has reduced cash production costs at the mine to $268 an ounce in 1993 from $377 an ounce in 1991.
"One could argue that they should have done these things earlier," Mr. Cohen says.
"But they've really busted their butts to squeeze these costs out."
Things are looking up elsewhere, too, even at 50%-owned Eskay Creek, which Homestake considered overvalued when it was acquired from Corona.
The company took write-downs of $176 million in 1991 and 1992 on the property.
Worse, the company couldn't find any smelters interested in handling the deposit's complex ore.
Homestake appeared doomed to building an autoclave unit, a technically expensive and tricky pressurized smelter, to treat the ore.
But now, ore supplies have declined world-wide, and Homestake is negotiating with several willing smelters.
That has cut the expected cost of developing Eskay to $75 million from about $225 million.
And, in a stroke of either luck or exploration genius, the company discovered a major ore body in Nevada, called Eureka, which has spurred a modern-day gold rush in the area.
The company's preliminary drilling indicates the 37-mile-long strike holds very high ore grades, although gold reserve estimates won't be available until a $4 million drilling program is completed this summer.
The only thing that hasn't gone right for Homestake in the past 18 months is its 16.7% stake in Main Pass 229, says John Tumazos, analyst at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette.
The offshore Gulf of Mexico sulfur and oil project, which is operated by Freeport-McMoRan Resource Partners L.P., has suffered from low oil production and low oil and sulfur prices since beginning operations in 1991.
Homestake took an after-tax write-down of $12.8 million on the project in 1993, and had a pretax operating loss of about $9.9 million on it for the year.
Over the next few years, Homestake will face plenty more hurdles.
Finding enough ore to replace the 1.8 million ounces Homestake mines from its reserves each year is difficult for any company, even one with a strike as big as Eureka.
Because of its remote location and extreme cold, Eskay Creek will be difficult to bring into production, and Homestake will have to work hard to keep its work force happy.
Expected mining law changes, including a proposed royalty on gold production from public lands, could threaten the viability of Eureka, which is on claims staked on government land.
And without the use of hedging tools, the company is more vulnerable than most to gold-price downturns.
But for now, those formerly skeptical analysts are pleased with and somewhat surprised at Homestake's success in absorbing Corona.
"I didn't expect this much progress," says Mr. Tumazos, the Donaldson Lufkin analyst.
"I couldn't have hoped for anything better."
