Germany's metal-working industry is sliding ever faster toward a massive labor conflict.
And the battle is shaping up as a test-case for the restructuring of Germany's recession-battered economy and the durability of Germany's traditionally powerful unions.
Both the IG Metall union and the industries involved -- including automobile, engineering and machine-building companies -- say they agree on the core issue that more work-time flexibility is needed.
But they differ sharply on how to implement it and at what cost.
With negotiations broken down, both sides are saying no new talks are likely before IG Metall, the country's largest union, begins polling it's 3.2 million members in a strike vote on Monday.
A strike could begin March 4.
In the meantime, IG Metall is resuming its short warning strikes -- the third week of such actions.
The prospect of a crippling work stoppage has prompted political leaders to urge that the union and the employers' association, Gesamtmetall, find a compromise fast.
Labor Minister Norbert Bluem said a strike in the current economic situation "would be like a fist in the eye."
Officially, the two sides remain far apart on a range of issues, including the union's demand for a 5.5% wage increase and the employers' determination to cut the extra pay that workers get when they're on vacation, which averages about two weeks' wages.
But while a deal could probably be struck on those points, the central difficulties thus far have revolved around the length of the work week -- one of the most sacred issues for the German labor movement.
Labor costs are rising four times as fast as in other Western countries, employers say, insisting that a return to competitiveness hinges on lowering those costs about 5% and getting more hours out of workers when orders pile up.
Consequently, the employers association proposed a contract clause allowing individual companies to lengthen the work-week to 40 hours from the current 36 without paying overtime.
But at a time when Volkswagen AG's four-day week is credited with saving 30,000 jobs and has been heralded as an antidote to spiraling unemployment, unionists want the work spread around.
IG Metall countered employer demands by suggesting a 30-40 hour week with the benchmark being 35 hours.
Such a plan would accelerate the timetable for a shorter work week, which employers -- back in better times -- had agreed to implement in 1995, a decision they now regret.
The union offered to moderate its wage demands in return for the shorter week.
"In view of four million unemployed," said IG Metall spokesman Joerg Barczynski, "No one would understand how we could demand that people with jobs have longer working hours."
Although few believe a strike would be in either side's interest, the recession "has put us in a very difficult situation, so the fronts have gotten harder," says Wolfgang Scheremet of the German Institute for Economic Research in Berlin.
IG Metall has been wounded by the loss of 600,000 jobs in the metal-working sector over the last two years, and is thus being forced to prove itself as a job-saver.
After three years of declining business, the employers' association has become especially aggressive and took the unprecedented step last year of canceling the current-collective bargaining agreement -- traditionally a step left to the union.
Smaller firms, which couldn't cope with wage agreements dictated primarily by Germany's largest companies, have sparked the change of tone.
Many of them have even dropped out of the industrywide collective-bargaining process, abetted by sympathetic workers' councils.
That, in turn, poses a serious threat to the bargaining process and to the long-term power of German unions.
Defenders of the collective-bargaining system, who are still legion, give it considerable credit for contributing to Germany's historically close relations between management and labor and low number of annual strike days.
"I think the employers associations by and large want to keep industrywide bargaining, because they see it has advantages for the whole association.
But the smaller firms are embittered," says Mr. Scheremet.
"The collective-bargaining system is definitely in danger in Germany."
