Senior Pentagon officials are contemplating selling overseas a large part of the military's Cold War inventory of high-performance weaponry.
They argue that the new approach would strengthen U.S. allies, improve U.S. military readiness, and help sustain the U.S. defense industry -- all without costing the taxpayer a penny.
But if implemented, the new policy would provoke charges that the U.S. is contributing to the proliferation of high-tech weapons, using poorer countries to support its defense budget, and perhaps sparking arms races in new regions, such as South America.
Several nations on that continent, as well as in Southeast Asia and North Africa, are being looked at as potential buyers under the program.
Under the contemplated plan, the Pentagon, rather than mothball part of the inventory of jets, ships and armored vehicles, would sell it overseas and use the proceeds to buy newer versions of the same weapons.
The size of the potential sales is huge.
The first step in the program, a kind of test run, would involve selling 400 of the Air Force's F-16 fighters for about $4.8 billion.
"This isn't a strategy to get rid of older, excess stuff -- it's some of our best stuff" that would be sold, Gen. Michael Carns, the vice chief of staff of the Air Force, and the leading proponent of the idea, said in an interview.
"It is to build up our allies, get them to do some of the heavy lifting, and to use the proceeds to help our own modernization at a level we currently can't afford."
The proposal already has received a positive response from Defense Secretary William Perry, from the State Department, and from some in the defense industry, Gen. Carns said.
The plan wouldn't require legislative changes, but would clearly need the explicit backing of the administration and Congress.
Congressional approval would be needed for the arms sales and for the Pentagon to spend the proceeds.
The Pentagon has occasionally conducted high-tech sales of this sort in the past, most notably in a 1991 Air Force sale of 24 F-15Cs to Saudi Arabia that enabled the Air Force to buy six state-of-the-art F-15Es.
But generally, the Pentagon has sold off its oldest and least-valued gear.
Discussing the first steps in the program, Gen. Carns, a former fighter pilot who holds a master's degree from Harvard Business School, estimated that each of the 400 F-16s could be sold for $12 million, after being upgraded.
The modifications to their engines, structure and cockpits would cost roughly $2 billion, leaving the Air Force more than $2 billion to buy 70 to 100 new F-16s.
Under the plan, these would be used in the late 1990s to replace retiring F-111s, Gen. Carns said.
The basic "flyaway" cost of a new F-16 currently runs about $20 million.
Foreign customers typically pay several million dollars more for special weaponry, parts, and support costs, a Lockheed spokesman said.
"It gives me brand-new warfighting airplanes at no cost to the taxpayer," Gen. Carns said.
On a large enough scale, sales of this sort would help the Pentagon get through the procurement squeeze that financial analysts predict for the late 1990s.
The Pentagon's official estimate is that from fiscal 1996 through fiscal 1999, its costs will be $20 billion higher than the budgets planned for that period.
The defense industry, which has objected in the past to some Pentagon sell-offs of older inventory, will support this plan because the sales ultimately would produce new work for it, the general argued.
First, he said, the industry would be able to upgrade the gear to prepare it for markets that it might not otherwise penetrate.
Then, when the Pentagon had the cash in hand, the industry would receive new orders.
Dwain Mayfield, vice president, marketing, of Lockheed Corp.'s Fort Worth, Texas, unit, which makes the F-16, agreed with that assessment, saying, "We've been needing something like this.
It's an innovative plan."
Mr. Mayfield, who was briefed on the Pentagon plan last week, added, "I think it will happen.
There are too many upsides to the plan for it not to happen."
Other advanced aircraft that could be sold under the plan, Gen. Carns said, are Boeing Co.'s KC-135 tankers and Lockheed's C-130 cargo planes.
In addition, he said, the Army probably could pursue similar plans with its best tanks and armored personnel carriers.
When asked about the possible new policy, Thomas Cardamone Jr., editor of Arms Trade News, called it a "short-sighted, very cash-flow-oriented" approach.
"It creates instability and sucks capital away from infrastructure," he said.
"It makes bad foreign policy.
Anytime a country buys a high-tech aircraft like the F-16, it makes their neighbors nervous."
Arms Trade News is published by the Council for a Liveable World, which advocates cutting the U.S. defense budget.
But Gen. Carns dismissed those concerns, saying, "We are working with coalition partners who share our values.
We aren't proliferating anything they wouldn't otherwise buy."
Among the countries that are being contemplated as potential buyers of the F-16s, industry and Pentagon officials said, are Thailand, Singapore, Egypt and South Korea, which already possess some, as well as Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Morocco and Tunisia, which don't.
In addition, Chile is believed to be eager to buy F-16s, but if it did, Argentina might want some, which would draw objections from the British because of the continuing dispute over the Falkland Islands.
The Philippines is believed to be interested, but Pentagon officials privately doubt that the island nation needs high-performance aircraft.
In addition to making financial sense, Gen. Carns argued, the inventory sell-off makes sound military and national strategy.
The experience of the Persian Gulf War, he said, was that the U.S.'s coalition partners lacked the hardware to perform many important missions, such as achieving air superiority or providing airlift.
"Coalition warfare is here to stay," he said.
"We ought to enable some of our potential coalition allies to participate in a robust way."
Having allies use U.S.-made equipment also would make it easier for U.S. forces to operate with them and to use their infrastructure when deployed abroad.
That would partially compensate for the loss of access and presence resulting from the reduction of U.S. forces deployed overseas, he said.
