While AST may lack the sprinter's glamour, it has survived to become one of the biggest PC makers in the country.
Its latest earnings underscore its good health: In the fiscal second-quarter ended Jan. 1, its profit rose 22.6%, topping analysts' estimates.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading late yesterday, AST was quoted at $29.125, up $4.375.
AST's revenue jumped 95% to $677 million from $346.3 million a year ago, reflecting strong growth world-wide and the company's acquisition of Tandy Corp.'s PC business last summer.
Like other big PC makers, AST has benefited as customers shift to brand-name PCs from lesser-known clones.
"From a momentum perspective, they head into 1994 in incredibly good shape," says Steven Eskenazi, principal in Alex. Brown & Sons.
AST reported fiscal second-quarter net income of $17.9 million, or 54 cents a share, up from $14.6 million, or 46 cents a share, in the year-ago period.
Financial analysts had expected net income of about 45 cents a share.
Analysts say AST's profit was higher than anticipated because the company digested its Tandy acquisition with unexpected speed.
The company took a onetime, pretax charge of $125 million in the fiscal fourth-quarter to cover the $175 million transaction.
Safi Qureshey, AST's co-founder and chief executive officer, says the acquisition gave his company the manufacturing capacity it needed last year to keep pace with increased demand.
"We see '94 to be a strong year," Mr. Qureshey adds.
"We will continue to position AST very well as a tier-one company that is very focused."
Under Mr. Qureshey, AST has quietly made formidable strides in market share by maintaining a broad line of updated products and distributing them widely.
Last year, AST's U.S. shipments -- not including Tandy's -- grew 66% to 530,000 machines, says International Data Corp., a Framingham, Mass., market research firm.
Including Tandy's sales, AST was the No. 5 PC maker in the U.S. last year, just ahead of Dell.
AST's goal -- like those of most other PC makers -- is to continue grabbing enough extra market share to offset falling profit margins.
At its present course, AST could one day rival the volume of the Big Three PC makers, International Business Machines Corp., Apple Computer Inc. and Compaq Computer Corp., some observers say.
Mr. Qureshey "is a very determined character and is pretty intent on winning at this game," says Steven Raymund, chairman and chief executive of Tech Data Corp., a Clearwater, Fla., distributor of computers.
Adds Kenneth R. Waters, president of MicroAge Inc., a Tempe, Ariz., distributor: "He's certainly doing the things he needs to do to be there in the event one of the other companies stumbles."
No one would have pegged AST as a contender 14 years ago when Mr. Qureshey and co-founders Albert Wong and Thomas Yuen launched the firm as a tiny maker of add-ons to IBM's original PC.
Just before the market for add-ons cratered, when IBM and others started shipping PCs with more features, AST saw its vulnerability and started making PCs as well.
Following a strong start, AST posted a loss in fiscal 1989 after, among other things, failing quickly to match a new feature offered by Compaq.
In a falling out that Mr. Qureshey likens to a divorce, Messrs. Wong and Yuen departed the company, leaving Mr. Qureshey to direct AST ahead of small rivals.
An engineer by training, Mr. Qureshey moved to differentiate AST by emphasizing technological advances in its products.
The company, for example, joined Compaq in beating Apple and IBM to the punch by coming out with a notebook computer.
AST also introduced a line of PCs with replaceable microprocessors, allowing customers to beef up their machines without having to buy another.
Mr. Qureshey also made sure that AST formed close links with big distributors like Tech Data and Merisel Inc., which are invaluable allies because they outfit large corporations with hundreds of computers.
Two years ago, he demonstrated foresight by expanding his business-oriented product line to include the then-untapped consumer market.
By launching its Advantage line of consumer PCs into retail chains like Circuit City and Computer City, AST was ready when consumer PC sales mushroomed last year amid falling PC prices and the advent of multimedia functions for full-motion video and sound.
In the second quarter, AST says its consumer sales accounted for 38% of total $451 million domestic sales, compared with less than 20% at the same time a year ago.
"They have been very quick to move to market trends," says Finis Conner, chairman and chief executive of Conner Peripherals Inc., a big supplier of computer disk drives.
Adds Mr. Qureshey: "We don't just want to focus on the Fortune 500.
We want to focus on a Fortune 5,000,000."
AST's international business is also performing nicely, after a slow start in the competitive European market.
Total international sales increased 56% to $226 million in the second-quarter, with European revenue up 113% during the quarter.
Although the European economy remains sluggish, AST says it has expanded its customer base throughout the continent.
In Asia, the company opened a new subsidiary in Malaysia and signed an agreement in Japan with Mitsui Bussan Digital to supply PCs to business and home users.
AST also dominates sales in China, where it broke new ground by becoming one of the first major PC companies to expand there.
"The Chinese market in 10 years could be the size of Europe," says Michael Pickett, chairman and chief executive of Merisel.
However, AST isn't immune from a renewed PC pricing war, which would drag profit margins down for all the companies.
AST faces renewed efforts by IBM, Digital Equipment Corp. and Hewlett-Packard Co. to win market share in Intel-based PCs.
And it faces a line of PCs from Apple and IBM that use a new chip called the PowerPC.
But Mr. Qureshey says his company's PC volume is increasing so much that margins shouldn't be tremendously affected.
Aside from the concern about margins, "There are very few issues left for AST to address," analyst Mr. Eskenazi says.
REVENUE (millions) $1,412.2 $944.1
NET INCOME (LOSS) ($53.7) $68.5
EARNINGS (LOSS) PER SHARE ($1.72) $2.16
International Business Machines Corp., Compaq Computer Corp., Apple Computer Inc., Dell Computer Corp., Packard Bell
