General Motors Corp. temporarily halted production of redesigned 1994 S-10 pickup trucks and then recalled all 120,000 of the trucks built so far to fix defective fuel tanks that put the vehicles out of compliance with federal safety standards.
The defect, which made the trucks illegal to sell, could lead to gasoline spilling from the fuel tank in a crash.
By coincidence, that's the problem at the heart of a separate dispute between GM and federal safety regulators who say some four million of GM's 1973-1987 full-sized pickups are unsafe because they're prone to leak fuel after side-impact collisions.
National Highway Transportation Safety Administration staffers have recommended a recall of the older trucks, but a final decision rests with Transportation Secretary Federico Pena.
GM said it's unaware of any fuel leaks or accidents related to the defective 1994 Chevy S-10 and GMC Sonoma small trucks.
But a GM spokeswoman acknowledged Friday: "We didn't need this to happen to this product."
The new S-10 pickup is a crucial, highvolume product in a profitable segment.
GM has two large assembly factories in Shreveport, La., and Linden, N.J., dedicated to the vehicle.
Just eight days ago, GM settled a strike at the Shreveport plant that cost nearly a week's production.
GM said it took the unusual steps to contain its potential liability and reassure some 53,000 customers who have already taken delivery of new S-10s that the vehicles will be made roadworthy.
In addition, GM will fix another 67,000 trucks now in inventory before they are delivered to customers.
GM halted production of the trucks for a day last Wednesday to track down the problem.
On Thursday, the company restarted production using properly built tanks.
On Friday, GM officials began calling dealerships directly to explain the situation.
Letters to customers won't go out until this week, GM said.
GM said it learned the S-10 trucks failed to meet federal safety standards in early January, after officials of the NHTSA crash-tested one of the trucks.
As part of the test, the truck was tipped over.
During that test, the sample S-10 truck leaked fuel from a joint that connects a vent to the filler tube of the gas tank.
GM blamed the defect on the fuel-tank supplier's failure to follow GM's specifications in attaching the vent to the filler tube.
GM wouldn't name the tank maker, but the spokeswoman said the supplier would bear the cost of the recall.
The spokeswoman also insisted that the supplier's failure to follow GM's specifications wasn't the result of corner-cutting in the face of GM's campaign to squeeze costs out of its purchasing.
The 1994 S-10's fuel tank is located inside the vehicle's steel frame rails.
In contrast, the old pickups that are the subject of the separate NHTSA probe into fuel leakage have tanks positioned outside the steel frame rails -- a design NHTSA had initially approved but now questions.
