It was a story that had everything -- danger, courage, triumph over heavy odds and a heroine of surpassing modesty.
The scene that followed had something for everyone, too.
There, at New York's City Hall on Monday, stood officer Arlene Beckles, surrounded by family, a fiance, happy police brass and a beaming Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
They were on hand, along with legions of cameramen and reporters, to watch New York's new police commissioner, William Bratton, award officer Beckles a detective shield.
The policewoman's path to that shield began with an off-duty visit to a downtown Brooklyn beauty parlor.
As officer Beckles sat under the hair-dryer at the Salon La Mode last Saturday, three armed thugs entered, announced a robbery, and began herding customers and staff toward the back.
The 30-year-old officer jumped up and got her off-duty revolver out from under her beauty-parlor smock.
By the time the action was over, she had pumped bullets from her five-shot revolver into all three robbers.
Two of the wounded robbers fled -- only to be captured later -- while police officer Beckles, with a transit officer who came in to help, subdued the one who arose to attack her after she had shot him in the nose.
There can be no question about why Officer Beckles's performance in the line of duty won raves -- for, among other things, protecting the 15 or more odd customers in the salon.
In another day and age the likelihood of many lost lives during a routine store holdup was not so great.
We live, however, in this day and age in which it is very nearly routine procedure for criminals to kill their victims during a robbery to get rid of witnesses.
Officer Beckles, who weighs in at 110 pounds, took out three armed thugs in the prime of their hoodlum lives -- one of whom wrestled her to the ground.
"The valiant only taste of death but once," Shakespeare tells us, but officer Beckles came close to tasting death twice when, her revolver empty, one of the wounded thugs put his gun to her head.
His gun fortunately misfired both times.
New York's new police commissioner didn't need Officer Beckles's case to encourage him in the decision, made the same weekend, to increase the firepower of the city's police.
The police will be getting 15-round clips for their new 9mm. semi-automatic guns, instead of being limited to the 10 rounds previously allowed them.
Yet since some in the city still profess to worry that the police might be too well armed, it did not hurt to have before them the case of officer Beckles, with an empty revolver and those she'd already hit still attacking her.
It didn't hurt, either, for citizens to have this chance to celebrate one lone law enforcer's big win.
In a time when the justice system is so deranged that juvenile killers go unpunished, when lawyers only have to argue child sex abuse to keep juries from convicting murderers, every such win over society's enemies is bracing.
And in New York, where racial questions are particularly tense as a white mayor replaces a black one, it certainly did not hurt that the ceremony at City Hall brought together a mayor who won on a law-and-order campaign and a black woman police officer who is now heroine of the entire city.
A fitting reminder that all of us owe a debt of gratitude to anyone as faithful to the call of duty as Detective Beckles.
