Sears, Roebuck & Co., forecasting that sales at its stores open at least a year will increase 4% to 5% in 1994, said it will accelerate the pace of its store remodeling program.
"We are in good shape," Sears Chairman Edward A. Brennan told retail analysts in New York.
Sears, which bounced back from a record loss in 1992 to a record profit last year, devoted much of the meeting with analysts to refuting concerns that the Sears resurgence may be running out of steam.
Such concerns precipitated a one-day 6% slide in the price of Sears common shares last Tuesday, when the big retail and insurance concern reported fourth-quarter earnings that were below analysts' expectations.
"We're ahead of the curve in delivering shareholder value," Mr. Brennan said.
He noted that Sears delivered a 19% return on equity to its investors in 1993, the first time in recent years that Sears surpassed its target of a 15% annual return on equity.
That was achieved in large measure because the company was able to do in one year what it had planned to do in three years: Chop $328 million out of its annual costs on an after-tax basis.
This year, though, the performance targets of the nation's No. 3 retailer are more modest.
The sales increase Sears is projecting is only about half the 9.1% the company achieved last year.
Sears also said it will spend more this year on store renovation in an effort to continue taking market share from its competitors.
Sears will renovate 170 of its 800 stores this year, 39% more than the 122 stores it refurbished in 1993.
This year's planned renovations, which call for Sears to convert stockroom square footage into selling space, will add about four million square feet of retail space, Sears said.
Maintaining usage of the SearsCharge card by customers, who since mid-1993 have been able to settle their purchases with major credit cards, will be a big challenge for the retailer this year, Sears officials said.
At year end, Sears had managed to slightly boost the level of sales settled with the SearsCharge to 57% of total volume, from 54% a year earlier.
Sears officials said their goal is to maintain activity of the highly profitable charge-card operation at the current level.
Allstate Corp.
Chairman Wayne E. Hedien, who also spoke at the meeting, said the Sears insurance unit has a favorable long-term business outlook.
Higher average population age, improved safety devices such as antilock brakes and auto airbags, and overall moderate economic growth should help Allstate report strong earnings this year, Mr. Hedien said.
