The aging of America is sparking a boom in adult day care.
Adult day-care centers, which provide supervision in a group setting for aged or disabled people who live at home, have multiplied tenfold in the past decade to 3,000, and the trend is accelerating.
The number of frail parents per adult child will nearly double by 2030, with families providing 80% of needed long-term care.
"The odds are good that somebody in your family is going to need adult day care someday," says Burton Reifler, program director of a national adult day-care demonstration project funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
He sees a need for 10,000 adult day-care centers by 2000 -- an eighth as many as the current number of U.S. child-care centers.
Yet regulation by the states is uneven, and centers offer services so varied that consumers can easily get confused.
Facilities range from homes and church basements to new medical buildings with nurses and physical-therapy setups.
Programs run from daylong TV-watching to "theme weeks" with drama troupes and field trips.
The field's fast growth is attracting many would-be entrepreneurs, raising risks for consumers.
"This is just the thing the wife and I have been looking for," one caller told a National Council on the Aging official after seeing a television show on adult day care.
"We have an empty garage we can use.
We'll just put in some heat, a TV and a few chairs."
The council is heading an effort to set uniform accreditation standards.
Finding good adult day care can be worth the effort.
Adult day care delays nursing-home placement by an average of 15 to 22 months, a California study shows.
At about $20 to $50 a day, it costs one-third to one-half as much as a nursing home and can serve nearly anyone who isn't bedridden.
But selecting a center is often a painful trial-and-error process.
When Vickie Lowe placed her brother, disabled by a stroke, in an adult day-care center in a storefront near her Columbus, Ohio, home, the director "seemed to know pretty much what she was talking about," Ms. Lowe says.
But the center staff lacked crucial judgment and skills.
The director once left Ms. Lowe's brother sitting alone in a van for two hours in a dangerous neighborhood.
Another time, she slammed his fingers in the van door.
A second center Ms. Lowe visited in a church basement had three clients sitting around doing a jigsaw puzzle -- a routine "that gets old after an hour or two," she says.
Finally, after a long wait for admission, an opening came up at Heritage Day Health Center in Columbus, where Ms. Lowe's brother gets physical therapy, recreation and social activities that have eased his depression.
"We have such peace of mind when he's there," she says.
Though many state regulators say reported abuses are rare, California regulators shut down a center where staffers abused clients verbally, failed to administer medications and special diets and didn't report accidents and injuries as required.
Others disregard the most basic safety rules.
Illinois regulators closed a center in a tough Chicago neighborhood where clients had to climb over a stack of boxes to get out the emergency exit and, once outside, run from the center's guard dog, a snarling Doberman.
"Clients who managed to get the boxes out of the way and get outside got bitten by the dog," a state official says.
Family members should check up on adult day-care programs by visiting them unannounced, Dr. Reifler says.
Warning signs: endless TV watching or a lack of personal attention to clients by staff.
One center director tells of visiting a center where two of the three clients were sleeping in hospital beds and the third was eating lunch alone.
"The only staff person had her back turned to all three, working on a puzzle," the director says.
A center should offer interaction and activities, "and that doesn't mean Legos or macaroni art," the director says.
"The materials should be age-appropriate," including activities that reflect a client's life experience and interests.
The setting should be safe and clean, with at least one trained staffer for every six adults.
If needed, security doors should be equipped with double knobs or release buttons to prevent wandering without blocking fire routes.
The staff should be trained to recognize medical problems, such as untreated infections.
Families who need financial help should ask about private grants or state aid programs for adult day-care users.
Medicaid can be used for adult day care in about 35 states.
A growing number of private long-term care insurance policies cover adult day care as well, says James Weil, vice president, senior services, for Metropolitan Life Insurance Co.
Family members should feel welcome, and staffers should talk daily with them, telling them about their relative's day and helping with referrals to other needed services, says Bill Weaver, executive director of Daily Living Centers, a nonprofit Oklahoma City adult day-care concern.
Many centers also offer transportation, physical therapy, care-giver support groups and other services.
But elders' needs differ so widely that even the highest-quality center can be all wrong.
Linda Simpson and her father faced three starkly different choices when they searched for an Atlanta-area day-care center for Ms. Simpson's mother, who is frail and had suffered a series of strokes.
One was a "fairly standard senior center" with sewing, puzzles, crafts and speakers.
At the other extreme was a center for Alzheimer's patients, where most clients weren't able to talk much with others.
While Ms. Simpson's mother wasn't able to do most of the activities in the first center, she was more lucid than most of the clients in the second, Ms. Simpson says.
So the family chose a third alternative, a homelike place where staff members were on hand to help clients get around but where many clients were still able to socialize.
Clients also were expected to help set the table and do other minor tasks, a practice that delights her mother, Ms. Simpson says.
A growing body of evidence shows good adult day care can ease the depression often associated with aging.
Bonnie Walson, director of the Heritage Day center in Columbus, says one participant asked a staffer to "clock out for him" at lunch because day care felt so much like the job he had once loved.
Adult day care also can lower medical bills.
One elderly woman who lived alone in Oklahoma City was visiting the hospital emergency room every few weeks for anxiety attacks, worsened by her fear of having a stroke.
Once enrolled in a center, she was checked daily and reassured by a nurse; that eliminated the need for emergency care, Mr. Weaver says.
For such clients, he adds, adult day care is "a lifeline, a social matrix" that eases the isolation of old age.
