Stronger manufacturing, home construction and consumer spending on big-ticket purchases are buttressing economic growth, a mostly optimistic Federal Reserve said in its periodic regional survey.
"Economic activity continued to expand with signs of acceleration in some sectors," said the report on the economy's performance over the past six weeks.
The report, issued in advance of a meeting of the Fed's monetary policy makers early next month, also indicated that inflation remained tame.
"Little upward pressure on wages and prices was indicated by almost all districts," it said, with rising lumber prices the lone exception.
Southern California, battered by the depressed real-estate and defense industries, was the only area of the country noted for continued weakness.
(The survey was made before Monday's earthquake.)
But other parts of the state show signs of "bottoming out or of modest improvement," the report said.
Holiday spending was generally as good or better than expected, with most of the spark coming from sales of electronics, appliances and other home-related durables.
Auto sales were particularly strong in the Dallas, Minneapolis, St. Louis and San Francisco districts.
Only in the Boston district did retailers report disappointingly modest gains from year-earlier holiday sales.
Apparel sales were weaker, with purchases of Rose Bowl items in Wisconsin one "dramatic" exception.
Moreover, retailers relied on heavy advertising and discounting to spur the sales.
Despite the disappointing holiday sales, retailers in Boston as well as those in Kansas City, Philadelphia, Richmond and St. Louis regions expect continued "economic growth to boost retail sales moderately this spring."
After several harsh years, sales and construction of homes showed substantial gains in most districts.
Even New England is exhibiting signs of life, with hard-hit Connecticut's residential market stabilizing.
Some of the businesses that were polled speculated that the recent uptick in long-term interest rates may be prompting some buyers to move as they stop waiting for rates to bottom out.
Commercial real estate remained weak in most big markets.
Vacancy rates rose in Manhattan during the period.
Manufacturing strengthened in most districts, with some pickup in employment expected to follow.
Orders for heavy-duty trucks, for instance, have stretched some industry suppliers "to their limits," the Chicago region said.
Vigorous home sales have bolstered demand for construction products in the Boston, Dallas, Minneapolis and Atlanta districts, while Atlanta also reported a jump in textile orders resulting from home refurbishing.
Three-quarters of the Philadelphia district manufacturers surveyed reported shipments at a steady pace or "moving up," and many plan to hire more workers over the next six months.
The Boston district estimated that four-fifths of its manufacturers have reduced employment in the past year, but now expect employment to stabilize.
The New York region also noted layoffs from some large manufacturers.
BOSTON: Strong sales of existing homes and "sizable gains" in new-home construction bolstered the economic expansion.
Retail, manufacturing and residential real-estate sectors are "moderately optimistic" about 1994, while insurance companies are still wary.
Retailers, especially in specialty niches, plan to expand stores, which could lead to more jobs.
Mixed sales marked manufactured goods.
Employment remains steady overall, but some airlines expect further reductions.
NEW YORK: Planned layoffs in New York could damp overall economic improvement but the outlook is still "somewhat more favorable," as volatile unemployment levels in New York and New Jersey have leveled off.
Retail sales surged in December, overcoming earlier sluggishness, though slim profit margins are expected due to massive discounting.
High primary vacancy rates in Manhattan anchored otherwise stable leasing activity in other parts of the city.
Lending levels were mixed, as was overall loan demand.
PHILADELPHIA: Despite increased demand for manufactured goods and higher-than-expected holiday retail sales, businesses remain cautious for 1994.
Bankers attributed lending increases to seasonal activity but are upbeat that growing consumer confidence will lead to greater personal borrowing.
CLEVELAND: Retail sales "continue to outperform the nation."
Unemployment fell just below the national average.
Modest but consistent gains in manufacturing has stabilized cutbacks in defense-related industries as well as weak European export markets.
Double-digit domestic-auto sales led Japanese models, spurred by consumer optimism, modest price increases on domestic models, and favorable interest rates.
Demand for loans, particularly auto loans, rose.
RICHMOND: Bad weather hurt crops but didn't detract from tourism, as hotels, motels and resorts posted higher winter bookings than in 1992.
Manufacturing, retail and home sales improved, though some prices for raw materials were beginning to rise.
Renewed commercial construction may not last.
ATLANTA: Despite flat apparel sales, retailers reported strong gains overall, lifted by last-minute holiday volume.
Tourism also increased except in Miami, where it is said to have fallen because of crime.
Defense cutbacks may be mitigated by conversions of output to civilian use.
Builders scrambled to match higher demand for new homes, but the short supply of subcontractors pushed up wages.
Prices for finished goods remain flat, but may soon rise as wage pressures increased last month.
Mixed demand for loans is expected to pick up at the end of the quarter.
CHICAGO: Retail sales, in line with expectations, exceeded the national average, aided in part by increased credit-card and check purchases.
Housewares, electronics and other big-ticket items led overall sales, while apparel sales continued to sap growth.
Consistent growth in manufacturing over the past quarter has led to optimism for 1994, even with tight Japanese and European competition in durable goods.
Pressure from sharp rises in corn and soybean prices have shielded farmers from flood losses.
ST. LOUIS: Economic activity "continues to pick up," boosted by "unseasonably strong" housing starts.
Manufacturers of kitchen and bath fixtures consequently posted increased sales and employment.
Advertising and general economic growth, not deep discounting, pushed up nonapparel sales, with strong sales growth expected to continue into 1994.
Job creation outpaced job loss, expected to be a continuing trend.
A sharp upturn in crop prices, especially new rice exports, will increase planting.
MINNEAPOLIS: Construction boomed in the region's growing economy.
Unemployment has remained lower than the national rate, with little pressure on wages.
While the manufacturing, retail and forest-products sectors continue to grow, agriculture remains flat due to poor weather.
KANSAS CITY: Strong housing starts and home sales, combined with "moderately higher" retail sales, contribute to overall moderate growth.
Offsetting effects include flat farm income and a receding energy sector from falling oil prices.
While bank deposits were mixed, overall loan demand increased.
DALLAS: The economy expanded with growth in manufacturing orders, particularly construction-related goods due to increased housing construction.
Higher demand for computer-related electronics opened the door for recent hiring.
Overdiscounting in December led to moderate retail sales but also lower-than-desired inventories.
Falling oil prices have reduced drilling.
Dry weather damaged wheat crops and weakened agricultural conditions.
SAN FRANCISCO: Signs of solid economic growth in the region missed California again, despite indications of modest improvement in its banking industry and the Central Valley's solid holiday sales.
The aerospace industry continues to sap western Washington's economy, as does lagging tourism in Hawaii.
Elsewhere in the region, retail sales are strong and the agricultural outlook is favorable.
Realestate and manufacturing activity is mixed, and decidedly poor in California due to continuing defense-related layoffs and weak commercial leasing.
