Philadelphia -- His Temple University basketball team had just defeated St. Bonaventure here on Saturday, 73-52, and John Chaney was talking about sports and life.
"When I taught gym classes in high school and junior high, the motto was 'leave 'em laughin' and puffin.'
That way, they'd be eager to go back to work the next time," he said.
Do you try to leave your Temple teams the same way? someone asked.
"Nah," said Chaney, "I just leave 'em puffin'.
They're beyond the laffin' part."
When you ask 61-year-old John Chaney a question, you get an answer.
In a form in which the players come and go and the coaches are the stars, front and center are his natural positions.
When you attend an NCAA basketball tournament, you expect his teams to be there: They've made the Big Show nine times in his previous 11 seasons at Temple -- three times to the round-of-eight in the last six years -- and, off its 16-2 won-lost start, this year is sure to make it 10 of 12.
And when a dispute roils the college-basketball waters, as the struggle over NCAA decision-making has threatened a black-coach's boycott in this one, you can expect to hear from him again.
On this late afternoon, standing in front of the red-and-white `T' banner that's a backdrop for his post-game press conferences at snug (3,900 seats), on-campus McGonigle Hall, he's holding forth on the reasons behind the stance for which he's become a point man.
Everyone present knows where he's coming from: He's black, raised in circumstances that make Tonya Harding's looked privileged, and for him sports were the key to, first, education, and, then, adult success.
Among his professional honors is a 1979 State of Pennsylvania Distinguished Faculty Award, earned while he was at Cheyney State University.
"It's not about cutting that 14th men's basketball scholarship.
That was not the reason.
That was just the last straw," says the man whose squad numbers 10 scholarship athletes, one of whom is from Holland.
"It's about access of coaches to kids they might help, and minority participation in every phase of college athletics.
It's about giving the people who make the system work a say in how it works."
"Kids today need direction and inspiration, but NCAA rules tie up the coaches, the very people who could help give it to them," he goes on.
"I'd like to be out in the high schools more, telling the kids how things are, but the recruiting rules won't let me.
"Or take what they're doing in the name of gender equity.
They're cutting back on scholarships in men's football, basketball and track, and adding them in women's sports like badminton, crew and synchronized swimming.
Everybody knows that sports are cultural, and that the effect of that is to take opportunity away from black men and give it to white women.
Where's the justice in that?
If we had proper minority representation in the NCAA, you wouldn't see that sort of thing."
"They talk about raising academic standards for athletes, but why should the elite schools make the rules for places like Temple?
And why should black people have to apologize for wanting to develop the talents we have?
If you have success in one area -- like basketball -- you have something you can build on, and, maybe, transfer to other areas.
Transfer -- that's the key.
You may start a trip hoping to get to New York, but even if you only make it to Newark it doesn't mean the trip is wasted.
It's the work you do along the way that counts."
When it comes to his current squad, of course, Chaney is hoping it'll make it all the way to Charlotte, N.C., for this year's Final Four.
As usual, hard work would be its ticket.
Chaney's teams begin their two-hour daily practices at 5:30 a.m.; that way, they don't conflict with classes and discourage player night life.
The Owls play defense early, late and in-between, good `D' being the part of basketball most attainable through pure effort.
Their style is a zone press that, when executed right, chokes off foes' close-in shots and harasses outside attempts as well.
Last year, with a starting team that included two freshmen, a sophomore and two juniors, Temple struggled into postseason play with a 17-12 mark, but once there won thrice and gave Michigan, an eventual finalist, all it could handle before falling.
All five starters returned, and the Owls entered the weekend with the nation's longest major-college winning streak (nine games), a second-place national ranking in field-goal percentage defense (36%) and a third in scoring defense (54.6 points per game).
Astonishingly, they'd recorded more steals (152) than turnovers (143).
Nothing the Owls did on Saturday appreciably lessened any of those distinctions.
Shooting 62.5% in the first half, they dashed to a 41-25 lead over the outmanned Bonnies, which they widened to 49-27 in the opening minutes of the second half.
The visitors rallied thereafter to cut their deficit to 12 points, but the Owls awoke to win going away.
Forward Eddie Jones, a truly talented offensive player, scored 21 points on seven of 11 shooting for the winners.
Guard Aaron McKie had 22.
Rick Brunson, the point guard, husbanded the ball well.
Chaney typically sees his coaching glass as half-empty, and his post-game comments reflected that.
He fretted about his team's persistently mediocre free-throw shooting (64%), allowed that he wished he could use more than the six players who've seen significant service this campaign but said the other teams won't let him, and bemoaned the ball-handling shortcomings of William Cunningham and Derrick Battie, his primary big men.
"The money's in the pot now, and we'd like to finish strong, but three deuces won't win it.
Even three treys," concluded Chaney.
But he'll do what he can to get his boys the best deal.
