DREAMS ARE STILL FREE, and Republicans have a lot of them right now.
Specifically, GOP heads are filled with visions of 1994 electoral success.
It now seems likely that the Republicans will pick up more House seats in this year's elections than the cognoscenti expected just a few weeks ago.
House Democrats are noticeably jittery and fear they could lose 20 or more seats.
But that's not all.
Republicans now are allowed to dream the ultimate 1994 dream: capturing the Senate.
Don't bet your winnings in the office basketball pool on this; it's still the longest of long shots.
But three months ago, it was so implausible that Republicans weren't even allowed to dream about it.
Now, thanks to various Democratic setbacks topped off by a healthy dose of Whitewater scandal, it's possible at least to see a scenario in which Republicans pick up the six additional seats they need to even up control of the Senate, or the seven needed for a majority.
"It will be extremely hard to achieve, and the odds are against it," says Republican pollster Frank Luntz.
"But it now is in the realm of possibility."
Here's why.
At the beginning of the year, it looked as if the new Republican senator from Texas, Kay Bailey Hutchison, faced a long and messy trial on charges of misusing her state treasurer's office for political purposes.
But the case against Sen. Hutchison collapsed, and she seems a safe bet to keep her seat.
Meanwhile, Democratic Sen. Chuck Robb of Virginia has stumbled into even more embarrassing discussions of his private life.
Democratic Sen. David Boren is pondering leaving the Senate to head the University of Oklahoma, which would open up a Democratic seat that isn't even supposed to be contested.
Worst of all for Democrats, Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell of Maine announced his retirement, exposing the safest of Democratic seats.
Hanging over it all is the Whitewater controversy.
Democrats may think President Clinton's troubles in explaining First Family financial dealings won't affect them, and there are new polls suggesting just that.
But these are deceiving.
The election-season effect of Whitewater isn't going to be determined by this week's newspaper stories, or last week's presidential news conference.
It's going to be determined by televised, summertime congressional hearings.
AND AS FORMER Republican congressman Vin Weber points out, what counts above all in midterm elections is voter turnout.
Whitewater disclosures could leave Democrats embarrassed and disheartened, Republicans motivated and upbeat.
Which group is more likely to turn out?
Mr. Weber draws a parallel to the Republican wipeout in the Watergate election of 1974.
"The popular perception of what happened to us in '74, which is that a lot of Republicans turned on the party and voted for Democrats, is wrong," he says.
"Republicans didn't vote.
They were embarrassed and they stayed home."
Assume the economy stays in decent but not robust shape.
Further assume that the health-care debate produces a modest package of market-oriented reforms, allowing Republicans to claim they've saved the nation from an unworkable original Clinton plan.
And finally, assume that Whitewater drags on, generating political contributions from well-heeled Republicans who smell blood.
All those factors come together to help Republicans pick off most of the Senate races now rated as toss-ups.
In Arizona, Rep. Jon Kyl wins Dennis DeConcini's old seat because the Democrats have torn up each other in the primary.
In Michigan, Ronna Romney, daughter of a former governor, emerges as a GOP female star and wins the seat of retiring Sen. Don Riegle.
IN OHIO, Lt. Gov. Michael DeWine just wins over superlawyer Joel Hyatt.
In Minnesota, Democrats run a cast of nobodies, and GOP Rep. Rod Grams takes advantage to win David Durenberger's old seat.
In Maine, the nation's crankiest electorate picks Republican Rep. Olympia Snowe to replace Sen. Mitchell.
And in Virginia, Republicans nominate the more electable former Budget Director Jim Miller rather than Oliver North, then win because nonstop Democratic sniping at Sen. Robb proves fatal to him.
At that point, Republicans still need one more upset to get to seven.
It comes when lots of national money pours into New Jersey to help State Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian defeat Sen. Frank Lautenberg.
To complete this fantasy, if Republicans don't get that seat, they get another shot in January, when Oklahoma's Sen. Boren retires, opening the way for Rep. James Inhofe to enter a special election for his seat.
You bet.
A better bet is that Republicans gain three seats.
But as March ends, Republicans gaze at 1994 and see a field of dreams.
RONNA ROMNEY, a Senate candidate in Michigan, is the former daughter-in-law of ex-Gov.
George Romney.
Wednesday's Capital Journal column incorrectly referred to her as his daughter.
