Your Jan. 12 article ("Why the Increase?
How Do We Compare?
Answering Questions About Electric Rates") contained some statements that present an unfair picture of electric utilities in Texas.
The article states that TU Electric received all of its requested rate increase in 1991.
Although the company was granted the requested 10.2% increase in revenue, the Public Utility Commission disallowed $1.38 billion in costs associated with the Comanche Peak nuclear plant and another $56 million in other costs.
Those disallowances were written off the books as a loss to shareholders, who will never earn a return on that investment.
Regarding the article's {contention that customers in most of the state's large investor-owned utilities pay higher rates than nearly every other major city in the country}: Even with the entire 15.3% increase implemented under bond by TU Electric in August, TU Electric's rates were still about 5% below the average rates of the nation's 25 largest cities.
I take issue with the assertion that national comparisons are skewed by high rates in New York and Boston.
Compare charges for the use of 1,000 kilowatt-hours per month over 1993 (close to the average usage in the Dallas area), and you'll find that electricity costs here were not only lower than those in New York and Boston, but also lower than Baltimore, Houston, El Paso, Los Angeles, Detroit, Chicago, Phoenix, Cleveland, San Diego, San Jose, San Francisco and Philadelphia.
Comparing the electric bills, as opposed to the various charges for the same usage, is not valid.
In most cases, that is merely a measure of the need for air conditioning in a geographic area, instead of the efficiency with which the local utility is serving its customers.
Michael Totty does an injustice to the citizens of El Paso when he writes about our average August utility bills being low because of the "area's mild climate."
El Paso is the fourth-poorest city in the U.S.
The average bill is low because consumers are frugal.
Most people would agree that 100-degree days in the summer and 28-degree nights in the winter do not fit the "mild weather" category.
Mr. Totty goes on to blame the high rates on El Paso Electric's "expensive investment" in the Palo Verde nuclear-power plant, with no mention of their sour investments in hotels and other commodities.
The bidding war for taking over El Paso Electric {which has been won by Central & South West Corp.} has resulted in an exorbitant price: As things stand now, creditors should get back around 95 cents to the dollar.
To say we are being hurt is an understatement.
The new company is asking for huge rate increases to cover its overbidding.
So, because El Pasoans are frugal and try to conserve energy because of the high rates -- they will be rewarded with huge rate increases.
We can only hope that Central & SouthWest will "decide" that its offer was too high, retrench, come back with a sane offer, and thus hold the line on the most expensive electric rates in Texas.
Texas Journal welcomes your comments -- by mail, phone or fax.
Letters should be addressed to Michael Allen, Editor, Texas Journal, 1233 Regal Row, Dallas, Texas 75247.
The phone number is 214-951-7010; the fax number is 214-951-7019.
