Blockbuster Entertainment Corp.
Chairman Wayne Huizenga, who has agreed to back the proposed $8 billion takeover of the video-rental chain by Viacom Inc., is pressuring Viacom to sweeten the terms of its offer, according to Wall Street analysts and others familiar with the situation.
As part of a merger agreement with Viacom signed in January, Mr. Huizenga already has agreed to vote his Blockbuster shares for the takeover as part of a group that holds a 23% Blockbuster stake.
And he hasn't formally asked that the deal be renegotiated.
Instead, with Viacom's stock price falling -- reducing the value of the Viacom securities that Blockbuster shareholders would receive, Mr. Huizenga has acted in several ways in recent weeks to push Viacom Chairman Sumner Redstone to sweeten his offer.
Mr. Huizenga has publicly raised the possibility that the Blockbuster board might not recommend that shareholders vote to approve the deal in a vote scheduled for sometime in May.
Mr. Huizenga also has made Mr. Redstone aware of overtures from Redstone rival John Malone, president of Tele-Communications Inc., who expressed interest in holding talks about making an investment in Blockbuster.
Blockbuster declined to comment, although people close to the company have consistently denied that Mr. Huizenga is attempting to renegotiate the deal.
A Viacom spokeswoman said executives weren't available to comment.
People close to the situation say any new talks on terms of the deal aren't likely to take place for several weeks, until just before the Blockbuster board must vote on whether to recommend the merger to shareholders.
One person close to Blockbuster said Mr. Huizenga "is not happy," but isn't trying to change the terms "at this time."
Viacom needs the merger with Blockbuster to help finance Viacom's nearly $10 billion acquisition of Paramount Communications Inc.
If the takeover of Blockbuster doesn't go through, Viacom will face a much heavier debt burden than it had anticipated without Blockbuster's cash flow to help make its payments.
But Mr. Huizenga and other Blockbuster executives have told some of their shareholders that they are unhappy about the degree to which Viacom stock has fallen, cutting the value to be received for Blockbuster stock to $23.16 a share, down from $31 when the deal was announced.
Nandita Parker, a media and entertainment analyst at Gerard Klauer Mattison & Co., says that Mr. Huizenga is "very actively" attempting to persuade Viacom to sweeten the deal, following the steep downturn in Viacom's stock price.
"He wants to get better terms," she says.
While Mr. Huizenga's efforts to get a sweetened offer have cheered Blockbuster shareholders, they have angered some traders who hold Paramount stock and are due to receive $17.50 in Viacom debt securities for each Paramount share, under terms of Viacom's acquisition of Paramount.
If the Blockbuster deal isn't completed, those debt securities would become preferred stock valued at roughly $5 a share less, the traders say.
Viacom already has acquired about 51% of Paramount's shares for $107 in cash.
But analysts note that Mr. Huizenga has a fiduciary duty to his Blockbuster shareholders to try to gain improved terms, as long as he abides by the letter of his agreement to vote for the deal with Viacom.
Alan Gould, an entertainment and cable-TV analyst at Kidder Peabody & Co., says the Viacom offer would have to have a value of $25 for each Blockbuster share in order to have a 50% chance of gaining approval in the shareholder vote.
The deal's chance of approval would be far greater at a value of $28 to $30 a share, he says.
Paul Marsh, who follows media and entertainment stocks at NatWest Securities Corp., says that Mr. Huizenga must "obviously ask questions" about where both Viacom and Blockbuster stocks are trading.
People close to Viacom insist they aren't concerned about Mr. Huizenga's intentions.
They say that once Viacom and Blockbuster can send out information about the deal and start talking up the combination of Viacom, Paramount and Blockbuster to investors, Viacom's stock will rebound, solving the problem.
Ms. Parker of Gerard Klauer Mattison says that since the Viacom-Blockbuster merger was negotiated in January, Blockbuster's prospects have improved because of the collapse of the proposed acquisition of TCI by Bell Atlantic Corp.
One implication of the collapse of that deal is that the threat posed to Blockbuster's video-rental business from new information-superhighway technologies, such as video on demand, appears less imminent.
If Blockbuster hadn't negotiated the Viacom merger, Ms. Parker thinks Blockbuster stock might be trading in the high 30s.
As it is, Blockbuster's stock now is trading at $25.875 a share -- a $2.72 premium over the value of the Viacom bid.
That indicates that traders are making a bet that the Viacom bid will either be sweetened, topped by another suitor, or called off.
Viacom Class B shares, which comprise the bulk of the Viacom offer, have bounced off their lows of under $24 a share in the past week.
But they remain far below the levels that analysts say are needed to assure approval of the deal.
Viacom B shares closed at $27.625, down 37.5 cents, in composite trading on the American Stock Exchange.
