For the third year in a row, most big brokerage houses can boast of their winning stock picks.
Stocks on the official recommended lists of 16 large brokerage houses achieved an average total return, including price change plus dividends, of 19.6% last year, according to a continuing study by this newspaper and Zacks Investment Research Inc. of Chicago.
Three quarters of the recommended lists outperformed the 10.1% return on the Standard & Poor's 500 index, a standard stock-market gauge.
The firms even bested the impressive gains of small stocks last year.
Nine of the 16 recommended lists beat the 14.6% return of the Wilshire 4500 index, which now comprises 5,856 stocks -- or just about everything outside the S&P 500.
PaineWebber Inc.'s "Performance Portfolio" led the competition with an estimated 39.1% return, edging out Raymond James & Associates' Focus List, which rose 34.2%.
Raymond James remains the five-year leader, thanks largely to big successes in 1991 and 1992.
The firm also scored the biggest gain in the 1993 fourth quarter.
Last year's triumphs contrast with the brokerage houses' floundering performance in 1989 and 1990, when most lagged behind the market averages.
Rick Chrabaszewski, an analyst at Zacks, says the brokerage houses typically do best when small stocks are hot -- and worst in an overall bear market.
PAINEWEBBER: Roaring gains in stocks like LDDS Communications Inc. (up 150%), Physician Corp. of America (71%) and Fisher-Price Inc. (70%) powered PaineWebber to the top of the rankings for 1993.
Customers can also thank PaineWebber for pointing them toward gains of more than 40% in Adaptec Inc., Baroid Corp. and Cygnus Therapeutic Systems Inc.
The New York firm, a unit of PaineWebber Group Inc., placed second in the five-year rankings and third in the latest quarter.
Of the 54 stocks featured in its Performance Portfolio at some point during the year, 38 rose and only 16 declined.
(The stocks are only tracked for the time they actually spent on the list.)
"The information-highway theme is one that we were on well over a year ago," says James Voytko, PaineWebber's director of research.
"Now, everybody is working it."
The firm's favorite vehicles on the information highway include LDDS, Telefonos de Mexico and U S West Inc.
PaineWebber also likes takeover or restructuring candidates such as ICO Inc., an oil-service company.
And it favors stocks, such as Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd., that would benefit from a European economic recovery.
RAYMOND JAMES: The St. Petersburg, Fla., brokerage house made its name with shrewd picks of small stocks in niches such as gambling and health care.
It holds a commanding lead in the long-term standings, even though its picks suffered more than those of any other firm in the crash of 1987 and the mini-crash of 1989.
Rebounding health-care stocks helped spur the firm's handsome 11.3% gain in the 1993 fourth quarter.
"We had seen the shape of the monster that was health-care reform" and concluded that it wouldn't chew up the entire industry, says research director David Henwood.
Pharmaceutical stocks and hospital stocks "don't excite us for the next three to five years," Mr. Henwood adds.
But the firm still recommends nursing-home stocks, such as Beverly Enterprises and Living Centers of America Inc., because it figures that such institutions will increasingly serve patients formerly cared for in high-cost hospitals.
The Raymond James Financial Inc. unit also likes medical-device makers such as C.R. Bard Inc., Medtronic Inc. and Cordis Corp.
KEMPER: The Chicago firm captured third place in the 1993 stock-picking standings by playing great defense.
While the Kemper Corp. unit had few big winners, it avoided losers.
Only four stocks on Kemper's Equity Opportunity List declined as much as 10%.
And 77% of the 48 stocks on the list rose.
Kent Lillick, a member of Kemper's investment policy committee, says the firm will normally remove a stock from its list if the stock falls 15%.
"We're not swinging for the fences," he says.
"We're just trying to keep the ball in play."
Among Kemper's current favorites are Banc One Corp., which Mr. Lillick terms "very inexpensive based on historical parameters;" Payless Cashways Inc., a retailer on the rebound after being hurt by the flooding in the Midwest last summer; and Walgreen Co., which Kemper thinks is capable of 15% annual growth in profit.
DEAN WITTER: Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., a unit of Dean Witter, Discover & Co., is hanging onto third place in the five-year rankings, but Smith Barney Shearson (a unit of Travelers Inc.) and Merrill Lynch & Co. are breathing down its neck.
Like Raymond James, Dean Witter favors certain beaten-up health-care stocks.
Research director Manny Korman says the firm especially likes Columbia Healthcare Corp. and Wellpoint Health Networks Inc.
He is also keen on Fluor Corp., a world-wide engineering and construction company with strong business prospects in Asia and Latin America, and on Telefonos de Mexico, which he thinks will prosper as Mexico continues to industrialize.
GOLDMAN SACHS: The U.S. Priority List at Goldman, Sachs & Co. jumped 7.3% in the fourth quarter, the second-best showing of any firm.
Goldman's best pick was Williams Sonoma Inc., a retailer of upscale cookware, which soared 66% in the quarter and 109% for the year.
Research director William Kealy says the stock could climb further, thanks partly to "renewed vigor in the economy."
For the same reason, the New York firm remains sweet on cyclicals such as Alaska Air Group Inc., Birmingham Steel Corp., Centex Corp., Georgia Pacific Corp., Owens-Illinois Inc., Roadway Services Inc. and Varity Corp.
EDWARD D. JONES: Edward D. Jones & Co., a St. Louis firm just added to the study, finished last in 1993, with an estimated return of 4%.
The firm favored big, high-quality growth stocks, which fell out of fashion last year, says research director Ray Robbins.
Even so, the firm is sticking with its blue-chip growth picks, including McDonald's Corp., Hershey Foods Corp., PepsiCo Inc. and Federal National Mortgage Association.
"We think these stocks are cheap and attractive," Mr. Robbins says.
"We're going to be marathon runners-we're not sprinters.
We think the marathon runners do pretty well over time."
LEHMAN BROTHERS: Of the 10 firms with five-year records in the study, Lehman Brothers Inc., of New York, ranked last.
For 1993, meanwhile, the soon-to-be-independent unit of American Express Co. placed 14th out of 16.
Research director Fred Fraenkel says Lehman's recommended list "tends to be somewhat defensive in nature," trailing in up markets but outperforming others in down markets.
CS FIRST BOSTON: For the fourth quarter, CS First Boston Corp. (a unit of CS Holding of Switzerland) trailed the pack with a loss of 0.1%.
The New York firm had no major disasters but picked more losers than winners.
Among the duds were Harcourt General Inc., Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc., Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and Limited Inc.
For the year, however, CS First Boston ranked tenth, and its return of 12.2% beat the S&P.
The Wall Street Journal-Zacks study estimates how an investor would do by buying the most-favored stocks from each of 16 leading U.S. brokerage firms.
The study assumes the investor buys every stock on a firm's recommended list, and avoids or sells all other stocks.
Results include dividends, as well as capital gains or losses.
A 1% trading cost is assessed when a stock is added to or deleted from a firm's list.
Goldman Sachs is judged by its U.S. Priority List, Edward D. Jones by its Best Buys, Kemper by its Equity Opportunity List, Kidder Peabody by its Core Model Portfolio and Small-Cap Model Portfolio, Merrill Lynch by its Focus One stocks, Morgan Stanley by its U.S. Model Portfolio, PaineWebber by its Performance Portfolio, Prudential by its "List of Single Best Ideas," and Smith Barney by its Priority Equities Retail Recommended List.
Bear Stearns, A.G. Edwards, First Boston and Raymond James are judged by their Focus Lists; Dean Witter, Lehman Brothers and Salomon Brothers, by their Recommended Lists.
A TABLE accompanying Tuesday's article on brokerage-house stock picks contained errors.
Harcourt General Inc. declined 19%, not 27%, while recommended by CS First Boston Corp. in the fourth quarter.
The firm's biggest quarterly loser therefore wasn't Harcourt but Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc., down 23%.
As a result, CS First Boston's list was up 0.1% for the quarter, instead of down 0.1%.
For the year, it was up 12.4%, not 12.2%.
The biggest winner recommended by Raymond James & Associates Inc. in the quarter was Cordis Corp., up 54%, rather than Stanley Furniture Co., up 41%.
The errors were made by Zacks Investment Research Inc., which prepared the table.
(WSJ Feb. 3, 1994)
