The Supreme Court of Texas put new restrictions on punitive-damage awards, in a decision that seems to reflect the court's growing effort to moderate the state's reputation as a plaintiffs' haven.
The decision by Texas's highest court makes it much more difficult for policyholders to win punitive damages against insurers for failing to pay claims on a timely basis.
The decision also adds a number of procedural safeguards for defendants that affect all cases in which punitive damages are an issue.
"It is a sea change for the court," said Charles I. Hadden, a Washington lawyer for Transportation Insurance Co., a Dallas subsidiary of CNA Insurance Cos., which was the defendant in the case.
Mr. Hadden, of Ross, Dixon & Masback, predicted the decision both would make it harder for plaintiffs to win punitive damages and would reverse a tendency of Texas courts to uphold such awards on appeal.
The case involved a worker in a building-products store in El Paso, who was injured in 1986 when a stack of counter tops fell on him, breaking his pelvis.
The man obtained a settlement from Transportation Insurance, his workers' compensation insurer, but then sued the insurer for bad faith, claiming it was grossly negligent in taking more than two years to pay his medical bills.
A jury awarded the man $1,000 to compensate for monetary losses, $100,000 for mental anguish and $1 million in punitive damages; the verdict was upheld on appeal.
But the state Supreme Court ordered a new trial, saying the standard for gross negligence that the lower courts had used in order to award punitive damages was too favorable to plaintiffs.
Since 1981, plaintiffs in Texas have been able to win such cases essentially by showing some carelessness on behalf of the defendants in refusing to pay, regardless of the extent of injury.
In its decision, however, the court toughened the requirement, holding that plaintiffs must show that the defendants had a "conscious indifference" toward payment and knew that their actions would result in extraordinary harm, "such as death, grievous physical injury, or a genuine likelihood of financial catastrophe," according to the opinion.
Kit Bramblett, an El Paso lawyer who represented the plaintiff in the case, said the decision effectively kills the possibility of punitive-damage awards in insurance bad-faith cases.
"It is as if, to borrow a phrase from Will Rogers, this majority never met an insurance company it didn't like," one of the Texas justices, Lloyd Doggett, added in a dissenting opinion to the court's 7-2 ruling.
The procedural safeguards that the court ordered include a requirement that lower courts hold a separate trial on the question of punitive damages, once the issue of liability has been decided, and that appellate courts lay out their reasons for upholding such awards on appeal.
The court said the changes were an attempt to bring Texas law in conformity with recent decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court on punitive damages.
The decision is the latest pronouncement by the Texas court in recent months to limit punitive-damage claims and other kinds of suits.
The court has held, for instance, that a Wal-Mart store could not be held liable for punitive damages in the case of a woman who had fallen and broken her hip on the sidewalk outside the store.
The court also recently held that, unlike other states, Texas doesn't recognize the tort of negligent infliction of emotional distress, in a case involving a woman who sued her former lover for videotaping their sexual encounters.
(Transportation Insurance Co. vs. Moriel, No.
TRADE-CENTER UPDATE: Prosecutors in the World Trade Center bombing trial told Judge Kevin T. Duffy that they had concluded the presentation of their case after four months of testimony by some 207 witnesses.
The 16-week-old trial in federal court in New York will now shift its focus to the four defendants.
They each are expected to present very brief defenses, possibly enabling Judge Duffy to send the case to the jury as early as the end of next week.
The defendants are charged with conspiracy in the blast that destroyed portions of the skyscraper and killed six people last Feb. 26.
