A federal judge ruled that Occidental Chemical Corp. won't have to pay punitive damages over toxic waste dumped at Love Canal, the Niagara Falls, N.Y., subdivision that became a symbol of the dire effects of industrial pollution.
The punitive-damages part of the 14-year-old case had been closely watched by many companies, which feared that a finding of liability could expose them to similar damages for environmental harm caused decades ago.
New York state had sought punitive penalties of as much as $250 million from Occidental, which had acquired Hooker Chemicals & Plastics Corp.
Hooker dumped 21,000 tons of hazardous waste at Love Canal in the 1940s and 1950s.
Occidental, a unit of Los Angeles-based Occidental Petroleum Corp., already has been held liable for cleanup costs, which are estimated to be $325 million.
But in a 180-page opinion, Judge John T. Curtin of U.S. District Court in Buffalo ruled that punitive damages, designed to punish wrongdoers for egregious behavior, didn't apply because New York failed to prove that Hooker's conduct was "willful, wanton and in reckless disregard for the safety of others."
That finding and several others, including proof that Hooker knew the dumping was reckless and could foresee its dangerous consequences, are required before punitive damages can be awarded in New York.
Occidental praised the ruling, saying it "vindicates Hooker's management and employees" and "debunks the myths and intentioned exaggerations that grew out of Love Canal."
Judge Curtin, however, stopped far short of that assessment, emphasizing that his verdict "does not signify approval" of Hooker's conduct.
"Hooker was negligent upon a number of occasions," he wrote.
"But a finding of outrageous conduct and reckless or wanton disregard for the safety of others requires more."
The ruling has broad ramifications for companies accused of unsafe dumping of toxic waste years ago, said Thomas H. Truitt, Occidental's lead outside attorney with Baltimore law firm Piper & Marbury.
"You can't take present-day sensibilities and knowledge and apply them against conduct 40 or 50 years ago," he said.
The case goes back to 1942, the year that Hooker began a decade of dumping its chemical waste at the abandoned canal.
In the 1970s, groundwater containing toxic chemicals began seeping into basements and yards, forcing state health officials to relocate 2,500 residents in 1978.
During a 78-day nonjury trial before Judge Curtin two years ago, Occidental argued that Hooker warned of toxic waste buried at the site when it sold the property in 1953 to the Niagara Board of Education.
The company supplied the board with a map showing where the waste was buried, dug 10 holes to demonstrate that none of it had spread, and was assured by school officials that no school would be built on the site, according to Occidental.
A school was built there a year later.
Judge Curtin said Hooker's conduct after the sale was "clearly unacceptable by present-day standards and at times violative of common sense."
But he added it wasn't "the degree of recklessness that would warrant punitive damages."
Hooker, he wrote, "was clearly negligent" for not warning that chemicals had been dumped in shallow holes in the central section of the land when it learned that a school was, in fact, to be built there.
But he found that Hooker violated no legal ordinance and responded with help to complaints of odors, fires and exposures.
New York Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell said that the judge's ruling read "like an indictment of Hooker's conduct," and that the finding of negligence makes Occidental fully liable for cleanup costs.
Still to be decided is whether the federal government, New York state, the city of Niagara Falls and the school board should share the cost of the cleanup.
