Yokohama, Japan -- At the Yokohama Museum of Art, an enormous neon Rising Sun flag flashes at visitors and beckons them into "Japanese Art After 1945: Scream Against the Sky."
Inside the show's decorous galleries designed by the patriarch of Japanese architecture, Kenzo Tange, there is cool beauty and even exuberance.
But there is also studied grotesqueness (a sculpture of a decomposing head in a cage) and mad erotica (a video of a dance called "Revolt of the Flesh").
Altogether, there are 212 works by some 70 artists chosen to represent the avant-garde tradition in contemporary Japanese art.
It's difficult to say what is more compelling about the show: the audacity of its theme or the artworks themselves.
Either way, "Scream Against the Sky" (up till March 30) is a radical and provocative step for a Japanese museum, the first survey of avant-garde art created by Japanese artists since the war.
In all those years, the art establishment here has mostly ignored native vanguard art, or zen'ei bijutsu, while the art world in the West has largely dismissed Japanese contemporary art as derivative of New York and Paris.
"Scream Against the Sky" defies both these attitudes.
More than that, the curator doing the defying is a New Yorker, Alexandra Munroe.
Ms. Munroe, steeped in Japanese art history as well as fashionable modernist cultural critiques, has more on her mind than simply storming the canon of Eurocentrism.
"The most radical aspect of this show," she says, "is that it attempts for the first time to put this art into a narrative."
It's the story of rebellious art in Japan and what it has to say about the perennial debate over identity: What does it means to be modern and Japanese?
Ms. Munroe, now 36, says she was drawn to her subject in the late 1980s when she discovered that not a single book had been written in either Japanese or English on the story's characters, whom she describes as artists "on strike against society."
In 1991, determined to write the book, Ms. Munroe was invited to be a guest curator at the Yokohama Museum.
Eventually, the book idea expanded to include this show.
And for the past two years, Ms. Munroe, with a great deal of help from the museum's brooding assistant curator, Taro Amano, has assembled her storyline, piece by piece.
The exhibition is organized so that you literally walk through Ms. Munroe's narrative, starting with Gutai -- one of the first manifesto-carrying, action-painting art groups of the 1950s -- and ending with Yukinori Yanagi's 1992 neon flag, called "Hinomaru Illuminaton."
The idea is to wind up with a new version of Japan's tribal narrative, which usually goes like this: Since it opened to the outside world, Japan has swung wildly from utterly identifying with the West to outright nativist rejection of all things Western.
The plot of "Scream Against the Sky" is much more complicated.
Many of these artists, Ms. Munroe writes in the show's superb catalogue, rebelled against the notion of East vs. West, or a pure Japan vs. U.S.
Some insisted they were international.
Some resented the supposed international art world as another form of "West is bestism."
Some looked to Japanese art forms of the past as a way of protesting the present.
Some retreated into a world of imagination, sometimes metaphysical and sometimes violent.
It's not that they were creating Japanese art out of some vague Japaneseness.
Instead, the show's point is that these artists' experience of modern Japan is crucial to understanding their art.
In the 1950s, for instance, the artists who called themselves Gutai, like many Japanese, were enthralled with Uncle Sam, Hollywood and demokurashee.
They staged art events described as rites to stomp out the imperial past.
The show includes Atsuko Tanaka's remarkable costume-sculpture called "Electric Dress," made of brightly painted light bulbs and dangling electric chords.
Then, as though they were running alongside the increasingly radical student politics in Japan, many artists retreated underground into a counterculture of their own making.
In the early 1960s, Ms. Munroe claims, Japanese artists like Yoko Ono were leaders in the conceptual art movement.
The show's title comes from a musical score Ms. Ono wrote in 1961.
Neglected by critics and museums at home, many avant-garde artists fled Japan altogether.
Or, more recently, such artists as Yasumasa Morimura have found success abroad precisely because they are Japanese.
From the obsessional, phallus-filled sculpture of Yayoi Kusama to the enormous paintings of Lee U-Fan and Naoto Nakagawa to the recent meditations on nationality by Kodai Nakahara, Ms. Munroe's show covers a huge amount of ground, both aesthetic and sociological.
Assembling it wasn't easy.
One example of how complicated and controversial it is to try to tell the story of contemporary Japanese avant-garde art is the trouble Ms. Munroe had with On Kawara.
Originally, "Scream Against the Sky" included a well-known piece of his containing 28 postcards of Japan that had been mailed to New York.
But Mr. Kawara blocked the loan.
In place of his work, Ms. Munroe has mounted a printed statement explaining that he will not participate in any show of Japanese artists.
For Ms. Munroe, this incident exemplifies many of the tensions of being a modern, Japanese artist.
"Kawara doesn't think that postwar Japanese art exists," Ms. Munroe says.
"He would never say this, but I think it's cultural insecurity.
It's the same thing as saying that Japanese artists' version of modernism isn't important enough."
Munroe's rebuttal is "Scream Against the Sky."
The show will travel to the Guggenheim Museum's Soho branch in New York in September, and to the new San Francisco Museum of Art next year.
Ms. Scott is a Tokyo-based journalist.
