For U.S. soccer, two huge goals are in sight.
As nine American cities gear up to host World Cup games this summer, soccer organizers are assembling 12 professional teams to begin playing their first season in the U.S. next year.
"With a crescendo on the World Cup side, we have the exact right mood," says Alan I. Rothenberg, who heads both World Cup USA and Major League Soccer Inc., which share offices in Los Angeles.
Fifa, the international soccer federation based in Switzerland, granted the U.S. the 1994 World Cup games on the condition that the U.S. try to launch a professional league.
Yesterday, Major League Soccer organizers announced that ESPN, the cable sports network airing most of the 52 World Cup matches this year, will broadcast professional matches through next year's six-month season.
ABC Sports would televise the league's championship game.
Terms weren't disclosed.
Major League Soccer will serve as something of an experiment in the world of big-time U.S. sports.
It will be owned by a single entity and operate via franchises.
That means no volatile individual team owners and no prima-donna athletes sparking huge bidding wars.
"We're going to avoid the problems other leagues have run into with overly entrepreneurial owners," says Harley Frankel, a Harvard Business School graduate who recently came to Major League Soccer from the National Basketball Association.
Among Mr. Frankel's projects is negotiating a strict team-salary cap to spare soccer the extravagant costs of baseball.
Franchises aren't an entirely novel idea, of course.
"I think the model is out there in business," Mr. Rothenberg says.
"It's McDonald's.
It's Blockbuster."
Central ownership controls the franchises, allowing a unified approach in marketing, sponsorships and player recruitment.
A select group of limited partners, including sponsoring companies, is being assembled to raise $100 million to capitalize the venture.
By May 15, local organizers must submit bids for franchises, proving their communities' interest in soccer by collecting deposits on at least 10,000 season-ticket orders.
The deposit, to hold a seat for a 14-game home season, is $75 for adults, $35 for children.
Single-game tickets are expected to cost around $12.
Converted football or baseball fields may be used in the first year -- as long as play can be on real grass -- but the soccer organization envisions longer-term construction of $30 million soccer stadiums that seat 20,000 to 30,000.
While the U.S. soccer organization expects to have teams in many of the big sports towns preparing for Cup matches in June -- New York, Chicago, Washington, Boston, Detroit, Dallas, San Francisco, Orlando, Fla., and Los Angeles -- the league could bring clubs to a whole new group of cities.
Among the 30 cities attending January's preliminary bidding conference in the Los Angeles-area, for example, were Tulsa, Okla., and Columbus, Ohio.
According to the league's plan, it would seek to recapture U.S. talent now playing professional soccer abroad.
John Harkes, one top U.S. player being sought, believes that nearly all the 30 or so of his fellow countrymen playing overseas will return to play in the U.S.
"If it's organized in the proper way from a business structure -- which it is -- there's no reason it would fail," Mr. Harkes says.
Along with the recruited Americans, a typical pro soccer franchise would include several foreign pros and other U.S. players with Olympic-team or college experience, Mr. Rothenberg says.
Also, the league has the official consent of Fifa to experiment with elements of the game to attract U.S. audiences.
An enlarged goal, for example, would reduce the number of low-scoring games, a recurring complaint of U.S. fans.
The North American Soccer League, the last U.S. foray into big-time, outdoor soccer, failed almost a decade ago after several lackluster years.
Mr. Rothenberg, who owned the league's Los Angeles Aztecs, says he's convinced soccer will succeed this time -- in part through the hard lessons learned from the earlier experience, and in part because of the exposure the sport will get from hosting the Cup matches in the U.S.
Nevertheless, skepticism abounds about how soccer will attract enough paying fans and viewers to be profitable, right in the middle of baseball season.
In a particularly scathing commentary, for example, USA Today columnist Tom Weir wrote that "hating soccer is more American than mom's apple pie, driving a pickup or spending Saturday afternoon channel-surfing with the remote control."
Others give professional soccer a better shot.
"They've done a nice sales job," says Wisconsin Sports Authority President Joe Sweeney of Mr. Rothenberg's organization.
"The big question, quite honestly, is, `Will outdoor soccer sell here?'"
The local joke, says Mr. Sweeney: "You know why so many people are playing soccer?
So they don't have to watch it."
Enthusiasm runs higher in Tulsa, where City Council administrator Donald Cannon calls the 10,000 season-ticket deposits "no problem" in a state that has long been fascinated with soccer.
The Tulsa Roughnecks were one of the NASL's most successful franchises, and today, he says, "we have virtually every element in the community involved in the bid process" for the soccer league, from government officials and universities to former pro players still living there.
John Koskinen, who heads Washington, D.C.'s pro-soccer effort, believes the new league will thrive nationally.
"Normally with a startup league, you worry about it failing once it starts because it's undercapitalized, or it can't complete its season," he says.
"But MLS hasn't been dreamed up in abstraction."
Purists elsewhere in the world worry that Major League Soccer's rule changes, like the goal enlargement, will ruin the essence of soccer.
Sunil Gulati, investigating potential experiments for the league, says any changes would be subjected to "in-depth study" and designed to benefit the sport by increasing "the number of times a fan gets out of his seat."
But some Europeans remain unconvinced.
Hugh McIlvanney of the Times of London wrote last December that anyone who believes America's soccer league represents "a triumphant spreading of the true word across a heathen land, should be reminded that missionaries have been known to get themselves eaten."
