In the gothic chamber of the Belfast City Council, Marie Moore introduces a motion stressing the importance of adequate health care.
Anywhere else, no politician with a lick of sense would oppose such a proposition.
But what governs others doesn't apply in Belfast.
Elected officials elsewhere might call one another "colleague," "sir" or "madam," but here they often refer to their fellows as "scum."
Other councils oversee police, but here -- lest fistfights break out -- police oversee the council.
And as to the merits of legislation, here, the greater issue is which tribe proposed it -- Catholic or Protestant.
Indeed, at this moment and on their side of the chamber, Protestants are outraged.
That is because the sponsor of the health-care motion is Mrs. Moore, who belongs to Sinn Fein, political party of the outlawed Irish Republican Army.
Noting that IRA violence taxes city health-care facilities, Protestant Councilor Sammy Wilson rises to cry foul.
Jabbing a finger at the Catholic side, he says, "You can plead all you want, but you won't find ready ears or weak minds supporting your hypocrisy."
Catholics -- who are outnumbered 26 to 19 because of Northern Ireland's Protestant majority -- sneer.
Scenes of this kind don't bode well for the current effort to bring peace to Northern Ireland.
"In a city where terror gangs are murdering people on a daily basis, an example should be shown by the people on the city council," says Seamus Lynch, a member until last May.
Instead, he says, "it's medieval politics, with even children in the streets telling stories about city councilors kicking, punching and shoving each other."
Certain moments in council history are notorious: A Protestant councilor once sprayed insecticide at Catholics.
A Catholic councilor assaulted a policeman who was trying to break up a fight.
A Protestant councilor blew a trumpet to keep a Catholic from being heard.
Some Catholic visitors hurled protest leaflets and shouted obscenities from the public gallery, precipitating a melee between themselves and Protestant councilors.
Mr. Lynch -- sole representative of the nonsectarian Workers Party until he lost last May's election -- says his most vivid image after 12 years on the council is that of "a Sinn Fein councilor standing amid a mob of 20 brawling councilors, a chair raised over his head prepared to come down on someone."
Such dust-ups arise partly from a shortage of legitimate business to conduct.
The debate over the health-care motion, for instance, is utterly irrelevant, because the Belfast City Council has no say about health care, just as it has no say about other issues -- including housing, law enforcement and education -- that typically are the province of local governments.
In the interest of keeping peace, Britain in 1972 began dictating virtually all aspects of local rule from London.
What remains of local government here isn't a democracy, say critics in both camps.
"We can't even fill potholes in our streets or trim weeds from footpaths," grumbles Protestant Councilor Jim Kirkpatrick, calling it "an insult to the intelligence of Catholics and Protestants alike to limit the council to removal of trash and burial of the dead."
By all accounts, the council does a fine job of tending what responsibilities it has: cemeteries, trash and parks.
But these duties hardly keep the council busy.
It meets just once a month and, even then, its meetings sometimes adjourn within five minutes for lack of business to conduct.
More often, though, councilors spend hours debating matters over which they have no authority.
The main item on the Jan. 4 agenda was the peace proposal signed before Christmas by the prime ministers of Britain and Ireland.
Never mind that neither prime minister sought the opinion of the Belfast City Council, much less gave it a veto.
With the audacity of a small-town Kansas council attempting to amend a federal bill, they voted down the unaltered peace proposal, debated two ways of altering it, then voted down both of those.
Afterward, Catholic Councilor Alban Maginness said, "A not infrequent thought here is: `Why am I involved in this madhouse?' "
That is an especially good question, considering the pay -- about $100 a month -- and the risks.
Catholic terrorists have shot and wounded such Protestant councilors as Billy Dickson and Sammy Millar, while Protestant terrorists have attacked the homes of several Catholic councilors, in one case killing a visitor and, in another, killing a councilor's 21-year-old son.
Despite all that, Belfast City Council races are hotly contested.
Voter turnout slightly exceeds the U.K. average, and there are hard feelings whenever a seat shifts from one party to another.
When Sinn Fein won a long-time opposition seat in 1991, for instance, Protestant Councilor Sammy Wilson called the winning voters "5,000 subhuman animals."
For extremists in both camps, a seat on the council represents a platform not for running the city but for speechifying on Northern Ireland politics.
"A lot of what they do is for the benefit of us hacks," says Jim McDowell, author of a long-running city-hall column called the "Dome of Delight."
Some Protestant councilors take every opportunity to condemn their Sinn Fein counterparts for condoning IRA violence.
Once, Protestant councilors even passed a law -- later overturned by the courts -- prohibiting Sinn Fein council members from attending civic functions at City Hall.
Protestant councilors also take every opportunity to bash the Catholic dream of a united Ireland.
They passed one law banning Irish President Mary Robinson from setting foot in Belfast City Hall, and another banning use of the Irish language in City Hall.
When Catholic members subsequently proposed lifting the language ban, Protestant members not only reaffirmed it, but passed a motion expressing an official interest in Chinese, Hindi and "the various languages of the Indian subcontinent."
For their part, Sinn Fein councilors routinely decline to vote for motions expressing sympathy for innocent victims of IRA violence.
They challenge nearly every council expenditure as extravagant, and profess to see bias against Catholics in virtually every action the council takes.
Still, some see reason for optimism.
In last May's election, several of the most radical Protestants got replaced by more-moderate newcomers.
And increasingly, members of the Catholic Social Democratic Labor Party are loudly condemning Sinn Fein Catholics for refusing to embrace the campaign for peace.
Following this month's meeting, about two dozen councilors cheerfully congregated in the mayor's office for the traditional post-business round of drinks.
"We're all getting along better," said Protestant Councilor Sandy Blair.
When asked how many gathered here are Catholic, however, he had to study the crowd.
"There's one," he said, pointing his pint of ale.
