Metallgesellschaft AG's 120 bank creditors pulled the big German company back from an imminent bankruptcy-law filing by agreeing to a rescue package totaling about $1.9 billion.
The 3.4 billion mark accord, reached on Saturday, includes a bigger cash contribution to the plan from Deutsche Bank AG and Dresdner Bank AG in order to overcome opposition from French banks.
Metallgesellschaft said that "a few" final approvals were still forthcoming, including from some U.S. creditors, but it declared that an agreement had been reached.
"With the support of the banks, Metallgesellschaft has a financial footing which opens up new perspectives for us," said Kajo Neukirchen, the new chairman of the metals, engineering and trading company.
He said the accord clears the way for a sweeping restructuring of Metallgesellschaft, which is Germany's 14th-largest industrial group with 58,000 employees world-wide.
Bankers said support for the plan was in part a vote of confidence in Mr. Neukirchen, a corporate turnaround specialist who was appointed last month to succeed the company's ousted chairman, Heinz Schimmelbusch.
The reorganization is to include the sale of Metallgesellschaft's 49% interest in Kolbenschmidt AG, an auto-parts supplier, as well as a Dutch trading company and some of its international mining activities, including Toronto's Metall Mining Corp.
In the fiscal year ended last Sept. 30, the German company incurred 1.8 billion marks in losses from operations and a further 1.5 billion marks in losses from its exposure in the oil markets.
Sales totaled about 26 billion marks.
The oil-related losses came from Metallgesellschaft's involvement in energy "derivatives," financial contracts whose values are derived from the price of crude oil and other energy products.
The losses apparently stemmed from an ill-fated attempt by MG Corp., Metallgesellschaft's U.S. trading unit, to hedge its business risks as a wholesaler of oil products.
The bailout plan for MG's parent company is expected to alleviate concerns on the energy-futures market that MG might have to liquidate large futures positions on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
As the banks negotiated the rescue plan, a U.S. affiliate of Metallgesellschaft, Castle Energy Corp., warned Friday that the German company's financial difficulties could "have a material adverse effect" on Castle.
The Radnor, Pa., energy company receives financing and credit support from Metallgesellschaft.
Saturday's refinancing agreement foresees a new share offering that would raise 1.4 billion marks.
The offering plan already has been tentatively accepted by Metallgesellschaft shareholders controlling 62% of the company's stock.
Those shareholders include Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank, the auto maker Daimler-Benz AG, the insurance company Allianz AG and the government of Kuwait.
Until Saturday, the sticking point in the bailout had been getting banks to approve the credit-restructuring part of the package.
Under the company's proposal, banks were asked to convert 1.3 billion marks in Metallgesellschaft bank debt into convertible profit-sharing certificates.
They also will extend a new 700 million mark credit line.
"The whole concept as it was presented is intact, it's just that the distribution has changed a little bit," said a Deutsche Bank official who attended the Saturday meeting.
To make it work, Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank had to reach deeper into their pockets after a group of German and foreign banks last week threatened to reject the plan unless the two big Frankfurt banks picked up a bigger share of the bill.
After providing Metallgesellschaft with a 1.5 billion mark standby credit in December, Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank previously had held that it was up to the other banks to put up the 700 million marks for the new credit line.
But many of them, including French creditors, refused to let Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank off the hook.
Saturday, Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank backed down and agreed to provide nearly one half of the 700 million mark total, according to a participant.
Among other concessions, Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank also had to step in and fill gaps in the proposed debt-for-equity swap left by some of the foreign banks, which disagreed with the arrangement.
In addition, the new rights issue is to be guaranteed by a group of major bank creditors.
"In the end, even those who initially didn't want to play along realized what the main point was: that we were talking about Metallgesellschaft, which was too good a company to go under.
Maybe it will take two years or more, but it can make money again," said a Deutsche Bank official.
