The long-awaited turnaround in the newspaper industry finally occurred in the fourth quarter, many analysts agree, with most predicting healthy double-digit earnings increases for most of the major publishers.
"For the newspaper industry, the turn is definitely here.
The question remaining is how big of a turn" it will be, says Kenneth Berents, managing director and media analyst for Wheat First Butcher & Singer, based in Richmond, Va.
"This is the best outlook I've seen for a number of years."
John Morton, media analyst for Lynch, Jones & Ryan in New York, concurs.
"The Christmas season is when newspapers make a lot of their money and it was a good shopping season most places around the country," said Mr. Morton.
In addition, he says, classified advertising finally began picking up at papers around the country during the fourth quarter, "which is why most people are confident the recovery is really here."
Kevin Gruneich, a managing director of First Boston Corp., said that in the area of classified ads, help-wanted ads were up for the first three quarters of 1993, but in the last quarter, the additional classified categories of real estate and automobiles were also picking up in many parts of the country.
"When you combine rising advertising with the cost-cutting that's been done and the fact that newsprint prices haven't risen much, you get some pretty decent profit comparisons," said Mr. Gruneich.
Mr. Morton of Lynch, Jones expects Miami-based Knight-Ridder Inc. to report fourth-quarter per-share earnings of 90 cents a share, up from 79 cents.
He also expects A.H. Belo Corp. of Dallas to report 73 cents a share, up from 56 cents, and profits at Chicago's Tribune Co. to rise to 70 cents from 53 cents.
Like many analysts, Mr. Morton is bullish on Arlington, Va.-based Gannett Co., whose earnings he expects to rise to 85 cents a share from 79 cents.
Some forecasts for Gannett are more bullish, such as that of Dorlaine McLaughlin of J.P. Morgan Securities Inc., who expects Gannett to rise to 90 cents a share.
"Gannett has a lot of small papers that are geographically diversified, and will get a boost from the improving economy," said Ms. McLaughlin.
"Secondly, USA Today finally became profitable in 1993."
In some parts of the country, the economy isn't rebounding as briskly, and thus some newspapers are still suffering from sluggish ad sales.
But even in cases such as Times Mirror Co., based in Los Angeles and affected greatly by the torpid California economy, most analysts aren't as bearish as they have been.
Michael Kupinski, a media analyst for A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc., expects Times Mirror to report fourth-quarter profit of 40 cents a share, vs. year-ago profit of 33 cents a share from continuing operations.
(The company reported a net loss of 50 cents, including write-offs from discontinued businesses.)
"It is still lagging behind the group, but it is starting to show some signs of improvement," says Mr. Kupinski.
He is recommending the stock because he believes the company's situation will improve considerably by the end of this year, helped by the overall economy and the fact that the company is a good-size cable operator.
The company has said it may sell or spin off its cable assets.
Despite their general bullishness, some analysts worry that the stock market has driven up too rapidly those newspaper companies with cable television holdings.
Among those with cable divisions are Times Mirror, E.W. Scripps Co., Media General Inc., Washington Post Co. and Knight-Ridder.
In a recent industry report, Mr. McLaughlin of J.P. Morgan warned, "We believe the market has overvalued newspaper companies with cable subsidiaries because it will be more difficult for those companies, vs. pure play cable operators, to sell cable assets in a tax-efficient manner."
Nonetheless, most analysts project good earnings gains for the newspaper companies in 1994.
"It won't be as spectacular as in past economic recoveries, but we expect continued modest growth this year," said Mr. Morton of Lynch, Jones.
"We expect overall advertising linage to grow about 4% or 5%, and newspaper revenues to rise about 9% or 10%."
