Less than two years after arriving here from the U.S., Leyland Hazlewood's management-consulting business is doing high-visibility deals that could lift his company, Dimpex Inc., out of obscurity.
Recently, Dimpex structured and arranged the financing for a $3 million licensing joint venture between Nike Inc. and a group of South African businessmen.
It wasn't Dimpex's largest transaction, but Mr. Hazlewood believes that doing business with Nike will help open doors -- not only here, but in other emerging countries as well.
"There is currently a window of opportunity for companies like mine to be involved in really important transactions" says the former New Yorker, who is black.
In the U.S., where blacks still find it difficult to penetrate the white-dominated business world, "I probably wouldn't be involved in a deal like this," Mr. Hazlewood says.
"But here in South Africa, I have a shot."
Such sentiments explain why South Africa -- still the world's leading symbol of black oppression -- is fast gaining a reputation among black Americans as the land of economic opportunity.
The South African consulate in New York, which handles all immigration applications from Americans, says it is currently processing a "very significant" number of applications from black Americans who want to relocate.
Although the consulate says it doesn't keep exact figures, it notes that most of those moving are skilled professionals, business executives and academics.
Many black Americans compare South Africa to the U.S. after World War II, when America was on the verge of an economic and population boom.
It was a time when fortunes and empires could be built from relatively small stakes.
"You grow up hearing stories of people who started businesses 30 years ago with only $2,000.
You can't do that today in the U.S., but you can do it here," says Gayla Cook, who moved to South Africa two years ago and runs a media-consulting firm.
In many cases, the new arrivals are filling positions left vacant by the large number of whites who are fleeing South Africa out of fear that the country's historic transition to democracy from apartheid will bring an escalation of racial violence and possibly even a civil war.
Locals jokingly refer to this exodus as "the chicken run," but it could develop into a serious talent drain.
That is why the official welcome mat is out.
"Americans helped in the struggle against apartheid, so we'd rather see them come here and fill certain high-skill jobs than people from countries that didn't support us," said Alan Mukoki, a lending officer at Nedcor, a unit of Johannesburg's NedBank Group Ltd.
Most of the black Americans who already have made the move say they truly enjoy and indeed cherish their new lives.
But they also admit to undercurrents of discomfort.
As Americans, they are generally treated better than black South Africans, and almost always are subject to far less discrimination.
The Americans find this all too easy to accept, which generates feelings of guilt.
"Sometimes I would feel bad that white South Africans would treat me better than they treat black South Africans," says Christopher Joshua, a black hair-care-industry executive from Little Rock, Ark.
"They would say, `You're not like them.'"
Many black Americans also feel embarrassed that they are experiencing South Africa's political transition at a level of affluence that is unknown to the large majority of black South Africans.
In fact, moving to South Africa boosted the standard of living for many families.
Houses in suburban Johannesburg -- many with lavish amenities -- are far less expensive than similar property in major U.S. cities.
For example, the 29-year-old Mr. Joshua purchased a four-bedroom house on more than an acre of land in Bryanston, a wealthy enclave near Johannesburg.
In addition to tennis courts, a swimming pool and guest apartment, Mr. Joshua's house, like others here, is surrounded by concrete walls, is cared for by a small entourage of servants and is separated from the street by an electronic gate.
The home is landscaped with mounds of pink and red azaleas and shaded by several jacaranda, a purple-flowered tree common in South Africa.
The cost: about 780,000 rand, or $225,000.
In New York or California, a similar home would cost $1 million or more; in Little Rock, maybe $300,000.
South Africa is one of the world's most beautiful countries, with picturesque vineyards, gorgeous seashores and breathtaking rural vistas.
The highways are smooth and the weather is mild.
Such physical comforts help make the move from the U.S. a relatively easy one for most Americans.
"It's like Northern California without the earthquakes," says Mackey McLeod, a former Bostonian who now is an executive with Lotus Corp.'s South Africa unit.
South Africa also resembles the U.S. demographically, in that it is a diverse, multiracial, multiethnic society.
American sitcoms and movies dominate the airwaves, and billboards advertise the latest recordings of pop stars such as Diana Ross and Michael Bolton.
On the evening television news, one can follow the latest twists and turns of the Harding-Kerrigan ice follies.
So, for better and worse, black Americans typically feel comfortable when they arrive in South Africa.
"I felt an immediate bond to the country," says Barron H. Harvey, a business professor at Howard University in Washington, who recently won a contract from the Agency for International Development to study South African venture capital.
"The people have a can-do attitude that I have not seen among blacks since my days in college in the 1960s."
Not everyone here is thrilled to see these can-do newcomers.
Conservative white Afrikaners, especially, view them as potential troublemakers out to turn their country of 45 million into a small version of the U.S., complete with affirmative-action programs, high educational spending, low-income housing and minimum-wage laws that affect all workers.
Koos Ferreira, an executive at Simba Group Ltd., a unit of South Africa's Foodcorp Group, a big food company, says black Americans "are too pushy" and "have a lot of fancy ideas," about how to bring racial equality to South Africa.
He complains that they "just don't understand what it is like here."
It wasn't too long ago that most black Americans disliked South Africa with equal severity, due largely to the country's infamous system of apartheid.
This rigid policy of racial segregation, introduced in 1947, forced whites, blacks, Asians and the mixed-race "coloreds" into defined areas of geography and culture.
International condemnation of apartheid began almost immediately, but Americans didn't get actively involved in the antiapartheid activities until the 1960s, when student activists protested the policy.
By 1989, at the peak of the U.S. antiapartheid movement, hundreds of American corporations were under pressure to sever their South African business ties.
Washington placed economic sanctions against the country and, perhaps most devastating psychologically, South African athletes weren't welcome at international sporting events.
Apartheid began to crumble four years ago when Nelson Mandela, leader of the once-banned African National Congress, was released from prison after 27 years.
Now that South Africa is on the road to becoming a multiracial democracy, with free elections scheduled for April and sanctions having been lifted, the economy has started to grow again.
Profits at diamond-industry leader DeBeers Consolidated Mines Ltd. and gold producer Anglo American Corp., South Africa's two largest corporations, have risen for the first time in several years, downtown Johannesburg is crowded with shoppers and entrepreneurship is the hottest topic among the emerging black middle class.
Still, the new arrivals are likely to find some difficult adjustments mixed in with the economic opportunities.
Mr. McLeod, the Lotus executive, says the undercurrent of fear related to crime and the remote possibility of a civil war has turned many South Africans into scared shut-ins.
"Some people have houses filled with panic buttons, emergency alarms and remote-control devices they can carry with them from room to room just in case something happens," he says.
"If they push the button, within two minutes one of the private, armed security services will come to your house. . . .
The backdrop of living here is one of concern for personal security.
You never really go to sleep; you always have one eye open."
Families often bear the brunt of the cultural changes.
Ms. Cook, the media consultant, recalls feeling humiliated when she was required to obtain written permission from white neighbors before she could move into Honey Dew, a section of Randburg, near Johannesburg.
The Group Areas Act has since been repealed.
To make matters worse, she then discovered that her children would be the only blacks in the neighborhood school.
Rather than subject them to what she suspected would be ridicule from classmates, she instead enrolled them in a private school in the city, an hour's drive away.
Nevertheless, her 14-year-old son "was miserable.
He missed basketball, football and McDonald's," she says.
"He had a very difficult time adjusting."
So difficult, in fact, that she has since sent him back to the U.S. to live with her brother.
Still, American blacks who yearn for better career opportunities find success stories, like that of Ophelia Jatta, compelling.
One of the earliest African-Americans to emigrate to Johannesburg, Ms. Jatta is a 42-year-old native of Oklahoma City who developed an interest in mining while working for Kerr-McGee Oil Co., a unit of Kerr-McGee Corp.
In 1987, two years after graduating from the University of Oklahoma Law School, Ms. Jatta sold everything she owned to move to Africa.
After visiting many countries, Ms. Jatta decided to make South Africa her home even though she had no contacts, no job and no place to live.
"I could tell right away that South Africa would be a fabulous country once they solved the racial and political problems," says Ms. Jatta.
"I knew that if I could get there before everyone else showed up, I would be sitting pretty once things began to open up."
Within two weeks, Ms. Jatta had landed a job as a labor-relations specialist at Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Co., one of South Africa's top mining companies and the biggest platinum producer in the world.
Like other managers in South Africa -- who receive among the best perks of executives anywhere in the world -- she was given a company car and financing to purchase a home.
"Blacks with solid skills can go much further here a lot faster than in the U.S.," because there is less competition for high-level jobs, says Ms. Jatta, who remains a member of the U.S. Republican Party and who took a one-year leave from South Africa in 1988 to work for former President Bush's election campaign.
Ms. Jatta recently formed her own company, Jatta International Investment Co., which plans to provide mortgages to South Africa's black middle class.
She also has her own radio talk show, and frequently appears on TV to discuss U.S. foreign policy toward Africa.
Some black Americans who moved to South Africa mainly for lifestyle reasons are surprised to discover their careers blossoming as well.
One of them is Kimberleigh Stark, a 29-year-old actress and radio personality who was born in San Diego.
In the past year, she has won roles in six movies -- all produced by U.S. film companies and starring such actors as Robert Mitchum and Kris Kristofferson.
"There are 10,000 women running around Hollywood who look just like me," says Ms. Stark, who has honey-colored skin and long, curly hair.
"Here, my look is unique."
Her look is also ambiguous, at least in a country that places lighter-skinned and darker-skinned blacks into separate racial categories.
That distinction sparked a controversy when she played the part of a black woman.
Black newspapers were outraged and admonished the European film company for hiring a "colored" to play the part of a "black."
In any case, Ms. Stark says she would be happy in South Africa even without her career.
She thinks the way of life here is quieter and simpler than in the U.S.
She lives on a 10-acre farm with her Afrikaner husband, two children, two dogs and several chickens.
She met her husband, a cameraman, during the filming of a movie several years ago.
Their interracial marriage then made it hard to buy a home in the city and its suburbs, so they live about 35 minutes from Johannesburg, where land-act provisions didn't apply.
Even though her home has been burglarized three times in the past few years, she finds South Africa's crime and violence less unsettling than American street crime.
"My kids are growing up playing in a tree house. . . .
In Los Angeles, they'd probably be dodging bullets," says Ms. Stark.
She recently visited L.A. after a five-year absence and "got the shock of my life" from what she saw as the city's deterioration.
"South Africa has its problems but it's not as bad as the U.S.
The quality of life here is much better."
