Seeking to broaden the distribution of their music products, Sony Software Corp. and Warner Music Group will launch a joint-venture radio-syndication network in late summer or fall.
The new company, SW Networks, will create radio programming, including plays, morning shows, talk shows, and music shows, to be distributed via satellite, digital radio and conventional broadcasting.
Sony Software is a unit of Sony Corp. while Warner Music Group is a unit of Time Warner Inc.
SW Networks is the latest venture between the Sony and Time Warner music groups, the two largest record companies in the industry.
The two have been partners since 1991 in Columbia House, which was Sony Music's record club until Sony agreed to give a half-interest to Warner in order to settle an unrelated lawsuit.
Since then, the two companies have invested in a number of joint projects, including the planned launch of a competitor to Viacom Inc.'s MTV Networks.
Susan Solomon, 41 years old, a former executive vice president at Andrews Group Inc., an entertainment and publishing subsidiary of MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings Inc., has been named president of the new start-up company.
MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings is owned by financier Ronald Perelman.
In recent months, Ms. Solomon, an attorney by training, has acted as an adviser to several other projects in which Sony and Warner Music have invested, including Viva, the German music-television channel, and Digital Cable Radio Associates L.P., a cable-delivered digital music subscription service based in Horsham, Pa., which does business as Music Choice.
The new radio network grew out the joint investment last year in digital cable radio.
At the time, both companies indicated that they were looking for a new programming entity to distribute recorded music.
In recent years the number of new recordings has exploded, outpacing the ability of the six major record companies to guarantee each an audience.
Ms. Solomon declined to comment on the new venture, as did Sony and Warner Music.
But people familiar with the plan say SW Networks hopes to attract a number of radio-station owners as joint-venture partners.
The budding network intends to make its programming available for sale to other radio stations.
Robert Unmacht, president of M Street Corp., a publisher of a broadcast newsletter, described the current radio-syndication market as unusually competitive.
"Radio has a much lower cost of entry than television, so it has attracted a lot of companies," says Mr. Unmacht.
"It's hard to make a profit, because most stations prefer to barter advertising time for programming rather than pay cash."
Advertising support, he added, is difficult to generate because the radio market is so fragmented.
