Oscar Herrera admits he is a crook.
Eager to collect lucrative premiums on life-insurance policies, the former insurance agent lied to customers and forged signatures.
He even cheated his own uncle out of $27,000.
But when an irate policyholder finally hauled Mr. Herrera before a jury last year, the jurors let him off scot-free.
Instead, they blamed his employer, New York Life Insurance Co., for his misdeeds and awarded the policyholder, a widow who lost $65,000, an astounding $21 million.
New York Life ultimately settled the civil suit for an undisclosed sum, and prosecutors have brought no criminal charges.
Still, the Herrera case is sending shock waves through the life-insurance industry.
For years, it has blamed abuses such as those admitted by Mr. Herrera on individual "rogue" agents.
Now, after years of fraud and deceit by some agents, many people find that excuse wearing thin.
Courts, government officials and the public are beginning to conclude that the industry itself is a rogue that must be brought to heel.
"It's not plausible for the companies to say it's just a bad apple.
They create a climate for this sort of thing," says Joseph Belth, editor of the Insurance Forum newsletter.
He contends that "what goes on in the life-insurance business is a national scandal."
Certainly, evidence of continuing abuses is mounting.
Florida state regulators, for example, are battling Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. over the practice of marketing life insurance as a retirement vehicle and failing to make clear to customers they are buying insurance.
Under Florida law, that practice is deemed fraud and carries stiff penalties.
Met Life says as many as 60,000 people nationwide may have been misled by its agents and has promised to pay up to $40 million in compensation.
But Florida's insurance commissioner, Tom Gallagher, is determined that Met Life won't get away with blaming an agent.
"We hold companies responsible for their agents," Mr. Gallagher vows.
Since Florida began its investigation, in fact, at least three more companies -- New York Life, Sears, Roebuck & Co.'s Allstate Corp. and Prudential Insurance Co. of America -- have admitted that one or more of their agents have used a virtually identical marketing scheme.
And investigators in a dozen other states are also looking at Met Life's sales practices.
At a recent life-insurance conference in Hawaii, executives of other insurance companies thanked a Met Life representative for "taking the heat" on the issue.
But the heat soon may be on an entire industry long accustomed to freewheeling methods and lax regulation.
In Washington, Sen. Howard Metzenbaum plans to hold hearings soon on Met Life and other insurers.
The Ohio Democrat, along with Rep. John Dingell, a Michigan Democrat, wants an expanded federal role in insurance regulation.
Anger over sales practices could provide additional motivation to wrest authority from the states.
Meanwhile, state insurance commissioners are working to avert federal regulation by trying to enforce their own rules more effectively.
Many want to force the companies to be more candid about the investment prospects of life insurance, barring insurers and their agents from such misleading practices as "illustrating" potential returns when selling.
Instead, agents would have to disclose past performance, much as mutual funds do.
States are also cracking down on one of the most pervasive forms of life-insurance fraud, called "churning."
Seeking out policyholders who have been paying premiums for years and have finally built up some equity in their policies, unscrupulous agents persuade them to borrow against the value of their policies and roll the proceeds into a new, unnecessary policy.
Last year, New York state said it suspended or fined 30 life-insurance agents for churning, including agents with Equitable Cos., Guardian Life Insurance Co. of America, John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. and Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York; all the companies say that they try to monitor their salespeople but that, with thousands of them, a few go astray.
But New York's insurance commissioner, Salvatore Curiale, promises more action, warning: "Executives and agents should be on notice that penalties, including fines and loss of licenses, will be forthcoming."
The efforts, taken together, represent one of the largest assaults on the life-insurance industry since 1905, when New York's explosive Armstrong Committee hearings led to far-reaching reforms.
Although the industry has steadfastly resisted change since then, it now concedes that it has little choice but to try to cleanse itself.
"We must make sure that we are never vulnerable again," New York Life's general counsel, Alice Kane, said in a speech to agents following the Herrera decision.
"There is no doubt we are being held to a higher standard of accountability."
Both the industry and agent groups say, however, that the problems are not widespread, as they want to build up long-term relationships with customers and thus have no interest in cheating them.
Even though consumers spend some $65 billion annually on various forms of life insurance, few really know exactly what they are buying.
Most who try to read a policy are overwhelmed with terms such as "paid-up addition," "mortality charge" and "waive-of-premium rider."
As a result, many simply bow to agents' highpressure tactics without knowing what they are buying or its cost.
"To get the salesman out of the kitchen, a lot of people take on a burden they can't handle," says James Hunt, a Woburn, Mass., actuary associated with the National Insurance Consumer Organization.
Life-insurance agents, meanwhile, have tremendous financial incentives to sell insurance any way they can -- especially whole-life policies, which carry not only a death benefit but also an investment feature.
The typical whole-life policy pays big commissions to agents in the first year while accumulating little value for the policyholder.
For instance, a 45-year-old male who buys a $300,000 whole-life policy might pay about $6,800 a year in premiums.
While he won't break even for five or even 10 years -- and loses everything if he cashes out earlier -- the agent who sold him the policy immediately collects a commission equal to 55% of the first-year premiums, or $3,750.
Administrative expenses and commissions for the agent's superiors eat up the rest of the money.
"In the first year, the consumer throws all his money away on costs," says Glenn Daily, a financial planner in New York.
Bad as that is for the consumer, the deceit and fraud committed by some agents make buying insurance even riskier, as the Herrera case indicates.
Court transcripts and exhibits in the Duval County trial illuminate some of the darker practices existing in the industry.
Mr. Herrera joined New York Life's Corpus Christi office in 1985 at age 32.
Driven by what he said was greed and a fear of being fired for not meeting sales quotas, he soon began to cut corners.
One of his victims was Richard Cruz, who had purchased term life insurance, a moderately priced policy that provides a death benefit but no investment gains.
When Mr. Cruz spurned Mr. Herrera's entreaties to switch to a more expensiveand, for Mr. Herrera, lucrative-whole-life policy, Mr. Herrera took matters into his own hands.
He forged Mr. Cruz's name on an authorization form to automatically withdraw enough money from Mr. Cruz's checking account to pay the higher whole-life premiums.
The practice, sometimes done by holding the authorization form up against a window to trace out a signature, is common enough in the industry to have a name: "windowing."
Mr. Cruz's wife, Veronica, discovered the larger withdrawals and complained.
After an investigation, New York Life reversed the transactions but took no action at the time against Mr. Herrera.
Mr. Herrera also persuaded his uncle, Jose Lopez, to buy an annuity for $27,000 from New York Life.
But annuities pay small commissions compared with whole life.
So Mr. Herrera took the money, forged his uncle's signature and bought him a $300,000 whole-life insurance policy.
Because Mr. Lopez was 70, the annual premiums were steep.
Within two years, all the money Mr. Lopez paid had been eaten up by the premiums.
Mr. Lopez complained and got his money back.
Mr. Herrera's biggest fraud involved Ramiro and Lamar Hernandez, who lived in Benevides, a poor Duval County town 60 miles west of Corpus Christi.
Mr. Hernandez worked as a "roughneck," supervising crews that laid oil-field pipe.
When the oil business prospered, so did the Hernandez family.
When the business suffered, the Hernandezes went without hot water and lit their small house with candles.
Then, Mr. Hernandez suddenly came into money.
In 1987, when he had a neck operation, his surgeon left a sponge inside him, near his spine, and Mr. Hernandez was paralyzed from the neck down.
He sued and won a $331,000 settlement.
Mr. Herrera heard about it and, along with his manager, launched a hard-sell campaign aimed at getting Mr. Hernandez to buy as much insurance as possible.
After being courted for several months, Mr. Hernandez agreed to invest $100,000, split among three New York Life annuities.
But Mr. Herrera would have earned a commission of only a few thousand dollars.
So he refocused his efforts on Mrs. Hernandez and eventually persuaded her to sign up for a $100,000 life-insurance policy.
Then, he increased her coverage to $1 million by carefully adding a zero to the coverage policy, a move that increased his commission tenfold.
For two years, the fraud went undetected.
Although the premiums came to $27,000 a year, Mrs. Hernandez never got a bill; Mr. Herrera would, without her knowledge, make the payments by withdrawing money from her annuities by "windowing" signatures on authorization forms.
Eventually the money in the annuity account ran out, and, in early 1991 Mrs. Hernandez got a $27,000 bill from New York Life, which said her policy would lapse if she failed to pay the premium.
She discovered the fraud and filed suit.
During the trial, New York Life used the evidence against Mr. Herrera to portray him as a "con man" who acted alone.
But Mrs. Hernandez's attorney, Frank Herrera (no relation to Oscar) presented evidence that Oscar Herrera's actions grew out of the culture of the Corpus Christi office.
Oscar Herrera's attorney, Roland Leon, took a similar approach.
At the time Mr. Herrera sold the policy to Mrs. Hernandez, the Corpus Christi office was headed by Ronald Dawson.
Mr. Dawson, who has since left New York Life, was among its most successful sales managers.
Agents who worked for him were under tremendous pressure to sell.
"It was do or die," testified Ronald Garza, a former agent in the office.
Another agent, Oswaldo "Sonny" Corea, testified that his manager encouraged him to boost commissions by converting term policies to whole life, including policies owned by his father and uncle.
Mr. Corea said he quit rather than agree to cheat.
"I didn't want to get caught up in a system where I had to do illegal stuff to meet management requirements and management goals," he testified.
He also said that "windowing" was commonplace and that he saw Mr. Herrera hold up authorization forms against a window to trace signatures.
Mr. Herrera, who admitted forgeries, has left New York Life.
Management memos in the Corpus Christi office, written after Mr. Dawson was reassigned to another office, back up much of what the agents alleged.
One memo warned against windowing: "In the past, this office has had a very, very loose attitude regarding windowing signatures."
Another cautioned against unauthorized conversions of term-life policies into whole life: "One last time on term conversions.
We have to be careful.
They're watching us."
Mr. Dawson himself became the subject of a New York Life investigation into "commission switching."
At New York Life and other insurers, general managers get bonuses based on how many of their agents reach a certain sales level.
If one agent made the level and another fell short, according to witnesses in the Herrera trial, Mr. Dawson would encourage the more successful agent to be a "team player" and switch enough of his commissions to the other agent so both could qualify.
The successful agent would be repaid in the future.
In a deposition, Mr. Dawson said he allowed commission switching only for clerical reasons and denied pressuring agents to cheat.
A lawyer for him asserts that "there was no credible evidence at the Herrera trial linking Ron Dawson to any unethical conduct or wrongdoing."
Jurors were plainly outraged by what they heard.
Although Mr. Herrera was a defendant in the civil case, they didn't hold him financially liable.
Instead, they held New York Life responsible for his actions.
They found that it had cheated Mrs. Hernandez and ordered it to pay her $65,000 for actual damages, $1 million for mental anguish, $5 million for legal fees and $15 million in punitive damages -- a sum they deemed just punishment for a company with a net worth of $2.6 billion.
Since agreeing to settle the case before taking it to appeal, New York Life has held seminars and showed employees a videotape describing the Herrera case to make sure agents follow ethical practices.
As for Mrs. Hernandez, she began getting calls from life-insurance agents even before the trial ended, her attorney says.
The agents told her that she shouldn't think badly of them just because one agent burned her.
