Limited Inc. said its vice chairman will act as head of its Limited Stores chain, the lagging unit of the retailing apparel company, following the resignation of the unit's president, Howard Gross.
Limited Chairman Leslie H. Wexner said that Michael Weiss, 52 years old, company vice chairman and No. 2 merchant, was named the acting president while the company searches for a permanent successor.
Shortly after that announcement, Today's Man Inc., a fast-growing New Jersey-based men's apparel retailer, said it hired the 50-year-old Mr. Gross as its new president and chief operating officer as of April 4.
A 21-year veteran of Limited, Mr. Gross spent the last three years running the Limited Stores unit.
Today's Man recently opened a superstore in Manhattan and three others in Chicago for a total of 25 stores, operating largely on the East Coast.
The company had annual sales of $167.1 million for the fiscal year ended Jan. 29.
It reported strong sales at its new Manhattan location and announced plans to open more stores.
In heavy Nasdaq trading yesterday, Today's Man shares rose 25 cents to $15.75.
In trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Limited shares fell 62.5 cents to $21.
Mr. Gross made his name at the Limited by guiding the expansion of Victoria's Secret from about 12 stores in the mid-1980s to over 400 stores by January 1991, when he was appointed president of the Limited Stores unit.
Under Mr. Gross, however, Limited Stores turned in largely disappointing operating results; and it was closing stores.
Limited Stores contributed $1.1 billion in sales to the company's total sales of $7.25 billion in the fiscal year ended Jan. 29.
But according to analysts, Limited Stores' operating profit in the last fiscal year was about $20 million, significantly less than a few years ago.
Although Limited Stores had about 760 stores in 1992, it is paring that number down to reach an estimated 703 by the end of this year.
Analysts said they expected Mr. Gross's departure because the unit wasn't keeping pace with the Limited's other fast-growing units, such as Victoria's Secret and Bath & Body Works.
"Limited Stores have been floundering for five years in terms of direction," said Jeffrey Edelman, an analyst with C. J. Lawrence Inc.
"It lost the focus on its target customer and never differentiated itself."
Limited's Mr. Wexner is looking to rejuvenate the unit.
In a statement yesterday, he said, "I believe Limited Stores has enormous potential for sales and earnings growth."
The Columbus, Ohio-based Limited operates 4,606 specialty stores under the names Express, Structure, Abercrombie & Fitch, and Henri Bendel, among others.
