Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison's acquittal on state ethics charges, in a bizarre finale minutes after her trial began Friday, leaves the Texas Republican the front-runner for re-election this year.
Due to double-jeopardy protections, Sen. Hutchison can't be tried again on the criminal charges that as state treasurer from 1991 to mid-1993, she used state workers for political and personal tasks, and then sought to cover up the evidence by destroying records.
Even before the trial's final twist, the state prosecutors' case has been plagued by technical snafus that twice forced them to seek new indictments.
The freshman senator hailed the outcome in Fort Worth where the trial had been moved after her defense lawyers argued that an unbiased jury couldn't be found in Austin.
Repeating her contention that the whole affair was a Democratic plot, she said afterward, "The lady showed she could take the worst that a corruption of the political system could give."
The indignant prosecutor, Travis County District Attorney Ronnie Earle, the next day took his case to the public arena, giving reporters access to reams of documents that, he argued, showed a "massive misuse of state employees and state resources."
Sen. Hutchison supported the release of the evidence.
According to a preliminary review by the Associated Press, state workers wrote Mrs. Hutchison's thank-you notes for political trips and for gifts, recorded political contributions, and handled her political schedule.
Mr. Earle abruptly abandoned his case against Sen. Hutchison when Judge John Onion Jr. refused to rule on whether those documents, seized from the state treasury on the basis of a grand-jury subpoena, were admissible evidence.
The senator's defense team contended the items were illegally seized because investigators had no search warrant.
Given the evidentiary snarl, Mr. Earle hoped the judge would dismiss the charges before a jury was sworn in; once a jury was sworn in, double jeopardy would prevent him from reindicting her.
When the judge ordered the trial to proceed, Mr. Earle refused to prosecute, and Judge Onion ordered the jury to acquit the senator.
Democrats and Republicans agreed that the outcome was a political as well as legal boon to Sen. Hutchison.
She was elected with 67% of the vote in a special contest last summer, replacing Lloyd Bentsen after he was named Treasury secretary, and the legal affair had cut into her popularity.
But now she can concentrate on re-election, while Democrats fight to pick a rival in a March 8 primary.
Candidates include former state Attorney General Jim Mattox, Rep. Michael Andrews and businessman Richard Fisher.
Even so, the allegations won't disappear as a political issue.
"It's not like a jury of 12 found her innocent," said Sam Kinch, editor of "Texas Weekly," a state political newsletter.
Moreover, the release of the would-be evidence, he said, "gives whoever the Democratic nominee is the chance to trot all this out."
The Democratic favorite is Mr. Mattox, who has ethical scars of his own.
But he also could undercut Sen. Hutchison's central complaint -- that Mr. Earle was leading a Democratic witch-hunt.
Mr. Mattox was tried by Mr. Earle in the mid-1980s on a bribery-related charge, and acquitted.
