Rep. Dan Rostenkowski is campaigning harder than he's ever had to in his 35-year congressional career to stave off defeat at the hands of a young Illinois state senator.
Polls show that Rep. Rostenkowski retains a thin lead over state Sen. John Cullerton, 45, who has emerged as the chief rival among the four Democrats challenging the 66-year-old incumbent in tomorrow's primary.
But with a large share of voters still undecided, Mr. Cullerton's higher profile raises the prospect that disgruntled voters will break for him as the clear alternative to Rep. Rostenkowski.
While Rep. Rostenkowski makes appearances at sites chosen to illustrate the largess he's secured for Chicago, television ads -- the first he's ever bought -- are replaying President Clinton's tribute during a recent trip on behalf of the Ways and Means Committee chairman.
He is considered pivotal to the president's healthcare, welfare and budget initiatives.
A more negative ad also began running over the weekend, directly attacking Mr. Cullerton and, in so doing, reflecting the tightening of the race.
Rep. Rostenkowski, greatly weakened by ethics allegations after a nearly two-year criminal grand jury investigation, would remain chairman if he's defeated, but would be a lame duck for the year.
If indicted later, he would have to forfeit the chair until he's cleared.
The incumbent's hope of survival has rested on having his top rivals evenly splitting the anti-Rostenkowski vote, so he can win with as little as one-third of the ballots.
Yet former Alderman Dick Simpson, Rep. Rostenkowski's 1992 foe, has failed to pick up strength.
Two other candidates are minor contenders.
Mr. Simpson had earlier turned on Mr. Cullerton, lambasting him as no less corrupt than Mr. Rostenkowski, but his campaign is crippled with debt.
The Rostenkowski campaign is banking on an expected low turnout, to keep hostile voters at home and to enhance pro-Rosty, get-out-the-vote efforts from hundreds of canvassers in the city's Democratic machine.
Thomas Serafin, a Rostenkowski spokesman, expressed confidence over the weekend that the lawmaker would prevail.
But Cullerton campaign manager John Longo yesterday boasted that his candidate is "cruising to victory."
Since President Clinton's visit, other politicians have joined Rep. Rostenkowski to underscore his importance to the city, state and nation, and to boost his support among women, minorities and ethnic groups in the diverse district.
They've included GOP Gov. Jim Edgar, House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) and other members of Congress.
Rep. Joseph Kennedy (D., Mass.), at the Rostenkowski campaign's request, got Mr. Cullerton to pull a TV ad that took aim at Mr. Rostenkowski's ethics with a quote from the late Robert Kennedy, Rep. Kennedy's father.
