With the U.S. economy surging back to life, corporate America is prowling for acquisitions.
A spate of hostile or unsolicited takeover offers, which began with the recent dogfight over Paramount Communications Inc., has gained momentum in the past week, with two new $2 billion offers.
Last Thursday, defense contractor Northrop Corp. offered about $2.04 billion for Grumman Corp. in an eat-or-be-eaten bid to break up an announced merger between Grumman and Martin Marietta Corp.
And on Monday, General Electric Co.'s GE Capital unit announced it had offered $2.2 billion for Kemper Corp., another financial-services company.
"Eighteen months ago, I don't think there was a boardroom in America that could stomach doing an unfriendly transaction," says Michael Koeneke, co-head of mergers at Merrill Lynch & Co.
"But now, there's just a lot of pent-up demand for acquisitions that's coming out on the back of confidence in the economy."
Most of the bids involve companies trying to expand within their own field to save on costs, enter new markets or adapt to changing technologies or regulations.
"Managers realize market position is important in survival, and they are willing to do whatever it takes," says New York investment banker Peter Solomon.
With activity swirling in the defense, financial-services, communications and health-care industries, hundreds of investors and investment bankers are trying to divine where deals will strike next.
Their predictions: the energy, pharmaceutical and -- given Federated Department Stores Inc.'s interest in gaining control of R.H. Macy & Co. -- retailing sectors.
While merger activity rose 80% last year from the rock-bottom level of 1992, investment bankers see the latest bids as a sign that the pendulum continues to swing back from the doldrums of the early 1990s toward the more hectic pace of the 1980s -- minus the corporate raiders, junk bonds and leveraged buyouts.
"The touchstone of the early 1990s was corporate downsizing -- layoffs, restructuring, recapitalization, bankruptcy and emerging from bankruptcy," says Richard H. Schneider, a takeover-stock trader.
He says the battle for Paramount, which began last September and ended recently when Viacom Inc. won with a bid of about $10 billion, "was a watershed event, the beginning of a new hostile acquisitive phase of the merger cycle."
Jeffrey Williams, head of media and telecommunications mergers at Morgan Stanley & Co., says that two Delaware court decisions in the Paramount battle, which roasted Paramount directors for not giving due consideration to a hostile bid by QVC Inc., may also have emboldened executives to make new bids.
The takeover activity is getting a strong tail wind from some basic economic fundamentals.
Interest rates are low.
That has reduced the cost of bank debt used to finance cash bids.
It has also sent stock prices soaring for the past three years, making cheap equity financing available as well.
"We have an absolutely terrific financing market -- low rates and high stockprice/earnings ratios," says Stephen Schwarzman, president of Blackstone Group, a merger specialist.
William Benedetto, a principal of Benedetto, Gartland & Green Inc., says the ebullient stock market may sometimes have a perverse effect, though.
He says it could pressure some companies to seek growth via acquisitions in order to justify their stock price.
The steady decline in interest rates, which bottomed in October and have since begun creeping up, has finally stoked the U.S. economy after three years of sputtering growth.
The gross domestic product -- the total value of goods and services produced in the nation -- grew only 0.2% in 1990 and 0.3% in 1991, but then surged in 1993 from a growth rate of 0.8% in the first quarter to a galloping 7.5% annual rate in the fourth quarter.
That was the fastest rate since the first quarter of 1984.
"People are more confident in the economy today, and that confidence is showing itself in a pickup in deals," says Mike Overlock, co-head of investment banking at Goldman Sachs & Co., which represents takeover targets Grumman and Kemper.
Mr. Koeneke of Merrill Lynch also says that some $20 billion or more in funds earmarked for leveraged buyouts is waiting in the wings to join the fray if stock prices falter.
As of now, he says, "everything is still too pricey for them."
The bids by Northrop and GE Capital have excited Wall Street traders, who believe that activity in a given sector will breed more of the same.
Yesterday, shares of mutual-fund companies and annuity insurers rose on news of the GE subsidiary's interest in Kemper, which Kemper is trying to deflect.
And shares of Time Warner Inc. have risen $2.50 a share this week on speculation that Seagram Co., which owns 13.1% of Time Warner, might wage a proxy fight for control of the media and entertainment concern.
This week has even seen the resurfacing of two names from the corporate-raiding heyday of the 1980s.
Carl Pohlad, a partner of Minneapolis investor Irwin Jacobs, made a $178 million unsolicited bid for Fibreboard Corp.
And Alfred Kingsley, who served as a lieutenant to Carl Icahn, proposed a breakup of U.S. Shoe Corp.
Such personalities, though, are rare.
Missing from the action are many of the players that added the most froth to the record years of 1988 and 1989.
Corporate raiders went into eclipse following the collapse of the junk-bond market and of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which had provided their financing.
Raiders also were hurt by a thicket of corporate takeover defenses, state antitakeover laws, and tax-law changes reducing the rewards of corporate breakups.
Leveraged buyout firms, which accounted for some of the biggest deals in history, led by the $25 billion buyout of RJR Nabisco Inc., also remain on the sidelines.
They can't find many bargains because stock prices remain high, but they also needed the raiders around to drive reluctant corporate executives into their arms.
Also gone are the foreign acquirers, led by British and Japanese corporations.
Some are saddled with high-priced U.S. movie studios or office towers, and their countries' economies have been slow to bounce back from recession.
So, the current merger scene is concentrated among U.S. corporations bent on acquiring others in the same or related fields.
The surge in bids has delighted investors who spotted the companies as takeover possibilities, and has cheered the arbitragers who make bets on the ultimate outcome of each battle.
Says money manager Mario Gabelli: "This is pig heaven for the arbitragers."
Since the deal with Martin Marietta and the rival bid by Northrop, Grumman stock has soared $26 from its closing price March 4 of $39.875; Kemper has risen $20.875 from its closing price of $40.875 last Friday, before the bid by GE was made public.
"It just feels like we're off to the races," says Peter Schoenfeld, vice chairman and head of proprietary trading at Wertheim Schroder & Co., which is attempting to boost the arbitrage assets it has under management.
George Kellner, managing partner of the arbitrage firm of Kellner Dileo & Co., estimates that the amount of money devoted to arbitrage, $3 billion to $4 billion, remains a small fraction of the $15 billion in the late 1980s.
(Arbitragers' funds under management dried up after the traders were bloodied by losses on a succession of deals that collapsed, most spectacularly the 1989 buyout of United Airlines parent UAL Corp.)
Another straw in the wind: GE's Kidder, Peabody & Co. securities unit, which gave up arbitrage after being scarred by the insider-trading scandals of the 1980s, hired a takeover-stock trader this week and plans to re-enter the field.
Of the current atmosphere, Dennis Laplaige, head of the equity group of McKay Shields Corp., says, "It makes me feel good."
His firm owned about one million shares of both Grumman and Kemper before either company became a takeover target.
Mr. Laplaige predicts that energy companies will become takeover targets, figuring that industry must shrink since the price of oil is way down.
Each industry has its own rationale for merger activity.
The defense industry is consolidating because of Pentagon budget cuts.
Health-care companies -- such as Columbia Healthcare Corp., which recently completed a $5.5 billion merger with HCA-Hospital Corp. of America -- are expanding to gain economies of scale, under cost pressure from both the government and private insurers.
Telecommunications and cable-television concerns are forging alliances because of regulatory and technological change.
Some regulatory changes, however, have the opposite effect.
A new cable-TV rate rollback contributed to the unraveling of the proposed $20 billion-plus acquisition of Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable-TV operator, by Bell Atlantic Corp., the regional telephone company.
The shock waves from the collapse of that deal are still being felt, with some auctions of cable-TV properties proceeding more slowly than expected.
Some transactions, like a proposed $4.9 billion joint cable-TV venture between Cox Enterprises Inc. and Southwestern Bell Corp., are being renegotiated.
Still, Mr. Schoenfeld says a deal in one field can sometimes have a ripple effect that lures other players.
For example, he says a proposed $1.9 billion takeover of Dreyfus Corp. by Mellon Bank signaled the start of takeover activity in the booming mutual-fund field that has been followed by GE's offer for Kemper.
Some analysts view that ripple effect as pack mentality: Companies stampede to make acquisitions in a hot business, only to see conditions change as competition increases.
"I think at times business leaders feel comfortable moving in herds.
It's almost like they're waiting for a leader to move before they all plunge in," says Charles Ronson, a money manager at Balestra Capital in New York.
For those attempting to resist an unfriendly takeover, even the stoutest defenses generally fall to a well-heeled industrial bidder, as the $7.9 billion takeover of NCR Corp. by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. showed in 1991.
Nor is the fear of layoffs as much of a deterrent to takeovers nowadays.
So many healthy corporations have announced layoffs unrelated to takeovers that more people may now realize takeovers can help some companies compete.
In the battle for Grumman, for example, both bidders are expected to make layoffs in combining the businesses.
Some of the unsolicited bidders are hoping to surf the wave of shareholder activism among big institutional investors, who in recent years have toppled the chief executives at such companies as International Business Machines Corp. and General Motors Corp., which were too big to be taken over even in the 1980s.
The timing of GE's bid, two months before Kemper's annual meeting, puts Kemper on the spot just as shareholders must vote on nominees for Kemper's board of directors.
One person close to the situation says GE hopes that shareholder pressure on Kemper will be amplified by newly relaxed rules that give large holders greater freedom to communicate with one another without making expensive legal filings with federal regulators.
Samuel L. Hayes, a Harvard Business School finance professor, notes that readier availability of bank financing has contributed to the increase in deals.
"With banks having replenished much of their equity reserves and written off their bad loans, they may be peeping out and looking for some profitable business.
This may be like the first robin of spring."
Alan Schwartz, head of investment banking at Bear Stearns & Co., says that "the perception of what is acceptable corporate behavior changes with the times."
In the late 1980s, he explains, junk-financed leveraged buyouts and other maneuvers that resulted in corporate breakups "sort of created this perception that deals were bad, and people wanted to get back to their knitting."
Now, he says, some companies feel that having gone through layoffs and restructurings, "that only goes so far, and to achieve their strategic objectives, they need more critical mass."
