Four major grocery chains with significant retail drug operations filed a suit in Cincinnati federal court charging 16 large drug makers and a mail-order prescription company with discriminatory and "pernicious" pricing.
The suit, filed by Kroger Co., Albertson's Inc., Safeway Inc. and Vons Cos., claims the pharmaceutical firms participate in "two-tier" pricing discrimination for their branded products.
The suit claims the firms' pricing policies favor institutional pharmacies, health-maintenance organizations and mail-order prescription companies with lower prices, while charging supermarket chains more.
The suit seeks an injunction and seeks treble damages if a jury finds for the plaintiffs.
The pharmaceutical industry currently faces more than 40 similar lawsuits.
A spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, a Washington-based trade organization, had no comment on any of the legal proceedings or pricing issues.
The increasing number of suits "clearly reflects the serious nature" of manufacturers trying to shift costs to retail consumers, said Phillip Schneider, spokesman for the National Association of Chain Drug Stores, of which Vons, Albertson's and Safeway are members.
Mr. Schneider said the cost shifting forces retail pharmacies to pay "many times" more than hospitals and HMOs for the same products.
Industry analysts say that in recent years HMOs have succeeded in forcing steep price reductions by telling manufacturers they would remove certain drugs from prescription lists used by member doctors.
Meanwhile, drug retailers with a broader consumer base, such as Kroger, must carry a wider array of pharmaceuticals.
That limits their ability to negotiate for lower prices, because they are unlikely to eliminate drugs from their shelves that customers might request.
Paul Bernish, a spokesman for Kroger, said its in-store pharmacies are profitable growth operations and are central to Kroger's "combination store" strategy.
Kroger, with more than 1,200 stores, has more than 600 in-store pharmacies.
The suit contends the grocery chains' pharmacy business has eroded in recent years due to price discrimination.
The suit claims violation of the Robinson-Patman Act, a Depression-era law that makes certain discriminatory pricing illegal.
Under the Robinson-Patman Act, unlike the Sherman antitrust law, proof of conspiracy isn't required.
Instead, plaintiffs need to show only that a company acted unfairly in pricing similar products for different customers.
Among those named in the suit, a spokesman for Ciba-Geigy Corp. said the suit "was without merit."
Spokesmen for Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Upjohn Co. and SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals Co., a unit of SmithKline Beecham PLC, had no comment.
Representatives of American Home Products Corp., Merck & Co., Pfizer Inc., DuPont-Merck Pharmaceuticals Co. and Glaxo Holdings PLC's Glaxo Inc. declined comment because they hadn't seen the suit.
DuPont-Merck Pharmaceuticals is a joint venture of Merck and DuPont Co.
Abbott Laboratories, Schering-Plough Corp., Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Wellcome PLC's Burroughs Wellcome Co., Monsanto Co.'s G.D. Searle & Co. and Eli Lilly & Co. didn't return phone calls seeking comment.
Medco Containment Services Inc., a mail-order prescription company and Merck unit, declined to return calls for comment.
Zeneca Inc., a unit of ICI PLC, couldn't be reached for comment.
