Fueled by its swift overhaul of dozens of recently acquired hospitals, Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. reported higher-than-expected fourth-quarter earnings, sending its stock surging 5.2%.
The burgeoning hospital concern, based in Louisville, Ky., earned $176 million, or 52 cents a share, up 18% from the company's profit from continuing operations a year earlier.
In the 1992 fourth quarter, net income was $213 million, or 63 cents a share, after $64 million in gains from the sale of securities and discontinued operations.
Revenue rose 4% to $2.57 billion from $2.47 billion.
Industry analysts had expected Columbia to report profit of 49 cents a share for the latest period.
In late New York Stock Exchange trading, Columbia's stock jumped $2.125 to $43.
The quarter and year results for both 1993 and 1992 include the combined operations of Columbia Healthcare Corp. and HCA-Hospital Corp. of America, which Columbia acquired for $5.7 billion in stock Feb. 10, to form Columbia/HCA.
The results also are the first to reflect Columbia's management of 73 hospitals formerly owned by Galen Health Care Inc., which it acquired in September in a $3.2 billion stock swap.
Prior to the Columbia acquisition, admissions at those hospitals had been falling for two years amid squabbling between physicians and Humana Inc., which spun off Galen last year.
Thanks largely to Columbia's efforts to repair relations with physicians and pursue additional managed-care business, overall admissions at former Galen facilities rose by 1.3% in the fourth quarter from a year earlier.
"They saw significant improvement in the former Galen markets that were the most troublesome," said Salomon Brothers analyst Margo Vignola, noting that hospital admissions were up 6.3% in Louisville and 11.5% in San Antonio.
"In a very short period of time, they have stopped the decline," added Kenneth S. Abramowitz, an industry analyst with Sanford C. Berstein.
In less than a year, Columbia has risen from an upstart Texas operator of fewer than two dozen hospitals into the nation's largest for-profit chain, with 193 hospitals in 26 states and two foreign countries.
Driven by an aggressive management team led by Richard Scott, its president and chief executive officer, Columbia has sought to achieve massive economies of scale and offer one-stop shopping for health-care services at a time when corporations and insurers are demanding less-expensive coverage.
In addition to its Galen and HCA acquisitions, Columbia has purchased dozens of individual facilities; signed an affiliation agreement with Dallas-based Medical Care America Inc., the nation's largest operator of outpatient surgery centers; and opened affiliation talks with Beverly Enterprises Inc., Fort Smith, Ark., the country's largest nursing-home chain.
"This could be a growth company for many, many years to come," said John Hindelong, an analyst with Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, noting that Columbia has purchased major hospitals in the Chicago, Kansas City, Mo., and Orlando, Fla., markets since the first of the year.
"We're always looking," acknowledged David Vandewater, Columbia's chief operating officer.
"We want to round out the markets where we have existing facilities and make sure we have a network that is comprehensive."
For the year, Columbia/HCA reported net income of $507 million, or $1.50 a share, up from $165 million, or 50 cents a share, in 1992.
The 1993 results included $166 million in net charges related to merger costs, early extinguishment of debt and sale of discontinued operations.
The 1992 figures include $483 million in net charges related to transaction costs, facility sales and investment sales and a $51 million gain from an accounting change.
Revenue for the year increased 3.2% to $10.25 billion from $9.93 billion.
