For better or worse, tourism is joining the forces encroaching on the panda.
In April, this mountainous region in central China -- one of the animal's few remaining homes in the wild -- will get a modern tourist hotel.
The 60-room inn sits alongside the headquarters of the Wolong Nature Reserve, which was established in 1975 to protect giant pandas, snow leopards and other threatened animals indigenous to this part of Sichuan Province.
The hotel is a controversial experiment in so-called eco-tourism.
Its backers hope to bring in money to help fund efforts to save the panda.
But conservationists fear an influx of tourists will destroy one of the few areas where the panda still flourishes.
The problem is how best to balance the rampant commercialism of reformist China against protection of the panda.
Other animals, such as the South China tiger and the Yangtze River dolphin, have been squeezed to near-extinction by China's rush to advance.
With poaching and deforestation already taking a toll on the estimated 1,000 or fewer living pandas, even Chinese scientists think it may be just a matter of time before the panda dies out.
"This generation and the next will have to work hard to save the panda," says Hu Jinchu, China's foremost panda expert.
"If not, the panda will be extinct within 100 years."
Such dire predictions are founded in the realities of a hugely populous, economically ambitious country.
Even in the steep Pitiao River valley here, where a few thousand peasants farm potatoes and vegetables, a craving for money has taken a toll on this supposedly protected environment.
Logging, either for construction materials or firewood, is the biggest problem.
Shrubs and saplings lining the road and footpaths here are being chipped away with small axes and scythes.
Trucks loaded with 20-foot timber wind down the dusty road.
Unintentionally, the activities have destroyed swaths of bamboo, on which pandas feed.
Poachers still occasionally go after the lumbering black and white animals, but a bigger threat is that pandas will strangle in snares intended for the tiny musk deer, which is hunted for a glandular oil valuable in making perfume and medicine.
During the 1980s, according to one Western panda specialist, as many as 200 pandas -- one-fifth of the total population -- were killed.
The losses extended to Wolong.
A decade ago, by one estimate, there were about 140 pandas in the wild around Wolong.
Today, a Sichuan official says, the number may be as low as 70.
Chinese bureaucrats blame their troubles protecting the panda on a lack of money.
Mr. Hu and his colleagues drafted plans for a large-scale protection scheme.
China's powerful State Council endorsed a version of the plan but still hasn't kicked in the $30 million it will cost.
Yet money was available for other projects.
Zhou Shoude, deputy director of the Wolong Nature Reserve Administration, says he was able to get a $340,000 loan to build a hotel.
"We might have preferred to spend it on conservation, but it wasn't available for that purpose," he explains.
So the reserve has a hotel, with an orange-tile roof and a karaoke sing-along bar.
Last year, about 1,000 foreign and 30,000 Chinese tourists visited Wolong, staying in fairly primitive conditions -- erratic hot water, no telephones, no heat.
Officials hope the numbers will rise, both to bring in money and to widen awareness of the panda's plight.
"The revenues of tourism can never meet the needs of conservation," a Sichuan official says.
"But it's a way of educating people.
Maybe the locals will say, `So many people coming to see our homeland!
We must protect it!'"
China's panda experts are cautious in their assessment of the new hotel.
If it pays for more anti-poaching patrols or new nature reserves, they say they will welcome it.
"If more tourists come and the management is good, such as Yellowstone, I think it could be good," says Zhang Hemin, who specializes in breeding pandas in captivity at Wolong.
But greater numbers of visitors don't necessarily mean better treatment for pandas.
At the Chengdu zoo, where 1.5 million tourists a year pay the equivalent of 25 cents to visit the dozen pandas on display, conditions are bad.
Two 150-day-old panda cubs are crowded into a cage of about one cubic meter.
Four young adults are jammed into a cage about four meters by five meters.
Zoo officials say they still lack money to do more.
At Wolong, officials say they will restrict visitors to seeing a zoo-like breeding center and won't let them travel beyond elevations of 2,500 meters, where pandas in the wild spend most of their time.
But keeping the tourists out won't be easy.
One recent morning, two Argentine tourists in leather jackets and fur-lined hats hiked up to Wuyipeng, a 2,500-meter-high research site.
"When I read in the guide there was a panda reserve, I didn't think twice," says Miguel Attaguile, a 23-year-old from Buenos Aires.
The enthusiasm of tourists worries panda experts.
"On the one hand, you want to make money," says Jiming Fang, an animal behavior specialist from Beijing Normal University.
"On the other hand, you want to protect the panda.
It's a difficult dilemma."
