Policy Management Systems Corp., in its first earnings report in almost a year, reported a loss of $60 million, or $2.62 a share, for the first half of 1993.
The figures appear to mark the close of one act in a 10-month drama at the Blythewood, S.C., insurance software concern.
Last April, Policy Management disclosed that first-quarter results would fall well below the company's expectations because several contracts hadn't closed as expected.
That news prompted Policy Management's share price to drop 43%, or $36.25, in a single day.
Since then, the accuracy of the company's financial reporting has become the subject of federal and internal investigations.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, the shares closed at $35.375, up 25 cents.
In a federal court filing last month, Policy Management acknowledged that it recognized on its financial statements some revenue before contracts were formally signed.
The company denied, however, that it misrepresented its financial health in an effort to achieve a consistent 20% growth, as a shareholder lawsuit charged.
Policy Management has also denied a series of allegations charging the company with improper accounting practices.
Policy Management, in a statement, blamed the six-month loss on the "current uncertainty surrounding the issue of national health-care reform," which it said has caused customers to postpone purchases of health insurance information systems.
As a result, Policy Managment said it recorded a pretax charge of $80.1 million in last year's first half to reduce the value of its health insurance assets and to reserve for the costs of restructuring that portion of its business.
Still, the company said it generated a $38 million operating profit in the first six months of 1993, and described its balance sheet -- more than $160 million in cash and marketable securities against some $9 million in debt -- as "strong."
The six-month numbers at least "put the bottom end on how bad things were," said Charles Phillips, an analyst with Kidder, Peabody & Co. in New York.
"The write-offs are done."
But, he added, "we still don't know" what the rest of the 1993 financial picture will look like.
Policy Management has told analysts and investors it will release 1993 third- and fourth-quarter numbers by March 31.
In August, Policy Managment dismissed independent accountant Arthur Andersen & Co., hiring Coopers & Lybrand.
The company has said previously that 1990 and 1991 audit reports by Ernst & Young, as well as the 1992 audit report by Arthur Andersen, had been withdrawn.
Accordingly, Policy Management said it couldn't provide accurate year-earlier comparisons for the first six months of 1993.
The company said audits for those years, as well as for the remainder of 1993, will be completed "as soon as possible."
POLICY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS Corp. reported approximately $15 million in operating profit for the first six months of 1993 before the effect of restructuring and other special charges.
The figure was misstated as $38 million in an article yesterday.
(WSJ Feb. 24, 1994)
