American Telephone & Telegraph Co. said it will cut as many as 15,000 jobs, or 15% of the work force, in its giant long-distance services unit, in a bid to boost profits in the slow-growth business.
The reductions, set over two years and to include 8,000 managers, come as the Communication Services Group battles MCI Communications Corp. and Sprint Corp. for consumer and business customers.
The group, which accounts for more than $40 billion of AT&T's roughly $67 billion in annual revenue, employs 96,500 people of a total work force of 309,000.
Since its breakup a decade ago, AT&T already has cut more than 140,000 jobs.
The consumer unit in the Communication Services Group will see the biggest cuts -- as many as 9,000 jobs, more than half of them in management.
The Business Services unit, which sells long-distance services to small businesses and corporations, will trim about 6,000 positions.
The cuts are being directed by the group's chief executive officer, Alex Mandl, who didn't rule out further cuts if the current plan doesn't boost revenue and profits.
He said he wants to boost the group's almost flat revenue growth to at least the industry rate of 4% to 5%.
MCI's revenue, by contrast, is currently growing at three times the industry rate.
Sprint's numbers are also showing steady improvement, although less robust than MCI's.
"I'm determined to get on this growth curve," Mr. Mandl said in an interview.
"If we can get on it, the job cuts should be behind us."
But he noted, "Unless you grow the business in line with the industry's growth, you'll face an environment of downsizing."
He said the cuts will remove some management layers and rid the unit of overlapping functions.
AT&T has estimated that it can save about $900 million a year through the cuts by installing new technology in its long-distance network and other streamlining.
Those savings should come in handy if AT&T must fight a price war with the leaner MCI.
For now, long-distance prices are heading up, thanks to numerous AT&T rate increases in the past year.
The latest cuts add to already announced plans to cut 6,000 operators out of 18,000.
AT&T has also begun cutting 7,500 jobs at its computer unit, Global Information Solutions (formerly NCR Corp.), and about 1,500 jobs at its internal information systems operations.
Reaction to AT&T's cutbacks from workers and union leaders was swift and bitter.
"There are many people here who come to work every day and are numb, not knowing whether they're next," said one headquarters staffer who asked not to be identified.
James Irvine, vice president of AT&T's largest union, called AT&T "a healthy company playing to Wall Street."
Laura Unger, president of CWA Local 1150 in New York, asked, "When is enough profit enough?"
Her local has been cut to less than 1,000 members from 2,600 in three years -- despite the fact that AT&T's fourth-quarter operating profit margin of 10.4% was the highest in the company's history.
AT&T executives, internally, had denied a Wall Street Journal report in early December that said big cuts were planned in its consumer unit.
In a memo to his employees, Joseph Nacchio, recently appointed president of Consumer Services, called the Journal report "misleading."
He added, "We do not have definitive workforce reduction plans at this time. . . .
We will take every initiative to drive other costs out of the business before resorting to work-force reductions."
Yesterday, an AT&T spokesman said, "All the points made in that memo at that time were completely accurate."
AT&T said it will offer nonmanagement employees who are affected by the reduction as much as 104 weeks of wages for the most-senior people.
Managers who leave the company will get as much as 42 weeks salary, depending on their seniority, AT&T said.
"AT&T absolutely has to make these cuts if Mandl is going to double the revenue growth in long distance," said Jack B. Grubman, telecommunications analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
"Having too many people not only hurts profits, it paralyzes the company's ability to compete."
As part of the cutbacks at the consumer unit, AT&T will consolidate sales and service operations and close centers in Providence, R.I.; Charleston, W.Va.; Bloomington, Minn.; Cheyenne, Wyo.; Itasca, Ill.; Pleasanton, Calif.; and Silver Spring, Md.
The 8,000 management cuts will include headquarters staff and administrative support functions, while the rest will be nonmanagement positions in operations and clerical areas.
AT&T said it will begin notifying individual employees about the cuts by the end of March.
