Scandal, bombings and severe securities restrictions weren't enough to stop U.S. money managers from launching two funds last week that will invest in India's stock market.
Although at first glance there was tremendous demand for the funds, underwriters trying to generate interest in them might have sought approval for fewer shares than they had hoped to sell.
On Friday, Morgan Stanley India Investment Fund Inc. offered 35.7 million shares, up from only four million shares originally planned.
The shares were priced at $15 each.
Last Monday, India Fund Inc. came to market with 34 million common shares priced at $15 each.
Underwriters led by Oppenheimer & Co. initially planned 2.7 million shares.
Both funds trade publicly on the New York Stock Exchange.
The only other fund that is a pure investment play on India is India Growth Fund Inc., which was started in 1988.
It, too, trades on the Big Board.
Although many fund experts agree that India's burgeoning stock market creates many investment opportunities, they say investors should recognize its volatility.
India's financial community has been embroiled in scandal since 1992, when bank funds were diverted into the stock market using forged or fictitious receipts for securities.
The injection of money set the market on a bull run before it crashed when the scandal was exposed.
Even with 7,000 publicly traded companies from which to choose, the markets still remain illiquid, meaning it is difficult to buy or sell shares easily and quickly.
"It's a lively market and a thin one on top of it," said Thomas Herzfeld, a closed-end fund specialist based in Miami.
Mark Mobius, who manages two emerging markets funds for Templeton Funds, a subsidiary of Franklin Resources Inc., said he is wary of India because its stock exchanges are a paperwork nightmare.
After completing stacks of forms, it takes months for securities to be delivered to investors, and that can cause "fraud and counterfeiting," Mr. Mobius said.
"Certainly there are good companies there.
The problem is with the whole system of trading and settlement" of securities, he said.
"I'm a bit puzzled about all of these funds coming out.
It's just a paper war."
Such problems have led many custodians, or companies that safeguard the securities, to tell fund managers like Mr. Mobius that they don't want to deal with Indian securities.
In addition, a series of bombs explosions last March at the Bombay Stock Exchange and other financial institutions, disrputing trading and the nation's financial infrastructure.
The increase in fund shares offered might be a sign of something other than great demand by investors, said Mr. Herzfeld, the closed-end fund specialist.
Money managers want to make a fund look like a success, so they will file for a smaller amount and increase it later.
"If they filed for 25 million shares and sold 20 million, they would look like losers," Mr. Herzfeld said.
If investors see a smaller fund, they might think it's harder to get into, and, therefore, demand is created, he said.
Mr. Herzfeld said he thinks there is strong demand for India funds because investors are snapping up shares of all types of emerging markets funds.
But he's critical of underwriters creating more shares.
"If you increase the size to meet the demand, there's no one left who wants to buy the stock," he said.
A good indicator of the demand for the stock might be to check how it is doing in the market, Mr. Herzfeld said.
Since coming out last Monday, the India Fund has barely edged higher.
It closed Friday at 15 1/8, up 1/8, on volume of 271,900 shares, compared with average daily volume of 940,400.
The older India Growth Fund should have been a beneficiary of publicity surrounding the two new funds.
But instead, it closed Friday at 26 3/8, down 1/2, on volume of 39,300, compared with average daily volume of 83,000.
The Morgan Stanley India Investment Fund closed Friday uchanged at 15 on volume of 1.6 million shares.
