World War II is long since over, and the Cold War is now over as well, but the habits of mind formed over the past half-century of foreign policy tenaciously survive.
These habits of mind survive in our vocabulary, which tries to capture Russian realities with such terms as "democracy," "authoritarian," "communist," "fascist" -- even "peace-loving."
That vocabulary may have had its uses in days of political confrontation, but it now serves only to frustrate our ability not only to think but to see things as they really are.
-- There are hardly any communists in Russia today.
True, there are people who call themselves "communists," and there is even a Communist Party, here and there, but these people are not Marxist-Leninist communists.
They don't believe in communism; they merely oppose Boris Yeltsin's democratic and free-market reforms.
They do believe that a more authoritarian state and a more collectivist economy are more suitable to the Russian condition today.
But there is no danger of any kind of return to Leninist-Stalinist communism.
The "true believers" in this faith today are probably outnumbered by those who favor a restoration of the czar.
-- What there are in Russia are Russians -- of different political outlooks, to be sure, but all of them Russian.
Probably the most important single fact about post-Gorbachev Russia is the re-emergence of the Orthodox Church.
People now get married in church and are buried with appropriate religious rites.
Orthodox priests and bishops are visible on most state occasions.
Russia is not going to be a secular society, communist or otherwise, and it might not even be a secular state.
-- The Russians have little or no experience with democracy or individual liberty, as we understand these ideas.
But they do have experience with what might be called constitutional (i.e., nonarbitrary) government.
Long before the Russian Revolution there existed a quite independent judiciary, one that (much of the time, anyhow) took the rule of law seriously.
There was also a huge, cumbersome bureaucracy that was legalistic and only moderately corrupt.
This, too, served as a check on arbitrary power.
And between 1905 and the outbreak of World War I there existed a parliament (the Duma) that, it is true, was more of a sounding board than a legislative body -- but it did exist and the czarist regime respected its prerogatives.
So there is reason to hope that a future Russian government can be law -- respecting and at least mildly representative -- a decent regime, in short, if not what we would call a democratic one, or even a liberal one.
In any case, it will be Russian -- not of American design.
-- The Russian people are extremely patriotic, even nationalist -- as patriotic and nationalist as the American people.
It is interesting to note that, while for Americans World War II was fought for "democracy," for Russians it was (and is) "The Great Patriotic War."
(Russians could not be mobilized to fight for communism.)
Having won that war, at the cost of many millions of casualties, Russians do not now regard themselves as a defeated nation that must acclimate itself to the ways of the victors.
Their defeat in the Cold War is seen as a defeat for a discredited regime, not for their nation.
-- It follows that Russians today, as in the past, still think that their nation has a "destiny," not merely a future.
(Russia and the U.S. seem to be the only two nations that think of themselves in this way -- though China is yet to be heard from.)
Whatever their strong desire for economic growth, they have no intention of becoming a landlocked country.
They will wish to inhabit a great nation, a nation both European and Asian, one respected by the world -- and if this creates anxiety among some of their neighbors, those neighbors will just have to learn to live with it and to adjust their foreign policies accordingly.
The notion of a "cordon sanitaire" of East European nations integrated into NATO is not, and never will be, acceptable to any Russian regime.
Fortunately, it is also not acceptable to the nations of Western Europe and the U.S., which have no intention of blithely issuing "security guarantees" to the newly liberated countries of Eastern Europe.
-- This Russian nationalism has -- it always has had -- a limited imperial dimension.
The communist dreams of world "liberation" are absolutely dead.
Russia's imperial ambitions today focus exclusively on what it calls "the near abroad" -- the 14 other nation-states that have emerged from the collapse of the Soviet regime.
Not a single one of these entities is an economically and politically viable nation-state.
They are rent with religious and ethnic conflict, and in any case have little or no historical sense of nationhood to begin with.
They are all going to be client states or semiprotectorates of Russia, though doubtless with more autonomy than in the past.
Only those whose knowledge of world history and world affairs is limited to a reading of the United Nations charter can think otherwise.
This issue is now being decided in the case of the most populous new state, Ukraine.
Back in 1954, Nikita Khrushchev blandly gave the Crimean peninsula, with its strategic position on the Black Sea (and thus an entry to the Mediterranean), to the "Republic" of Ukraine, then a Soviet puppet.
But the majority of the population of Crimea is Russian, and they have just voted in a referendum to dissociate themselves from Ukraine.
Naturally, the Ukrainian government -- whose economic policies are even more self-destructive than Russia's and whose politics are even more dominated by nationalist demagogy -- is furious.
But its resistance is weakened by the fact that the eastern portion of Ukraine itself is mainly Russian, and the Ukrainian government has been foolishly provoking this very large minority that inhabits an area contiguous with Russia.
So a Russian-Ukrainian showdown looms, one that Russia is bound to win.
And what will our State Department be saying and doing while all this is going on?
The only sure prediction is that it will be lost in a maze of irrelevancies.
This has been the case since the very day that Mr. Yeltsin came to office.
The first, automatic, unthinking response was an invocation of that all-American panacea, economic aid.
Such aid moved along two tracks.
Aid from the International Monetary Fund was structured to achieve strict economic objectives.
Other aid was political, to help the "good guys" in Russia maintain power.
Both strategies have collapsed.
If the Russians could have followed the IMF dicta, they wouldn't have needed its aid in the first place.
And politicized aid has inevitably offended Russian pride and produced a national backlash.
The Russian economy is a shambles because -- well, because the Russians are Russian.
Economics has never been their strong point.
There is not much the U.S. or Western Europe can do about it, except watch and wait.
Some narrowly targeted aid -- such as that for the disassembling of dangerously archaic nuclear power plants -- can easily be justified, since such plants threaten the world.
But aid of this kind does not offer the kind of moralistic aura with regard to "democracy" or "a market economy" that American governments take to be a necessary accouterment of foreign policy.
Shambles or not at this time, there will eventually be a Russian economy that Russians can live with.
And in the meantime, Russia will move to confer something like "protectorate" status on those 14 other new nations, most of whom are inherently unstable.
Only Russia is in a position to prevent a dozen new Bosnias, which could threaten its own multiethnic condition.
Will we protest this infringement on the "sovereignty" of those new states?
Of Turkmenistan?
Probably -- our State Department by now has an ingrained habit of thinking legalistically, not politically.
Will there be actions against Russia, the second major nuclear power in the world?
Just inflated talk and posturing.
Watchful waiting is what we need more of in our foreign policy.
That is not isolationism.
It is simply a recognition that neither our own national interest nor the claims of humanity require some kind of consistent, activist, interventionist foreign policy.
As a world power we are free to exercise our power responsibly, not dogmatically in response to prefabricated doctrines that blind us to reality.
Mr. Kristol, an American Enterprise Institute fellow, co-edits The Public Interest and publishes The National Interest.
