Eastman Kodak Co. picked former International Business Machines Corp. financial executive Harry L. Kavetas as its chief financial officer, a position vacant since last April.
The appointment is Chairman George Fisher's first major management move since he took over the helm of the troubled photographic and health company in December.
The 56-year-old Mr. Kavetas, who is known as a steady decision maker, last served as president and chief executive of IBM's Credit Corp. unit.
During his tenure, the division's profit rose to $220 million from $118 million.
He retired late last year after 32 years with IBM.
Some investors had hoped Kodak would choose an aggressive cost-cutter to shake up the Rochester, N.Y., company, which has been burdened by increased competition and slower growth in its core film business.
But "Mr. Fisher wanted a total CFO, not just a cost-cutter," said Ted Jadick, managing director of Heidrick & Struggles Inc., an executive search firm which helped recruit Mr. Kavetas.
"He wanted a business partner almost, and he wanted the chemistry to be right."
It's expected that Mr. Kavetas's vision and operating style will fit closely with that of the 53-year-old Mr. Fisher.
That would be a sharp departure from the clashing styles of former Kodak Chief Executive Kay Whitmore and Christopher J. Steffen, who quit as Kodak's financial boss after only three months on the job.
Mr. Steffen wanted to cut costs and sell assets faster than Mr. Whitmore did.
"I'm a disciplined, analytical and orderly person," Mr. Kavetas said Friday after the board approved his appointment.
"I want to create an environment at Kodak where there is some consistency of purpose . . . where there is not the program du jour or program per quarter."
Mr. Kavetas, who lacks a background in Kodak's type of manufacturing, said his financial skills and experience as "a boss" will help Kodak realize its full potential.
He agreed that Kodak needed more revenue growth.
"There are enormous resources locked up at Kodak," he added.
Bob Djurdjevic, president of Annex Research, a Phoenix consulting firm, said Mr. Kavetas is "forceful and stands up for what he believes.
Right or wrong."
Added Jack Kelly, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs & Co.: "The consensus is that Mr. Kavetas is a solid citizen.
What Kodak really needs is someone with a solid reputation who will change the way the company is going."
Separately, Kodak named Michael P. Morley, its 50-year-old director of human resources, as a senior vice president.
Alex P. Wasilov, 40, general manager, consumer imaging, U.S. and Canada, was named a vice president.
