Tyco Toys Inc., in an effort to cut costs after two years of disappointing sales, said it will reduce European operations and take a $26 million fourth-quarter charge.
The toy maker said it expects to post a loss of about $59 million, significantly wider than the $8.2 million loss in the 1992 fourth quarter.
Sales were about $250 million compared with $249 million a year earlier, Tyco said.
The maker of Little Mermaid, radio-control cars and other toys has been in a slump for the past two years, after stringing together a series of hits before that.
The disappointing results "reflect continued weakness in our U.S., international and Playtime units," said Richard E. Grey, chairman and chief executive officer.
Results are to be announced Feb. 10.
Tyco said it will combine the German operations of its Matchbox unit with its Tyco Germany unit, a move it projects will result in "substantial operating efficiencies beginning in 1994."
The company said it also plans to sell its year-old Italian subsidiary, and then sell toys in Italy through distributors.
Tyco's estimated fourth-quarter net loss would indicate the company plans to report a full-year loss of about $70 million.
In 1992, it earned $18 million, or 60 cents a share.
Sales in 1993 are expected to total $732.2 million, down 4% from $768.6 million a year earlier.
Separately, the toy maker named Michael J. Lyden to the new post of president of its Tyco U.S. business unit.
The road in the months ahead will be precarious for Tyco, predicted Jill Krutick, an analyst for Salomon Brothers Inc.
The company, which was in violation of some convenants in its bank agreements, expects to have new terms in place by next month, Ms. Krutick said.
Still, David Leibowitz, analyst for Republic New York Securities Corp., forecasts that Tyco will "report red ink in the first half of 1994."
Mr. Leibowitz said Tyco indicated in a conference call with analysts Friday that it plans to raise up to $50 million in a previously disclosed private equity offer, less than what some had speculated Tyco would need to raise.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday, Tyco closed at $8.625, off 25 cents.
