Caterpillar Inc., citing higher-than-expected demand for its construction equipment, said it will hire 200 workers more than previously planned at its Illinois plants.
That marks the third time since November that Caterpillar has increased its hiring plans for factory workers.
Together, that means the Peoria, Ill., company plans to hire some 1,000 factory workers between last November and the end of May.
Caterpillar's latest announcement indicates that the recent increase in interest rates hasn't hurt demand for big machines.
Indeed, other midwestern manufacturers also report that business is strong, though some aren't ready to resume hiring.
"The general business psychology is pretty good," said James Cotting, chairman of Navistar International Corp. in Chicago.
Navistar said its sales of heavyduty trucks remain strong and that orders for medium-duty trucks, which have been lagging behind other models, were "outstanding" in February.
Navistar, back to profitability after years of trouble, recently recalled 130 workers at its diesel engine plant in Indianapolis.
A spokesman for Johnson Controls Inc., Milwaukee, meanwhile, said his company is starting to worry about a shortage of skilled workers for its factories.
Caterpillar's news cheered investors who had already bid Caterpillar stock to new highs in recent months.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, shares were up $3.25 at $119.50.
Although some of Caterpillar's hiring is due to retirements in its aging work force, a Caterpillar spokesman said most of it is due to higher-than-expected demand in this year's first quarter.
The company said sales for the full year should also be higher than it expected earlier this year.
Caterpillar's hiring will be a combination of recalls of laid-off workers and new hires.
Some 125 of the 200 will be at a plant in Decatur, Ill., which makes mining equipment and motor graders.
But the news isn't all good.
Caterpillar, which ended 1993 with world-wide employment at 51,250, still has a freeze on hiring white-collar workers.
And with a continued standoff and lack of a contract with the United Auto Workers union, it said "labor conditions remain an uncertainty."
Although most of the hires will be UAW members, they'll be working under a contract imposed by the company after the union's failed strike of 1992.
A spokesman said a small number will be hired at the Cat plant in Joliet, Ill., whose workers are represented by the International Association of Machinists.
