Sports fans in Toronto may lose a promised National Basketball Association team because the provincial government thinks it can make more money from gambling than from having a home team.
In November, the NBA awarded an expansion franchise to a Toronto group on the condition that the Ontario government drop basketball from its "Pro-Line" sports-betting lottery.
Ontario refuses to give up the gambling revenue, and confidential talks between the league and province collapsed last week.
If the two sides can't reach a compromise, the league will lose a $125 million franchise fee and a footing in one of North America's most lucrative sports markets.
Toronto will lose a proposed 125 million Canadian dollar (US$95 million) stadium and the business that a big-league basketball team would draw.
So neither side wants to kill the franchise agreement, but defending Pro-Line is "a monster money position for us," says Larry Bertuzzi, Ontario's negotiator.
He adds that the province netted about C$50 million from the sports lottery in the year ended Oct. 31.
The squabble shows how important gambling has become as a revenue source for governments.
Ten years ago, a province might have offered tax or land breaks to entice a professional team so that the city could enjoy the spinoff benefits, says Brian Neysmith, president of Canadian Bond Rating Service in Montreal.
"But now with gambling, the revenue goes right into their pocket," and the government can't afford to give it up, he says.
Basketball represents only about 10% of Pro-Line bets, but Mr. Bertuzzi says the NBA dispute is pivotal because other professional sports have told the province they will want out of Pro-Line if the NBA gets its way.
The NBA has fought against basketball betting in the U.S., where a recent federal law banned sports-gambling in most states.
It doesn't intend to give up the fight in Canada.
Deputy Commissioner Russ Granik says the league wants fans "rooting for the home team to win, not to beat the point spread."
Mr. Granik says that if the dispute isn't resolved by mid-February it will be too late to include a Toronto team in the 1995 season and unlikely that it will be settled as long as the current government is in power.
"Unless there's no gambling on NBA games there won't be a team in Toronto," he insists.
Chris Antaras, a Toronto waiter who bets more than C$50 per week on Pro-Line, says the NBA's position is "ridiculous."
People will find a way to gamble on sports, anyway, he contends, adding that, if anything, Pro-Line raises the city's interest in basketball.
"I'd prefer basketball," over sports betting, says Tracy Barker, a Toronto office supervisor who wagers about C$10 a week.
He expects that Bob Rae, Ontario's premier, eventually will cave in to the NBA's demand because Mr. Rae, already low in voter support, can't afford to turn his back on jobs and revenue that basketball would bring to the city.
Caught in the middle of the hoopla is John Bitove, who heads the group that was conditionally awarded the franchise.
Mr. Bitove says he's still optimistic that a settlement will be reached, because both sides stand to gain from professional basketball in Toronto.
"I think the fans of Toronto have waited too long for this."
