The snowbanks are higher than her head, and arctic winds howl outside her window.
But when Debra Meese zips up her insulated one-piece suit and pulls on her mukluks, she isn't going outside.
Dr. Meese walks down the hall at the Cold Regions Research & Engineering Laboratory and opens a huge refrigerator door to a room kept at 20 degrees below zero, where tubes of ice from the Greenland ice cap are stored.
In this frigid room, Dr. Meese hunts for clues about global warming.
One of the team of U.S. scientists that drilled a 10,000-foot ice core in Greenland, the 36-year-old glaciologist is trying to create the most detailed history of world climate yet.
She is amused that her childhood fascination with Antarctica has led her to the debate about whether the Earth's climate is heating up to dangerous levels.
"One thing about science -- you never know what will be the next hot topic," she says.
Dr. Meese and her colleague at the lab, Tony Gow, a 62-year old New Zealander, worked in central Greenland the past three summers, drilling a hole 17 miles west of a team of European scientists.
The Europeans drilled faster, and last summer they concluded that global temperature can rise much faster than had been previously imagined, based on calculations of the ratios between two types of oxygen isotopes present in the ice.
The U.S. scientists confirmed the European discovery that during the last ice age, global temperatures repeatedly shot up by more than nine degrees in less than 20 years, before falling gradually again.
But they couldn't find evidence of the Europeans' conclusion that similar sharp, sudden increases occurred during the Eemian period before the last ice age, more than 85,000 years ago.
As the Earth currently is not in an ice age, what occurred during the Eemian period is crucial to understanding whether sharp warm-ups could occur even in temperate periods such as our own.
If the European conclusions are right, they might indicate that the world could be subject to volatile and devastating temperature rises.
A nine-degree rise in global temperatures would melt ice caps, flood coastal cities and destroy some vegetation in temperate regions.
The European interpretation also added weight to the argument for controlling man-made warming effects, such as the emission of gases from burning fossil fuel.
Ice-core dating is "exotic stuff" for the Cold Regions Lab, which is part of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, says George Ashton, chief of research.
Lab engineers develop antifreeze for pouring concrete in subfreezing temperatures, and study how snow affects the infrared sensors on smart weapons.
The lab's biggest engineering triumph was convincing the Army that knobby Jeep tires didn't provide better traction in snow than regular tires, saving millions of dollars.
The lab has 40 Ph.D.s and 300 other workers.
It keeps its refrigerators humming so they can freeze giant chests of soil or chill huge scale models of flumes and rivers.
But the Corps of Engineers also has a long involvement with Greenland, where it helped design radar stations that could survive the far North -- and more recently drilled ice cores.
The team to which Dr. Meese belongs came up with some conclusions about temperature that diverge sharply from the Europeans.
"We didn't see the sharp changes during the Eemian period," says Dr. Meese.
She asserts that the ice-core record at that depth is too deformed to provide good information on the Eemian climate.
Dr. Meese has supervised what she says was a more painstaking visual count, using lasers and electrical-conductivity measures to count the years according to embedded dust, which is scattered more heavily during the summer.
Dr. Meese asks: "How can you put it in a time frame when you have an overturned fold" in an ice layer?
When the European scientists "had a deformation . . . they didn't take as detailed a look," she says.
Dr. Willi Dansgaard of the University of Copenhagen, the man who discovered the pattern of repeated sharp temperature increases, says his investigation of the European ice core indicates it isn't deformed until a level much deeper than the American core.
"It could be that the European core is deformed also, but we see no evidence of it," he says.
He adds that the Europeans "examined every inch of the core very closely," finding no deformations down to the 9,405-foot depth that he says corresponds to 130,000 years ago, near the dawn of the Eemian period.
Dr. Meese says the U.S. scientists have built the most detailed time-line of global weather yet constructed.
It goes back 85,000 years to the dawn of the last ice age.
Correlating their time-line with records of seabed sediments, volcanic activity, coralreef growth, bristlecone-pine rings and carbon dating is improving the precision of dating prehistoric, and even historic, climatic events.
In one of the cold rooms, Dr. Meese slices thin strips of ice off the cylinders with a band saw and mounts them on glass for viewing through plastic polarized sheets.
A mosaic of large blue, black, red and yellow polygons appears, revealing crystals of snow that fell some 75,000 years ago and have been packed down year by year ever since.
In Greenland, scientists dated the ice from the six-foot-long, five-inch-diameter cores by gauging things like electrical conductivity, which differs from summer to winter, because summer snow is more acidic.
But their eyes, unexpectedly, turned out to be the most accurate instruments.
"We thought we'd just be able to see layers for a few hundred meters," says Dr. Meese.
It turned out layers were visible down almost 9,000 feet or 85,000 years, where a year's snowfall was compressed to a single centimeter.
"The ice age period was 40 times more dusty" than the current Holocene period, so the summer dust storms that deposit cloudy bands are still visible in the astoundingly clear deep ice, says Dr. Gow.
Even so, at greater depths, where the ice was compressed below growing tons of snow, they admit they may have missed a year here and there.
Drs. Meese and Gow have correlated the various measures to arrive at a year-by-year record that spans 850 centuries with a 10% error rate.
The scientists hope to go to Copenhagen where the European core is stored and study it, but they fear it may have deteriorated in the year-and-a-half since it was pulled from the ice cap.
