Wake up and smell the coffee -- with fried eggs and toast on the side.
A new gadget from Welbilt Corp. called Breakfast Express will prepare two eggs sunny side up, toast and coffee, and have them ready when you wake up.
The machine, which will retail for $400, is an amplification of the automatic coffee maker.
The night before, its owner puts ground coffee and water in the brewer, bread slices in the oven component and one or two eggs in a cracking area.
The next morning, at a predetermined time, a razor-sharp blade slices off the bottoms of the eggs, and they drop onto a nonstick griddle.
As the coffee brews and the bread toasts, the eggs are cooked to order, from runny to firm.
Welbilt has had considerable success with bread machines, which turn raw ingredients into fresh-baked bread, and it figures the same market will appreciate a hot breakfast on demand.
It also cites American Egg Board studies detecting "nostalgia" for eggs and other traditional breakfasts.
Its product, the company says, would let a working mom or dad "send off the family in the morning with a quick nutritious breakfast."
Some Welbilt marketers even insist the device would be ideal for truck drivers to use "in lieu of a diner."
The machine, which will be featured at the International Housewares Show in Chicago this month, will be sold through mainline department stores and specialty catalogs.
So far, hotels aren't worried that the machine will cut into their breakfast clientele.
Philippe Feret, executive chef at the Regency Hotel on New York's Park Avenue, says the people who turn out for the hotel's "power breakfast" care more about the art of the deal than the meal.
"It's not just breakfast," Chef Feret says.
"It's like a special gathering place."
It took Welbilt three years to figure out how to duplicate the careful cracking an egg requires to avoid a runny yolk and keep out bits of shell.
So how many eggs kept Breakfast Express from becoming an expensive omelette maker?
"Hundreds, perhaps thousands," says Tom Lacalamita, a company spokesman.
In a demonstration for two breakfast eaters, only one of four yolks came out broken.
