Many investors are wondering if the bond market's turmoil will send stock prices reeling.
Shareholders of John Nuveen already have their answer.
The Chicago money manager, which manages $33 billion in tax-free municipal bond funds, has seen its stock plunge 46% in the past six months, to 22 5/8 yesterday.
"It's been a blood bath," says Dean Eberling, a Lehman Brothers analyst.
Nuveen "looks awful cheap compared to its long-term growth rate, which could be 15% a year over the next few years."
Nuveen has long been known for its sales of tax-exempt unit investment trusts, which are unmanaged portfolios of municipal bonds that are sold off after a fixed period, typically 25 to 30 years.
But in recent years, the company has turned its hand to closed-end municipal-bond funds, with dazzling results.
Unlike regular mutual funds, closed-end funds don't continually sell shares to new investors.
Instead, fund shares are sold in an initial public offering.
Thereafter, investors who want to buy into the fund, or get out, can do so only by trading in the fund's stock-exchange-listed shares.
Nuveen started selling closed-end funds only in 1987.
But since then, sales have soared.
Nuveen now manages an astonishing 82 closed-end funds, 66 listed on the New York Stock Exchange (which take up 6 1/2 inches in The Wall Street Journal's stock tables) and 16 on the American Stock Exchange (another inch and a half).
The boom in closed-end fund sales allowed Nuveen itself to go public in May 1992, selling eight million shares at $18 each.
Following the initial offering, the stock climbed to an all-time high of 41 5/8 in late August 1993, before dropping precipitously.
Why has the stock tanked?
"Everybody was optimistic that the Clinton tax plan would lead to higher muni-bond sales," says Jeffrey Hopson, analyst with A.G. Edwards.
"But in the fall, it became clear that closed-end sales were slowing."
Nuveen hasn't brought a new closed-end fund to market since Sept. 17.
Analysts say Nuveen's fund sales weren't killed off by rising interest rates, which depress the price of existing bonds.
Rather, interest rates in late 1993 were so low that yield-hungry investors balked.
Rising rates have, however, added to Nuveen's problems.
The recent surge in yields has shoved down bond prices, reducing the value of Nuveen's assets under management and thus lowering the money-management fees that Nuveen earns.
The drop and then startling upturn in rates were "a double hit" for Nuveen, says Stephen Lieber, manager of the Evergreen Fund.
"We think it will be more interesting for them once rates stabilize."
Mr. Lieber expects a pickup in demand for municipal-bond funds, given the rise in personal tax rates and the attractive yields on tax-exempt bonds compared with taxable bonds.
Municipal bonds kick off income that's exempt from federal taxes and, in some cases, from state and local taxes as well.
In addition, analysts believe rising bond yields may eventually help to revive Nuveen's sales, because yield-hungry investors will once again be tempted to buy new closed-end funds.
"This is a company that should be helped by an uptick in interest rates," says Ira Malis, an analyst with Alex. Brown.
"That might stimulate sales."
Lehman's Mr. Eberling says the company could also bolster sales by making an acquisition or pushing its sales of regular mutual funds more heavily.
And he doesn't rule out the possibility that insurer St. Paul Cos., which owns roughly three-quarters of the company's stock, might put Nuveen up for sale; St. Paul declined comment yesterday.
"The market has clearly discounted a situation of no growth," Mr. Eberling says.
"Given that the stock has been basically decapitated, it's darn cheap."
Nuveen is trading at less than 13 times trailing 12-month earnings of $1.76 a share, with a dividend yield of 2.8%.
Analysts are looking for the company to earn $2 a share in 1994, though Mr. Eberling believes earnings could be higher than the consensus forecast.
He's currently predicting $2.18 a share.
Alex. Brown's Mr. Malis gives the stock a "neutral" rating.
But he says he may upgrade his rating if the stock tumbles much further.
"It's clearly getting tempting," says Mr. Malis.
"At some point, with this company and this franchise, you just close your eyes and say things will get better."
