Surging vehicle sales this month have prompted two of the Big Three U.S. auto makers to raise their 1994 sales projections, and led Ford Motor Co. to give a mid-month sales report to the Federal Reserve before this week's meeting at which the Fed nudged up short-term interest rates.
A Chrysler Corp. executive said yesterday the company's March sales will "approach an all-time record" on the strength of a continuing recovery.
The news triggered a jump in auto stocks.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Chrysler rose 75 cents a share to close at $58.125; Ford Motor increased $1.75 to close at $63.375 a share, and General Motors Corp. climbed 87.5 cents to close at $60.50 a share.
E. Thomas Pappert, Chrysler's vice president for sales, said yesterday that U.S. car and truck sales for the month would come close to a 16 million-vehicle annual selling rate.
That would be up from last month's 15.5 million rate.
In all of 1993, U.S. consumers purchased 13.9 million cars and trucks.
At Ford, sales are "well ahead of projections," one executive said separately, spurring the company to officially change its sales forecast from 15 million vehicles to a range of 15 million to 15.5 million cars and trucks.
A GM spokesman said the company "expected to be pleased" with March numbers but declined to provide specifics.
The auto makers no longer publicly report sales at 10-day intervals.
But they do brief the Federal Reserve about sales.
Ford said its treasurer, David N. McCammon, told a Fed official earlier this month that the auto maker had revised its sales projection upward.
That sign of a continued robust recovery may have played a role in the Fed's decision Tuesday to nudge up short-term interest rates in an effort to head off inflation.
A Federal Reserve spokesman declined to comment yesterday on the matter.
But there is little doubt that the auto industry has been leading the recovery, and has been straining to keep up with demand.
Recently Ford, Chrysler and GM have moved to make major capacity increases.
But in the meantime, some economists worry that tight supplies could inflate prices -- exactly what the Fed wants to avoid.
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan is understood to watch auto sales as a main indicator of economic activity.
Officially, Chrysler has been predicting 15.6 million vehicles would be sold during the year, but Mr. Pappert said he believes vehicles are selling at an almost 16 million rate.
Mr. Pappert said his estimate is based on Chrysler's strong sales and informal conversations with dealers reporting good volume throughout the country, even in California.
The auto makers don't officially report March sales until early April.
Mr. Pappert said that for the first 10 days of March, Chrysler's market share was running at 15.5%, up only moderately from 15.4% in the previous month.
But that strong sales industrywide were depleting the auto maker's inventories and setting new records.
Minivan sales for the month will "break every record we've ever set," Mr. Pappert said.
In February the company sold 46,314 minivans, but in March Mr. Pappert indicated sales would be well above 60,000 vehicles.
He also said Chrysler's launch of the Neon has been going well and the company would sell 13,000 of the small cars this month.
He expects Chrysler to sell 22,000 Dodge Intrepids, Chrysler Concordes, New Yorkers and other so-called LH sedans, up from 20,100 in February.
Mr. Pappert said that Chrysler's inventories have dwindled.
Auto makers typically have a 65-day supply of vehicles in their distribution pipeline.
But Chrysler's hot-selling Grand Cherokee has only a 20-day supply, Mr. Pappert said.
At times, Chrysler has had more than a 120-day supply of its LHS and New Yorker models on hand, but Mr. Pappert said that there was no more than a 95-day supply for any car model.
Separately, Mr. Pappert said Chrysler is changing the way it structures its $200 million-a-year dealer incentive program as part of a major effort to make buying a car a pleasant experience.
Previously, Chrysler made incentive payments to dealers based on sales volume as well as customer satisfaction.
The new guidelines will reward dealers only for meeting customer satisfaction targets.
