The Italian lira shrugged off its status of whipping boy and flexed its muscle yesterday, as the conservative alliance of media magnate Silvio Berlusconi appeared assured of an election victory.
In what was one of Italy's most important elections since World War II, preliminary exit polls showed Mr. Berlusconi triumphing over his leftist rivals -- and within reach of the absolute majority he needs to lead a united government.
The dollar's biggest move of the day was its drop to 1,630 lire in late New York trading, from 1,649 lire late Friday.
The dollar also fell against the yen on expectations that Japan's market-opening measures, to be released today, are almost certain to disappoint the U.S.
This is expected to prompt renewed pressure by U.S. officials to strengthen the yen as a way to shrink Japan's huge trade surplus with the U.S.
The U.S. currency rose against a generally weak mark, which took a battering on a combination of a technical rebound from last week's gains, weak German inflation data and a flurry of unsubstantiated rumors about a coup attempt on Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.6715 marks, up from 1.6643 marks late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 104.05 yen, down from 104.80 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4960, off from $1.4985.
About noon Tuesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 104 yen and at 1.6715 marks.
"Berlusconi's apparent victory, although it may be clouded by its size, is bullish for the Italian markets and the lira," said David DeRosa, director of foreign-exchange trading for Swiss Bank Corp. in New York.
The lira had been pummeled mercilessly for months as political divisions and corruption scandals plagued the Italian government -- where more than a quarter of parliament members and former Premier Bettino Craxi are under investigation -- crushing investor confidence in Italy.
The lira gained, largely at the mark's expense, right from the opening of European trading.
The mark was hovering at around 990 lire as London opened, then suddenly fell into 975-lire territory.
"The market isn't stupid, and it sensed a win," Mr. DeRosa said, noting that the market saw "a chance that political solidarity and leadership could return to Italy."
"That Berlusconi wins is good, that he may win an absolute majority is better," he said, adding that the market had little preference over who the winner would be as long as he came through with a mandate to lead.
The mark traded at 975 lire late yesterday in New York, down from 988 lire late Friday.
Meanwhile, the U.S. currency teetered against the yen on renewed worries over simmering U.S.-Japanese trade tensions.
Japan is expected to announce today a series of measures to open its markets and chop its trade surplus, but market expectations are low, said Bob Near, vice president at the Bank of New York.
"There's nothing the Japanese can do to satisfy the American position unless they agree on numerical targets -- and why should they come out of nowhere and do that?" he asked.
Mr. Near added that if the trade measures amount to an empty gesture the dollar could head down toward 103 yen, providing there isn't any intervention by the Bank of Japan to prop up the dollar.
"The suspicion is that there will be a lot of platitudes and a lot of words spoken, but when you peel it all apart there'll be nothing there," Mr. Near said.
