The dollar softened against most major currencies Tuesday in quiet trading, as testimony by Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve Board chairman, failed to provide a sufficiently clear reason to extend a rally begun Monday.
Traders said the market also appears to lack conviction following the drubbing the dollar took against the yen after the collapse in U.S.-Japan trade talks.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7235 marks, down from 1.7303 marks late Monday in London but up from 1.7140 marks last Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 105.65 yen, up from 104.60 yen Friday in New York.
Sterling was trading at $1.4790, down from $1.4820 on Friday in New York.
About noon on Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105 yen and at 1.7257 marks.
Financial markets and banks in the U.S. were closed Monday for the Presidents Day holiday.
Mr. Greenspan, in comments before a congressional subcommittee, indicated the Fed was likely to raise further short-term interest rates.
He declined to offer a timetable.
The Fed's chief also termed the U.S. economic recovery "well-entrenched," and expressed optimism that inflationary pressures were contained.
He said price pressures "appear to remain damped," and wages "don't seem to be accelerating."
Nevertheless, the dollar slid slightly on the testimony, as traders discounted a Fed rate increase in the near term.
"There was nothing new in what he said," according to Paul Farrell, vice president at Chase Manhattan.
"Any central banker would have said the same thing."
"If he had said inflationary pressures persist and said so with some urgency, the market might have reacted differently," Mr. Farrell added.
The dollar earlier had gained on rumored Bank of Japan intervention and on statements by one of the Japanese ruling coalition's leading power brokers.
Ichiro Ozawa, head of the Shinseito party, hinted that Japan may accept numerical trade targets to avert a trade war with the U.S.
But the upward move, which pushed the dollar to an intraday peak of 106.49 yen, wasn't sustained and the dollar fell back on profit-taking.
By the time North American trading began, the U.S. currency's rally was long over, and trading remained in narrow, lower ranges.
U.S. traders said Mr. Ozawa's statements did little to fuel optimism for a resolution of the trade-talks stalemate, noting there was no follow-up from any Japanese or U.S. officials.
Indeed, North American trading appeared to be hesitant throughout the day, hurt from last week's massive dollar liquidation, said Thomas Benfer, director of foreign exchange for the Bank of Montreal.
In particular, he said investment hedge funds, which had been bullish on the dollar based on strong economic fundamentals for the U.S., were badly hurt by last week's precipitous dollar decline.
"People's convictions are being shaken at this point," Mr. Benfer said, noting the absence of many big players from the foreign-exchange market.
Mr. Benfer also noted a reluctance to play the market ahead of the Group of Seven industrialized countries' meeting of finance ministers this weekend.
