San Francisco -- Eyes intent, legs crouched, a large duffel slung over his shoulder, Mark Gonzales and his skateboard zoom down the steep street toward a tiny gallery called Kiki.
Mr. Gonzales is moving so fast there's no question of stopping for the red light at the bottom of the hill.
Deftly he careers through the intersection, evading the oncoming cars, and arrives at Kiki in one piece, ready to talk about whether a living legend of skateboarding can make it in the equally rough-and-tumble world of art.
"What I did in skateboarding was a whole new direction," says Mr. Gonzales, who is 25 but looks even younger in the skater uniform of outsized jeans and plaid flannel jacket.
"In artwork there's nothing new I can invent, so it's more a personal feeling.
If people like it that makes me happy."
There's another important difference between art and skateboarding, he adds: "You can't get hurt doing art things."
Mr. Gonzales's drawings have been featured on skateboards for several years -- the duffel contains some examples -- but he has only recently begun exhibiting in galleries.
Following his one-man show at Kiki, he is part of a group show at Feature, on Greene Street in New York, that runs until March 19.
At Kiki the works on display are cartoonish sketches in black marker and paintings on paper and cardboard, priced from $10 to $200.
By the end of the show more than half will be sold.
The subjects are mostly figures, ranging from entrepreneur Warren Buffett to gangsters and hard-to-define half-human creatures, and all the works seem to prize urgency more than craft.
"It's real quick," Mr. Gonzales explains, "a quick feeling or a quick gesture.
I hardly ever erase or redo."
Many pieces include words as well as images.
Thus in one drawing a Joe Camel look-alike with a beard and pompadour is saying, "Just kincking back thinking of witch oqupachion would fite me best."
Mr. Gonzales, who lives in Los Angeles and dropped out of school at 16 to become a professional skateboarder, attributes his creative orthography to a learning disability.
He also writes poetry, some of which Feature emblazons on its stationery.
"His poems are fantastic, and I hate poetry," says Hudson, Feature's one-name impresario.
"They're non-formulaic, unpredictable and very modern."
A sample: "AZTEC BUMBALL BEE/CELTIC FLE/READ ME THAT JHONE/DUNE POEM I LOVE/IT SO MUCH."
"Mark's intellect is made up of flashes, and he's honestly and unselfishly sharing his vision of the world," says Rick Jacobsen, Kiki's director, who calls Mr. Gonzales's work an example of "microculturalism" -- multiculturalism that honors "the realism of individual experience."
Mr. Gonzales is both Mexican- and German-American, a member of the "youth culture" and the skateboarding subculture, Mr. Jacobsen explains.
"What Mark does is interesting because Mark is part of a group that's moving the way America thinks right now."
Mr. Gonzales has already had a huge impact on skateboarding as a founder of "street style" -- the use of curbs, railings, dumpsters and every other feature of the urban and suburban landscape for jumps, slides and other athletic feats.
"Mark is one of the masters of the genre that is street skating," says Jake Phelps, editor of Thrasher, a skateboard magazine headquartered here.
"There are tricks that don't seem possible, but Mark was the person who said anything is possible."
One example is a trick Mr. Gonzales first performed in 1987 at this city's Embarcadero Plaza, one of skateboarding's most famous venues.
Mr. Gonzales rocketed off a ledge, sailed some 15 feet over a walkway and a set of stairs, and rolled away on the other side.
The gap is now known as "The Gonz" in his honor.
Such prowess is achieved at the price of numerous failed tries that send flesh slamming into concrete.
"In skateboarding, you have to take the beef" -- the punishment -- "to get the respect," says Mr. Phelps, whose baggy orange shorts reveal shins thick with scar tissue.
"Mark ate it royally.
He got whomped.
He has a really high threshold for pain."
Mr. Gonzales hasn't sustained more than a few broken bones thus far.
"When you get older you get injured easier," he says ruefully.
"I have a feeling I'm going to end up in a wheelchair."
If pain is an important part of skateboarding, so is graphic design.
Most skateboard "decks," which cost between $50 and $150, are virtually identical in size, shape and materials.
The real selling points are endorsements by stars such as Mr. Gonzales and the dazzling designs imprinted on the decks.
"Skateboarders look at stuff, unlike the usual kid who's just a TV clone," says Don Fisher, one of the owners of Think Skateboards, a manufacturer.
"We need radical graphics, not mainstream, typical run-of-the-mill stuff like Nike or Reebok would do."
A few years ago, when Mr. Gonzales was one of the most prominent skateboarding pros, his fans bought up decks featuring his drawings and his signature.
Then he disappeared from professional skateboarding until recently, for reasons he doesn't want to discuss.
"When I was younger I liked skating because it was totally free from everything.
It's me and my skateboard and that's it," Mr. Gonzales says.
"With the artwork it's the same thing.
I can get away from everything that's bothering me."
Although Mr. Gonzales is now saddled with tax troubles dating from his earlier time in the limelight, he says he still makes enough money from shoe, deck and other product endorsements to subsidize a career in art and poetry.
And he is still skating.
"He dropped out of the scene for a while, but he skated for himself the whole time," Mr. Fisher says admiringly.
"When he came back he was better than ever."
Indeed, last summer Thrasher ran photos of Mr. Gonzales chalking up another first at The Gonz: jumping the gap while kicking his board 360 degrees in midair.
Says Thrasher editor Mr. Phelps, "If you can skateboard like that, you can do anything."
Ms. DeCarlo is a writer in Napa Valley, Calif.
