Capping a blockbuster year in the brokerage business, three of the nation's largest securities firms reported sharply higher profits for the fourth quarter and full year.
But despite unexpectedly huge commission revenues and strong seasonal trading profits, the results didn't wow Wall Street.
Many brokerage-industry stocks fell on the news.
That's because of dark clouds gathering on the horizon: Some analysts contend even a modest uptick in interest rates could make 1993's results the last gasp of Wall Street's three-year-old boom in securities underwriting.
Merrill Lynch & Co., the nation's largest broker and a barometer for the industry, reported a 57% jump in fourth-quarter earnings and record 1993 net income of $1.36 billion.
The firm's revenue for the full year surged in almost every category, to a record $16.59 billion.
Also reporting robust results were PaineWebber Inc. and Travelers Inc., parent of Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
Similar results are expected to follow in coming weeks from other brokers.
Low interest rates powered the profits surge.
U.S. corporations are bolstering their balance sheets by selling stock, paying down big chunks of their debt, and refinancing much of the rest at historically attractive interest rates.
Meanwhile, more individual investors are turning to stocks to bolster their portfolios' returns.
"You would see an end to the momentum if interest rates went up a point," predicts Guy Moszkowski, analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co.
Industry analysts are expecting the brokerage industry's combined 1994 earnings to fall about 10% to 15% below 1993 levels.
Based on fourth-quarter results, "the bloom is not off the rose," says James Hanbury, analyst at Wertheim Schroder & Co.
But, he adds, "If you look at the stocks, it's another matter."
Buyers apparently have anticipated all of the industry's good news; the Dow Jones index of the brokerage industry group peaked in late summer of last year.
But securities-industries officials note that analysts have been warning for months that the sky is about to fall and yet the broad-based boom continues, as does the flow of money to Wall Street.
At PaineWebber, where fourth-quarter net surged 37% above the year-earlier level, Donald Marron, chairman, said the increase was "not dependent on any single business or any single activity."
Fees from the firm's asset management business, which is somewhat insulated from interest-rate climbs, were high enough to "cover 50% of our fixed costs."
Merrill said fourth-quarter net was $347.2 million, or $1.53 a share, compared with $221.4 million, or 99 cents a share, a year earlier.
Merrill's 1993 earnings included an accounting change that reduced the firm's net by $35.4 million.
Before the accounting change, which related to the adoption of new accounting treatments for employee retirement benefits and securities, 1993 profit was $1.39 billion, or $6.14 a share.
At PaineWebber, fourth-quarter net was $56.9 million, or $1.11 a share, up from $41.4 million, or 78 cents a share.
Commissions increased 29% from the year-earlier period to $265.5 million.
For the year, net rose 15% to a record $246.2 million as revenue gained 19% to $4 billion.
Travelers Inc., the successor to Primerica Corp., reported a 35% rise in fourth-quarter earnings, reflecting the acquisition of the Shearson brokerage firm and improved operating results in its other businesses.
The company earned $297.9 million, or $1.19 a share, compared with $221.3 million, or 96 cents a share (adjusted for stock splits), a year earlier.
Revenue rose 73% to $2.2 billion from $1.27 billion.
For the year, Travelers reported net of $915.6 million, or $3.74 a share, up 26% from $728.1 million, or $3.22 a share, for 1992.
Travelers' investment-services business, which includes Smith Barney Shearson, showed strong growth in operating earnings.
The inclusion of Shearson explains much of the growth, but, as with other brokerage firms, it was helped by the bull market for stocks.
As a result, the company made more investment banking fees, higher profits from capital markets trading and higher commissions.
Sanford Weill, chairman of Travelers, noted that the company is well-diversified and took issue with the notion that profits of the "new Travelers" will get hammered if the stock market falls.
"We have a company where more than half our profits come from recurring sources," he said.
"If the market goes down, we will still have those engines operating for us.
It's not like we're just in the brokerage business."
Results don't include full results of Travelers Insurance, which the company acquired at year end.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Merrill fell 75 cents to $40.375, PaineWebber dropped 62.5 cents to $25.75, and Travelers rose 25 cents to $39.50.
Greg Steinmetz contributed to this article.
