Just as the U.S. government is getting involved again in efforts to control the world's population, it is encountering a complex new dispute.
This time, the fight isn't over whether the U.S. should support international population programs -- President Clinton has decided it should.
The fracas now centers on what sort of programs to back, and it pits women's groups against traditional population experts.
Women's advocacy organizations like the New York-based International Women's Health Coalition charge that traditional, top-down programs have reduced women in the developing world to pawns in a global drive to reduce the number of births.
They demand a broad range of services that go beyond addressing fertility to dealing with such concerns as women's health, education and economic roles.
The traditionalists argue that such demands threaten to dilute population-control efforts even as births are poised to accelerate in some of the poorest regions of the world.
The strains could snarl the United Nations Conference on Population, to be held in Cairo in September.
This needn't be.
Any population or family-planning program that is insensitive to women's needs will fail.
If women feel population-control clinics don't serve their needs -- by, say, presenting sterilization as the sole means of contraception -- they won't show up.
The exceptions, of course, are the world's remaining totalitarian states, where authorities engage in utterly coercive practices.
There is no doubt that the world faces a problem of accelerating population growth.
The number of women of reproductive age has grown to more than one billion from 600 million in 1980, and will reach 1.5 billion by 2010.
World population will expand substantially even if those women have only two children each; if they give birth to six or seven children, as is the norm in some countries, the next generation likely will face more poverty, bigger environmental problems and larger migration flows.
Notwithstanding the demographers' tallies, population questions turn on highly personal decisions by individual women and men.
To mount any program in which their preferences and apprehensions are dismissed isn't only arrogant, it's absurd.
It seems to overlook where babies come from.
"Women have to be seen as actors in this, not means to an end," says Joan Dunlop, president of the International Women's Coalition.
In working with developing countries and the women who live there, she adds, "we have to earn our partnership rather than impose our leadership."
Tim Wirth, the State Department's special counselor on population and a slew of other issues, has been trying to reconcile some of the differences between the traditionalists and women's groups.
As a first step, he and others have to come to terms with the fact that some population programs have given the field a bad name.
Reports proliferate of coerced abortions in China, for instance.
But the trouble isn't confined to totalitarian societies.
In India, the central government sets numerical population targets, and passes them down to state and local governments.
At times, bureaucrats manning a network of more than 150,000 health centers and clinics are paid according to how well they meet the targets.
The state of Rajasthan's parliament recently voted through a law that bars government employment or public office to people who have had more than two children.
The main method of contraception in India is the sterilization of women.
Other approaches often aren't even offered.
Population Action International, a more traditional population-control advocacy group based in Washington, notes that the Indian population program has "prevented about 90 million births," since its inception in the 1950s.
But even it criticizes India's approach.
Officials involved in population work say the Indian government resists foreign meddling on population matters, though.
Still, the question remains: How much more success could India have achieved with a more humane approach?
Many Indian women drop out of various family-planning programs because they have found them disrespectful or lacking in quality.
In some areas, women pay to use private-sector contraceptive services rather than free state clinics.
World-wide, 125 million women want contraception but don't now use it, according to the Rockefeller Foundation.
If this unmet need were satisfied -- through accessible centers that would enable women to control their own fertility -- most countries' immediate population targets would be met.
Steve Sinding, the foundation's main population specialist, concedes that meeting these women's needs alone won't bring new births down to "replacement levels," at which there would be no net population growth.
Inevitably, population control will require more money.
About $5.5 billion is currently spent on family-planning and reproductive services.
Also, providing for the women who want contraceptives but don't use them currently would double that amount.
If the task were broadened further to include better education and a broader range of services, the expenditures would grow substantially higher.
Much of the additional funds could come from developing countries, provided they cut military spending in some cases and privatize state-owned industries.
Ultimately, though, the conflicting philosophies of population control promise to do more damage than any money problems.
Mr. Wirth's first priority should be to move the debate toward reconciliation.
The reproduction wars should end.
