Under pressure to discount prescription drug prices, the pharmaceutical industry is expected to post the slimmest quarterly profit gain in more than a decade.
Securities analysts predicted fourth-quarter earnings will rise on average 3% to 6%, compared with 15% to 20% increases generated by major drug makers from the mid-1980s through 1992.
The slowing in profit growth is having widespread effects; companies are restructuring, reducing work forces, and forming cost-saving alliances.
The most important reason: Drug makers have lost the ability to boost prices at will in the U.S. and abroad.
Analysts anticipate Pfizer Inc. and Schering-Plough Corp. will still report earnings rises of about 18% and 15%, respectively, mostly because both companies sell innovative products for which they can demand premium prices.
But for such drug makers as Merck & Co., Eli Lilly & Co., Warner-Lambert Co., and Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. the torpid performance reflects the changes taking place in health care, as cost-saving programs at government and private health insurance plans spread and take hold.
The latest U.S. Labor Department data show that prescription drug prices rose an average 3.1% in 1993, compared with 8% to 12% a year in the previous decade.
The industry's "engine of growth in the 1980s -- aggressive pricing of all pharmaceuticals -- has been effectively eliminated," said Joseph Riccardo, an analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co.
Mr. Riccardo said half of the industry's profit-margin expansion from 1980 to 1993 came from raising prices of existing products.
Analysts agree that the pricing motor will remain stalled for several years, meaning that annual average profit growth will be a more modest 5% to 10% through 1996.
"Any company counting on price increases simply is not going to have significant revenue growth these days," said Robert Ingram, president and chief operating officer of Glaxo Holding PLC's U.S. operation.
Since early 1993 investors have shied away from the once-favored drug company shares, fearing that proposed health reform legislation will limit prices.
To forestall price regulation, most big drug companies last year promised to keep their combined price rises to the rate of inflation.
Pfizer said its prices rose less than 2.8% last year, and it expected average prices to rise about 2.5% in 1994.
Drug buying specialists at major managed health insurance plans said that even without pressure from Washington they have begun to demand price discounts for certain big-selling medicines.
These plans, which manage pharmaceutical benefits for millions of U.S. employees, are encouraging doctors to prescribe the least costly medicines by choosing inexpensive generic versions of brand name drugs, or brand name drugs bought at bargain prices.
"The whole arena of managed-care medicine has very quickly changed the dynamics of marketing pharmaceuticals," said Caroline Dorsa, a top Merck marketing executive.
She said managed care plans "using the bargaining power" of large employee pools accounted for half of Merck's sales in 1993, up from 20% several years ago.
Ms. Dorsa said managed care will climb to 75% of Merck's sales by 1999.
The U.S.'s biggest pharmacy-benefits company, McKesson Corp.'s PCS plan, manages drug coverage for 40 million people, and expects that to grow to 50 million this year.
PCS executives said that in the 1993 first half, prices it paid for medicines were flat compared with a year ago.
That follows price rises of 2.5% in 1992, 4.3% in 1991, and 6.5% in 1990.
Price competition is especially stiff where numerous choices of medicines exist, such as for treating high blood pressure or ulcers.
A pharmaceutical buyer at one large HMO said the per-tablet price it paid for Merck's hypertension drug Lisinopril fell almost 6% in 1993 to 52 cents from its price in 1991.
The drug's price surged 25% in 1991.
Merck declined to comment.
To be sure, critics of drug company pricing note that the wholesale list prices many small or independent pharmacies pay for medicines still are rising fast.
Prices are climbing smartly for medicines bought by the elderly who must pay for drugs themselves.
Medicare doesn't now cover outpatient drug costs, but the Clinton health plan proposes to extend drug coverage for Medicare recipients in exchange for a 15% rebate from drug makers.
A report from the Senate's Special Committee on Aging, whose chairman, David Pryor (D., Ark.), has long attacked drug prices, shows list prices in 1993 typically rose about 5% to 8%.
"We agree that for some people the marketplace is working," Sen. Pryor said.
"But for the many outside the marketplace political pressure may be required to keep prices down."
Indeed, some large pharmaceutical buying plans said that while the specific prices they pay for medicines are rising slowly, total costs per person covered in the plan were still growing well above inflation as a result of rising drug use, especially for new medicines that are released with higher price tags than the older drugs they replace.
Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound said its per enrollee costs rose about 7% last year, although that is down from 13.2% in 1992 and 18.2% in 1991.
As a result, those drug makers with a steady flow of medicines that provide a significant benefit over other drugs did well in the past quarter.
Analysts said Pfizer earnings should rise to about 98 cents a share from 84 cents a share a year ago based on sales of five drugs with little competition.
Schering-Plough's profit should jump to 97 cents a share from 84 cents because of its premium-priced medicines, analysts said.
Both companies wouldn't comment.
Meanwhile, Merck's profit is expected to rise 10% to 59 cents a share, while Bristol-Myers' profit from continuing operations is expected to grow 11% to $1.12 a share.
But analysts predicted that earnings will rise only 6% at American Home Products Corp. to $1.23 a share and that earnings at Eli Lilly would be flat or slightly lower than the year-earlier period at 95 cents to $1.06 a share.
Those companies also wouldn't comment.
Analysts said Upjohn Co. and Marion Merrell Dow Inc., whose big-selling drugs now have significant generic drug competition, will post earnings declines.
Upjohn's profit may drop 10% to as low as 76 cents a share, some analysts said, while Marion's profit could fall 20% to about 42 cents a share.
The companies said they wouldn't comment.
Finally, analysts said Warner-Lambert's earnings from continuing operations may decline about 14% to 88 cents a share, as a result of pricing competition and a loss of sales for certain products because of regulatory problems at a plant in Puerto Rico.
A spokesman said it didn't disagree with analyst projections.
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB Co. markets the hypertension drug Captopril.
The drug's marketer was incorrectly identified as Merck & Co. in a chart accompanying an article yesterday about fourth-quarter earnings estimates for pharmaceutical companies.
(WSJ Jan. 19, 1994)
