International Business Machines Corp. pulled the plug on its first experiment in "clone-killing," announcing that it's discontinuing its lowest-price personal computer line in Europe called Ambra.
Separately, the Armonk, N.Y.-based computer giant told employees at three U.S. mainframe plants yesterday that at least 1,200 more workers, almost 20% of the work force remaining in that ailing business, would be laid off as part of previously announced cutback plans.
In addition, IBM handed out a total of 700 more pink slips throughout several other divisions.
IBM stressed it will continue selling Ambra in the U.S. and Canada, where its direct-marketing strategy is more successful and some buyers want a cheaply priced computer and don't care about brand names.
Even so, analysts say Ambra sales account for significantly less than 5% of IBM's total PC sales in the U.S.
In Europe, Ambra was apparently starting to clash with IBM's other PC brands, confusing buyers, analysts said.
It was also never much of a hit, with 140,000 sold since the June 1992 launch -- a puny number by IBM standards, according to IBM.
While PC sales in the U.S. are recovering with the economy, in Europe recession is still battering parts of the PC market -- especially the "no-name" PC clone segment in which Ambra played.
In addition, prices for IBM's own-brand PCs, such as ValuePoint, have fallen so fast that there isn't any longer much difference between them and Ambra.
There's also little difference in cost to IBM -- while each Ambra once cost IBM about 40% less than its other PCs, now the savings is less than 10%.
William E. McCracken, head of IBM's PC business in Europe and Asia, said that with so little difference, "on balance I would prefer the consumer have an IBM logo on the machine."
Industry analysts concurred, adding that there was little point in IBM continuing to foot the bill for a separate Ambra organization if it wasn't getting extra profit.
IBM said it will lay off about 64 employees that managed the Ambra brand in Europe.
In the U.S., the other announced layoffs will come from the Endicott, N.Y., office of IBM's microelectronics division; from the Austin, Texas, RS/6000 workstation unit; and from the Endicott and Hudson Valley, N.Y., offices of ISSC, the services and consulting unit.
So far, mainframe workers and others based mainly in the Hudson Valley have borne the brunt of IBM's massive scaling-back efforts that have reduced the size of the company to 256,000 from its peak of 406,000 in 1985.
IBM said the majority of the 35,000 layoffs scheduled for this year will come primarily from European operations, where already 10,000 layoffs have been announced.
