If there is a better deal anywhere than Macy's cashmere-blend sweaters on sale for $34, that bargain has to be Macy itself.
So believes Federated Department Stores Inc., which owns Bloomingdale's, Lazarus, Burdines, Rich's, A&S and Jordan Marsh, and now is trying to gobble R.H. Macy & Co. right out of bankruptcy court.
Barely a month has passed since Federated announced it bought control of a critical piece of its strapped rival's debt for a mere $109.3 million in cash up front.
Despite a public ceasefire, Federated is still stalking a reluctant Macy behind the scenes.
"I give them a 9-in-10 chance" of nabbing Macy, says David Millison, head of bankruptcy research at Dabney/Resnick, a Los Angeles investment firm.
Federated's success depends as much on the retailer's brazen and innovative exploitation of bankruptcy law as it does on the growing realization among Macy's management and creditors of Macy's precarious financial position.
With $6 billion of debt, Macy has little hope of repaying any but its most senior creditors.
"Bankruptcy has already become a form of takeover for financial speculators," says Hugh Ray, a bankruptcy lawyer with Andrews & Kurth.
"Now, it could be the companies' turn."
But Federated's high-stakes game isn't risk-free.
Macy's most powerful ally may prove to be federal Bankruptcy Judge Burton Lifland, widely viewed as a prodebtor jurist.
He has the power to strip away Federated's right to vote its stake -- and for almost any reason, such as if he decided Federated had a conflict of interest as a Macy's creditor and competitor.
A look at Federated's raid on Macy suggests how a takeover war can be fought far from the spotlight of public markets, in the dim recesses of the courts where hobbled companies seek refuge.
Veteran bankruptcy investors say Federated Chairman Allen Questrom and his chief strategist, Chief Financial Officer Ronald Tysoe, have ignited a slow-motion takeover that could last until year end.
But whatever happens to Macy, they believe, Federated will emerge a financial winner.
Mr. Tysoe, who spearheaded Federated's lightning-fast emergence from bankruptcy court two years ago, isn't one to let details get in the way of a good move.
Last summer, despite a hundred-degree heat wave, he packed up his house himself to move his family into a sprawling new home in a Cincinnati suburb.
He approached Prudential Insurance Co. of America with like determination last summer.
Mr. Tysoe was no stranger to Prudential.
Federated was the insurer's second-largest retail borrower, and Prudential had held 7% of the Cincinnati retailer's stock.
The insurer welcomed his overtures: Prudential hadn't received a cent on its $832.5 million loan to Macy since its largest retailing borrower filed for bankruptcy-court protection in January 1992.
And tough new capital rules for insurers were making it hard to keep a loan like Macy's on the books at face value.
In negotiations that stretched into December, Mr. Tysoe hammered out an unusual solution.
Federated agreed to buy half of Prudential's claim-paying only one-fourth up front, with the remaining $340 million due over three years, with an option on the other half of the debt later on.
In one stroke, Federated gained control of a $1 billion claim secured by Macy's 70 best stores, including Herald Square, that puts Federated first in line to be repaid.
Federated got a bargain.
It is paying only 86 cents on the dollar, less than Prudential expected to get back from Macy at the end of the bankruptcy-court proceeding, despite the loan's top-notch collateral.
Prudential even agreed to lend Federated the money for its stake, at an interest rate so favorable that Federated is guaranteed to be paid about $32 million a year through the end of the bankruptcy-court proceeding.
But the insurer was content: it turned a nonperforming loan into a good one, and booked a $30 million profit to boot.
This coup transforms Mr. Questrom, a flamboyant merchant who once posed with his wife in black tie in Bloomingdale's window when Federated was still in bankruptcy-court proceeding, into the first corporate chieftain to join the brass-knuckle crowd known as vulture investors.
Vultures grab control of the most powerful piece of debt, wrest control from their prey and block any reorganization they don't like.
Successful vulture investors such as Apollo Advisors and Trust Co. of the West have used that strategy to gain control of dozens of companies.
Mr. Questrom's empire-building rests on Prudential's controlling block of debt.
With it, Federated has a huge advantage.
It is unlikely another bidder will emerge because Federated can veto any plan it doesn't like unless it gets paid off fully including interest.
To unseat Federated, Macy or an outside bidder would likely have to come up with the full $1 billion in cash or stock.
Federated is "certainly in the driver's seat," says bankruptcy investor Mark Dickstein of Dickstein Partners & Co., who says he isn't an investor in Macy debt.
"They can dictate the terms of almost any plan."
Further, Federated can hunt its quarry with the same stealth tactics other bankruptcy raiders use.
Unlike in the stock market, where most takeovers happen, bankruptcy court is not a level playing field.
Secured creditors such as Federated are first in line to get their loan repaid, and can often muscle in to seize large chunks of the post-bankruptcy company's new stock.
Moreover, the debt Federated bought isn't subject to the same securities regulations as public stockholdings.
So Federated can build alliances with other creditors without disclosing its intent or position.
But Federated can't risk alienating Judge Lifland.
That is why Mr. Questrom and Mr. Tysoe have kept mum about their strategy in meetings with other creditors since January.
Federated will outline the value of a combined company in a meeting with secured creditors on Tuesday.
Federated executives "are being very smart about bending over backwards to be able to prove in court that they have not abused their position," says Mr. Ray, who isn't involved in the takeover contest.
Federated's biggest edge may come from the growing realization by Macy's management of the company's financial status.
At the same time Prudential and Federated began talking, Macy was embarking on the next phase of negotiations with its creditors to move the retailer out of bankruptcy court.
At the end of September, Mr. Ullman put James Kenney, a 34-year-old ex-McKinsey consultant, in charge of softening up Macy's senior creditors, the banks and mortgage lenders with which the retailer hopes to keep doing business once it gets out of bankruptcy court.
These creditors are a formidable array.
Macy owes money to, among others, Trust Co. of the West, and a working-capital bank syndicate including Chemical Banking, Credit Lyonnais of France and Mitsubishi Bank Ltd.
But the most powerful creditor, second only to Prudential, is Fidelity Investments, the mutual-fund company that aggressively bought up bank debt to accumulate a $490 million claim.
The news Mr. Kenney had to impart to them was bleak, according to people who sat in on the talks.
He told them Macy's business was likely to continue doing so poorly that the retailer wouldn't be able to carry much more than $1 billion of debt.
This meant the secured creditors, who were owed about $2.4 billion in principal and interest, would have to take much of their recovery in stock.
How much stock Federated and the other senior creditors can get depends on what Macy is worth.
Ordinarily, a wounded quarry like Macy would want to fend off its predator by paying off the debt Federated owns and showing the suitor the door.
But to get rid of Federated, Macy would have to come up with $1 billion -- or another 12% loan on security as good as its best stores -- options it cannot afford.
People present for the fall meetings between Macy and its lenders say Macy's financial adviser, Blackstone Group, told creditors that the retailer is worth between $3.1 billion and $3.5 billion, but probably not more than $3.3 billion.
"The reality is that there is not enough value here," says a person familiar with the talks.
The longer it takes Macy to win over creditors, the more value the senior secured lenders such as Federated will receive.
That's because Prudential, Fidelity and the banks are entitled to receive interest on their claims before Macy's bondholders, who are owed $1.3 billion, get one cent.
So Federated can afford to lie in wait as interest builds up on its claim.
This poses a big problem for Macy's management.
Macy's best chance of staying independent is if it can persuade all creditors to agree to a consensual plan, instead of fighting its way out of court.
But the only way to provide bondholders with much of a recovery is to take a piece of the pie away from secured creditors.
That's what Mr. Kenney set out to do.
But Macy underestimated its powerful creditors -- the same people Federated will have to sway.
In mid-fall conversations with Prudential and the so-called 49-store syndicate bank debt (now owned almost entirely by Fidelity Investments), Mr. Kenney valued the stores as if they were held not by Macy, but by a third party, to drive down the properties' value.
That would mean the lenders would have to stand in line with unsecured bondholders to get the last part of their recovery.
Prudential and Fidelity balked.
They told Mr. Kenney in no uncertain terms that if the company wanted to stay independent, it would have to assign all its property the high value it was really worth.
Since December, Macy's management has been shifting gears.
Bankruptcy investors speculate that Macy management will try to strike an alliance with Fidelity.
Aligned with Fidelity, Macy could muster the financial wherewithal to neutralize Federated by offering the retailer new debt, and distributing the bulk of its stock to the mutual-fund giant and other secured creditors.
That move could spell bad news for bondholders.
Macy's tactical reversal may indicate that the company is rethinking its strategy of forging a consensual plan.
It also increases the likelihood of a so-called cram-down -- a plan of reorganization that would distribute little to junior creditors, over their objections, if senior creditors can show that there is not enough value to go around.
Robert Miller of Berlack, Israels & Liberman, who represents the bondholders' committee, calls any suggestion of a cram-down "irresponsible."
Macy is putting on the brakes.
Rather than press forward with a plan of reorganization, as many creditors expected, Macy will ask the bankruptcy court to extend its exclusive right to propose such a plan in an unusual hearing scheduled for Feb. 22.
