Attempting again to spur the German economy, the Bundesbank cut a key lending rate, but stopped short of a broader monetary easing.
The German central bank's announcement that it had lowered its discount rate to 5.25% from 5.75% caught economists and financial markets by surprise and triggered interest-rate reductions in Austria, the Netherlands, Belgium and Italy.
The Bundesbank previously lowered interest rates last October.
The central bank is trying to stimulate Germany's slumping economy, and its rate reductions have the broader benefit of touching off monetary easings in other European countries as well.
Such stimulus is welcomed in the U.S. because officials believe that as the economies of Europe strengthen, Europeans' appetite for U.S. goods should rise.
The new U.S. emissary to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, David Aaron, argued in a recent letter to the head of the Paris-based organization that the U.S. believes "there is substantial room to reduce short-term interest rates to stimulate aggregate demand" in Europe.
German government officials applauded the Bundesbank's decision, hoping for an economic boost that will help Chancellor Helmut Kohl in next October's national election and possibly will quiet U.S. calls for more stimulus in Europe.
The Bundesbank's rate-cut announcement was made after the stock exchange closed in Frankfurt, but shares jumped in aftermarket trading.
Other European stock exchanges rallied in late trading.
While the four other central banks followed the Bundesbank with rate cuts of their own, other countries whose currencies have close links to the mark held back, notably France.
The countries were believed to be waiting to see how the foreign-exchange market reacted to the Bundesbank's announcement.
Although rate reductions often can weaken a currency, the mark was stable after the rate cut.
"It might take days before there is more of a follow-up by other central banks in Europe," said Mads Jacobsen, head of treasury at Den Danske bank in Copenhagen.
Despite the optimism that the rate cut triggered among German government officials and on the stock market, the effect of the action by the Bundesbank was limited.
For one thing, the central bank acted to lower only one of two important interest rates over which it has control.
For another, economists and business leaders said that lower interest rates alone won't overcome deep structural imbalances in the German economy and will do little to put Germany's four million unemployed back to work.
The cut in the discount rate to 5.25% left the rate at its lowest point since it peaked at 8.75% in July 1992.
The rate is charged on some borrowings that banks make from the central bank.
But the Bundesbank -- always cautious about inflation -- left unchanged at 6% the interest rate for its securities-repurchase agreements.
The so-called repo rate is considered at least as important as the discount rate.
It is a key refinancing facility for the banking system and plays a bigger role than the discount rate in guiding money-market rates.
Also left unchanged was the less-important Lombard rate, which was held at 6.75%.
The Lombard rate is a penalty borrowing facility and serves as a ceiling for short-term money-market rates.
The decision to leave the repo rate unchanged illustrated the central bank's continued cautious stance, Bundesbank directorate member Otmar Issing said in an interview.
Mr. Issing, the Bundesbank's chief economist, explained that the Central Bank Council was encouraged by the firm mark and by a slowing in German inflation, which eased to a 3.5% annual rate in January from 3.7% in December.
However, he said the council continued to be concerned about the rate of money-supply growth in Germany.
"But since we last reduced interest rates in October, we thought that, considering all factors, it was possible to ease policy, especially as inflation is slowing," Mr. Issing said.
"It isn't new that lower central bank interest rates are better suited to a weak economic situation."
