Micrografx Inc., saying new versions of some of its software became too powerful too fast, warned that it will post a loss for the current quarter.
The graphics-software concern also said its chairman and co-founder, J. Paul Grayson, will become more actively involved in the business by assuming the additional post of vice president of product development.
Although remaining chairman, Mr. Grayson, 44 years old, will report in his new job to 38-year-old Gordon Tucker, who was brought in as Micrografx's president and chief executive officer in August with a mandate to turn around the company.
Industry analysts had been predicting a profit for Micrografx's fiscal fourth quarter, which ends Thursday.
A year earlier, the company had a loss of $4.3 million on revenue of $11 million.
Before yesterday's announcement, which came after the end of Nasdaq Stock Market trading, Micrografx's shares closed at $8.375, down 37.5 cents.
Mr. Tucker said revenue in the current quarter will be up from a year ago, but not enough to allow a profit.
He largely blamed struggling sales in North America of new versions, introduced last year, of two programs put out by the Richardson, Texas, company.
The upgraded versions are very advanced, but require too much computing power for many existing personal computers, Mr. Tucker said.
One of the programs, which allows the user to draw on a PC, represents about a third of Micrografx's business, he said.
"It just won't run on most of our customers' machines," he said.
Mr. Tucker, who before joining Micrografx led the development of rotisserie chicken at PepsiCo Inc.'s KFC unit, said one of his goals is to make the software company driven more by customers than by technology.
The CEO said the board approved last week a business plan he presented to launch some new products and to reposition some existing ones, but he wouldn't elaborate.
Last month, the company announced an alliance with the maker of Crayola crayons, a Hallmark Cards Inc. unit, to develop a line of drawing software for children.
Mr. Tucker said the first two programs in that line will be out next month with price tags under $50.
In an unusual strategy for software, Micrografx plans to advertise the Crayola programs on television.
Despite a wave of consolidation in the software industry, Mr. Tucker said Micrografx has no desire to merge but isn't adopting any defensive measures, either.
