IF A TRIP TO Cuba has crossed your mind, think again.
While it's legal to visit, most Americans are barred from spending money there on business or tourism.
The restriction, part of the U.S. economic embargo on Cuba, exists despite that country's recent easing of travel restrictions for Cubans or Cuban-Americans living in the U.S. Violators face fines of up to $50,000 and 10 years in prison.
The Treasury Department allows a few exceptions, though.
The biggest is Cuban-Americans visiting close relatives.
Others include journalists, scholars, government officials, Americans whose trips are fully funded by non-American interests and others licensed for things like humanitarian missions.
To ensure compliance, Treasury says it audits travel agents and airline charter operators that arrange travel to Cuba.
Travel agents report that some Americans fly to Cuba via Canada or the Caribbean, or sail there on private yachts.
Cuban immigration officials normally don't stamp their passports, so chances of being caught are minimal.
From 1986 until last fall, Havana limited Cuban-American visitors to 100 per week.
The waiting list was 30,000, reports one airline official.
Today, there are no limits and the requirement that visitors buy hotel packages has been dropped.
Havana also authorized an increase in charter flights from Miami.
Now there are 10 a week and "everything is full," says Vivian Mannerud, president of Airline Brokers, a charterer.
Marazul Tours, which flies to Havana and sells travel packages, says its thrice-weekly charter flights are jammed.
Bob Guild, a program director, says the number of non-Cuban visitors who fall under the Treasury's exemptions is up as well.
Marazul handled 1,600 such visitors in 1992 and 2,500 last year, he says.
TRAVELERS GOING abroad can get initial advice on vaccinations they'll need from travel agents and airline reservation clerks.
But pretravel care may be more difficult to obtain.
There's no certification process for travel-medicine physicians in the U.S., says Leonard Marcus, a Newton, Mass., doctor in the field, which specializes in pretravel vaccinations and treatment of exotic diseases.
But the American Society for Tropical Medicine & Hygiene, of which he is a member, is preparing a certification exam, as well as curricula for medical schools, he says.
American Express and Carlson Travel Network, two big travel agencies, say agents with access to big computer reservations systems can give information on disease outbreaks, needed vaccines and the like by tapping into a database.
Most U.S. airlines' reservations staff also have access to the data.
"But we wouldn't be your primary source for medical information," cautions an American Airlines spokeswoman.
U.S. travelers might seek advice from the international traveler hotline (404 332-4559 ) operated by the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention in Atlanta.
It gives information on food and water precautions, general vaccination requirements and geographic-specific diseases, risks and prevention.
But for shots, travelers still must visit a physician or public health clinic, which may not have the vaccines on hand.
On the society's behalf, Dr. Marcus maintains a list of travel-medicine practitioners in North America.
While far from complete, the list has grown to 117 names from about 75 three years ago, he says.
To obtain it, send a large, self-addressed envelope and 98 cents in postage to Travelers Health & Immunization Services, 148 Highland Ave., Newton, Mass. 02165.
SINCE THE AIR Carrier Access Act went into effect in 1990, airlines flying planes of 30 seats or more can't refuse to transport disabled individuals.
But with more than 300 U.S. airports served exclusively by commuter airlines, the Department of Transportation is proposing to amend the act to include planes of 19 to 30 seats.
"As more feeder planes come into the hubs, it's going to be an issue," says Edna Cook, director of Flying Wheels Travel, an Owatonna, Minn., agency that arranges travel for the disabled.
Paralyzed Veterans of America concedes that it wouldn't make sense to mandate such a change for planes of 18 seats or fewer because they're too small.
But PVA and other advocacy groups support the department's plans to require the purchase of ramps or hydraulic commuter-aircraft boarding lifts to load wheelchair-using passengers into 19- to 70-seat planes.
In most cases, these travelers are placed in narrow chairs on the tarmac and lifted onto small planes.
Some, understandably, don't like this approach, and some airline and airport workers can't or won't assist.
And some handicapped individuals who have been denied boarding on 19-seat planes have sued airlines.
While airports and airlines generally support the proposal, the big sticking point is who will pay for the boarding lifts, which cost between $8,000 and $40,000.
"Unless an airline is going to use it exclusively, the airport should fund it," says the Regional Airline Association.
Airlines, not airports, are responsible for handling passengers, responds the Airports Council International.
The plan would give airports and carriers nine months to decide how to split the cost and three years to install the equipment.
HYATT HOTELS, IN doing research before introducing rooms with workstations, fax machines and computer hookups, found that 72% of its business guests feel more pressure to produce on business trips than they did five years ago; more than 80% believe they work harder than their bosses on such trips. . . .
A concierge at Chicago's Ritz-Carlton Hotel said one of her most unusual requests last year was to reserve a basketball court for a company president.
