An aggressive bid by U.S. and European trade officials to open South Korea's dynamic but tightly protected passenger car market could hasten a shakeout in the local auto industry, which has spent billions of dollars on new capacity.
Officials from the U.S. Trade Representative's Office and European Union this week are pressuring the South Korean government to reduce what they describe as an array of tariff and nontariff barriers to imported cars.
Last year, imports accounted for 0.2% of total auto sales, compared with about 5.0% in Japan.
South Korean trade officials contend that the market is already liberalized, and that its high tax structure for automobiles does not discriminate against imports.
But most private analysts acknowledge an array of obstacles that discourage sales of foreign cars.
Should those barriers be lifted, local auto manufacturers could be faced with new competition by the time a massive capacity expansion program is completed.
South Korea's five car producers have earmarked about $10 billion to double production capacity by 2001.
Some analysts think the domestic auto market is crowded even without foreign competition.
On Monday, the EU threatened to slap retaliatory tariffs on imported South Korean cars.
Its threat coincided with a visit here by Peter Collins, deputy assistant to the U.S. trade representative, to discuss various trade disputes.
Although coincidental, the parallel efforts come at a time when Seoul is already worried that Washington's tough stance in trade disputes with Tokyo could spill over into U.S.-Korean relations.
"We don't want to be in a position of having to raise a club over the Koreans' heads," said a U.S. diplomat in Seoul.
"But if these things aren't done voluntarily, there are other forms of persuasions."
Local manufacturers say the prospect of foreign competition doesn't bother them.
"Our expansion plans are mostly for export," says a spokesman for Hyundai Motor Co., South Korea's top auto maker.
"Foreign competition wouldn't have a big impact on us."
But analysts say there is no guarantee exports sales will be robust enough to offset dwindling market share at home.
"It's hard to tell what's going to happen," said Don Lee, an analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
"If the Koreans don't have their price and technology together by 1997, they'll have a difficult time surviving.
It's a big concern."
The U.S. and EU demands include a reduction in the customs and luxury taxes slapped on both local and imported cars, and the elimination of rules that prohibit foreign car companies from offering financing to customers.
