Electronic Arts Inc. said it will acquire Broderbund Software Inc. in a stock swap valued at about $400 million.
The transaction unites two leaders in attractive niches of the software market, and could increase their ability to fend off turf incursions from new entrants such as Microsoft Corp., the industry's reigning leader.
Broderbund, in particular, said Electronic Arts would help the smaller company expand into international markets and new hardware opportunities.
Broderbund, founded in 1980 by several members of the Carlston family, has focused on educational and creativity software in addition to games.
Its products include the geographical-game series that started with "Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?"
Electronic Arts, founded in 1982, specializes in games and entertainment titles for personal computers and video-game machines, with specialties that include a popular line of sports titles.
Trip Hawkins, the company's former chief executive, left to start a closely watched multimedia concern, 3DO Co., which is attempting to set a new standard for game systems that hook up to living room televisions.
Mr. Hawkins, who remains chairman of Electronic Arts, also pledged to vote his 7% stake for the acquisition.
Lee Isgur, an analyst at Volpe Welty & Co., called the merger a "brilliant" move for both companies.
It will help Electronic Arts gain an instant boost into the entertainment market, he said, and help Broderbund grow more quickly.
"They are very cash-rich companies," Mr. Isgur said.
"Neither of them has to do anything."
Under the agreement, holders of Broderbund common stock will receive 1.6 common shares of Electronic Arts stock for each Broderbund share.
About 15.4 million common shares of Electronic Arts will be exchanged for Broderbund stock, representing about 25% of the combined company on a pro-forma basis.
Doug Carlston, Broderbund's chairman and chief executive, will join Electronic Arts' board, increasing it to eight members.
Mr. Carlston, who holds an 18% stake in Broderbund, has agreed to vote his shares in favor of the merger.
For its last fiscal year ended Aug. 31, Broderbund's profit rose 41% to $13.6 million, or $1.36 a share, from $9.7 million, or 99 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue was $95.6 million.
For the nine months ended Dec. 31, Electronic Arts earned $33.5 million, or 67 cents a share, on revenue of $311 million, compared with year-earlier net income of $22 million, or 48 cents a share, on revenue of $212 million.
News of the transaction came after markets closed.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday, Electronic Arts closed at $25.50 a share, down 75 cents, or 2.9%.
Also on Nasdaq, Broderbund closed at $41.25, up $3.75, or 10%.end.
