Compaq Computer Corp., citing surging demand and lowered trade barriers, is shifting some computer production to the U.S. from Singapore in a $20 million expansion.
The move, which will add seven manufacturing lines to the company's Houston plant, comes amid both a supply shortage in the red-hot personal computer market and a broader show of strength among U.S. manufacturers.
Compaq shares jumped 3.5% yesterday to a new 52-week high in New York Stock Exchange composite trading on more than triple usual volume.
Economists say U.S. labor costs, now at a 15-year low compared with international competitors, have combined with a lower dollar to produce a resurgence in the domestic manufacturing base.
"U.S.based producers are more competitive today than they've been since the 1960s," said Stephen Roach, chief economist at Morgan Stanley & Co., New York.
Mr. Roach and others cite recent decisions by Germany's Daimler-Benz AG and Bayerische Motoren Werke AG to build cars in the U.S. as signs of the manufacturing turnaround.
Even more important, they say, is the return of domestic manufacturing among technology companies such as Compaq, AST Research Inc. and Apple Computer Inc.
It was, after all, the overseas moves of high-growth, high-tech companies in the 1980s that cost thousands of U.S. jobs and prompted hand-wringing throughout the country about the ability of domestic companies to compete.
"A very good case can be made that U.S. competitive ability has improved," said Richard D. Rippe, chief economist at Prudential Securities.
For Compaq, the latest expansion effort marks the first time in more than two years that the Houston company has made portable computers in the U.S.
In late 1991, Compaq moved all notebook-computer production to Singapore after the U.S. government imposed stiff tariffs on flat-panel displays, all of which are made in Japan.
Last year, among what were then warmer relations between the U.S. and Japan, the tariff was lifted, easing the company's manufacturing move back to the U.S.
However, Compaq officials say their decision ultimately was made by sharp productivity improvements and cost reductions at the Houston plant.
Greg Petsch, the company's senior vice president of corporate operations, said Compaq has cut the size of its manufacturing support staff by 40% since 1991.
Those lower costs, along with sharply higher production volumes, have enabled the company to double its production per square foot in the past two years, he said.
The Compaq expansion, to be completed by June, will increase to 24 the number of desktop-PC and portable-PC manufacturing lines in Houston.
The company said its Singapore plant will continue at full capacity, though with a different mix of both desktop and notebook products.
Compaq, meanwhile, is proceeding with separate plans to broaden its manufacturing operations in Scotland, and last year it opened a plant in Shenzhen, China.
Investors, perceiving that Compaq's expansion plans mean the company will continue to see surging PC sales, sent Compaq's stock up $3.375 a share to close at $100.50 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Compaq said the expansion wouldn't result in charges against earnings, and it declined to say how many jobs would be created.
The company, along with all its peers in the PC business, has been scrambling in recent months to keep pace with record demand.
Mr. Petsch, the senior vice president, said the company remains backlogged on many products, even though Compaq's plants have been running at full capacity.
"This is something that's affecting everybody," said David Goldstein, president of Channel Marketing Corp., a Dallas consulting company that specializes in computer distribution.
"Demand has been outstripping supply all the way around."
