Rogers Communications Inc. said it plans to make an offer valued at 2.7 billion Canadian dollars (US$2.03 billion) for 83% of Maclean Hunter Ltd.
If the bid, which was unsolicited, is successful, it would create a media company that would control a third of Canadian cable television.
Ted Rogers, president and chief executive officer of the telecommunications and cable-television company, has purchased shares representing 8.3% of Maclean Hunter, which would in turn be sold to Rogers Communications as part of the planned bid.
Mr. Rogers said his company's board will meet tomorrow to determine the price and terms of the offer, adding that the offer will be mostly cash, with some Rogers Communications shares.
The company won't offer to purchase the 17% of Maclean Hunter stock controlled by the company's independent directors.
News of the announcement boosted shares of Maclean Hunter and other Canadian cable companies.
Mr. Rogers said Canada hasn't kept pace with the U.S. in creating large, powerful multimedia companies.
"If we are to maintain a distinctive Canadian voice," he said, "it is essential to build companies of comparable scale and sophistication."
In addition to its cable operations, Maclean Hunter also owns 62% of the Toronto Sun Publishing Co., and has interests in magazines and radio.
It also has 540,000 U.S. cable subscribers and publishing interests in the U.S.
Mr. Rogers said if the offer is successful, the new company would likely try to sell Maclean Hunter's U.S. cable interests, but keep the remaining assets intact.
Maclean Hunter didn't appear to welcome Rogers's advances, which it disclosed yesterday morning before its suitor had decided on terms for the bid or lined up all its financing.
Maclean Hunter said it was approached by Mr. Rogers and decided to disclose that information when it became apparent Rogers Communications intended to make a bid.
Ronald Osborne, president and chief executive of Maclean Hunter, said the company "will look at all our options" if Rogers proceeds with a bid.
He said the company wants to consider the best interests of its shareholders, employees and the consumers of its newspapers and other properties.
"We want to make sure all the properties are in safe and stable hands," he said.
Rogers Communications said it would arrange C$2 billion in debt financing to fund the offer.
The company already had C$2.7 billion in long-term debt as of June 30.
Rogers Communications is Canada's leading cable-television operator, with 1.8 million of the country's 7.2 million household subscribers.
Maclean Hunter, ranking fourth in the country, has about 700,000 subscribers.
Mr. Rogers, 60 years old, owns about 89% of the voting shares of Rogers Communications.
He's known for spotting trends early in the high-technology service sector; he formed Canada's first commercial FM radio station, and moved into cable television in the 1960s and cellular communications in the early 1980s.
Cable TV penetrated Canadian homes earlier and faster than in most other countries, partly because of Mr. Rogers's efforts.
Some analysts were puzzled by Rogers's interest in Maclean Hunter.
"I'm just mystified," said Steve Garmaise, a longtime Rogers Communications analyst with First Marathon Securities Ltd. in Toronto.
With its large cable network, and a stake in telecommunications concern Unitel Communications Inc., Rogers Communications is already well positioned to become "a major player" in the emerging technologies in the television and communications industries, Mr. Garmaise said.
"I don't see what more this adds."
Andrew McCreath, an analyst with Gordon Capital Corp. in Toronto, said Rogers Communications is mainly interested in Maclean Hunter so that it can beef up its Canadian cable holdings for the multimedia services that Rogers will eventually offer.
Maclean Hunter's shares jumped C$1.625 to C$15.375 (US$11.56) in active trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday.
Rogers Communications stock sank 87.5 Canadian cents to C$21.375. Stocks of other Canadian cable-television companies rose, including Montreal-based Videotron Ltd., up 75 Canadian cents to C$29, and Shaw Communications Inc. of Edmonton, Alberta, up C$1.25 to C$26.50. Analysts cautioned that bidding wars were unlikely for Videotron or Shaw because, like Rogers, they're each controlled by a dominant shareholder with a majority of voting stock.
Any takeover of Maclean Hunter would face a hurdle with Canadian regulators, since Rogers would become by far the dominant operator in the Canadian cable business.
ROGERS COMMUNICATIONS Inc. hasn't attached a value to its planned offer for most of Maclean Hunter Ltd.
An article Thursday said the company valued the offer at 2.7 billion Canadian dollars (US$2.03 billion); the figure represented the indicated value of such an offer using stock prices at that time.
(WSJ Feb. 7, 1994)
