On June 24, 1966, Mrs. Edith Smith of Apra Heights awoke at 4 a.m. to find a snake slithering across her neck.
This breach of privacy was dramatic enough to make the Guam Daily News.
Few people had ever seen a snake, much less slept with one.
Except for a grubby blind snake most people would confuse with a worm, this speck of American territory in the Mariana Islands some 3,000 miles west of Hawaii and 1,500 miles east of the Philippines was said to be snake-free.
A few years later, in the early 1980s, the yellowed news clipping fell into the hands of a frustrated ecologist combing the archives in Guam's ramshackle Micronesian Area Research Center.
Reading on, she found that the number of snake sightings had increased steadily over the years and in places further and further away from the harbor area where Edith had screeched into the night.
They were multiplying and moving on.
The young ecologist, Julie Savidge, had not come to Guam to study snakes.
The Guam Division of Aquatic and Wildlife resources had hired her to study the local bird population.
Every day when the sun rose over the steaming forest and Guam slowly stirred to life you could hear dogs barking, roosters crowing and some cars puttering along the few miles of paved road.
What you couldn't hear were any birds.
Not a peep.
To the utter mystification of biologists, virtually the entire indigenous avian population of Guam -- including groundhugging rails, tiny green-tinted white-eyes, and Micronesian kingfishers -- had been wiped out.
What parasite or predator could do such a thorough job on local birds that a cat could go hungry on Guam?
What about those snakes? you are saying.
But as Mark Jaffe relates in his weirdly absorbing "And No Birds Sing: The Story of an Ecological Disaster in a Tropical Paradise" (Simon & Schuster, 283 pages, $23), this was not an obvious connection.
No serpent had ever been implicated in bird murder on such epic scale, especially not Boiga irregularis, a nocturnal, slow-moving, mildly venomous brown tree snake, content, on the whole, with a meal a month.
Just a graduate student writing her dissertation, Ms. Savidge had to prevail over senior thinkers who thought the killers had to be a virus or some kind of chemical poisoning or perhaps the hulking monitor lizard, one of whom fought the shoe-wielding ecologist for a peanut butter sandwich.
Nailing B. irregularis took several years of sweaty work.
The snake's color made it hard to see even close-up and its preference for night made it hard to follow as it slithered high up in the jungle canopies, stalking sleeping birds and eating eggs.
Mr. Jaffe's description of how four snakes were sent forth (to untimely deaths) uncomfortably fitted with a radio transmitter and antenna is one of the highlights of the book.
By then the snakes were everywhere.
They brought on costly outages dangling from power lines trying to get at sparrow nests, ate puppies, fruit flies, and made energetic if unsuccessful attempts at swallowing human babies whole.
One stunned biologist estimated there could be around 30,000 snakes (up to 10 feet long) per square mile.
Their surprise appearances make interesting reading.
One serpent emerging from a toilet drain pipe bit a woman in the butt.
Another lunged at a driver through the air conditioning vents of her car.
A salesclerk noticed what was not a tie hanging from a clothes rack in a fashionable boutique in the Tumon Bay hotel district.
"The brown snake had wormed its way into the social and economic life of the island," comments Mr. Jaffe in a calm tone that suggests he hadn't been there shopping for shorts.
But how did the snakes get to Guam?
And where might they be going next?
A fondness for travel is just one of the traits described by Mr. Jaffe, an environmental reporter for the Philadelphia Inquirer who began reporting on Guam's bird-killers some 10 years ago.
The beast probably hitched a ride aboard a military transport flying in from the naval base on Manus in the Micronesian archipelago.
Perhaps they were escaping poor conditions; on Manus, the environment is harder for snakes, meaning skimpier meals (and thinner and fewer snakes).
With no predators on Guam, the snakes flourished in ways that would thrill Stephen King.
It can adjust the shape of its head to accommodate a really major morsel.
And it seems to have a startling capacity to hone in on the newly born -- little nippers, rat pups, baby birds, chicks.
Now how does it do that?
By looking?
An animal behaviorist finally arrived at the answer with some untidy experiments I won't detail involving fresh placentas and blood.
As much a cautionary tale as an eco-thriller, Mr. Jaffe's account leaves us with a vivid picture of how easily and quickly nature can go out of whack and quite beyond repair.
Already a few brown tree snakes have made it to Hawaii, riding in wheel wells and cargos.
It is worth worrying about.
Back in Guam, they're trying electric fences which fry the snakes on impact.
Say, what do they taste like?
