It was a low-key end to a six-year crusade.
Last November, in a drab conference room in the Texas comptroller's offices here, Hugh Tollack signed a few papers and received a check for $385,346.44.
No cameras, no reporters, no fanfare.
But don't be fooled: The meeting was a lot more important than it looked.
Mr. Tollack's reward -- for turning in his former employer for nonpayment of state franchise taxes -- was by far the biggest ever given under the state's Informant Recovery Program, which rewards tipsters who bring tax scofflaws to the attention of authorities.
It's a program shrouded in secrecy: Details about individual awards are kept confidential to protect the identity of informants and to guard the privacy of taxpayers.
But the 42-year-old Mr. Tollack isn't interested in secrecy.
He believes publicity is needed to encourage other whistleblowers to come forward.
And his willingness to talk sheds light on this little-known state program -- as well as on the patience and obsession that whistle-blowers often need to see their efforts pay off in the end.
"How do they expect to catch the other companies that might be doing the same thing, if they don't tell people about the reward?"
Mr. Tollack asks.
"They're obviously out to promote the lottery.
Why don't they do the same thing with this?
If my picture was in the paper with Texas Comptroller John Sharp giving me a check for $385,000, you can bet more people would know about the program."
Begun in 1988, the informant program has resulted in two dozen payments to people who have turned in their employers, competitors or suppliers.
Before Mr. Tollack's reward, the average payment was about $3,200.
The program has brought $10 million into state coffers.
Mr. Tollack's story as a whistle-blower began in 1988, when he was fired from his job as associate vice president-taxation at Allianz of America Inc., the U.S. subsidiary of the big German insurance company Allianz AG.
Mr. Tollack, who had worked at Allianz for three years, filed a wrongful-termination lawsuit against Allianz in state district court in Dallas, claiming he was fired because he refused to prepare a federal income tax report he says was fraudulent.
The lawsuit was dismissed in 1991, and Mr. Tollack's appeal is pending.
A spokesman for Allianz, which moved its U.S. headquarters from Dallas to Novato, Calif., after acquiring Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. in 1991, says that Mr. Tollack was fired for "nonperformance" and that his charges lack merit.
The spokesman confirms that the company settled state and federal taxes, but refuses to give details and denies any wrongdoing.
"Settlement was reached in each case without assessment of penalties, indicating an absence of impropriety," says the spokesman, John Kozero.
Like many informants, Mr. Tollack made his first call to the comptroller's office more out of anger than any desire for a reward.
"I wanted to see them brought to justice," he says.
"If there hadn't been a reward, I would have cooperated anyway."
His allegation: He had discovered, in the course of his lawsuit, that Allianz had never obtained a certificate of authority to do business in the state, and had never paid franchise taxes.
Mr. Tollack says that at the time -- September 1990 -- he had given up looking for a job; a year-long search, he says, had resulted in only one interview.
He was convinced that Allianz was blacklisting him -- and he was determined to get even.
"I had nothing to lose at that point," he says.
After calling the agency, Mr. Tollack was told that no information about the informants' program could be given over the phone.
He would have to come to Austin with documents backing up his claim, and to sign a contract.
Among other things, the contract says that no reward has to be given if the information provided is already known, or if it is discovered within three months by a state employee working independently.
The informant also gives the comptroller "complete discretion . . . to determine whether a payment should be made, when, and in what amount."
Most tipsters rarely get this far.
Comptroller officials say they get about a call a week, but most people don't want to go through the hassle of signing a contract.
Some can't deliver independent proof of their claims, and others think the reward -- of up to 5% of the tax collected -- is too low.
Still others are afraid the agency won't be able to keep their names secret.
In fact, the comptroller's office goes to great lengths to protect the identities of informants.
Contracts are signed in Austin, rather than in local audit offices, so that few people know the identity of the informant.
Reward checks are drawn on an anonymous account.
And auditors typically aren't told who provided the tip.
"The less they know about who the informant is, the less likely that a slip could be made and confidentiality could be breached," says Harold Lee, manager of the audit division, who attended the first meeting with Mr. Tollack, along with Mary Hawkins, a senior auditor in charge of the program, and Ledford Kelly, a supervisor in the audit division.
The first meeting took about an hour.
Mr. Tollack brought documents from his lawsuit against Allianz, which he said showed the company had been doing business in Texas.
A few months later, in February 1991, Mr. Tollack says, the investigator assigned to the case called to tell him the audit had begun, and asked for guidance finding additional proof of Allianz's business dealings in Texas.
He met with the investigator (and her replacement) several times.
But there was little Mr. Tollack could provide.
He turned over most of the public filings in his lawsuit, but was barred by a protective order from giving documents obtained during discovery.
Later, digging through boxes of files he stored in his garage after he left Allianz, he found the draft of a promissory note, apparently misfiled, that gave the company's Dallas address.
His contact with the investigators over the next 22 months was sporadic -- he met occasionally to answer more questions in detail, and to suggest documents investigators might want to go after.
But in private, he was a man obsessed.
Although he was trying to pursue some real-estate ventures, much of his time was spent pursuing Allianz -- digging for documents, writing letters to Congress proposing a tougher federal-reward program, and putting together slick-looking fact sheets on how foreign companies allegedly evade millions in federal income taxes.
Money got tighter.
He used up all his savings and retirement funds.
His wife -- a gospel singer who used to perform on the Lawrence Welk show -- earned some money, but less and less after their first daughter was born shortly before he was fired.
(A second daughter was born in late 1992.)
They began putting their mortgage payments on credit cards.
The audit lasted almost two years, ending in December 1992.
"Some people have the impression that when we start an audit, it's over in a couple of weeks," Ms. Hawkins says.
But it can take several months, or longer.
Sometimes the review is halted so auditors can get an opinion about an unusual tax issue.
Then there's the appeals process, which can take a couple of months or more than a year.
Mr. Tollack tried to be patient.
"Of course, they had other things they were working on," he says.
"But from my perspective, it was the only audit I was working on.
It seemed agonizingly slow."
The worst was the last six months, after Allianz had settled and paid, when the reward is withheld to make sure that the taxpayer doesn't intend to appeal.
"The state had my money, and I was having to pay 20% to Citibank so I could pay my mortgage," Mr. Tollack says.
Finally, the Monday after Thanksgiving, Mr. Tollack drove to Austin.
He was ushered into a small conference room.
Messrs. Lee and Kelly asked him to sign a notarized statement saying that the payment settled all his claims.
And then they handed him the check.
Now that his claim is settled, Mr. Tollack still isn't ready to let go.
He was disappointed by the size of the check; the comptroller only collected taxes for 1985 to 1991, according to a letter from Mr. Lee.
He has written Travis County District Attorney Ronnie Earle asking for a criminal investigation into Allianz's state tax matters.
He also continues to write lawmakers about the federal whistle-blower program, and he wants the Texas Legislature to strip the cloak of confidentiality from companies found doing business here without authority from the state.
Mr. Tollack is still trying to put together real-estate deals, and he has thought about working for a large company.
But his experiences have soured him; he prefers, he says, to work on his own "rather than save money for some big corporate taxpayer."
If he does decide to head back to corporate life, however, he doesn't think his reputation as a whistle-blower will hurt him -- at least at places where he would want to work, anyway.
"There are always going to be people out there who are going to want to keep their distance from someone who might turn them in," he says.
"That's the price I'm willing to pay."
