In the global arms business, conventional wisdom is being stood on its head.
For decades, the U.S. had been reluctant to spread its best armaments over the globe.
But since the end of the Cold War, even as Washington urges others to show restraint in the name of global security, the U.S. has become the world's pushiest arms merchant.
From Southeast Asia to Switzerland and across the Mideast, Americans have unleashed a barrage of weapons exports, largely to prop up the declining domestic defense industry and keep aerospace industry employment from slipping even more rapidly.
Take the case of Malaysia, which just completed a deal for eight sophisticated jet fighters made by McDonnell Douglas Corp.: In December 1992, while returning to Kuala Lumpur after a tour of the aircraft carrier USS Kitty Hawk, Defense Minister Datuk Mohamed Najib Abdul Razak told U.S. Ambassador John Wolf that the Southeast Asian nation would order $660 million of Russian MiG-29R fighters.
Malaysia would have bought American, he explained, but "you probably wouldn't be prepared to release your high-tech aircraft."
Alerted by the ambassador, top U.S. government and corporate officials sprang into action.
And in a matter of months they persuaded Malaysia to augment the Russian purchase with the F/A-18 attack jets.
The Malaysian deal is just one in a surge of Third World purchases of U.S. arms, according to figures from Congressional Research Service.
American sales accounted for 57% of the $23.9 billion of weapons that developing nations ordered in 1992.
In 1987 -- when total Third World arms purchases were twice what they are today -- the U.S. share was less than 13%.
And the Clinton administration is solidly behind U.S. companies in their sales efforts, even as it harbors vague hopes about ending arms proliferation, a stance that was reiterated at the recent U.S.-Russian summit in Moscow.
The total of weapons sales arranged through Washington last year topped $34 billion, an unprecedented level.
Such booming sales hark back to the days of overall U.S. export leadership, before the Japanese and lower-cost Third World producers helped create this nation's huge trade deficits in such areas as autos and electronics.
But the drift of U.S. arms-export policy, as domestic economic concerns take precedence over geopolitical goals, is raising questions about the risks of proliferation.
While keeping U.S. industry strong aids the nation's security, providing top-tier weapons to contentious neighbors in the world's hot spots could be tantamount to striking matches in a tinderbox.
Further, the U.S. sales push is stirring competitive vigor within Russia and Europe, increasing chances of regional destabilization.
Overall, global demand for arms has shrunk as many buyer nations come to grips with their own economic ills, or feel less anxious because of relaxed East-West tensions.
But those countries that are building arsenals, such as Thailand and Taiwan, often find sellers willing to undercut each other, offering friendly terms on everything from side arms to guided missiles -- nuclear warheads excluded.
Even some U.S. defense-company executives worry that global-security considerations are getting short shrift because arms-exporting countries are so pressed to protect jobs and their industrial base.
"I think the world as a whole is perilously close to that line," says Norman Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corp., a leading arms exporter.
Some in the U.S. also believe that the sales spree isn't helpful for the long-term health of the aerospace industry.
Exporting arms "is not a growing market, and there's substantially growing competition," says Deputy Defense Secretary William Perry, who has been tapped by President Clinton for the top Pentagon post.
"I'd say this is a faint hope for the companies."
One disconcerting feature of the export frenzy is that it hasn't halted the slide in defense-related employment in the U.S., which the industry estimates at a rate of 20,000 jobs a month.
Such jobs have fallen 20% since 1987 -- including an 11% drop in the past year alone -- and now total about 2.7 million.
One reason for the drop may be that arms exports have been accompanied by a sharp rise in the level of "offset" concessions, which allow buyers to do more of the manufacturing work in their own countries and help them set up their own civilian industries.
By transferring arms-related technology out of the U.S., such concessions compound the drain on American industry.
The Malaysians, for example, have successfully pressed the U.S. and McDonnell Douglas to reduce the price of the F/A-18, and are seeking advanced composite-parts technology, work on commercial airplanes and establishment of a pilot-training and maintenance center.
Kuala Lumpur already has won from Moscow generous promises of technology transfer and permission to make as much as half the payments in palm oil.
U.S. arms makers argue that, even if some jobs are lost, American security is served by defense contractors staying competitive in the world market.
The dogfight over Malaysia, with its thorny complexities, in some ways seems a crucial one for U.S. arms merchants.
Fighter jets, which are typically outfitted with missiles, radar and other systems, are the weapon of choice in the 1990s.
And the U.S.-Russia contest over the jets is their first since the splintering of the Soviet Union.
The rivalry over the Malaysian sale also shows the pressure Russia can exert as it tries to revive its crumbling export machinery and catch up to America's flourishing trade.
The 11th-hour U.S. bid for the Malaysian business has been viewed by some Russians as unwelcome interference in a nearly completed transaction.
The Russians now pledge to redouble their export push, in part by trying to improve the shabby after-sale service that has long scared off customers.
If the U.S. is determined to interfere, says Ivan Materov, first deputy minister of foreign economic relations, Russia will continue to slash its prices and "our rival will have a problem."
Russia already discounts arms as much as 40% below the cost of similar Western weapons.
U.S. companies point to that discounting and to new Russian joint ventures with European companies to justify more federal help with exports.
For all the bluster on both sides, however, the Russian campaign has a long way to go.
Russia won a huge 1992 armored-vehicle order from the United Arab Emirates.
But that has been its only foothold in the U.S.-dominated Middle East market except for such traditional customers as Iran, which recently bought several Kilo-class submarines.
India and China remain Moscow's most important clients, buying its fighters, missiles, tanks and naval systems.
Like other sellers, the former Soviets figure their best new prospects are in Asia, where a Chinese military buildup has stimulated regional cravings for advanced arms.
The Russians hope Malaysia's purchase of the MiGs will help open another 10 Asian markets for the jets, says one Third World attache in Moscow, who reports getting "10 calls a day" from Russians offering everything from rifles to tactical aircraft.
The Malaysian purchase, too, has fueled demand.
When word reached President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines -- a usually tightfisted nation -- he publicly vowed to speed the upgrading of his own air force.
Similar pronouncements have come from Thailand, a traditional Chinese buyer that U.S. officials say is eyeing new Russian and U.S. helicopters, as well as MiGs and AV8-B vertical-takeoff fighters built by McDonnell Douglas and British Aerospace PLC.
Singapore is close to ordering either Lockheed Corp.
F-16s or F/A-18s, and Indonesia has begun prowling for U.S.-made surveillance planes.
Herbert J. Lanese, chief financial officer for McDonnell Douglas, says the Malaysia sale "opens up a number of opportunities for us in Southeast Asia."
The Russian pursuit of new markets betrays one shortcoming in U.S. policy: While Washington has amassed billions of dollars to help rebuild Russia's economy, it has failed to win a Russian commitment to stem arms exports in return.
Even if such an agreement were reached, it isn't clear that President Boris Yeltsin could deliver.
Russia's government "doesn't even know what the real stocks and reserves are," says Vitaly Shlikov, an adviser to Russia's Defense Ministry.
He adds that there is no unified oversight of exports or of compliance with conventional-arms accords, and tanks and other weapons are made in Ukraine, whose president has agreed to surrender the former Soviet republic's nuclear arsenal.
Clearly, there is still plenty of demand for advanced arms around the world.
Many nations feel that they must counter the buildup of conventional or nuclear forces by regional troublemakers like North Korea, Iran and Iraq, or that they simply need to replace aging weapons.
One nation of special concern is China, which has absorbed not only Russian Su-27 Flanker fighters, but advanced technology as well.
China's recent recruitment of as many as 1,000 Russian scientists and engineers could help boost its exporting power.
And last week, Beijing said it planned to design and produce advanced jet fighters by the year 2000.
"Once they know how to build the jets, they can make as many as they need," says Ian Anthony, a leading researcher at the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, which tracks arms transactions.
In the U.S., a major advantage of exporting arms is that such sales lead to increased production and thus hold down the per-item cost to the U.S. military.
And Brian Rowe, chairman of a General Electric Co. unit that builds engines for the F/A-18 and other warplanes, echoes another favored exporter argument: "If we don't sell these arms, someone else will."
The danger is that seeds sown now by U.S. exports -- including newly loosened exports of missile-launching technology -- could germinate into arms-control land mines.
The new killing power brandished by more nations hardly ensures that they will become more sophisticated in resolving regional disputes peacefully.
"It's a very volatile world," says Bernard Schwartz, chairman of Loral Corp., the defense-electronics company.
"I don't think the lessons of Yugoslavia are lost on many countries," he adds.
But many experts outside the industry believe that with the Cold War consigned to history, the U.S. needs a new policy of arms-export restraint to guide it.
The conservative Hudson Institute's William Schneider Jr., President Reagan's undersecretary of state for security assistance, science and technology, warns that today's precision-guided conventional arms "can do the kind of damage attributed to weapons of mass destruction," such as atomic bombs and chemical weapons.
With the right acquisitions, "countries with very small forces can be very effective."
Natalie Goldring, deputy director of the British American Security Information Council, an independent research group based in Washington, worries that the U.S. is "selling weapons as sophisticated as anything in the U.S. arsenal."
Sales shouldn't be conducted today "as if we know . . . which countries will be stable in 2003 or 2013," Ms. Goldring says.
If U.S. policy were dedicated to encouraging arms customers to avert conflicts, "people would be less concerned," says Dr. Anthony of the Stockholm institute.
"But unless there's a reason to prevent the sale, you just go ahead because you want the commercial advances -- you want the money."
The promise of keeping U.S. workers employed, as much as revenue, was at the heart of the biggest weapons-exports deals of late.
President Bush, in his campaign against then-Gov.
Clinton, unveiled two pre-election deals directly to defense workers.
He first told a cheering St. Louis crowd that McDonnell Douglas would be allowed to sell $9 billion of advanced F-15 fighters to Saudi Arabia.
(The Saudis, their spending power impaired by lower oil prices, currently are discussing the restructuring of that transaction.)
Then, he announced to a jubilant throng at a Fort Worth, Texas, F-16 fighter plant then owned by General Dynamics that he would overturn an 11-year-old U.S. ban on sales of advanced fighters to Taiwan and sell it 150 of those jets for $6 billion.
Lockheed subsequently bought the plant and the F-16 line in December 1992 from General Dynamics Corp.
The deal also illustrates Taiwan's influence in the world of arms purchases.
When some U.S. opposition was expressed about work and technology being shifted to Taiwan, Taipei lawmakers challenged the contract terms, briefly blocked payments and threatened to have the military offer a bigger order to Dassault Aviation SA of France, maker of the Mirage 2000-5 fighter.
The deal was completed.
A year later, the Taiwanese had won an agreement for $1.1 billion in contracts to make parts for and maintain the F-16s.
The Taiwanese also have been told they can buy Harpoon antiship missiles.
China was politically alienated by the huge Taiwan F-16 deal, which far surpassed the volume of Russian jets bought by the Chinese so far.
Beijing boycotted the arms-control talks initiated by Mr. Bush among five world powers -- Russia, Britain and France are the others -- to restrain sellers after the Persian Gulf War.
Since dropping out, China has expanded sales of long-range missiles to Iran and stepped up exports of sensitive technologies to North Korea and Pakistan, U.S. officials say.
Even at Sam's Bulldog bar in Fort Worth, a favorite of Lockheed workers, the shine has faded from the Taiwan sale.
Owner Edris "Sam" Cogburn remembers how joyous workers flocked to hear Mr. Bush announce the deal.
Now, she says, some are "feeling down" about continuing layoffs and the cancellation of 200 orders for F-16s by the U.S. and by Pakistan.
In Washington, regrets over the Taiwan F-16 contract have led some Pentagon officials to contemplate reneging, which would gain China's approval and perhaps secure its help in persuading North Korea to halt its nuclear program.
Such a flip-flop would doubtless horrify both Texas and Taiwan, and open the U.S. to criticism for a hastily planned sale in the first place.
The U.S. approach to arms exports has been awash in contradictions ever since the nation showed off its weapons-making prowess in the Gulf War, creating a huge swell in demand for U.S. systems, such as Patriot-missile defenses and M-1A1 tanks.
While contradictions over proliferation policy emerged during the Bush years, the Clinton administration has been slow even to assess its choices in devising an arms-control agenda.
A major Pentagon review of exports and acquisitions is in its early stages, and Lynn E. Davis, undersecretary of state for international security affairs, declines to be interviewed about conventional-arms transfers.
A spokeswoman says a policy "is not yet finalized."
Andrew J. Pierre of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a privately funded think tank, says he can see the problem facing Bill Clinton: "On one side of the brain he's got nonproliferation; on the other, it's American economic competitiveness and support for industry."
The administration switched positions before helping to kill industry-backed legislation to provide $25 million that could have paid for guarantees to leverage $1 billion of weapons-export loans.
In another case, the administration misjudged congressional sentiment and backed down from its proposed ban on the use of $4 billion in annual foreign military aid for certain exports the industry can arrange without federal intercession to 10 countries, including Portugal, Israel, Egypt, Turkey, Greece and Jordan.
Typically, the Pentagon and the State Department must approve sales of military gear.
Even as the Pentagon's Mr. Perry was decrying over-dependence on exports, Commerce Secretary Ron Brown was at the Paris Air Show, touting U.S. products to Malaysia, Indonesia and Saudi Arabia.
The Pentagon recently reversed a stand against sending weapons and personnel to such exhibitions, and has authorized a large U.S. presence at the Singapore show next month.
And Secretary of State Warren Christopher has won corporate praise for affirming support for U.S. exports.
Once, "the U.S. ambassador would only go in with all his forces and lobby for a U.S. defense company when a $10 million contract was at stake," says Moshe Horowitz, vice president of Israel's Tadiran Ltd., a telecommunications and electronics maker.
"Now they go full force on every bid.
Even for half a million . . . ."
It isn't just local ambassadors who come out swinging for a sale.
When Litton Industries Inc. was competing last year with GEC Marconi, a unit of General Electric Co. of Britain, to sell to Greece an advanced electronic-warfare system for new F-16s, Messrs. Brown and Christopher wrote to Athens plugging the U.S. product.
Litton landed the $122 million deal.
Such support elates the industry, of course.
"Suddenly, we have a government that will actually help you in a transaction," says David Danjczek, international vice president for Litton.
In many boardrooms, it isn't unusual to find plans for doubling exports over the next five years.
Exports are "an important cushion and target" as domestic spending erodes, says Edmund Woollen, a vice president at Raytheon Co., purveyor of the Patriot and aircraft-fired missiles.
The support complements efforts by the contractors themselves, often in the area of customer financing.
When Litton competed for a ship-refurbishment contract in Venezuela in 1992, the company had to include in its bid a long-term financing proposal.
Litton suggested that Venezuela pay for the $200 million in work by floating commercial Eurobonds, according to people familiar with the deal.
Litton was selected.
The current export boom may provide at least a short-term safety net for U.S. companies by beefing up profits and stock prices as they deal with the precipitous drop in Washington's defense spending.
But some in Congress are raising questions about the longer-term economic damage that could be wrought as concession-laden arms deals shift enormous volumes of work and know-how overseas.
The General Accounting Office, for instance, has found that U.S. defense companies are "commonly offering" cash to U.S. buyers of nondefense foreign goods as a way to give products an edge overseas.
Democratic Sen. Russell D. Feingold of Wisconsin won Senate approval this week for his proposal for mandatory reporting to Congress on any arms exports, including what he calls "kickbacks" that unfairly divert business away from U.S.-based producers.
Typically, weapons contracts call for offsets or countertrade worth 60% to 100% of the value of the weapons purchased -- at least twice the amount of a few years ago.
Because offsets aren't monitored, related job losses in the U.S. can't be tallied.
They more often affect small suppliers, though, whose work is easier to duplicate.
"The little guy is going to get hurt," concedes GE's Mr. Rowe.
For a decade, unregulated concessions have permitted buyers to make more parts and do more assembly work.
Today, some countries can make their own versions of weapons bought from the U.S. years ago -- and they are now eager to export, too.
At a Tusas Aerospace Industry Inc. plant near Ankara, Turkey, where General Dynamics and the U.S. government helped set up F-16 coproduction in the 1980s, workers are assembling 40 of the jets for export to Egypt.
In Egypt, officials would like to sell tanks produced at its M-1A1 Abrams tank plant.
But because costs are too high for it to successfully export the tanks, Cairo is seeking U.S. aid to convert the plant to make trucks or buses.
The GAO has found 10 cases in which the Japanese had learned to make brakes, landing gear, instruments and other parts for the F-15s they assemble.
Then, they arranged to supply the equipment to U.S. makers of airliners -- in one case for the new Boeing Co. 777 aircraft.
In Saudi Arabia, where U.S. companies have won orders for $30.8 billion in weapons over the past three years, General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Aircraft Co. is near an agreement to build a plant producing 500,000 car batteries annually, say people familiar with the arrangements.
The plant would be an "indirect" offset to Hughes's $950 million sale of a Peace Shield air-defense system.
Westinghouse Electric Corp., a major producer of radar and military air-traffic-control systems, has provided the Saudis with technology to set up an advanced-electronics company.
U.S. companies note that European arms makers aggressively offer similar terms.
They also contend that offsets ultimately clear the way for U.S. defense and nondefense businesses to expand overseas with low-cost factories and research, while protecting jobs in the U.S.
"I understand it's an emotional issue," says J.T. Tymann, international sales chief at Westinghouse Electronics.
But the U.S. can't be "some sort of island of exports and say people ought to buy our products," he says.
"We have to get into international alliances and cooperation."
Still, when such offset arrangements help other countries sell their own nondefense goods in the U.S., they have drawn fire from congressional investigators and lawmakers.
John Richards, a senior Commerce Department official, says the government shouldn't inhibit foreign sales, but "when you give away 100% offsets, you're not getting the full benefit" at home.
Yet efforts to rein in offsets have flopped, and a 1992 law requiring companies to report offsets in excess of $5 million has yet to be enforced.
Even while exports increase, U.S. industry efforts to license Third World clients to use American military technology have exploded.
One senior federal official estimates that more than 7,000 such export-license applications were expected to be filed last year with the State Department, which received almost no such applications before 1990.
"It has gone crazy over the last three years," says the official, noting that U.S. companies usually place the technology where it can be developed inexpensively so they can profit from global resale.
Buried among the applications last year was one from Loral seeking to export to Israel the laser target-designator used on F/A-18s.
U.S. government and industry officials say the license was approved despite objections from some Pentagon reviewers, and the technology will be commingled with Israeli-researched devices for resale to third parties.
Pentagon regulators winced again at a Martin Marietta application, since approved, to send to Israel's BVR Technologies Ltd. the advanced electronic "ranges" used to train and test pilots during maneuvers.
Martin Marietta says the U.S. knowledge is old and exporting it won't compromise security or jobs.
Rather, the new Israeli capability will enhance sales for a BVR/Martin Marietta joint venture, Martin Marietta says.
Some critics in the Pentagon argue that, at a minimum, Israel will emerge as a new rival in a crowded market.
Israeli catalogs are loaded with weapons derived from U.S. systems, they say, and Israel has sold its borrowed skills to nations out of U.S. favor.
Recently, the director of central intelligence, James Woolsey, advised a Senate committee of "several billion dollars" in Israeli technology sales to China over a decade.
Uneasiness over Israeli dealings has intensified with its decision yesterday to buy $2 billion of McDonnell Douglas F-15s in the first big export sale expected to be approved under President Clinton.
In a heated contest against Lockheed and its F-16 fighter, both companies stressed a willingness to place expanded aerospace subcontracts in Israel.
Coming on the heels of the Mideast peace talks, the sale is controversial because Israel will buy the planes with $1.8 billion in annual U.S. grants.
Israel's estimated $21 billion in planned procurements through 1998 transfix American sellers.
But Israel also has been a successful exporter.
It has provided upgraded equipment for the Chilean air force, for some Romanian jets, for India's MiG-21s and for Czechoslovak trainer jets sold to Thailand in 1992.
Israelis also have sold missile-warning systems to the Dutch and Germans.
A recent U.S. industry study says the Israelis are in "aggressive pursuit" of global electronics and sensor work, and a "best bet" for suppliers seeking Israeli contracts is to team up with companies there.
The Mideast is widely perceived as the potential Waterloo in any U.S. effort to restrain proliferation.
As the Gulf War ended in 1991, Congress and Mr. Bush set out to curb U.S. arms sales there.
But since then, the U.S. has been on a $43.9 billion selling spree, according to the Arms Control Association, a watchdog group in Washington.
While many big deals have been done, U.S. exporters are still drawn by regional plans to buy as much as $20 billion in arms annually.
Moshe Arens, the former Israeli defense minister, says he proposed after the war that the U.S. cease arms sales in the region.
"There were no takers," he recalls.
"Commercial considerations are more important than the growing destabilization."
As for the future, he says, "I'm not optimistic at all unless the U.S. bites the bullet and gets other countries to go along.
The Europeans are the most promiscuous.
They'll sell to almost anyone."
Elusive solutions to the proliferation puzzle may lie in cooperation between supplier nations.
But first the U.S. must repair its damaged trade relations with its French, British and German allies, who are also America's most formidable competitors in the arms market.
Officials in Europe, as in China and Russia, so far have found that the U.S. only talks a big game when it comes to restraining exports.
France's Parliament has vowed to boost annual weapons exports sharply, and Paris now aims to establish an agency to conduct government-to-government sales, as the U.S. does.
European arms makers also are hedging their bets with a spate of joint ventures, and are teaming up with Russia to boost the reliability of their jets and make the planes more salable.
France's Thomson SA and Snecma, as well as Britain's Rolls-Royce PLC and GEC Marconi, have agreed to provide avionics and do engine work for Russian fighters and trainers.
"We will go where the market is," says Gerard Renon, Snecma's chairman and a former secretary of state for defense.
"In the defense field, we cannot cooperate with the Americans."
Mr. Renon, whose company has a commercial-engine partnership with GE, says past arms-cooperation failures show "the U.S. doesn't favor the existence of a European defense industry."
Sensing Europe's anxiety, the Pentagon undersecretary for acquisition, John Deutch, has acknowledged that some North Atlantic Treaty Organization members don't believe the U.S. gives "armaments cooperation sufficient priority."
He proposed the possibility of cooperative missile-defense-technology research and efforts at defense conversion.
There are a few other signs that America may be moving toward a real nonproliferation policy.
The U.S. has offered to let Moscow help fashion a new joint space station in exchange for improved Russian arms control.
And the Pentagon is pressing a review of foreign military assistance as anxiety grows on Capitol Hill.
U.S. defense contractors deserve support, says Sen. Jeff Bingaman of the Armed Services Committee.
"But in certain areas we have conflicting goals, and one of those areas is arms proliferation," the New Mexico Democrat says.
In the quest for solutions, Rand Corp., the California think tank, suggests banning sales of the most potent conventional weapons.
In a Pentagon-funded study, Rand singles out submarines, advanced surveillance and target-acquisition systems, top-of-the-line mines and self-guided missiles.
Suppliers and workers wouldn't be hurt by such a prohibition, says Rand, noting that the weapons represent only about 10% of Mideast sales.
"I can't think of a single good reason to sell this stuff," says Kenneth Watman, co-author of the Rand report.
Amy Dockser Marcus in Tel Aviv, Adi Ignatius and Marya Fogel in Moscow, Jeremy Mark in Taiwan, Stephen Duthie in Malaysia, Marcus W. Brauchli in Hong Kong, Brian Coleman in Brussels, Steve Glain in South Korea and John J. Fialka in Washington contributed to this article.
The home of nine of the world's 10 largest arms-making companies has found demand soaring for its jets, helicopters and missiles since the Persian Gulf War.
Air Force equipment, including Lockheed's F-16 and global sales leader McDonnell Douglas's F/A-18 and F-15, accounted for about two-thirds of the more than $34 billion in America's government-to-government agreements last year.
McDonnell Douglas's Apache and United Technologies' Sikorsky-Blackhawk anchor the 80% U.S. share of helicopter sales.
Nearly 8,600 surface-to-air missiles, especially Raytheon's Patriot, overwhelm sales of other world suppliers.
Boeing, Lockheed and Grumman provide planes for surveillance, submarine hunting and other uses.
While most sales have flowed to traditional European allies and Japan (the leading buyer, with $9 billion of U.S. arms received in five years), demand since 1990 has surged in Mideast markets such as Israel, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Kuwait.
New links have formed with second-tier European buyers like Finland and with such developing nations as Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines and the United Arab Emirates.
But competition has increased for sales to South Korea, Taiwan and elsewhere.
Budget pressures facing buyers jeopardize some deals.
Or the U.S. could suspend deliveries for political reasons, as it did with helicopters and radars for China and with F-16s for Pakistan.
Its arms exports appear to constitute less than 10% of global deliveries, but tracking sales is difficult.
Neighbors are alarmed by its increasing might; China has territorial disputes with Russia, India, Japan and others.
And accumulations of advanced French and Russian technology give it greater export potential.
While a need for cash is cited as driving their deals, the Chinese often include barter agreements in arms-sales contracts.
China ranks fifth among exporter nations, with $7.6 billion in shipments over five years.
And Iran and other nations with terrorist ties are heavy buyers.
Concern focuses on China's transfer of ballistic missiles to Iran, Syria and Pakistan, though China won't acknowledge most sales.
Iranian purchases include F-7 Airguard fighters, surface-to-air missiles and attack boats.
China reportedly told Israeli officials last May that Beijing would halt missile sales to Syria.
In return, it wants Israel to help it with aerial-refueling technology for Chinese bombers.
Pakistan, China's hottest customer, took $1.93 billion in deliveries between 1988 and 1992, and has ordered more tanks and other armored vehicles as well as F-7s.
India ordered antitank missiles last year.
Heavy sales to Bangladesh include A-5 and F-7 fighters, naval vessels, missiles and launchers.
China has found Thailand and Burma to be big arms customers -- and may be angling for a strategic alliance with Rangoon.
U.K. producers, already pummeled by a 26% drop in defense jobs over three years, face a future of steady shrinkage.
But led by British Aerospace, the world's No. 3 arms maker, British companies expect to sell more than $9 billion of weapons overseas this year.
While the government limits more-generous offset terms, it strongly backs joint ventures with other countries.
Shipments to Saudi Arabia, including Tornado fighters, will expand.
Tanks, attack boats and surface-to-air missiles have been bought by Oman, the UAE, Bahrain and Qatar.
In Southeast Asia, Britain sells to Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines.
In France, government increases in defense spending -- extraordinary amid cuts elsewhere -- should restrain domestic costs for weapons.
A $2.6 billion sale of Dassault Mirage 2000-5 fighters to Taiwan in 1992 was France's first big export deal in years.
Giat Industries SA is selling 436 LeClerc tanks and armored vehicles to the UAE, also a potential Mirage buyer, and the Saudis are buying three frigates for $4 billion.
Other buyers of French arms include China, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Pakistan, Kuwait, Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
Shoulder-fired Mistral missiles are popular, and France exported 990 surface-to-air missiles in 1992, second only to the U.S.
Among the three largest arms-producing nations in Western Europe, Germany had the largest 1992 dollar-volume of deliveries.
But Daimler-Benz AG's Deutsche Aerospace unit has announced plant closings, and political support for the Eurofighter and other programs with heavy German participation is softening.
Greece and Turkey together absorbed $2.8 billion of German deliveries in the five years through 1992.
Now, increased competition leads Germany to seek new markets.
Indonesia is buying 39 ships from the former East German Navy.
A unit of Mannesmann AG recently turned back U.S. and French rivals to win an order from Sweden for 120 tanks, and Thyssen AG's shipbuilding unit aims for Australian and Saudi sales.
Customers of submarine makers such as Howaldtswerke Deutsche Werft AG include Israel and South Korea.
RUSSIA & FORMER U.S.S.R. STATES
The Soviet Union's collapse shattered the foreign-sales machine that led world markets six years ago.
But the need for hard currency has reignited Russian efforts to export arms and technology -- with a goal of increasing them by at least $5 billion annually.
One tally says just 11% of 1992 world deliveries were attributable to Russia and other former Soviet states, though administrative disarray produces gaps in official estimates.
U.S. intelligence services say such weapons exports nose-dived to $2.5 billion in 1992 from $6 billion in 1991.
Russia complains that complying with international arms embargoes against Libya and others have cost it $7.5 billion in sales.
Losing Syrian and Iraqi business is also painful, Moscow says.
Weapons sales are weaker to Afghanistan, North Korea, Bulgaria, Angola and the former Czechoslovakia, among others.
East Germany is gone.
Together, Russia sold $18.7 billion of arms to those countries between 1988 and 1992.
The Chinese expect to order 400 Russian tanks and two Kilo-class submarines, along with T-22M Backfire bombers and Grumble surface-to-air missiles.
Beijing also wants to build 200 MiG-31 fighters.
India is shopping for upgraded MiGs, and bought Russian rocket fuel this year.
Russia also sold subs and cruise missiles to Iran.
The UAE bought 500 missile-equipped BMP-3 armored vehicles, and now will choose between Russian and Western fighters and helicopters.
Russia is selling Malaysia 18 MiG-29Rs, hoping the sale will be an opening to Kuala Lumpur's Asian neighbors.
Despite peace talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, the region's 22% share of international arms deliveries will grow.
Demand is intensified by religious zealotry and the fear of being outgunned.
Tel Aviv arms expert Zeev Eytan calls the phenomenon "the Middle East version of keeping up with the Joneses."
Spending by Egypt and Saudi Arabia has slowed, but those countries, along with the UAE, Kuwait and Israel, are planning total procurements of around $80 billion during the next five years -- with the U.S. remaining the region's dominant supplier.
A popular new purchase: Apache helicopters, veterans of the Gulf War.
Israel seeks new U.S. fighters and refurbishing packages, which will help its own sales to countries such as India and Chile.
Europeans are getting orders from the Saudis and Kuwaitis, and from perimeter nations like Oman, Qatar and Bahrain; Britain has sold Saudi Arabia $7 billion of Tornado and Hawk planes and armored vehicles.
Turkey dabbles in Russian weapons and assembles its own U.S.-designed F-16s, armored vehicles, Sikorsky helicopters and rocket systems.
Iran is spending $4 billion annually on Chinese F-7s, Scud missiles and attack boats, plus Russian MiG-29s and Su-24s, submarines, surface-to-air missiles and tanks.
It is close to buying Russian Mainstay airborne warning planes, which carry $2 billion price tags.
Iran's ship-to-ship missiles have come from France; its maintenance ships from Japan.
Iran, Iraq and Syria are barred from Western purchases, but have bought certain technology that can have military applications.
The tension-filled nations from the subcontinent to the Coral Sea create a thriving fighter-jet and warship market.
Many fear the Chinese military expansion, with added concerns arising from a U.S. base closing in the Philippines, and territorial disputes.
Bangladesh is piling up Chinese arms, though this pales next to the Russian and Chinese stocks amassed by two members of the nuclear club, India and Pakistan.
India, leading developing-world purchasers with $1.2 billion in deliveries in 1992, is investing heavily in naval and aerospace research and development.
Russia remains its dominant supplier.
Pakistan, its F-16 purchases cut off by a nuclear-related dispute with the U.S., is turning to the Chinese, French and, perhaps, Russia for arms.
Burma gives China the lock on sales.
Thailand, a traditional customer of Beijing, is courted by arms-merchant rivals U.S. and Britain, and Spain sold it a $228 million landing ship.
Coming soon: a helicopter competition between U.S. and Russian producers.
Indonesia has bought German ships and missiles, and has keen interest in Grumman surveillance planes -- though Washington foiled its effort to sell helicopters to Iran.
Malaysia remains a loyal British customer, with recent deals signed for 28 Hawks for $740 million, plus $600 million for frigates.
But last year, Malaysia agreed to buy Russian MiG-29Rs and McDonnell Douglas F/A-18s as air force replacements.
The Philippines may buy Israeli Kfir fighters, and has bought naval craft from Australian, Spanish and U.S. producers.
Japan, which out-purchased any Mideast nation in 1992, buys U.S. weapons almost exclusively.
While nervously watching the arming of China and other neighbors, it keeps future commercial uses in mind in its purchases and wins broad technology-transfer terms.
Japanese FS-X fighters are modeled on F-16s, and Japan makes a version of the F-15.
It is loading up on Grumman and Lockheed surveillance and sub-hunting planes, is buying Patriots, and now is seeking access to the new Thaad U.S. missile-interceptor system.
Another Thaad candidate is South Korea.
But investigations into government corruption have chilled sales there for Western producers.
Still, South Korea has laid the groundwork for imports of German submarines, French missiles and the best U.S. missiles, surveillance planes and artillery.
While its rulers think the U.S. too stingy with its most advanced technology, Seoul coproduces many U.S. jets and borrows American tank technology for its own K-1.
North Korea buys arms from Russia and China.
While facing global pressure to unveil its nuclear-weapons development, it also resolutely exports Scud missiles -- and develops new Scuds with a longer range.
The region's other big buyer, Taiwan, just landed $6 billion of F-16s in a deal that will let the island nation make parts and perform maintenance.
It recently ordered 54 U.S. helicopters, and plans to buy Patriot-missile technology, American surveillance planes, U.S.-made frigates, shipboard guns and missiles, as well as older Patton tanks.
Its $2.6 billion purchase of French Mirage fighters may soon be followed by large orders for German naval vessels.
Economies have cooled and the threat from the East has fizzled, but there is still strong demand for imports, especially from the U.S. and dominant producers Britain, France and Germany.
The Finns, Swedes and Swiss, especially, have long shopping lists.
The Continent bought 36% of exported arms in 1992, including Boeing Awacs air-defense radar planes for the U.K. and France.
Finland and Switzerland gave McDonnell Douglas orders for 98 F/A-18s.
Germany, a buyer of U.S. missiles, also has contemplated buying French/Italian missile systems.
In Europe, as the world over, used tanks and other weapons are serving as sweeteners in package deals for new systems.
Through savvy offset dealings, Europeans exact a heavy price from U.S. producers.
Britain will get work valued at 130% of the Awacs costs, and the Swiss won 100% in countertrade and other offset terms for their $2.5 billion F/A-18 buy.
The Finnish coproduction deal makes heavy demands on McDonnell Douglas and F/A-18 subcontractor Northrop to sell Finnish papermaking machines and other nondefense products in the U.S.
Many buyers in Europe, as elsewhere, want less to do with making weapons in a world less interested in warfare.
"Who wants coproduction of military goods?" asks Daniel Cecchin, a London-based consultant serving U.S. defense-company clients in Europe and elsewhere.
Based on his tracking of deals struck by 211 U.S. and European sellers, he says indirect "credits" that seller countries owe to buyer nations have rocketed 31% from 1991 to 1995 -- to about $34 billion -- after having slipped in prior years.
Economic hardship relegates both continents to mostly buying used tanks, planes and vessels.
But exceptions benefit all major arms suppliers.
Argentina is buying Canadian and Italian helicopters, along with older U.S. fighter-bombers.
Chile has been picking up French Cougar helicopters and shoulder-fired Mistral missiles, and is looking at Israeli missiles and Phalcon airborne-warning planes.
The Swedes want to sell Gripen fighters to both Chile and Brazil.
(Brazil, once a notable exporter of Embraer trainers and light fighters, has been hit hard by lost sales to Iraq.)
Ecuador and Peru are picking up tanks from the former Czechoslovakia and patrol boats from the U.S., while Uruguay buys new and used Swiss and British weapons.
Venezuela has bought French Mirage variants along with U.S. Harpoon missiles and close-support aircraft.
In Africa, where rifles from Russia and other countries make up a bustling trade in smaller weapons, piecemeal sales of bigger and newer systems occasionally crop up.
Zaire has purchased French light tanks, for example, and Kenya has acquired 100 of its shoulder-fired Mistrals.
The British have taken orders for Hawk trainers from Zimbabwe, and sold 80 battle tanks to Nigeria for $282 million.
Germany placed used ships from the former East German fleet in Tunisia last year.
South Africa is home to weapons-maker Denel, formerly Armscor, which is the continent's only real maker of bigger weapons.
It promotes its new Rooivalk attack helicopter in Africa and Asia, and has sold 78 of its 155mm guns to the UAE.
Sources: Congressional Research Service, Electronic Industries Association, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.
