Martin Marietta Corp.
Chairman Norman Augustine said the company will walk away from a planned $208.5 million purchase of General Dynamics Corp.'s space-launch business if the government doesn't agree to pay more for those services.
Martin Marietta is asking the government for a portion of the more than $400 million in savings it anticipates that the government could realize over 10 years as a result of Martin Marietta merging its Titan IV heavy-launch rocket business with General Dynamics' medium-lift Atlas-Centaur system.
The companies agreed to the sale late last year, but a formal sale document isn't to be signed until April 30 at the latest.
Antitrust regulatory approvals are expected next month.
Most of the government's savings will emerge in the Titan program, which is used for launches of defense satellites, Martin Marietta said.
The company, based in Bethesda, Md., wants the Pentagon to agree to pay more for launches and related services.
A Pentagon spokesman couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.
Mr. Augustine said his proposal hasn't been presented as a threat and is being studied carefully by the Defense Department, although it isn't clear when that review will be complete.
Without the new payment terms, he said, the acquisition doesn't make financial sense.
"If we can't realize this savings, then we have places that we can better invest our shareholders' money."
General Dynamics, based in Falls Church, Va., would get a $10 million payment from Martin Marietta if the sale isn't completed.
"We're in good shape either way," said a General Dynamics spokesman.
However, if the deal unravels, General Dynamics would retain a hard-to-sell unit faced with intense foreign competition, particularly from European, Russian and Chinese rockets.
While the General Dynamics operation broke even in last year's fourth quarter, it had a loss of about $39 million for all of 1993 and has posted losses of nearly $600 million since 1988.
Like the companies, the federal government has reasons to hope the sale agreement is made final.
The Atlas-Centaur program, which provides both government and commercial launches, represents the nation's main medium-lift launch service and the merger appears to be an obvious way to cut costs.
The Titan program, which originally included 41 launches at a cost of $11.8 billion, has about $2.4 billion in launches and services to be delivered through the year 2002.
However, an added $2 billion in funding will be needed to complete the contracts, Martin Marietta officials said.
The Atlas-Centaur system has contracts for another 31 launches, including seven payloads for the Air Force.
Its other contracts include launches for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
General Dynamics also holds contracts to produce 15 Centaur boosters for use on Titan rockets, a General Dynamics spokeswoman said.
If the merger proceeds, Martin Marietta would look for ways to make the two operations more efficient, including job cuts and tranferring work between General Dynamics plants in California, and Martin Marietta holdings in Colorado.
