R.H. Macy & Co., saying it has made significant progress while operating under federal bankruptcy protection against creditors, asked the bankruptcy court for six more months to come up with its own Chapter 11 reorganization plan.
The department-store retailer, operating under bankruptcy-court protection since 1992, said it plans to "pursue the development" of a reorganization plan to present to creditors and the court before Sept. 15, according to the motion filed with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York.
The filing signals Macy is close to finally emerging from bankruptcy proceedings, as a leaner organization.
Under the exclusivity period that is scheduled to end March 15, only Macy can offer a plan of reorganization.
After this period, its creditors and others, including unwanted suitor Federated Department Stores Inc., could propose reorganization plans to the court.
Judge Burton Lifland, who is scheduled to consider Macy's motion at a hearing Feb. 22, is expected to approve the move.
Myron E. Ullman III, Macy's chairman and chief executive officer, said the extension is necessary so Macy's can continue negotiations with creditor groups and work out a "consensual plan of reorganization that provides a fair recovery for all of our creditors."
Macy noted in the filing that while it narrowed the company's net losses for the fiscal year ended July 31, 1993, to $544 million from $1.25 billion the year before, "there remains much to be done," including negotiating the reorganization plan with eight major creditor groups.
Currently, Macy owes its creditors a total of about $6 billion.
Macy, which operates 111 Macy's and Bullock's department stores, is currently fending off Federated, which last month acquired a chunk of Macy secured debt and said it wants to merge with Macy.
Macy said that without an extended exclusivity period, the potential for the proposal of competing plans "might well lead to unnecessary adversarial confrontations that might cause a deterioration in the value of the assets and business of Macy's."
