The courageous, and perhaps overly optimistic, Clinton administration means to reinvent government in the area of bank regulation.
It proposes to consolidate the four bank and thrift regulatory authorities into one independent federal regulatory agency.
This new unified agency would be governed by a five member board -- one member from the Treasury Department, one from the Federal Reserve, and three independent members appointed by the president, confirmed by the Senate and, most important, removable only for cause.
Today, as a result of historical accident, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision and the Federal Reserve system each have a piece of the federal regulatory action.
This bureaucratic gang warfare creates a high-cost system rife with duplication and delay, and can from time to time come close to destroying effective and efficient bank supervision.
When these agencies disagree, not the president or the pope can force them to agree.
There is no place to get a final decision on important issues -- like how much capital banks must have to be safe and sound.
Under the administration's new plan, the two agencies with pure regulatory powers (OTS and OCC) will go out of business, while the two other agencies will be stripped of supervisory duties.
The FDIC would continue to be an independent insurer and the Federal Reserve would continue to independently determine monetary policy.
Who would oppose such a simple and logical plan to improve the way the government governs the banking industry?
The answer is no surprise.
The primary opposition comes from the Federal Reserve system, which stands to lose the most.
Additional opposition will come from state bank regulators and their community bank friends because they fear (needlessly, I believe) that the state and federal dual banking system may eventually be jeopardized by the regulatory weight of a single giant federal agency.
But in the end, the Federal Reserve holds the key to whether the administration's plan succeeds or fails; and the Fed has gone all out to preserve its powers to regulate.
Here's what officials at the Fed have said in a series of unprecedented op-ed attacks on the president's plan.
"If regulatory authority is vested in a single agency and little in the central bank, our nation's ability . . . to respond efficiently and effectively to a crisis would surely be impaired.
". . . the Federal Reserve is involved in monetary policy continuously.
In this area, too, the insights derived from our supervision and regulation are important inputs to the policy process.
". . . the safety and soundness of the banking system . . . cannot be maintained (let alone improved) without hands-on supervision by the Federal Reserve.
It is simply too risky to think that in a crisis, when we need to make rapid decisions affecting many billions of dollars, we could count on examination reports prepared by others."
Let us examine these claims on the charitable assumption that they have only a minimal relationship to the old political adage that where you sit is where you stand.
Mr. Greenspan's statement to the effect that sound monetary policy requires supervisory authority has not been supported by the experience of other central banks, particularly the German Bundesbank, which many consider the pre-eminent monetary operator in Europe and perhaps the world.
The Bundesbank has no regulatory duties, nor do about two-thirds of the central banks in the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Further, while the Bank of England has such authority, many feel it is undesirable because there is often a conflict of duty between the regulator and the monetary authority.
There is an obvious example of such a conflict when monetary policy calls for an expansion of bank credit for economic expansion but regulatory responsibility mandates restriction of lending deemed to be risky.
Note the recent call in the U.S. by both the Bush and Clinton administrations for regulators to "let up" on banks so that more lending can expand the economy, while at the same time regulators are still worried about the effects of the banking mistakes of the 1980s.
What about the argument that the Fed would be unable to handle a crisis in the system without supervisory and regulatory authority?
It is said that "it is too risky . . . to count on examination reports prepared by others."
But under the administration's proposal, the Federal Reserve will be part of the regulatory authority as a board member, and no doubt most of its current examiners will transfer to, and work for, the new consolidated agency.
Further, all information related to the entire banking industry by law will be instantly available in one place on a fully coordinated basis for the Fed's use.
Such information is not available to the Fed or anyone else today.
The new system will provide better, more current and comprehensive information on the banking system than is available in government today.
Since the Fed now supervises only a small percentage of banking assets -- less than 20% -- its information base will be improved by a factor of five.
Fed officials will be able to talk to regulatory personnel for as long and in as much detail as they desire.
With regard to the argument that two or more regulators are necessary as "checks and balances," do we need two SECs or two FCCs for balance, or to provide regulatory shopping?
The answer is no, clearly.
No one would even suggest such a thing.
As a former FDIC chairman and former chairman of a Federal Reserve bank branch, I have had the unusual opportunity to observe our present regulatory situation from both sides of the fence.
Based on my experience, it is clear to me that for the good of the country's financial system, the administration's proposed plan should be supported.
What is needed is a place to get a uniform, rapid and final decision on important regulatory issues.
Neither the present system nor a proposed two-regulator system recently tossed out by the Fed will provide this essential ingredient of any real banking regulatory reform.
My former colleagues at the Fed and in the FDIC will no doubt feel that my judgment has become impaired since I served these two fine institutions; but I believe it really may have been improved by a view not colored by being part of the problem.
Mr. Seidman, who was head of the FDIC from 1985 to 1991, is chairman of Commac Inc., a financial services company.
