Joining two of the biggest names in the travel-agent industry, Carlson Cos. said it will merge its travel-agent operations with Wagonlit Travel of Paris, creating an enterprise with 4,000 locations in 125 countries.
Carlson and Wagonlit's parent, Accor Group, will each inject $45 million into the new venture over the next five years, and each will retain a 50% ownership of it.
Top management of the combined company, called Carlson Wagonlit Travel, will also be evenly divided between the two agencies.
Carlson's and Accor's other travel-related properties, including hotels and car-rental concerns, are not part of the deal.
The companies expect the deal to be completed this summer.
The move would create what appears to be the world's largest travel agency, with $10.8 billion in annual travel sales.
That would surpass American Express Co., which has about $8 billion.
(Agency sales figures are not publicly reported and difficult to come by.)
The planned merger underscores the continuing consolidation of the agency business and will likely pressure rivals to seek out partners.
While there are 35,000 U.S. agencies, the top half-dozen companies account for about 20% of all travel sales and dominate the lucrative businesstravel market.
Size and global reach have become increasingly important for agencies, as growing numbers of customers want travel-agency representation wherever they go.
In addition, mega-agencies that can pack planes and fill hotels have more bargaining clout with suppliers.
Carlson, based in Minneapolis, owns Radisson Hotels International and T.G.I.Friday's restaurants, among other businesses, and has annual revenue of $10.7 billion.
Accor, with $14 billion in annual revenue, also operates restaurants, the Europcar rental business and hotels, including Motel 6 and Novotel.
Headquarters for the new agency venture will be in London -- a symbolic compromise between Minneapolis and Paris, the companies said.
Under terms of the agreement, business-travel accounts in North America will be handled by Carlson Travel Group under the Carlson Wagonlit brand; in Europe, these accounts will be managed by the Wagonlit Travel organization under the new brand name.
For the rest of the world, the combined company will be responsible for managing and developing new accounts and markets, particularly Asia and the Pacific Rim.
Jacqueline Simmons contributed to this article.
