At an oft-delayed White House meeting right before Christmas, the House Democratic leaders were direct with President Clinton: Working control of Congress may well disappear with this year's elections.
They cited more than a half-dozen major votes during 1993, including critical budget and spending tallies as well as other key measures such as overhauling the campaign finance laws.
A switch of less than 10 votes would have changed the outcome in each.
They then tossed in a few more bills, and a switch of 18 votes would have wiped out most of the president's legislative achievements.
Bill Clinton, who took copious notes, was impressed.
At the end he agreed to raise $2 million for House Democratic candidates this year.
This is almost four times as much as the Clinton-Gore team raised for these candidates in 1992.
In 1994, the stakes in the House elections are huge.
An even average showing by Republicans could revive the dominance of the old GOP-conservative Democratic coalition.
More important, if the Republicans add two-dozen seats it will make actual GOP control of the House a distinct possibility either two or four years later.
Many of the 34 Senate races and 36 gubernatorial elections, as usual, will capture most of the political attention.
But the clash for the House is the most critical battlefield in 1994.
The difference between a mediocre and a spectacular showing may rest, in part, on how the current House Republicans present themselves in this sure-to-be-turbulent political year.
Accordingly, the most pivotal Republican in the land today is not Bob Dole or any GOP presidential hopeful; it is the House whip and next House GOP leader, Newt Gingrich.
"Newt is the most important Republican in the country for the next 18 months," says former House Republican Vin Weber.
"We'll pick up somewhere between 10 and 50 seats," Rep. Gingrich predicts.
That will depend, he believes, on how Bill Clinton does this year and whether the economy stays in good shape -- factors beyond his control -- and how the congressional Republicans perform, which decidedly is in his control.
The Georgia Republican makes no secret that he'll be a no-holds-barred foe.
Tomorrow he plans to challenge the president to convene a special 60-day congressional session to deal seriously with crime before even considering health care and other legislation.
Mr. Gingrich and his colleagues have a way to go with the public; voters in this week's Wall Street Journal/NBC News Poll, by 34% to 29%, say they're more likely to vote for Democratic congressional candidates.
But the poll also shows opportunities; by 56% to 33% the public now thinks it's better if Congress and the presidency are controlled by different parties.
Traditionally the party controlling the White House suffers setbacks in midterm elections.
Dating back to Harry Truman, in the first off-year elections of a president's term the opposition party has gained an average of more than two-dozen seats.
The Democrats currently enjoy a 259-to-176 margin.
So if the GOP gains two-dozen seats, that would bring them to 200 -- or more seats than anytime since 1956.
The Republicans seemingly have two other advantages.
The huge 114-member freshman class, about 60% Democratic, has had less time to solidify the advantages of incumbency.
Thirty-one of those Democratic newcomers won by 55% or less in 1992, indicating those districts are very competitive.
Moreover, already 31 House members have retired this year, and there may be a dozen or two more, also giving the GOP disproportionate opportunities in these open seats.
Rep. Gingrich and other Republicans also believe some key issues will cut their way.
Some leading party strategists think that while health care may end up a political plus for the president, it's more likely to help Republican congressional candidates this year as voters angry about any changes will turn out but any benefits won't be apparent until later.
But major Republican strides won't be easy.
GOP pollster Robert Teeter remembers how tough it was to defeat freshman Democrats from the huge Watergate class of 1974: "Sometimes first-termers are actually safer because they work harder."
And dreams that the divisive fight over the North American Free Trade Agreement would cause sizable problems with unions are fading.
Labor has told Democratic politicians privately that while it will probably oppose a couple of pro-Nafta Democrats, it wants to normalize its close ties to most of the party.
Further, the single most important issue in most nonpresidential elections is, not surprisingly, the economy -- and today that looks like a winner for the Democrats.
"This is one of the few times that an off-year election will be held in a recovering economy," notes Democratic pollster Peter Hart.
The politically astute Newt Gingrich realizes this and knows he must position Republicans artfully this year.
"If it's Republicans opposing, we will only gain the minimum seats," he acknowledges.
"If it's Republican alternatives, we'll double or triple that."
He therefore has little use for assertions by some prominent Republicans that the GOP line on health care should be that there is no crisis: "I wish people who say that would go talk, at random, to any 10 small-business people in America."
That doesn't mean, however, that Mr. Gingrich will help the president get a health care overhaul passed.
The only question is how best to frame alternatives that will kill -- or, even better, embarrass -- the Clinton initiative.
Almost everyone who spends any time with Mr. Gingrich appreciates his brilliant mind and political dexterity.
Even some friends, however, worry about personal flaws.
Character assassination -- linking Democrats to Woody Allen in 1992 for instance -- has been a too-frequent Gingrich tactic, and his plans to target House Speaker Tom Foley's opposition to term limits are disingenuous; the eight-term Georgia Republican has no interest in term limits for himself.
It's really a reach when he suggests that the Clintons' ethics are "Nixonish."
But the Georgia Republican can taste the prospects of exercising real power in the House, and he doesn't plan to blow it.
And he has a catchy campaign theme that should give the Democrats fits: "Do you think 40 years is long enough?"
