One of the most successful teams on Madison Avenue unexpectedly split this week, as Steve Dworin resigned as president of the hot New York agency Deutsch/Dworin.
Mr. Dworin was a sharp contrast to Donny Deutsch, the agency's flamboyant executive vice president and creative director.
Mr. Dworin was perceived as the more serious half of the pair, while Mr. Deutsch was thought of as the creative "mad genius" who craved publicity and disliked anyone who took the spotlight off him.
In a joint telephone interview, both men acknowledged their personal relationship had deteriorated lately.
"We had a magical relationship, both personal and professional," says Mr. Dworin, 40 years old.
"But it began to fall part.
We used to sit next to one another on an airplane for six hours and talk nonstop and have a great time.
That disappeared.
Instead of letting that ruin the business, we decided to part company."
The two began talking about dissolving the partnership about two months ago and confided in no one.
The final decision came last Friday and Mr. Deutsch began informing clients on Monday.
"I wish it was something in particular," says Mr. Dworin, who doesn't have another job at the moment.
In an earlier, separate interview, Mr. Deutsch, whose father, David, founded the agency in 1969, said: "We decided it was best for us to go our separate ways.
He had a great run.
Sometimes it's like a marriage.
It just doesn't work out.
Steve is parting as a friend of the agency."
David Deutsch remains the agency's chairman.
Individuals who know both men offered other reasons for Mr. Dworin departing.
"Steve probably wanted more in terms of money, power and recognition than Donny was willing to give," says one person who knows both executives.
"It is, in the end, the Deutsch candy store."
Mr. Deutsch disputes that theory.
But Andrew S. Pakula, who was senior vice president, new business director, at Deutsch from 1987 through 1990, said yesterday, "It's very difficult for someone to be truly compensated for their efforts there."
He now holds the same position at Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon & Eckhardt.
Mr. Dworin owns about 25% of the agency, which will be repurchased by Mr. Deutsch, who is 36 years old.
Mr. Dworin is said not to be lacking for money.
He said he will take a vacation and may sit on a beach and think about his next move.
Mr. Dworin joined the agency in July 1991 when it was Deutsch Inc., moving from WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson where he was senior vice president and director of account management.
Mr. Dworin is credited with being instrumental in snaring some of the agency's recent account wins.
In November, Hardee's, a unit of Imasco Ltd., awarded the agency its $75 million account, boosting Deutsch/Dworin's total 1993 billings to $275 million from $135 million a year earlier.
Last year, the agency also won the accounts of Prudential Securities, with billings of $20 million; Lens Crafters, $35 million; Tanqueray Gin, $15 million; and Ikea's West Coast stores, $10 million.
Deutsch/Dworin has about 150 employees.
"We're going to move forward," says Mr. Deutsch.
"Our clients are behind us."
"If this had happened a month ago, I would be worried," says Jerry Gramaglia, Hardee's executive vice president of marketing, who says he was "surprised" at the departure.
"But we are well into producing the new campaign and began showing rough cuts to our franchisees recently.
It's well under control."
Peter Connolly, director of marketing at Ikea, says "we don't expect his resignation will make any difference with our account."
He adds he is sorry to see Mr. Dworin leave, describing him as "brilliant, one of the best in the business, a smart strategic man."
Recognition was slow to come to Mr. Dworin at the agency.
After reportedly much discussion, his name was finally added to the agency's name in November 1992, 16 months after he arrived.
The teaming of Messrs. Deutsch and Dworin was a reunion of sorts.
Both worked at WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather in 1979.
At the time he was hired, Mr. Dworin said one of the main attractions was the opportunity to be an entrepreneur.
But Mr. Deutsch is said by advertising executives who have first-hand knowledge of the agency to loathe the prospect of anyone making more money than he.
Mr. Deutsch says, "There are always people who would say anything negative about me.
Success speaks for itself."
The agency is known for brash and cheeky ads, exemplified by Ikea and its trademark line, "It's a big country.
Somebody's got to furnish it."
The agency got involved in presidential politics when it did work for the Clinton campaign.
Deutsch/Dworin seemed immune to the troubles of other agencies, winning accounts much faster than it lost them.
One notable exception, however, was the loss last November of G. Heileman Brewing's Colt 45 malt liquor account.
Bozell, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon & Eckhardt, has signed up as a "charter agency" in a test of interactive television advertising, creating work on behalf of Avis Inc.
Bozell and Avis are taking part in a test of interactive programming and advertising conducted by IT Network Inc., a closely held Dallas company that provides interactive information services via telephone in 44 U.S. cities.
IT is testing the Interactive Channel in 150 cable homes in Denton, Texas.
The Interactive Channel transmits audio and still-photographic images to consumers via existing cable and telephone lines.
Current programming includes "on-demand" news, weather and sports reports, as well as travel information, including airline schedules from Official Airline Guides, and home shopping from the J.C. Penney catalog.
Avis will sponsor a segment of the travel guide and provide information about car rentals at featured destinations.
"We want to find out what type of information consumers want, and in what form," said Michael Drexler, president of Bozell's BJK&E Media unit.
"Do they want straight information or entertainment?"
BJK&E Media handles Avis's Yellow Pages advertising account; Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates creates Avis's general media advertising.
Two other agencies also are participating in the test, Young & Rubicam's Wunderman Cato Johnson Worldwide and Foote, Cone & Belding Communications.
They declined to say which of their clients are involved.
Ad Notes. . . .
ACCOUNT: Dell Computer Corp., Austin, Texas, tapped Lowe Direct, a unit of Interpublic Group's Lowe Group, for a new, $10 million to $12 million direct-response and database marketing account.
Dell's general media advertising account, at San Francisco shop Goldberg Moser O'Neill, is unaffected, Dell said.
VIDEO NEWS: Medialink, a satellite distributor of video-news releases, said the most popular VNR in 1993 was about the Diet Pepsi-syringe affair, part of a series PepsiCo Inc. sent to television stations last June for use in news broadcasts about the hoax.
Other popular advertiser-related VNRs covered Sony Corp.'s "Last Action Hero"; Pepsi ads starring Shaquille O'Neal; and McDonald's Corp.'s Super Bowl advertising and the 25th anniversary of the Big Mac.
FCB: Foote, Cone & Belding Communications of Chicago reported net income of $12 million, or $1.06 a share, in the fourth quarter of 1993, compared with $6.5 million, or 59 cents a share, in the year-earlier quarter.
For the year, Foote Cone reported profit of $25.7 million, or $2.30 a share, up 18% from $21.7 million, or $2 a share, in 1992.
