By trial and error, electronic retailers are starting to hone the tricks of their trade.
Here are a few of the ways they try to nab viewers:
TAKE A TIP FROM SPIELBERG: Tyee Productions Inc. of Portland, Ore., makes infomercials like minimovies.
It shoots in film rather than videotape, because film makes anything seem high-quality, and it uses lighting to dramatic effect.
The result looks more like a Hollywood product than a studio demonstration show.
RECREATE A FANTASY STORE: Static, in-studio displays of products on velvet pedestals will be replaced by sets with the ambiance of stores and boutique.
R.H. Macy & Co.'s TV Macy's home-shopping channel, due to start this fall, will have sets replicating the retailer's actual shops and departments.
"We want to bring the store into people's living rooms," a spokeswoman says.
GET OUT OF THE STUDIO: Catalog 1, a Time Warner Inc.-Spiegel Inc. joint venture being launched this month in a few markets, plans to leave the studio whenever possible.
When selling designer swimsuits, Catalog 1 may go to Hawaii.
That should lead to another trend: less on-air time live in home-shopping studios, and more videotape, which producers can use for more-elaborate production effects.
GET A CELEBRITY: Nothing sells better than a familiar face, or so the reasoning goes.
Joan Rivers sold millions of dollars in jewelry and clothing on QVC, and she's a natural for the syndicated chat-and-shopping hour "Can We Shop Starring Joan Rivers," which began airing in January.
Expect more celebrities as Hollywood talent agencies form infomercial divisions.
DON'T GET A CELEBRITY: They can backfire or just fizzle.
Infomercials from Burt Reynolds, Vanna White, Joan Collins, and Fay Dunaway flopped in test markets recently, according to Jordan Whitney Inc., a Tustin, Calif., firm that tracks infomercials.
Revlon Inc. had to retool an infomercial for its line of Dolly Parton cosmetics to do more than rely on the singer's star power.
SHORTER IS BETTER: When fully interactive networks arrive, the typical half-hour infomercial or selling program will disappear as viewers surf through myriad shopping options.
Now, their length is determined by the 30-minute and one-hour time slots that divide the viewing day, says Michael Seymour, the managing director of Hudson Street Partners, a New York maker of infomercials.
"But on interactive systems, they will be replaced by short, 10-to 15-minute-long shows," he says.
