Northern Telecom Ltd., struggling to shore up its U.S. business, lost a key executive to archrival American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
Gerry J. Butters, 50 years old, the president of the Canadian company's U.S. unit, Northern Telecom Inc., was named vice president of business development at AT&T's Network Systems unit, a new position.
The AT&T unit is Northern Telecom's main rival in the U.S. market for switching and transmission equipment.
"Gerry's a loss," a Northern Telecom spokesman acknowledged, "but Northern's turnaround isn't going to depend on one individual."
To succeed Mr. Butters, Northern Telecom named Gary R. Donahee, 47, currently president of Northern Telecom Canada Ltd.
While responsible for day-to-day operations of Northern Telecom Inc., Mr. Donahee will continue to manage major accounts in Canada.
The U.S. unit, based in Nashville, Tenn., had revenue of $4.5 billion in 1992.
Northern Telecom also named one of its board members, Donald J. Schuenke, chairman of the U.S. unit.
The Toronto-based telecommunications equipment maker said Mr. Schuenke's appointment will become effective Feb. 1.
Previously chief executive officer of Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Co. of Milwaukee, Mr. Schuenke remains chairman of the insurance company until the end of this month.
He succeeds Roy Merrills, 59, who will retire in March.
Mr. Schuenke has been a member of Northern Telecom's board for a decade and will be responsible for planning the U.S. unit's strategy.
Northern Telecom, plagued by software problems and delivery delays to the Baby Bells, has lost market share to AT&T in the hotly competitive $6 billion U.S. market for digital switching systems.
Northern has cut back manufacturing and closed or consolidated several plants.
The parent Northern Telecom Ltd. recently consolidated into two groups under its new chief executive, Jean Monty.
The company's U.S. unit is part of one of the groups, Nortel North America.
The other group is Nortel World Trade.
The company also named David A. Twyver, 47, president of wireless systems, succeeding John A. Roth, 51, now president of Nortel North America.
Mr. Twyver was previously group vice president, wireless systems.
