Tele-Communications Inc. has made an overture to Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. about a possible investment in Blockbuster or an alliance with it if Blockbuster's proposed acquisition by Viacom Inc. isn't completed, according to people on Wall Street.
It couldn't be determined how serious John Malone, TCI's chairman, is about working with Blockbuster, especially in light of last week's collapse of the proposed acquisition of TCI by Bell Atlantic Corp.
As the collapse of that transaction illustrated, Mr. Malone has a penchant for making deals that may come unraveled or have to be renegotiated.
But even the possibility of his entry into the Blockbuster-Viacom situation increases the uncertainty surrounding that deal.
Viacom, a cable-television programmer, negotiated a deal originally valued at $8.4 billion to acquire Blockbuster, the video-rental chain, in January as a way of financing a higher bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
But a steep decline in Viacom's stock price since it won the bidding for Paramount on Feb. 15 has raised questions about whether Blockbuster shareholders may overturn the takeover by Viacom if the stock doesn't rebound.
The shareholder vote is scheduled for May.
Viacom stock already has begun to bounce back, with its Class B nonvoting shares rising $2 to $27 in composite trading Friday on the American Stock Exchange.
Wayne Huizenga, Blockbuster's chairman, has agreed to vote his shares in favor of the Viacom deal, in a group of holders totaling 23% of Blockbuster stock.
But if Blockbuster's board doesn't recommend the deal before the shareholder vote, then a two-thirds shareholder vote may be needed for approval.
Both Messrs. Malone and Huizenga might have ulterior motives in holding talks about doing business together.
Mr. Huizenga could use any interest by Mr. Malone in buying all or part of Blockbuster to try to obtain sweetened terms from Sumner Redstone, Viacom's chairman, for the Viacom-Blockbuster acquisition.
And Mr. Malone may wish to make trouble for Mr. Redstone, who brought a massive antitrust suit against Mr. Malone's cable empire at the height of the Paramount battle, during which TCI initially backed Viacom's rival, then QVC Network Inc.
TCI already has been reported in talks to buy an interest in another Hollywood studio, such as Universal or Columbia, which are both owned by Japanese companies that may be willing to sell a stake.
Johnnie L. Roberts in New York contributed to this article.
