For six years, David Steele relied on Robert Miner, a plastic surgeon in Santa Ana, Calif., for continuing corrective surgery to improve mobility in his badly burned legs.
Then Mr. Steele's employer, Rockwell International Corp., moved to control health costs by raising employees' contributions toward their medical bills and by setting up a network of doctors for workers to see.
Dr. Miner isn't in the network, but under the company plan, Mr. Steele could continue to see him if he picked up a greater portion of the bill.
When those contributions rose to a 40% share of Dr. Miner's charges, Mr. Steele had to seek more affordable care.
He switched to another, cheaper health plan offered to Rockwell employees -- a health maintenance organization -- and now must consult only its affiliated doctors.
Mr. Steele's experience is not unusual, but many Americans don't realize that unlimited choice of doctors is steadily going the way of house calls.
More than half of the people whose employers provide health benefits have some restrictions on which doctors they may choose, according to a study soon to be published in Health Affairs journal.
From 1988 to 1993, the percentage of people enrolled by their employer in fee-for-service health plans -- which reimburse for services from virtually any physician or hospital -- plummeted to 49% from 71%, according to the research by KPMG Peat Marwick.
And almost always, the fee-for-service option comes at a higher cost to the employee.
"There are very few companies that have wide open, pick-any-doctor-you-want plans today," says Sharon Canner, a health-benefits expert at the National Association of Manufacturers.
Yet, as Congress takes up the fiercely debated issue of overhauling the healthcare system, surveys show one of the questions foremost on people's minds is: Will health-care reform reduce my ability to choose my doctor?
In a poll conducted last spring for the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 38% of respondents said they were "much less likely" to support health-care reform legislation that restricted people's ability to choose doctors and hospitals; 26% said they were somewhat less likely.
Partly with this in mind, the American Medical Association is making the issue a cornerstone of its lobbying campaign to protect the medical profession's interests.
Most of the major health plans before Congress, including President Clinton's bill to guarantee coverage to all Americans, contain financial incentives similar to those offered by many large companies to encourage people to enroll in managed-care plans.
Under the White House proposal, for example, workers would select from a menu of health plans -- including HMOs, fee-for-service policies and other forms of provider networks -- but, as in today's market, they likely would have to pay extra for plans offering total freedom of doctor choice.
Cognizant of public sentiment, backers of every health proposal hope to navigate the choice minefield by stressing the provisions that would leave people at least some discretion in picking their physicians.
For all the emotion and rhetoric, the freedom to choose a doctor not only has been sharply diminished already, but is certain to erode further, fueled by a sharp corporate expansion of managed care to curb costs.
AMR Corp., Gannett Co., Sears, Roebuck & Co., Ameritech Corp. and many other large corporations have set up plans that let employees select from a network of doctors, generally require them to get approval to see a specialist, and require them to pay more if they wish to go outside the group.
Many people already find that a change in jobs effectively creates a change in doctors, and some face a change in medical treatment, too.
When Lillian Bikash of North Quincy, Mass., switched employers about a year and a half ago, she and her husband had to change health plans.
Their old policy reimbursed them for any doctor they saw; the new one was an HMO.
Mr. and Mrs. Bikash had been seeing a psychiatrist and wanted to continue their therapy.
But their psychiatrist wasn't in the HMO referral network -- no psychiatrists were.
The Bikashes remained in therapy with their psychiatrist, but they had to pay the entire bill themselves, a tab of nearly $5,000 a year.
"When you're dealing with a therapist, you develop a relationship of trust.
A great deal of time and emotion are invested," Mrs. Bikash says.
"If you have to switch doctors, it's almost like starting over again."
Robert Tenery, who is president of the Texas Medical Association, estimates that the number of his patients on a health plan that restricts choice of physicians has swelled to about one in three from one in 20.
"It's all come within the past few years," he says.
A Dallas ophthalmologist, Dr. Tenery has seen the economics of managed health care lead a number of his patients to switch -- twice.
Texas Instruments Inc. negotiated a deal with Presbyterian Health Care System in an effort to rein in employee health costs that were rising at an annual rate of 22%.
Workers who went to Presbyterian paid about 30% less for their portion of health-care coverage than did people who went outside the network.
Dr. Tenery lost some of his TI patients because he is affiliated with Dallas's Medical City hospital.
But last year, he says, some familiar faces reappeared in his waiting room.
It seems TI failed to reach an additional agreement with the physician staff of Presbyterian for doctor services.
TI cut a deal with Medical City, dropped Presbyterian, and gained a new group of affiliated physicians -- and Dr. Tenery welcomed back some TI workers.
Company executives say they tried to include as many of their employees' regular physicians in the new network as possible.
TI asked workers to nominate doctors for the network and took on any who passed the credentialing process and agreed to TI's prices.
TI officials also say they took great pains to smooth the way for their employees in the tug of war between hospital staffs.
"We were astounded that it went as smoothly as it did.
We did spend a lot of time communicating with employees, explaining why," says Sue Nelson, health-benefits manager.
Such communication -- even terminology -- counts, according to Towers Perrin, the employee-benefits consulting firm.
Towers Perrin advises corporate clients to use the term "doctor of choice" when explaining how an employee in a managed-care plan goes about getting a referral to a specialist.
Typically, the plan won't pay for a specialist's services without clearance from the patient's designated primary-care physician in the network -- the "doctor of choice."
The health-care industry calls that doctor a "gatekeeper."
But "nothing turns an employee off more than to say, `Select your gatekeeper,' which suggests that you're not going to get the care you need," says Sid Stolz, a Towers Perrin principal.
Gannett followed Towers Perrin's advice.
Its new health-care plan is called Communicare Choice, and its literature makes frequent use of the choice word.
But reduce the plan to its simplest terms and it's clear: A covered employee must pay more to pick a doctor who isn't in the network, and the plan won't pay for services from a specialist unless a network "doctor of choice" clears the referral.
For many people, serious illness throws the issue of physician choice into sharp relief.
When Phil Kaim was diagnosed with cancer more than a year ago, he sought the very best specialist.
He decided on an Indiana University physician cited in many articles on Mr. Kaim's ailment, a malignancy of the lymph nodes.
Several times he made the four-hour drive from his home in Batavia, Ill., to visit the doctor for chemotherapy and other treatment.
Today he is cancer-free, Mr. Kaim says.
"I think when you go through something as traumatic as cancer and you really see your own mortality, you want to do everything in your power to get the very best care," the 29-year-old Midwesterner says.
"I think if everyone was put in that situation, they'd also think doctor choice is very important."
Though Mr. Kaim was highly satisfied with his treatment, choice for him, too, came at a cost.
He was enrolled in a Blue Cross "preferred provider" network, which required patients to pay a higher price if they chose to see specialists outside the preferred-provider list.
To Mr. Kaim, it was worth it.
"You can go to any doctor or hospital in the country," he says.
There is no such option for the nearly 39 million people who lack any health insurance at all.
Their choices are limited to physicians who will accept an uninsured patient or, often, to the emergency-room staff at a local hospital.
Also limited are choices for about 27 million people on Medicaid, the federal-state health program for low-income people.
Medicaid's reimbursement rates are so far below those of private insurers that many doctors refuse to see patients in the program.
Any health-care legislation that covers all Americans would increase choice for the currently uninsured and those on Medicaid.
But it is the erosion of choice among the comfortably insured -- people like Mr. Steele -- that stirs up the most striking controversy in the health-care reform debate, even though "it's no longer the shock it was, say, five years ago when just a few of the large, sophisticated companies" were moving toward doctor networks, Ms. Canner says.
The great switching sound continues to outrage many medical specialists, such as Dr. Miner, the plastic surgeon.
"It's the same thing they gave you in Russia before the wall came down: `Sure, you can vote, and here's who you can vote for.
Sure, you can choose your doctor, and here's the list of doctors we have chosen for you,'" he says.
Ironically, it is the medical system with the most government controls -- a national "single-payer" arrangement under which the government uses tax-payer money to reimburse people for their medical bills -- that allows patients the greatest freedom to choose their doctor.
"Sometime, about April, the AMA is going to wake up and see that only a Canadian-type single-payer system allows freedom of the patient to choose," says Alan Hull, a Dallas nephrologist and an AMA member.
Such a taxpayer-financed, government-run system would allow individuals to select any doctor or hospital and obtain reimbursement from the government.
A single-payer bill introduced by liberals in Congress has been given little chance of passing, however, as lawmakers take up health-care reform.
All of the other major proposals would continue the trend toward managed care and restrictions on choice.
But all also hold out promises that some choice would remain.
The Clinton plan also would sever the employers' power to dictate which plan its workers enroll in.
The bottom line for the American health system -- now and under any of the reform bills in Congress -- is that choice comes at a price.
The health program that covers more than four million federal employees and their dependents lets workers select from a number of plans.
Their contribution to the premium varies -- generally HMOs are cheaper -- but many seem willing to pay an added cost for less-restrictive options.
During last September's enrollment period, 70.7% signed up for fee-for-service policies; 29.3% enrolled in HMOs or other networks.
For some, a restriction has worked out just fine.
Janet Baker, a senior-executive aide at Texas Instruments, was nervous about changing gynecologists when she switched to the network.
She held her breath and picked a physician whose office location was convenient.
Now Ms. Baker likes the doctor she ended up with far better than her old one.
"He turned out to be very good," she says.
"I probably wouldn't have found him if I hadn't been forced into it."
-- CLINTON Individuals and families can select from an array of private plans through their regional health alliance.
Each alliance must offer at least three plans, including at least one fee-for-service policy, which allows total free choice.
Each HMO must offer a "point of service" policy that allows patients to go outside the network for a higher fee.
Plans that offer more choice are expected to be more expensive than those that restrict choice.
-- COOPER-BREAUX Plan provides incentives, primarily through tax code, to enroll in HMOs or other managed-care networks.
Limits employer deductiblity of employee health benefits to the cost of the lowest-priced plan in a region.
-- McDERMOTT-WELLSTONE (Single-payer) Individuals may select any doctor or hospital and be reimbursed.
-- CHAFEE-DOLE Plan provides incentives to enroll in managed-care networks: Limits employer deductiblity of worker health premiums to the average premium charged by the least expensive half of plans in a region.
Caps at that same level the excludability of employer-provided health benefits from workers' taxable income.
-- HOUSE REPUBLICANS Degree of choice depends on plan offered by employer, similar to the current system.
