When Florence Dolan needed a permit to replace her plumbing supply store with one almost twice as large, city officials in Tigard, Ore., were happy to oblige -- but at a considerable price.
In return for permission to enlarge her business, Mrs. Dolan would have to dedicate some 10% of her 1.7 acre parcel for long-planned improvements to the city's flood control system and for construction of a pedestrian/bicycle pathway.
Although her expanded business would nestle comfortably within existing zoning laws, an additional "action area overlay zone" ordinance sanctioned the city's demand that Mrs. Dolan contribute to needed public facilities.
Last year, the Oregon Supreme Court interpreted the city's action as consistent with the federal Constitution.
The U.S. Supreme Court has agreed to review Dolan v.
City of Tigard and will hear oral argument on March 23.
This may well be the court's most important property-rights case since 1987.
The court could use Dolan to decide the extent to which municipalities can impose exactions on development.
More important, the case could help clarify when government regulation of private property is permissible and when it becomes a "regulatory taking" requiring compensation.
Financially strapped municipalities increasingly are funding improvements through exactions on development instead of through taxes.
Demands for "on-site" improvements by developers, such as roads within subdivisions, rarely present problems.
Exactions for directly related "off-site" improvements, such as the widening of a side road between a highway and a new regional shopping center, often are reasonable.
However, cities from Boston to San Francisco are imposing exactions on developers to fund such general public purposes as public housing or job training centers.
Comprehensive data are almost impossible to obtain, since exactions wear many labels, such as "connection," "linkage" and "inspection" fees.
Officials often claim not to impose charges at all, and instead hold up projects informally until developers make "voluntary contributions" of funds or services.
Dolan v.
City of Tigard also gives the Supreme Court an opportunity to untangle the collision of two basic principles of American law.
On one hand, the state has an extensive right, referred to as "police power," to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
On the other, the state has a duty under the Fifth Amendment Takings Clause not to take private property except upon "just compensation."
As the court noted in 1960, in Armstrong v.
U.S., a primary purpose of the Takings Clause is "to bar Government from forcing some people alone to bear public burdens which, in all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a whole."
Mrs. Dolan does not dispute that flood control and transportation projects are legitimate governmental concerns.
She disputes that she should be singled out to pay for them.
The court's takings jurisprudence, although unclear, reflects two fundamental concepts.
First is the notion crystallized in 1938, in U.S. v.
Carolene Products Co., that government actions affecting economic rights will be less closely scrutinized by the courts than those affecting fundamental rights such as speech and voting, or the rights of minorities.
Second is the notion that judicial deference is not unlimited.
As Justice Holmes declared in 1922, in Pennsylvania Coal Co. v.
Mahon, "if regulation goes too far it will be recognized as a taking."
How far is "too far" never has been spelled out.
In its most recent takings decision, in 1992, the court held in Lucas v.
South Carolina Coastal Council that "regulations that prohibit all economically beneficial use of land" must be implicit in "the State's law of property and nuisance."
South Carolina couldn't wipe out David Lucas's investment in his beachfront lots by characterizing its development prohibition as flood prevention rather than tourism enhancement.
It would have to show that at the time Mr. Lucas purchased the lots he was precluded from developing them under established property and nuisance law.
Nowhere, however, did the court's opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia explain the essential nature of constitutionally protected property rights or, more practically, why complete deprivations should be judged by a higher constitutional standard than, say, 95% deprivations.
Where officials remember to leave property owners a modicum of value, the governing law remains Penn Central Transportation Co. v.
City of New York (1978).
There, Justice William Brennan used a balancing test to sustain the city's preservation of the beaux-arts facade of Grand Central Terminal by forbidding the railroad from erecting an office building above it.
Given the "ad hoc" nature of takings determinations, he reasoned, the railroad's "investment-backed expectations" of owning a train station were not unduly affected by the restriction.
The principal cloud upon judicial deference to governmental actions affecting private property is the court's 1987 decision in Nollan v.
California Coastal Commission.
It is the scope of its Nollan holding that the Supreme Court has undertaken to decide in the Dolan case.
The Nollan family wanted to enlarge its house between a highway and the Pacific Ocean and also between two beachfront parks.
Under its authority to block construction interfering with ocean views from highways, the commission refused to allow the Nollans to expand unless they agreed to allow the public to walk behind their house from one park to the other.
The court found it "impossible to understand" how its action furthered the commission's mission.
Since the commission's demand could not have furthered its legitimate goal, Justice Scalia wrote, the court did not have to decide the scope of the "essential nexus" that must exist between governmental goals and means.
The court agreed to hear Dolan v.
City of Tigard on precisely this unresolved issue.
It could agree with the city that the exaction need be only "reasonably related" to a legitimate governmental purpose.
In that event, the city's assertion that expansion of the Dolan store will add to surface runoff and traffic congestion probably will suffice to support its exactions.
However, if the justices agree with Mrs. Dolan that under an "essential nexus" the means and ends of regulations must be "substantially related," then courts in the future will have to examine regulations and exactions more carefully.
The likely result would be more compensation for owners and fewer regulations.
Some argue that increased protection for private property rights would discourage vital public works.
Others say that compensation would force municipalities to take into account the costs of improvements as well as the benefits.
Mrs. Dolan argues, echoing Armstrong, that she should not be forced "to bear public burdens which, in all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a whole."
Mr. Eagle is a professor of law at George Mason University in Arlington, Va.
