Butler International Inc., citing "strong" contributions from all its business lines, said it expects to record revenue for 1993.
"We continue to see companies worldwide adopt the movement toward outsourcing and Butler is benefiting from that trend," Chairman and Chief Executive Edward M. Kopko said in an interview.
The company in Montvale, N.J., provides companies with temporary technical personnel and skilled engineers.
Mr. Kopko said Butler expects to report a 15% increase in 1993 revenue to $308 million from $267 million, with fourth-quarter revenue of at least $82 million.
The company reported nine-month revenue of $225.6 million.
According to Mr. Kopko, Butler will report 1993 income from continuing operations of $1.6 million, or 28 cents a share.
He added that Butler will report a nonrecurring charge of $375,000 to cover the cost of a debenture-offering withdrawal in the quarter, which will reduce income from continuing operations to 20 cents, which compares with a loss of $4.6 million, or $1.03 a share, in 1992.
Mr. Kopko said the company will report a 1993 net loss of $2.2 million, or 50 cents a share, after a $3.4 million charge from discontinued-operations and the debenture.
In the first nine months, Butler reported profit from continuing operations of 22 cents a share for the first nine months of 1993, putting fourth-quarter profit from continuing operations at six cents a share.
The company has reported a net loss of 24 cents so far for the year, putting fourth-quarter net at a loss of 26 cents.
According to Mr. Kopko, selling, general and administrative costs for the year rose 2.6%, and profit margins rose to 14% from 1992's 13%.
"All the groups contributed significantly," to the year's results, Kopko said, noting that average billable employees rose 10% from a year ago.
About half of the $6 million swing in annual earnings from continuing operations came as a result of the performance of Butler's Telecom division.
Mr. Kopko said the division, which provides telecommunications services world-wide, benefited from the company's cutting some weak business lines.
Butler is scheduled to report year-end results next week.
Mr. Kopko said he expects the strength in Butler's business lines to continue in 1994, which should lead to a continuation of "double-digit" growth in revenue, without the aid of acquisitions.
Mr. Kopko also projected earnings from continuing operations rising roughly a third to about 40 cents for 1994.
Operating cash flow, also from continuing operations, for 1994 should increase to about $1 a share from 76 cents in 1993, he said.
Butler, however, will have to overcome a historically weak first quarter, that was made weaker by the unexpectedly cold winter and higher interest costs.
On a continuing operations basis, Mr. Kopko said the first-quarter results "will be a bit lower" than 1993's 11 cents a share.
The company expects net income for the quarter to be comparable with the restated one cent a share it earned in 1993.
In the wake of the recession, temporary personnel companies such as Butler have benefited from companies using their services to bolster leaner staff.
However, there have been recent reports that the boom in the hiring of temporary workers may be coming to an end as companies, emboldened by the increasingly stronger economy, switch to permanent workers.
Such potentially downbeat news doesn't seem to concern Mr. Kopko.
He explained that companies such as Butler and CDI Corp. focus on the high-end, highly skilled end of the market, and the outlook for this niche "continues to be very positive."
He said Butler and CDI, which is the largest publicly traded company in the contract technical workers niche of the industry, share only 6% to 7% of that world-wide market, which is close to $20 billion.
"We improve our market share," he said, "but not at the expense of each other."
Last month, Butler withdrew a $15 million convertible subordinated debentures offer, citing "mutual agreement" with the underwriters.
Mr. Kopko said that the particulars of the offering were formulated months ago, and Butler had continued to make progress and improve within that time.
