John Updike has always shared with his hero Vladimir Nabokov a fascination with the ravished virgin that is the New World.
The tragic and foolish history of the despoliation provides an audible counterpoint in Mr. Updike's tales of modern life, from "Rabbit Run" to "Memories of the Ford Administration."
In his new novel, "Brazil" (Knopf, 260 pages, $23), Mr. Updike reflects more fancifully on America's past, loading his narrative with legend and metaphor.
In telling his story he boldly sets forth into the treacherous waters of magical realism, and there he flounders.
When a writer of Mr. Updike's gifts moves in a radically new direction, it seems churlish to wish him back to his old ways.
But in "Brazil" he has definitely blundered into the wrong genre.
Though in previous books he has handled magic effectively (notably in "The Witches of Eastwick"), the fantasy was firmly grounded in the petty world he evokes so brilliantly -- that of the middle class.
Mr. Updike, a subtle and worldly man, is not quite so credible in the persona of Latin American magic realist, celebrant of innocence, youth and fidelity.
"Brazil" tells the tale of a modern -- no, a postmodern -- Tristan and Isolde.
On the beach of Copacabana in Rio, Tristao, a black slum boy, sees and pledges himself on the spot to Isabel, the pale blond daughter of one of Brazil's governing elites.
He is the descendant of slaves, she of the European masters: "a mismatched couple," Mr. Updike writes, "but Brazil had been populated by mismatched couples."
The knight-errant presents his beloved with a ring bearing the legend "DAR," which the young people read as the Portuguese "to give."
It is also an acronym for Daughters of the American Revolution, and it transpires that Tristao has stolen the ring from a blue-haired member of that club.
The two young people are now spiritually one, for as Mr. Updike explains in one of the fatuous bromides that pepper the book, "In Brazil, one says 'wife' and 'husband' not after some stilted legal ceremony but when one's heart feels married."
Pursued halfheartedly by the powers of bourgeois convention as represented by Isabel's father and his goons, the lovers take a zigzag journey into and beyond the primeval heart of their country.
From cosmopolitan Rio they go to industrial Sao Paolo; to dead, bureaucratic Brasilia"Brazil's heart's prison"; to a gold-mining community still using 18th-century methods; to the wild Mato Grosso, where they become part of a 17th-century colony of Portuguese raiders; and finally to the immemorial Indian communities of the Amazon basin.
There, Isabel consults a shaman.
How is she to free Tristao, who because of his race has been made a slave by the Portuguese raiders?
Thanks to the shaman's spell, a solution is found: The lovers change race.
Isabel now becomes black, Tristao white.
Their personalities change accordingly, and so does their already overwrought sex life.
As a white woman, Isabel (an Isolde not merely of the white hands but of the "white, white ass") has been the one ostensibly bestowing the favor of her person upon her black lover.
Now, Tristao adopts the role of giver.
"Did not Portugal, here in the continental backland of brazilwood and sugar cane, make a wife of Africa but not consecrate the fact?
He would be a white man who would elevate his black mistress to his own level."
They retrace their steps toward the east and the present day, ending up back in Rio as members of the industrial ruling class, and at the end of the novel Tristao is murdered on Copacabana by just such a young hood as he once was.
Isabel lies down in the waves to die with him, but since she is in fact a modern Isabel and not a medieval Isolde, death does not come as easily as she had hoped.
In the course of the story, the lovers act out every economic role Brazil's history has offered.
They become in turn capitalists, industrial workers, petits bourgeois and slaves.
They take part in every possible racial combination: Tristao's brothers and Isabel's children (from various brief affairs) are of every breed that populate the continent.
And they perform more insistent and exhaustive variations on the sex act than I thought even Mr. Updike's imaginative powers were equal to.
As Mr. Updike dwells on race, class, gender and colonialism, he resorts to uncharacteristic cliches.
Of Isabel, he writes: "She had left coddled girlhood behind, she had embarked upon the path of woman, which is a path of pain."
What is that supposed to mean?
And what about "The banality, the brightly masked tedium, of bourgeois life-taletellers remain balked by it."
Who does Mr. Updike think he's fooling?
The teller of the "Rabbit" tales has hardly been balked by the banality of bourgeois life.
But to be antibourgeois is part of the baggage that the would-be magical realist must shoulder.
Coming from Mr. Updike, the bourgeois artist par excellence, such a simplistic pose is not very convincing.
One hopes that "Brazil" turns out to be a mere glitch in the career of the man who is probably this country's best living writer.
Ms. Allen writes on books for the New Criterion and other publications.
