The Clinton administration's practically complete Superfund plan cleared a major hurdle when it won praise from the chairman of an influential private-sector panel.
The comments by Jonathan Lash, chairman of the National Commission on Superfund, appear to remove a potential obstacle raised by four Senators likely to play an important role in rewriting the Superfund law.
The four senators -- Democrats Max Baucus of Montana and Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey and Republicans David Durenberger of Minnesota and John Chafee of Rhode Island -- wrote President Clinton last month urging that the administration proposal incorporate the findings of the commission, which is sponsored by the Keystone Center, a Colorado-based nonprofit group.
The Clinton Superfund plan could go up to Capitol Hill as early as this week.
"There is now consensus on the changes to the program," said Carol Browner, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
"What we have is a proposal that many are going to be able to stand behind."
Mr. Lash, who in recent weeks has been involved in intense negotiations with the administration over wording in the Superfund bill, said yesterday, "It appears that it will be a very constructive proposal and a good starting point."
Asked whether Rep. Al Swift (D., Wash.), chairman of the House hazardous-materials subcommittee, would introduce a version of the Keystone Center's plan to compete with the administration plan, a move the lawmaker is said to have contemplated, Mr. Lash said, "I don't expect there to be an alternative bill."
Sen. Baucus is chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee; Sen. Lautenberg is chairman of the panel's Superfund subcommittee.
Sens. Chafee and Durenberger are the ranking Republicans on the two panels.
Mr. Lash, in addition to being chairman of the Keystone panel, is president of the World Resources Institute and co-chairman of the President's Commission on Sustainable Development.
The Superfund proposal being readied by the administration would alter the hazardous-waste law in several significant respects.
It would aim to substantially reduce Superfund-related litigation by creating a new fund to settle lawsuits between polluting businesses and their insurers over who is responsible to pay for cleanup of sites where dumping occurred before 1986.
Revenue for the fund, drawn from a new tax on insurers, would total $500 million in each of the first two years of the law's implementation, and as much as $700 million in each of the following three years.
Because different states have different laws and legal precedents about how responsible insurers are for cleanup costs, polluting businesses suing their insurers could get from the federal government 20% of cleanup costs if they are suing in a state that generally favors insurers; 40% in a state that favors neither side; and 60% in a state that favors polluting businesses.
Under the proposal, determining which state fits which category would be left to the regulatory process.
Reflecting a longstanding consensus between the EPA and the business community, the Superfund plan will allow federal officials greater flexibility to approve different levels of cleanup for a Superfund site depending on what that site's future use -- parking lot or playground -- is expected to be, based on input from community groups.
In a concession to the Keystone group, the administration also has agreed to move more quickly on so-called hot spots, or areas within waste sites where danger from contamination is particularly high.
Overall, the administration estimates the changes in cleanup standards will reduce cleanup costs by 25%.
In addition, purchasers of abandoned urban properties that have already been designated Superfund sites would be exempted from Superfund liability, a move that is aimed at easing financial barriers to revitalizing urban areas.
