Palaces to sport continue to rise across the country.
Most get built with tax dollars that supposedly weren't available for traditional public services.
Something's not quite right about this game, which makes the current brouhaha in Phoenix worth watching.
The local business and political establishment there, as in many other cities, would do nearly anything to be given a new professional franchise, in this case from Major League Baseball.
In the hopes of luring one, they cooked up a deal whereby Jerry Colangelo, owner of the Suns basketball team, would line up the tribute required to buy into baseball.
And the Maricopa County taxpayers, without being asked, would cough up $240 million for a retractable domed stadium.
A funny thing happened on the way to the ballgame.
The taxpayers started a rhubarb.
Despite the usual shilling for the project by the local media and a lot of talk about reviving downtown Phoenix, a large part of the citizenry believes it's being asked to subsidize a seventh-inning stretch by Mr. Colangelo and his associates.
Thanks to a bill snuck through the state legislature a few years ago, the taxpayers apparently would be denied a vote on the sales-tax increase that would fund the stadium.
We recall this practice creating a new sport a few hundred years ago in Boston harbor.
But before the Maricopa supervisors could meet to ice the pact, the flood of protesting phone calls was substantiated by a poll that showed 59%-30% voter opposition.
The supervisors canceled their session and have been back at the drawing board.
The deciding vote on the body, Jim Bruner, who wants to grab an open Republican congressional seat this fall, has retreated to the dugout to consider a lineup change.
The Bronx cheers for the new stadium from residents of Maricopa County are exceptional in a sportsmad country.
No one would deny the enthusiasm that a local sports team sometimes generates, but we think the fans deserve fuller disclosure about the financing for many of the stadiums (in the cases of St. Petersburg and St. Louis, built on spec for teams that haven't been granted).
"This is still a pretty conservative part of the world, and there's an objection to socialized baseball," says William Cheshire, an editorial columnist who has bucked the pro-stadium party line at the Arizona Republic.
Also, taxpayers around Phoenix have experience in resisting such machinations by the local elite, which is why the novote clause was put through the legislature.
The tax-subsidy team may yet come up with the right sucker pitch, but for now they're getting hammered pretty hard in the Arizona desert.
Fans elsewhere should tune in.
