Turner Broadcasting System Inc. and Home Shopping Network Inc. met recently to discuss a possible business combination, according to people close to both companies.
Turner Broadcasting is "very serious" about pursuing some type of deal with the network, said one media executive familiar with the conversations.
Cable-industry executives said Turner may be particularly interested in 12 UHF stations operated as Home Shopping affiliates by Silver King Communications, a company recently spun off by Home Shopping.
Turner's potential interest was first reported by Variety, an entertainment industry publication.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Home Shopping shares gained 75 cents to close at $13.75.
A spokeswoman at Turner Broadcasting declined to comment on any talks with Home Shopping.
A spokesman at Liberty Media Corp., which controls 80% of Home Shopping, said Home Shopping "from time to time has been contacted by third parties interested in pursuing some mutual venture."
But he declined to comment on any talks with Turner.
Turner's board is scheduled to meet in mid-April.
Turner -- which owns several cable networks, including Cable News Network, TNT and TBS -- could use the UHF stations as a launching pad for a fifth network, given that they reach about 28 million U.S. homes in such large markets as New York, Chicago and Los Angeles.
Though the stations are generally low-powered, they were recently granted must-carry status by the Federal Communications Commission.
That means the stations must be carried by the cable operators in their markets.
Some industry executives believe the key to any agreement between Turner and Home Shopping is John Malone, who is chairman of Liberty Media and president and chief executive of Tele-Communications Inc., as well as a powerful member of Turner's board.
Liberty Media, with partners, controls Home Shopping's chief competitor, QVC Inc.
Mr. Malone has wanted to unite QVC and Home Shopping, but has run into some regulatory roadblocks.
If Turner purchases Home Shopping, it would allow Mr. Malone to retain some say-so over the network's operation, and, through TCI's 22% interest in Turner, some ownership of it, as well.
Turner Broadcasting Chairman R.E. "Ted" Turner is also said to be comfortable with Home Shopping's management.
The channel's president and chief executive, Gerry Hogan, spent 19 years at Turner Broadcasting as one of Mr. Turner's top lieutenants.
He left in 1990 to become vice chairman of Whittle Communications L.P. and was named chief executive of Home Shopping last year.
If Turner acquired all of Home Shopping, an electronic retailer, it could use the network partly to sell merchandise -- such as Atlanta Braves baseball and cartoon and movie memorabilia -- that it now retails through its two Turner stores.
(Turner owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team, as well as Hanna-Barbera cartoons and a large film library.)
"Cable programmers are thinking a lot more about retailing," said Larry Haverty, a money manager with State Street Research & Management Inc. in Boston, which is a large shareholder in Home Shopping.
