Andrew Corp.
President Floyd English said "it looks like we can make" the 28 cents a share earnings analysts are projecting for the second quarter ending Thursday, and added that "we have a good chance of beating" that figure.
Revenue is expected to be up about 35% from a year earlier, to about $135 million, Mr. English said in an interview.
Those results would solidly top earnings in the prior year's second quarter of $4.5 million, or 18 cents a share, on revenue of $99.9 million.
Per-share figures reflect a 3-for-2 stock split paid earlier this month.
Asked if the company expects to hit analysts' mean estimate of $1.39 a share for fiscal 1994, Mr. English said: "I think we've got a chance of exceeding that."
Andrew, which makes communications equipment, is riding a wave of business generated by the expansion of wireless communication.
More than half of the company's revenue this year will come from international sales, including projects under way in Russia and Hong Kong.
About 60% of the latest quarter's revenue jump is attributable to a big South American contract, Mr. English noted.
Andrew is a major supplier to a consortium, Compania de Telefonos del Interior, which includes GTE Corp., American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and some Argentine interests, which is installing cellular facilities in Argentina.
Revenue from that contract will total about $30 million in the current fiscal year, Mr. English said, with the bulk of the business having been received in the first and second quarters.
Orders in the second quarter, he said, will hit $115 million to $120 million, compared with $101.6 million a year earlier.
The one trend that "stands out, and is fueling our growth, is wireless communication," Mr. English said.
Andrew sells coaxial cable and other products used in wireless applications, such as cellular telephone systems and two-way radio communications.
The growth of cellular systems in the U.S. has slowed somewhat after furious growth earlier, but remains strong in many overseas markets.
