In "The Diner," a new short story by Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright David Mamet, readers are invited into a world of relaxation, where breakfast is served all day and a writer can simply "hang out."
There aren't the usual Mamet characters -- sleazy salesmen, disturbed therapists or desperate individuals selling their moral soul to get ahead in Hollywood.
That's understandable since Mr. Mamet's latest work of fiction isn't in a literary magazine.
Rather, it can be found in the current family-oriented Lands' End catalog sandwiched between fashion spreads promoting casual men's and women's apparel.
Mr. Mamet, who won the 1984 Pulitzer Prize for his play "Glengarry Glen Ross," is the latest and perhaps the most renowned literary figure to contribute to the Lands' End catalog.
Others include George Plimpton, William Least Heat-Moon, author of "Blue Highways," and Edward Hoagland, who has written 15 books.
By having Mr. Mamet write an original story, Lands' End, based in Dodgeville, Wis., is using a strategy familiar to scores of other marketers: cut through the commercial clutter and create a distinctive voice.
"Mamet separates them from the rest of the pack," says Joan Burden Litle, president of the Catalog Connection, a merchandise and creative consulting company in Salem, N.H.
"It's a smart marketing tool that gives Lands' End a heart that beats.
It presents them as real people and not just a company that's on paper."
Lands' End, founded in 1963 as a boating-equipment catalog, is competing in an increasingly crowded field.
The average U.S. household receives 78 catalogs each year from among the 8,000 to 10,000 direct-mail companies, says a spokeswoman from the Direct Marketing Association.
The industry had projected sales last year of $55 billion, she says, up 7% from $51.5 billion in 1992.
And Lands' End wants to maintain its share of the growth.
It registered sales of $734 million in the fiscal year, ended Jan. 31, 1994.
That's up 7% from year-earlier sales of $683 million.
"The choice of Mamet is inspired," says Arnold Fishman, president of Marketing Logistics, a business consultant in Highland Park, Ill.
"Lands' End is like the Esquire of mail-order catalogs, in that it is trying to be a literary magazine."
But Mr. Fishman says the strategy isn't risk-free.
"Trading merchandise space for nonmerchandise space sometimes is ineffective," he says.
"You're giving away valued real estate by giving away pages of your catalog."
The selection of Mr. Mamet is indeed a curious one.
After all, his name doesn't conjure up characters with wholesome images.
And his plays are replete with curse words.
(Mr. Mamet didn't comment, and his agent, Andrew Wylie, didn't return phone calls seeking comment yesterday.)
But Stan Tymorek, the editorial director of the Lands' End catalogs, says Mr. Mamet was suggested by staff members who are fans of the playwright.
Mr. Tymorek wanted the current issue to spotlight men's chinos.
"And we thought Mamet could do a lighthearted essay on relaxation," he says.
"We left it up to him to do pretty much whatever he wanted."
Lands' End declines to comment on Mr. Mamet's fee, although Mr. Tymorek says Mr. Mamet "got paid more than we usually pay."
The company normally pays "the usual magazine rate," he says, which could be about $1 per word.
Lands' End isn't the first company to use famous authors for its catalog.
A decade ago, Banana Republic published in-store catalogs with essays, usually on travel, by well-known writers, including humorist and now film director and screenwriter Nora Ephron ("Sleepless in Seattle").
"These are highly effective," says Katie Muldoon, president of Muldoon & Baer, a New York catalog-consulting firm.
"They bring credibility to the table.
If someone is a fan of the person writing, then they may make a purchase."
To date, only one author has refused overtures from Lands' End: Calvin Trillin, the witty, laid-back observer of America.
And, says Mr. Tymorek, the reason wasn't ethics.
Rather, the refusal (made twice) was because of scheduling.
Land's End will probably try him again.
Mr. Trillin couldn't be reached for comment.
Land's End publishes its 12 catalogs annually with the hope consumers don't initially thumb though them and toss them if they don't initially find something to order.
The catalog periodically even features letters to the editor.
Still to come for Land's End consumers: an essay by National Public Radio commentator Bailey White, as well as stories by other authors about Mother's Day and Father's Day.
And to push its shorts, Land's End asked eight short-story writers to compose tales of 300 words, maximum, for its July issue.
"This is the marriage between magazines and a catalog, or a magalog, if you will," says Mr. Fishman.
"Lands' End is appealing to the upper end of the segment of the population who buys through catalogs."
It is perhaps fitting that Mr. Mamet's prose winds up in a venue that has only one purpose: selling.
After all, Mr. Mamet's Pulitzer Prize-winning play dealt with small-time, cutthroat salesmen.
And "Speed-the-Plow" was about selling out in Tinseltown.
Exactly why Mr. Mamet would write for a catalog remains unclear since he isn't talking.
Asked for his opinion, Mr. Tymorek says, "I assume he found it fair rate and worth his while.
And maybe he needed the work."
The CBS network is cleaning up during the February "sweeps" period with its Winter Olympics coverage.
The other two networks are resorting to racy fare, and it's making some advertisers queasy.
Kraft General Foods, a unit of Philip Morris Cos., has put two episodes of the ABC series "Roseanne" on its list of shows to avoid.
At issue are shows dealing with masturbation, a repeat that was set to air last night, and a new episode scheduled for next week, in which Roseanne and a lesbian, played by guest star Mariel Hemingway, kiss.
Also making the big advertiser's list of taboo shows is a repeat episode of "Law and Order" dealing with racism that's set to air on NBC tonight.
Kraft's agency, Grey Advertising, New York, put out an all-points bulletin to local ABC stations, noting that KGF spots shouldn't run in those episodes -- "be they regularly scheduled, make goods or bonus spots."
The company hadn't bought any national network time during the shows.
In addition, several advertisers pulled out at the last minute from NBC's broadcast of "Saturday Night Live" last week, in which comedian Martin Lawrence delivered a graphic monologue about sex, a network executive said.
An NBC spokeswoman declined to comment on advertisers' reaction to Mr. Lawrence's monologue, which drew tabloid headlines and dozens of calls to the network.
During "sweeps" periods, television audiences are measured to determine how much local stations can charge for ads.
Paul Schulman, whose company buys media time for advertisers, predicts CBS will end the first 10 days of Olympics coverage with an average prime-time rating of 26% of the nation's 94.2 million television homes -- beating the highest single night of viewership during the 1992 games in Albertville, France.
"It's almost like ABC and NBC saved these episodes to be controversial and push the envelope during the sweeps," says Paul Schulman, a New York media buyer.
"Right now, it doesn't seem like it matters what they throw against the Olympics -- no one is watching."
CRYSTAL LIGHT: Kraft General Foods returned the estimated $15 million Crystal Light powdered-drink account to D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles less than a year after firing the New York agency from the business and awarding it to WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather.
This time, DMB&B bested Ogilvy and two other KGF agencies, Grey Advertising and Young & Rubicam.
GAP: Wieden & Kennedy won't be creating ads for Gap Inc. after all.
The Portland, Ore., shop had been invited to show creative work to the San Francisco retailer last year and made two fruitless presentations since.
Last week was the last one, said David Luhr, the agency's director of account services, confirming a report in Adweek.
"They didn't buy the creative {work} we presented," he said.
"That was their prerogative.
Now we're going our separate ways."
DIET COKE CANS: Coca-Cola Co. said it is giving Diet Coke cans a new nostalgic design.
The cans will feature "Diet" written in the style of script used in the original Coke trademark.
Diet Coke has lost market share in the last two years, according to the Maxwell Consumer Report, as diet-soda sales have slowed.
Coke has been trying to spark interest in its brands with packaging changes: The company recently added the image of the old-fashioned contoured Coke bottle to cans of Coca-Cola Classic.
