North Korea may be the most vexing place on earth right now.
While it observes the diplomatic forms punctiliously, at a fundamental level it just doesn't operate like the rest of us.
North Korea's weirdness wouldn't matter so much if it were some harmless backwater.
It is not; it is now playing chicken with its nuclear program, refusing to allow inspections to which it is subject under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Despite recent talk of progress on inspections, North Korea on Friday denounced the International Atomic Energy Agency's "absurd" assertion that the Koreans were making serious inspections impossible.
All the North Koreans had done was tell the agency that "regular" inspections of its civilian sites would be forbidden and a look at two undeclared sites was out of the question.
Meanwhile, President Clinton was telling CNN last week it's clear the North Koreans are trying to develop the bomb.
Mr. Clinton's reaction to this is that the U.S. will "continue to work very hard and to be very firm about not wanting Korea to join the family of nuclear states."
We're not reassured.
It now must be clear to the most cautious of compromisers that the usual combination of carrots and sticks (or in the case of the negotiations with the U.S., carrots and carrots) simply hasn't worked.
The CIA thinks that Pyongyang already has a bomb or two; in November President Clinton flatly said the U.S. could not allow this.
And in the tremendous effort to get inspections of some kind, we didn't hear much about what the consequences would be if something truly bad was found.
The U.S. side has offered lots of blandishments -- cancellation of annual military exercises, high-level talks and the possibility of aid and diplomatic relations -- that North Korea would like to have.
All these carrots have not appeared to dim Pyongyang's determination to do whatever it is doing.
The assumption must therefore be that North Korea is determined to have its bomb.
Would Pyongyang use it?
Maybe not.
That is the one thing that could provoke retaliation, but there are some troubling signs to consider.
Jane's Defense Weekly has reported on the development of the Nodong-1 short-to-intermediate-range ballistic missile; and Russia, through a Japanese company, has just sold 40 attack submarines to Pyongyang.
These subs, all ancient by naval standards, were supposedly sold for scrap metal, but we think skepticism is the better part of diplomacy here.
After all, given the state of North Korean industry, it would be cheaper to strip a few disused local plants for scrap instead of spending precious hard currency on old subs.
There has also been much talk in the official press of "reunification in 1995."
A Pyongyang Times editorial last week noted with a sense of urgency: "It is our nation's supreme task to reunify the country in the '90s and hand down a reunified country to generations to come."
And in December, a communique after the Central Committee plenum said that the economy was rotten, blaming Western aggression for the situation: "We could not but take resolute self-defense measures," the communique noted, "putting the whole country, the entire people and the whole army in a semiwar state."
That may be rhetorical exaggeration, but North Korea is still the world's most intensely militarized country, with the least predictable leadership.
Such pronouncements bear watching.
Under these circumstances, one has to question President Clinton's reflex in offering more and more concessions to entice good, or at least not awful, behavior from the regime.
The lesson that Kim Il-sung (and Iraq and Iran and Libya) could easily draw is that bad behavior pays.
For all these reasons, we think it's time to brandish the stick.
Yes, we know China is not keen to be too tough on its socialist neighbor and we know Japan doesn't want to stop the flow of funds to North Korea and we know the U.N. can't be expected to do much.
Still, at some point seriousness and credibility demand that Pyongyang begin to incur a cost for its actions.
