Brazil's financial markets are reacting nervously to reports that the government might impose measures to stem the inflow of foreign capital in the wake of its latest anti-inflation plan.
Fearful that a continued massive inflow of foreign funds could lead to an expansion of its monetary base and accelerate inflation, the Brazilian government Thursday published a decree giving it the option of imposing a tax of as much as 25% on funds entering Brazil's stock markets -- though a separate bill said no tax will be levied at present.
The decree also confirmed that foreign-currency loans would be subject to a 3% tax and funds entering the country for fixed-income investments will continue to pay a 5% tax.
Though the decree and related bill don't introduce any immediate change, businessmen saw the mention of stock market investments in the decree as a potentially ominous sign that could stunt the spectacular growth of the Brazilian market.
Luiz Fernando Furlan, chief executive officer of the Sadia food group, described the looming threat of taxes as "a terrorist measure."
Despite the measures, the Sao Paulo market rose 6.5% on Friday.
On Thursday, the market rose 2.3% in value, but volume fell by more than 20%.
In Rio, the stock market rose 6.1% in value on Friday, but on modest volume.
The measures are widely viewed here as an effort by the Brazilian government to assuage concerns expressed by the International Monetary Fund over rapid monetary expansion -- while at the same time doing nothing to scare away foreign capital.
Total foreign investment in Brazil last year totaled $32.6 billion, up from $17.7 billion in 1992, and Brazilian stock markets absorbed more than $12 billion in foreign investment last year.
But as in other South American countries like Chile, which enforces measures to discourage short-term investments, these funds are both a blessing and a curse.
Brazil needs foreign capital to build up its foreign-exchange reserves, which stood at $32.2 billion at the end of December; healthy reserves are necessary to back up the gradual phasing-in of a new currency, which is the centerpiece of the country's economic plan.
But a rapid expansion could undermine the plan by accelerating inflation.
"The government is between a rock and a hard place," said Humberto Casagrande, executive director for capital markets at Banco Crefisul in Sao Paulo.
"But imposing a high tax on stock market investments would be disastrous.
Money would leave, reserves would drop and the confidence of foreign investors would collapse."
