The Clinton administration thinks it has solved the job-training puzzle.
Armed with a raft of studies on how best to find jobs for inner-city poor people, out-of-work factory workers and everyone else from the elderly to native Americans, the Labor Department is trumpeting its new methods: Get to the unemployed earlier.
Train inner-city kids longer.
Get inner-city adults better job data.
In the past, two things have been missing from job-training efforts: the money to make things happen, and the gumption to expand small programs that work and cut ones that don't.
The administration's budget that was released yesterday would go a long way toward solving the first problem.
While funds for discretionary federal programs are being slashed across the government, the Labor Department's employment and training budget would jump a huge 17% to $7.4 billion.
At the core of the new training money would be a 31% boost for helping "dislocated workers," often middle-class people who have lost their jobs because of technology, corporate restructuring, military cutbacks and international trade.
At the same time, programs for the inner-city poor would rise 13%, more than four times the projected rate of inflation.
Within those major areas, the Labor Department is using a raft of studies as guideposts for how to target the funds.
For the inner-city poor, a large boost would go to Job Corps, a program that takes city kids out of their neighborhoods and places them in a military-style environment for as much as two years.
"The program is a winner," says Labor Secretary Robert Reich, who wants to see the Job Corps budget increase 11%.
Similarly, the administration would increase spending on youth summer jobs by $168 million, to $1.06 billion, and triple spending (to $150 million) for a program that would help link high-schoolers to jobs if they don't go on to college.
At the same time, the administration wants to slash by 9%, or $60 million, spending on short-term training for poor youths.
A 30-month study recently completed showed that youths using the program actually earned less than a control group.
"We have to move dollars toward those efforts that have demonstrated effectiveness," said Douglas Ross, Mr. Reich's point man for job training.
The proof, he contends, is in the studies.
Take, for example, a New Jersey pilot program that showed people get off unemployment earlier if authorities target training funds to workers who most need help.
In the New Jersey program, officials distinguished between workers who were temporarily laid off and those who are permanently dismissed.
The latter group got most training funds, and the help reached them more quickly.
"Profiling" unemployed workers, as the New Jersey practice is known, has since gone national.
In an interview, Mr. Reich said the agency he inherited was "not just a backwater, but a backwater within a backwater."
But all it needed was to be reinvigorated to find the better ideas, he said.
"There's no magic in listening to employees who have good ideas," Mr. Reich said.
But some people are skeptical.
"There is no solution in what they have found," argues Steven Hofman, former assistant secretary at the Bush Labor Department.
"They have dropped any attempt to make the local training providers accountable for results.
Until you make them accountable, they will continue to train people for jobs that don't exist."
