Perhaps the most remarkable thing about communitarian Amitai Etzioni's Dec. 31 editorial-page piece "How Our Towns Fight Crime," is that he blames one of the nation's most intractable and complex social problems on one relatively small, nonprofit organization: the American Civil Liberties Union.
The next most remarkable thing is that he exonerates through omission the people who bear the greatest responsibility for our crime problem: the local, state and federal elected officials who, for so many years, have evaded their responsibility to come up with solutions that work by pandering to the public's fears and passing laws that sound tough but do little to reduce crime.
The truth, as Mr. Etzioni very well knows, is that if the ACLU were to fold tomorrow, the crime rate would not decrease by even one-tenth of a percentage point.
Mr. Etzioni's article contains many misstatements of ACLU policies and practices.
Contrary to his claims, the ACLU has never opposed community crime watches, community antidrug patrols or airport metal detectors.
We actively support the concept of community policing.
These activities do not raise serious constitutional problems and they can, under some circumstances, effectively fight crime.
But let's take one of Mr. Etzioni's "crime fighting" measures that we do oppose: roadblocks to apprehend drunk and drug-using drivers.
As many law enforcement professionals will tell you, roadblocks are a terribly ineffective strategy for apprehending drivers under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
In our 1986 challenge to a Michigan State Police sobriety checkpoint program, three Michigan county sheriffs testified that roadblocks were an inefficient use of scarce police resources and that deploying police officers on roving patrols to look for signs of erratic or intoxicated drivers -- in other words, to look for "probable cause" -- was the preferable law enforcement strategy.
This testimony reflected the view of the Michigan Sheriffs' Association, which had voted to oppose sobriety checkpoints.
The Michigan trial court was persuaded and found that, "Sobriety checkpoints can be used to effectuate only an extremely low number of arrests, and . . . they have no potential for a sustained deterrent effect."
Mr. Etzioni also belittles the Fourth Amendment problems raised by roadblocks and checkpoints, suggesting that they are no more invasive than passing through a metal detector at an airport.
Perhaps he has never been subjected to one.
The Michigan program that was struck down by the state courts required that all vehicles passing through the checkpoint be stopped.
Every driver had to submit to an examination by the police that included the following: looking at the driver's face and eyes to see whether they were flushed or bloodshot; smelling the driver's breath; engaging the driver in conversation, and inspecting the driver's shirt to see whether it was unbuttoned.
All this without any reason to suspect any particular person of wrongdoing.
If you hang 'em all, you'll get the guilty, Mr. Etzioni seems to believe.
Well, we believe otherwise.
So did the people who founded this country, and so do most thinking Americans today.
Several years ago, the American Bar Association published its report, "Criminal Justice in Crisis."
It was based on hearings in three cities and a national survey of more than 800 prosecutors, defense lawyers, judges and high-ranking police officials.
One of the questions posed to the law enforcement officials was whether they believed constitutional rights, like the Exclusionary Rule and the Miranda warnings, posed an obstacle to effective law enforcement.
Most of them said no.
The ABA concluded that, "Taken as a whole, the testimony and the survey results demonstrate that constitutional limitations are not seen as a relatively significant problem by the people who must work within those limitations."
