Orders for durable goods in 1993 showed their strongest gain in five years, providing another sign that the manufacturing sector is recovering from a long period of stagnation.
Orders for durable goods, products which are expected to last three years or more, rose 8.6% last year to $1.597 trillion, the Commerce Department said.
It was the largest increase since the 9.6% rise in 1988.
In December, durable-goods orders climbed 2.2% to $142.78 billion, the fifth consecutive monthly increase.
Analysts said the latest figures suggest that the manufacturing sector has become much healthier in recent months after years of restructurings and layoffs.
They also said the figures suggest that industrial production will continue to improve this year.
"We've paid our dues and now it's time to reap the reward," said James Smith, finance professor at the University of North Carolina.
The pickup in activity is likely to curb massive job cutbacks in recent months at many U.S. factories.
But employment growth still isn't likely to pick up drastically, analysts said.
"Jobs in the manufacturing sector will likely stabilize or rise a little bit in 1994," said Stuart Hoffman, chief economist at PNC Bank Corp. of Pittsburgh and chairman of the American Bankers Association's economic advisory committee.
Economists were particularly encouraged that despite continual cutbacks in defense spending, overall orders were still strong in 1993.
Analysts often exclude defense when interpreting orders, because these big-ticket items often are more reflective of government fiscal policy than capital spending.
The rise in durable-goods orders in December followed a revised 2.3% gain in November and a 2.6% increase in October.
The strongest showing for December was in electronic and other electrical equipment, which rose 5.4%.
Analysts also noted significant increases in orders for non-defense capital goods, particularly computers and office equipment.
Transportation, the most volatile of the sectors, rose the least, 1.2%.
Aircraft orders, however, fell during the month.
That makes the transportation figures look better, because the often volatile aircraft orders frequently make the transportation sector appear healthier than it actually is.
Unfilled orders for durable goods fell for the 10th consecutive month to the lowest level since March 1988.
A backlog of orders is often considered a measure of whether current facilities and manpower can keep up with demand.
A consistently declining number suggests no need for larger production lines and increased employment.
However, some economists contend that the shrinking backlog is due to strong shipments, which also increased for the fifth month in a row, outpacing the growth in orders.
The significance of the continuing decline in unfilled orders is "not necessarily a negative," said Tom Runiewicz, an economist at WEFA Group in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
"Manufacturers understand they need to be much more efficient or they won't be in business in the next five years.
It may be positive in the sense that turnaround time in filling orders has been shortened," Mr. Runiewicz said, and manufacturers are working with less of a backlog.
The manufacturing trend of investment in more-efficient equipment will continue, keeping the size of the work force flat, he said.
Separately, initial claims for unemployment insurance tumbled 56,000 in the week ended Jan. 22 to 309,000.
Analysts said that cold weather, the Los Angeles earthquake and the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday probably kept many Americans from filing claims during the week.
The four-week average for seasonally adjusted claims for the same time frame was 347,000, up from a revised 343,000 for the previous week.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
