If health reform goes into the lawbooks, an obscure regulatory organization will likely have a lot to say about how that law works on the ground.
The regulators' organization -- the Kansas City, Mo., National Association of Insurance Commissioners -- has been studying for months the health-care alliances, huge cooperatives to buy health insurance that form a key part of President Clinton's plan.
While it isn't clear whether the health-care alliances will make it through the political maze to become part of the final health-reform plan, if they do, Washington "will rely on states for follow-up," said Robert Laszewski, a consultant with Health Policy & Strategy Associates in Washington.
"The states will have the power to implement whatever passes."
What many states, particularly small ones, will likely do depends on the outcome of a series of meetings now under way among the insurance commissioners.
In June, the association is expected to release model legislation that states can use to pattern their own laws.
States routinely adopt the models devised by the association.
The association's low profile hasn't made a difficult job any easier.
Allen Feezor, North Carolina's chief deputy insurance commissioner, said he is disappointed that the only outside reaction on the health-care alliance proposal has come from insurers and consumer groups.
He said the commissioners would also like to hear from employers and their trade groups.
His boss, North Carolina Insurance Commissioner James Long, heads the NAIC committee looking into the issue.
Insurance is regulated by the states, and the NAIC is the closest thing there is to national oversight of the industry.
Made up of insurance commissioners from all 50 states and the District of Columbia, the association meets several times a year to discuss industry issues and work on model legislation.
The group has become more active in recent years, after the failure of several large life insurers prompted calls for federal regulation.
Its proposal four years ago on how to reform legislation governing health-insurance rates was subsequently adopted by 40 states.
Despite the controversy surrounding alliances, the concept itself is simple.
Employers pool together in groups to buy health insurance, and get the volume discounts and other privileges that come with group purchasing.
But setting the alliances up is tricky.
Washington will decide the broad outlines of what an alliance should look like.
Then states will take over.
The insurance commissioners are currently working on a voluntary plan, in which co-ops compete with insurance companies for business.
Later, the group will look at mandatory alliances, favored by Mr. Clinton, which give consumers no choice but to buy from the co-op.
The White House argues that's the only way to achieve the president's goals of universal coverage and more affordable coverage.
But the view from Capitol Hill is that the large, mandatory health-insurance purchasing co-ops supported by Mr. Clinton for all employers with fewer than 5,000 workers won't become reality.
Instead, a system of voluntary alliances to help give small businesses clout in the health-care market is likely to be adopted.
States are likely to be given the option of setting up a mandatory alliance system if they wish, however.
Under the voluntary plan now being crafted by the commissioners, states could have several alliances.
But each alliance would serve a distinct region without competition from other alliances.
Health plans that sell through the alliances would have to offer identical sets of benefits.
The plans would have to charge everyone in the same age group and region the same rate regardless of health, gender and occupation.
Regional advisory boards would oversee the alliances.
Employers, rather than employees, would select specific health plans.
Health-insurance brokers and agents, whose jobs would vanish under the Clinton proposal, could probably continue to advise employers on choosing a health plan.
Some insurance companies object to how the proposed alliances would limit the number of plans being offered.
For instance, instead of being able to choose from 60 different health plans, as they can now, employers might get to choose from only 10 within the alliance.
Mr. Feezor says it's unrealistic to allow every insurer to sell through the alliance.
"I don't know too many big employers that offer every plan to their employees," he said.
Many insurers also object to regional limits on alliances.
They would rather have alliances competing with each other.
That way, an insurance company rejected by one alliance might find a home at another one.
