Interest-rate cuts by the German Bundesbank and other European central banks yesterday ignited late rallies on many of the Continent's bourses.
London stocks rose marginally after worries about British corporate earnings eroded gains prompted by the unexpected rate cuts.
The German move was unveiled after the exchange closed in Frankfurt, where prices fell in the regular session but jumped in after-market trading.
In Tokyo, stocks dropped in thin turnover Thursday, as investors remained wary about the Japanese yen's continued strength in the standoff in U.S.-Japanese trade relations.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.16, down 0.23, reflecting lower Asia/Pacific and American markets and higher European markets.
Water utilities stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 125.77, up 1.62, or 1.3%, with Lyonnaise des Eaux Dumez of France posting a 2.4% gain in its local currency.
Advanced technology/medical devices stocks trailed at 70.22, down 1.93, or 2.7%, with Acuson of the U.S. sliding 5.1% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index rose 7.6 points to 3425.3, off from its intraday high of 3437.6.
The FT 30-stock index edged up 1.0 point to 2634.0.
Volume was 701 million shares, compared with 817.5 million shares a day earlier.
In its first easing of key rates since last October, the German central bank lowered to 5.25% from 5.75% its discount rate, which it charges commercial banks for short-term loans.
Central banks in Belgium, the Netherlands and Austria also reduced rates, and later yesterday, Italy joined the bandwagon.
The afternoon news of the Bundesbank decision spurred London's FT 100 to reverse a loss -- the session low was 3404.5 -- and roll up a 17.5-point gain.
The London rally also was aided by a strong opening on Wall Street.
Investors continued to hope for a British lending-rate cut, following the previous day's report of subdued inflationary pressure, disappointing industrial output and a rise in unemployment.
But in the last hour of London trading, prices retreated on concerns about a glut of corporate results to be posted next week; 10 of the companies in the 100-stock index are to report earnings.
The low volume indicated that investors were awaiting a British monetary easing and bullish corporate results.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index slipped 7.89 points to 2128.72, less than a point above the session's low, in quiet trading.
In computerized after-market dealings, stocks jumped 20 points, as investors had expected the Bundesbank to leave rates steady until at least early March, based on money-supply growth data then and an anticipated settlement of the giant metalworkers union contract.
In Paris, share prices were lower in morning dealings but rallied in the afternoon in response to the European interest-rate cuts, finishing higher.
Traders expected the Bank of France to follow suit soon, perhaps today; the central bank left benchmark rates unchanged during yesterday's securities repurchase agreement.
In Amsterdam, equities had a mixed to weaker start but also ended with gains following a rally driven by the monetary news in Europe.
In Milan, stocks advanced in frenzied dealings touched off by interest-rate fever following the German announcement and by speculation Italy also would cut rates, as it did later.
In Madrid, prices ended higher after a weak opening and further sagging before roaring up in response to the Bundesbank move, then slipping toward the close.
In Stockholm, shares jumped in heavy trading, supported by declining Swedish bond and money-market yields after the German discount-rate cut.
In Zurich, equities climbed, propelled by strength in banking shares and a late burst of buying in response to the German easing, which also pushed many shares up in Brussels, where prices closed mixed to higher.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 77.51 points Wednesday, fell 120.72 to 18931.39.
On Friday, the Nikkei index rose 88.41 points to close the morning session at 19019.80.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 300 million shares, down from 372.3 million shares a day earlier.
Losers trounced gainers, 696293.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which gained 3.76 points Wednesday, fell 5.55 to 1553.55.
Activity was subdued, as investors continued to wait for clues about the direction of the Japanese currency, though more advances soon weren't considered likely.
Participants were cheered when the yen didn't advance further Wednesday after President Clinton said his top advisers will make recommendations "in the next few days" regarding trade with Japan.
The yen had strengthened sharply against the dollar following the failure last weekend of bilateral trade talks.
A stabilizing yen reduced pressure to sell shares.
But many investors feared that the yen's rise could offset Japan's efforts to hasten an economic recovery.
The trade issue caused weakness in Tokyo stocks in morning activity, and prices were hurt in early-afternoon dealings by arbitrage-linked selling, as declines in Nikkei-index futures led to selling of shares.
Overseas investors, who were mostly on the sidelines in the morning, bought large-capitalization shares in the afternoon, helping the Nikkei recoup some of its losses.
In Sydney, stocks closed mainly lower, driven largely by a sell-off in the futures market, which is typical there ahead of a U.S. report on consumer prices; gold stocks rose along with the metal's price.
In Hong Kong, shares climbed 1.4%, regaining some of losses that took the market down 7.6% in the previous three sessions.
Overseas institutional investors were the major players.
Trading was quiet, as news to influence the market remained scarce ahead of Friday's meeting of the local banking cartel, which will decide after the market closes whether to lift Hong Kong interest rates.
In Taipei, prices rose 0.7%, after losing 2% Wednesday and more than 6% in this week's first three days.
Late in the session, financial shares saved the market from its fourth drop in a row, bringing the main index into the positive territory where it had begun.
In Seoul, equities eased after a storm of last-minute selling wiped out early gains, as investors turned cautious following two strong sessions on positive news, including settlement of North Korea's nuclear issue, a strong Japanese yen and the South Korean government's renewed commitment to technology development.
In Bangkok, stocks survived several bouts of profit-taking in blue chips to rise 1.1%.
Among corporate developments, in Tokyo, Pioneer Electronic lost 60 yen, or 2.1%, to 2,800 yen ($26.97).
The consumer electronics maker's consolidated pretax profit for its third quarter ended Dec. 31 plunged 74% to 3 billion yen ($28.9 million) from a year earlier, hurt by sluggish global sales and the yen's appreciation against other major currencies.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
