A band of scrappy independent energy producers and two of California's major utilities are going head to head over who gets to produce the state's electricity in the future.
Under rules set by California's Public Utilities Commission in the late 1980s, dozens of companies have been bidding for more than $1 billion in customer-funded contracts to build new generating plants through the late 1990s.
Many of the winning bids have come from producers of wind turbines, thermal energy and other "renewable resources."
Now, SCEcorp and San Diego Gas & Electric Co., California's second- and third-largest utilities, say they don't want or need all the additional generating capacity.
SCE claims that California's precarious economic condition, combined with the prospect of lower-than-anticipated growth rates through 2005, means that the state-endorsed plans to build new plants are unreasonable and obsolete.
The San Diego utility wants to modify the terms of some new projects.
So they've appealed to the Public Utilities Commission to halt the process.
The commission's decision will help shape the electric-utility industry into the next decade.
What SCE objects to is being forced to contract for power that won't be needed for a decade or more.
It "makes no sense whatsoever," says Don Fellows, SCE's manager of independent power.
The Public Utilities Commission yesterday put off a decision about what to do with the bids until later this year.
The rhetoric over the proposed new power capacity has become superheated, with each side accusing the other of using phony cost estimates and scare tactics to mislead the public.
SCE, for example, contends that the new plants could cost customers an extra $530 million over the next few years, which would prompt many prime industrial customers to try to produce their own power.
The opposition contends that SCE is dredging up any argument, no matter how far-fetched, to halt the new projects, because the Rosemead, Calif., utility simply wants to block "any new power generation that it doesn't own, control and profit from," reads a filing from Kenetech Corp., a fast-growing wind-power company in San Francisco.
Utilities are "feeling fundamentally threatened, so they have drawn up the bridges and filled up the moat," says Gerald Alderson, Kenetech's president.
Having won roughly $500 million in the state auction, Kenetech stands to emerge as a big winner.
There isn't any doubt, says Allan Thompson, a San Francisco attorney specializing in independent power regulation, that bids submitted by most utilities "were beat by the independents."
Wind-power advocates claim, for example, that their projected costs to produce energy came in at least 20% below traditional utility estimates for comparable capacity.
If alternative-energy bidders are victorious, as many observers expect, SCE and many other utilities could be phased out of the business of building and operating new U.S. generating plants.
They might then be relegated largely to the role of buying power from the cheapest sources and transmitting it over the existing power grid to customers.
SCE and San Diego Gas say they aren't opposed to alternative energy and point out that in years past they have been in the forefront of utilities that have switched to wind turbines, thermal energy and other alternative-power sources.
But Gregory Enholm, a former Wall Street analyst who is now an industry consultant, says utilities increasingly are concluding that many of the renewable projects conceived years ago "are not such a good idea for them or for their ratepayers."
Instead of rubber-stamping the auction results as a single package, SCE wants the commission to give it authority to negotiate for a few new plants on a case-by-case basis.
The most bitter attacks on the utilities come from consumer advocates, whose recent filing dismisses SCE's complaints as "a diversionary action" to draw attention away from fundamental pricing issues.
The same document lambastes SCE for serving up "a bizarre and unreal collection of red herrings, strawmen, anecdotes . . . shameless economic" distortions and "everything but the kitchen sink" to protect its market share.
SCE, too, is stepping up the pressure.
To convince skeptics, it has promised to forgo expansion of any of its existing plants for at least eight years and to seek competitive bids for all new power sources it may require.
Meanwhile, San Francisco-based Pacific Gas & Electric Co., the nation's largest investor-owned electric utility, is hedging its bets.
PG&E's executives also have complained about the bidding procedures, but they have stopped short of calling for outright cancellation of the construction program.
One reason appears to be that the company's unregulated subsidiary submitted the lowest-cost bids for a sizable chunk of the projects under debate.
The commission's deliberations, which will probably stretch out over months, will be watched closely by regulators and utility executives across the country.
The outcome will go a long way toward determining the financial and regulatory constraints utilities will have to confront in other states.
Federal energy regulators already have ordered utilities to give competitors equal access to transmission lines, increasing the likelihood of intrastate and interstate price wars to sell electricity.
Although today's low oil prices make renewable energy less atractive, independent producers have made considerable headway in the past few years marketing such power.
SCE, for example, gets 23% of its current power from renewables.
During the third quarter of 1993, according to the latest figures compiled by the industry-backed Edison Electric Institute, U.S. utilities spent nearly 15% more than the previous year to purchase power from outside sources.
The bottom line, according to David Roe, a senior attorney with the Environmental Defense Fund, is that many large utilities "are committed rhetorically to the idea of buying the cheapest power" and favoring pollution-free energy sources.
"But in practice," Mr. Roe asserts, "they don't want to do anything to compete with their own generating capacity."
