The publishing division of Paramount Communications Inc. said it plans to sharply reduce the number of books published under the Macmillan name after it acquires the company, but will retain a significant number of Macmillan Inc.'s 1,100 staffers.
Paramount's $552.8 million purchase of Macmillan, announced last November, is scheduled to close next month.
Already the nation's largest publisher with more than $2 billion in annual sales and nearly 9,000 employees, Paramount Publishing will be strengthened by the merger in several high-growth areas, including reference publishing, college books and children's titles.
Macmillan's revenue for the year ending in March is estimated at about $300 million.
It isn't clear what other changes may be in store for the combined publishing operations once the takeover battle for Paramount Communications is settled between rival bidders QVC Network Inc. and Viacom Inc.
There has been some speculation that whoever acquires Paramount might spin off or sell the publishing division, but insiders at both QVC and Viacom deny that is their plan.
The consolidation plan announced Friday by Richard Snyder, Paramount Publishing's chairman, and Jonathan Newcomb, president, put to rest for now concerns that there would be mass layoffs and cutbacks at Macmillan.
"They didn't go through here with a machete like some people feared," said one Macmillan editor, who requested anonymity.
Paramount will, however, disband Macmillan's 35-year-old Atheneum unit, which publishes 15 or 20 highbrow fiction and nonfiction titles annually.
"I think there is inevitably some sadness here because all of us at Macmillan formed a small, cohesive unit and we're being broken up and moved around," said Lee Goerner, publisher of Atheneum.
Mr. Goerner said he has been asked to stay until spring to finish publishing the books he has under contract.
"I can understand why a huge company wouldn't want to keep a small imprint like this," he said.
"What we are experiencing is relatively little downsizing in the creative areas where products are developed," said Jack Romanos, who heads consumer publishing at Paramount.
"We didn't buy Macmillan to make it go away."
Although Paramount executives decline to estimate the magnitude of final staff cuts, some insiders say they don't expect it to be higher than 10% of the combined staff.
Messrs. Snyder and Newcomb said the Macmillan name will cease to appear on adult consumer books or college textbooks.
But the merged reference book division, including a number of Paramount units, will be named Macmillan Publishing.
In most areas where functions are duplicated, the Paramount editor will run the merged division, as in children's books, even though Macmillan's children's department dwarfs Paramount's in size.
The combined output of Paramount and Macmillan children's divisions is about 650 titles a year, said one executive, but that will be cut to about 450 titles a year.
With the addition of Macmillan's titles, Paramount will be able to justify a separate sales force for children's books for the first time.
In the consumer area of fiction and nonfiction, while the Macmillan name will disappear, Paramount said it will publish about 60 to 75 titles a year under the Scribner name, which has a long tradition of good literature.
The only other freestanding publishing imprint to remain will be Free Press, known for nonfiction titles with a conservative bent, such as Robert Bork's memoirs.
Paramount will continue to publish under the names Simon & Schuster, Pocket Books, Touchstone and Fireside.
In college publishing, Paramount is already a national leader, but Macmillan will allow it to "fill out our portfolio," said Mr. Snyder, the Paramount Publishing chairman.
"They made us stronger in science and math and upper-level courses, where we were stronger before in entry-level courses."
The combined college division will be so large that Paramount can build six specialized sales forces instead of the two it has now, for science and humanities.
One of the six divisions will be in the area of English as a second language, in which Paramount will become the largest U.S. publisher.
Individually, some editors in the Macmillan college division complain that their counterparts at Paramount have been asking to be briefed on what books have already been signed up so they could take them over, and indicating that the Macmillan staffers would soon be out of a job.
Paramount said it wasn't aware of any such conversations and that such statements wouldn't reflect the spirit of the integration.
