Apple Computer Inc., continuing to feel the squeeze of shrinking profit margins, said net income plunged 75% for its fiscal first quarter, although shipments of Macintosh personal computers soared to a record on discounted prices.
The profit of $40 million, or 34 cents a share, for the period ended Dec. 31 compared with net income of $161.3 million, or $1.33 a share, for the year-earlier quarter.
Revenue increased 23%, to $2.47 billion in the quarter from $2 billion a year ago, boosted by a year-over-year 40% jump in shipments of Macintosh PCs to a quarterly record of more than 1 million.
The profit results slightly exceeded analysts' mean expectations for the Cupertino, Calif.-based computer maker to earn about 31 cents a share for the quarter.
Revenue was about as analysts expected.
"They just really pushed a lot of inventory out on the market but it came at the expense of margins," said John J. Girton, vice president of research for Van Kasper & Co.
Apple released its earnings after the close of major financial markets yesterday.
Its stock rose 62.5 cents, closing at $29.875 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Apple's ongoing quandary the past year has been to cut the prices on its flagship Macintosh line while at the same time trying to keep costs in line with sliding profit margins.
Apple used to be able to sell the Macintosh for a premium over rival PCs, since its operating system was easier to use.
But the explosion onto competitive PCs in recent years of Microsoft Corp.'s Windows operating system, which emulates Macintosh's ease of use, crippled Apple's once-healthy market-share gains.
Since succeeding John Sculley as Apple's chief executive last summer, Michael Spindler has aimed to sharply discount the Macintosh line to get sales back on track.
Because the reduced prices have severely crimped profit margins (gross margins fell to 24% of net sales in the first quarter from nearly 41% a year ago), Apple has had to undergo massive cost cuts, including layoffs of 2,500 employees last summer.
While Apple's operating expenses for net sales were reduced in the quarter from a year ago, Mr. Spindler indicated in a statement that "our challenge is to continue to grow our unit shipments and revenues while we make further progress in reducing our operating expenses."
He didn't indicate in the statement whether more staff cuts were anticipated, although when asked that at a recent news conference, Mr. Spindler responded: "You never know."
That Apple was able to achieve big gains in Macintosh sales during the busy Christmas season is a plus for the company, since some analysts have voiced concern that buyers might await the company's planned introduction in March of a line of Macintoshes based on a new microprocessor called PowerPC.
The company said yesterday that the PowerPC launch remains on schedule.
While Apple developed PowerPC with two powerful allies, International Business Machines Corp. and Motorola Inc., it faces tough odds in wresting much share away from Windows-based PC rivals because Windows commands 90% of the PC market.
The Windows-based computers are powered by micrprocessors made by chipmaker Intel Corp., a key Microsoft ally.
Apple also is counting on new businesses to shore up the profit line.
It recently announced it would soon start a computerized on-line service, and is trying to build a product line around the handheld Newton MessagePad, introduced last summer.
Newton, though, has gotten off to a shaky start because of users' difficulty in using its vaunted handwriting recognition, and so sales have been disappointing.
