In response to your Jan. 10 editorial "Segregated and Unequal," which presents your apparent opposition to taking race into account in seeking to remedy racial discrimination in voting: You note that I withdrew from consideration for the position of assistant attorney general for civil rights and assert that I "declined to strongly support the continued drawing of race-conscious districts."
Virtually the same assertion was made in a Dec. 27 editorial-page piece by Carol Swain.
Neither your editorial writer nor Ms. Swain contacted me.
If they had, they would have learned that I hold the opposite view.
I believe that race-conscious remedies are often necessary to redress racial discrimination.
(I have defended many race-conscious programs designed to remedy discrimination, including Richmond's program in the Supreme Court in Richmond v.
This is especially the case with respect to racial discrimination in the political process where a well-documented and overwhelming history of racial discrimination caused Congress to adopt and then to extend the Voting Rights Act.
The act explicitly provides a remedy for members of racial groups that "have less opportunity than other members of the electorate to participate in the political process and to elect representatives of their choice."
The jurisdiction you focused on, the Fourth Congressional District of Louisiana, was drawn for the specific purpose of remedying Louisiana's longstanding exclusion of black people from the political process.
Louisiana has had a substantial black population for more than two centuries; at present, its population is 30% black.
Nevertheless, from Reconstruction to 1990, more than 100 years -- no black person had been elected to Congress from Louisiana.
The Voting Rights Act was passed to deal with precisely this type of situation, and because of its application, two of the seven congressional districts in Louisiana are now represented by black people.
We all wish for the day when race no longer plays the pernicious role that it continues to play in our society.
The challenge is to bring that day closer.
The only way to ensure that is to use all of the tools available to eliminate the effects of racial discrimination in our society.
The Voting Rights Act is such a tool; it must be vigorously enforced.
