As a university economics professor, Edmond Alphandery is convinced that greater labor flexibility, lower costs and better job training are vital to reducing France's high unemployment rate.
As France's economics minister, however, Mr. Alphandery has first-hand experience of just how hard it can be to put those convictions into practice and make even seemingly innocuous changes to the nation's rigid labor laws.
Over the past few days, the streets of Paris and other French cities have been clogged by tens of thousands of students and workers protesting new government measures designed to curb youth unemployment.
The measures would allow companies to pay young people 20% less than the standard industry wage -- in some cases less than the statutory minimum wage -- in exchange for teaching them professional skills.
France has long admired the German apprentice system, which gives young people the opportunity to learn a trade without overburdening industry with high wage costs.
One consequence is that youth unemployment is far lower in Germany than it is in France, where more than one in five people under age 25 are unemployed.
The new rules are part of a big government package of measures that seeks to inject the sort of flexibility into the French labor market that Mr. Alphandery espouses.
As well as improving training, the government is seeking to reduce the high cost burden on companies who hire low-qualified workers.
And it is looking at ways to encourage the return of low-wage jobs in the service sector, such as gasoline-pump attendants and janitors, which have all but disappeared in recent years in France as a result of high overheads.
But the furor that is greeting the youth-training measures is typical of the difficulties many European governments are facing as they try to reform their social systems.
In Spain, legislation that would make it easier and less costly to lay off workers has been met with strikes.
Government efforts in Germany, Italy and elsewhere to shake up the labor market have also sparked controversy.
The French government, its popularity sliding in recent polls, is now under intense pressure to back down.
Mr. Alphandery, in an interview, concedes that the new legislation "has aroused some emotions," but he insists that the program being implemented "isn't so revolutionary."
The uproar, coming on the eve of President Clinton's jobs summit in Detroit this week, provides a timely reminder of the frequent gulf between theory and practice in Europe's unemployment battle.
In Detroit, Mr. Alphandery says he will stress the importance of free-market policies to combat joblessness, and -- seeking to reverse conventional views about French policy -- plans to urge his colleagues to resist calls to adopt protectionist trade measures, particularly against lowwage developing countries.
At the same time, as a ranking government minister, he acknowledges that he faces important political and social constraints in implementing his beliefs as a self-professed "liberal" economist.
There is, he says, "a trade-off" between the desire for jobs and the need to maintain a standard of living that society considers acceptable.
Many in continental Europe likewise argue that the sort of low-wage jobs that have led to the growth of the "working poor" in the U.S., and increasingly in Britain, aren't acceptable, even if they do reduce unemployment.
Calls by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, among others, for the abolition of France's statutory minimum wage have usually been ignored.
Given the fuss over the youth-training measures, overly radical action would probably bring France to a complete standstill.
A poll published over the weekend shows 69% of French people are now expecting "a grave social crisis" in the coming months, and that 44% are ready to join in mass protests.
Will the government's piece-meal employment measures work, assuming they are implemented as planned?
The OECD, in a report on the French economy released this month, says the package "should help to tackle the country's most serious structural problem, high and rising unemployment."
But don't hold your breath, the government cautions.
Unemployment has jumped from 9% of the work force in 1989 to more than 12%, and is still rising, albeit more slowly than over the past two years, as the nation pulls out of recession.
