A House Ways and Means Committee subcommittee today begins considering a Democratic-backed health-care plan that would expand Medicare and possibly increase the payroll tax to help achieve universal coverage.
Beginning next year, the bill would require larger employers to pay 80% of the cost of a minimum benefits package for workers.
But companies with 100 or fewer workers would be exempt until January 1997, and would then have the option of buying into the new government Medicarelike program to provide basic coverage for people without private insurance.
While employer contributions are at the heart of the scheme, the proposal would allow for an additional 0.8% payroll tax.
The levy would help to close a possible $30 billion budget gap the bill would cause by the year 2000.
At this stage in the legislative process, the suggested tax represents more of an accounting device than a concrete proposal.
But the size of the levy -- it would raise about $24 billion a year -- is sure to provoke controversy and irritate the House leadership, which had hoped to avoid such tax issues at the subcommittee level.
Lawmakers emphasized that the subcommittee's decisions are sure to be modified when the bill reaches the full Ways and Means Committee.
"This is an evolutionary process," said Rep. Benjamin Cardin (D., Md.) a member of the subcommittee.
Details of the measure were provided by subcommittee Chairman Fortney "Pete" Stark (D., Calif.) and by the panel's staff.
While abandoning major elements of the Clinton administration's health plan, the new alternative would keep alive both the president's goal of providing universal health-insurance coverage and his proposal that employers be required to contribute to the cost of coverage for their workers.
The Medicare component and accompanying price controls call for a larger, more direct government role than many lawmakers are ready to accept.
But compared with the Clinton plan, the Stark proposal otherwise would preserve more flexibility for business, and it would begin to address complaints by small companies that the administration plan would be too burdensome.
Mr. Stark's bill would drop the mandatory health alliances -- giant regional insurance-buying pools -- proposed in the Clinton plan, instead taking a more voluntary approach.
And companies with more than 1,000 employees would be permitted to continue to self-insure, as many do today.
In addition, insurance reforms designed to spread risk more broadly would be phased in over three years, so that the insurance industry would have more time to adjust to the change.
And while relying primarily on employer contributions to finance health coverage, the Stark plan also recognizes a principle espoused by many moderate Republicans, that all individuals should be required to help pay for their insurance coverage.
For the administration, any committee action now will be welcome, albeit perilous.
Mr. Stark estimated that it will take at least two weeks for the panel to produce a bill, and without any promise of Republican support, he is forced to do whatever he can to hold together a core group that includes himself and five other Democrats.
He is fond of joking that he has five votes for all the provisions -- just not the same five votes in each case.
Compared with earlier drafts, the outline released last evening shows that Mr. Stark has had to temper his leftward instincts to try to bring Democrats on board.
For example, price controls would be phased in, and they would only be enforced if certain cost objectives are exceeded.
The administration's own plan flirts with a payroll tax of 1%, but would use it more narrowly as a penalty on large employers who would opt out and form their own corporate alliances.
Mr. Stark's 0.8% levy would be applied much more broadly, and to an extent it appears to be a subsidy of sorts for the larger expanded Medicare-like program.
When fully operative, that plan would cover as many as 60 million people at a cost of about $100 billion a year, according to still preliminary estimates.
A major emphasis in the Stark plan is to ensure coverage for young children, and the premiums would be established according to whether there were one or two working adults in a family -- regardless of the number of children.
Draft documents released last night also assume the same increased cigarette taxes of 75 cents per pack, as proposed by the administration, and a set of tax credits to encourage medical personnel to serve inner-city or rural areas defined as having service shortages.
For example, a physician who served in such an area for at least two years would be eligible for a non-refundable tax credit of up to $1,000 a month for up to 60 months and would be eligible for additional tax write-offs for medical equipment.
While more flexible than the administration's initial proposal, the Stark plan limits the ability of medium-size firms to be self-insuring.
Employers with 1,000 full-time workers or less would be prohibited from self-insuring under the plan, in an effort to broaden the risk pool for all the remaining smaller companies and to lessen price distortions.
