Is Morgan Stanley Group Inc. trying to salvage a soured merchant-banking deal on the backs of unsuspecting investors?
That's what some analysts are saying about a $185 million private junk-bond issue for which Morgan Stanley is the sole manager.
The issue is for Sullivan Communications Inc. and a sister company -- large commercial printing concerns that Morgan has controlled since April.
Analysts cite several significant problems with the offering.
Among them: Sullivan has virtually no cash flow to pay the bonds' interest, losses from its coupon-booklet business appear to be mounting, the company is likely to spend the offering's net proceeds by December, and the offering memorandum shown to prospective buyers appears to be less than candid about Sullivan's coupon-printing page count, analysts say.
Meanwhile, Morgan faces potential conflicts in the deal, which is set to be priced tomorrow.
Two Sullivan directors are Morgan executives.
The investment bank's Morgan Stanley Leveraged Equity Fund II unit holds the majority of Sullivan's equity.
And Morgan stands to pocket underwriting fees of $6.5 million for buying new Sullivan notes and debentures and reselling them to investors.
"It's an unconscionable offering from the point of view of any fiscal responsibility and is rife with conflicts of interest," says C. Clive Munro, an analyst specializing in the printing business at Montecito Research in St. John, Virgin Islands.
"Morgan's hope is that there are some big suckers out there who can't read a financial statement."
The investment bank's fee, he adds, "isn't bad for bailing themselves out."
Through a successful offering, Morgan effectively would be buying time for beleaguered Sullivan so it can reap a return on its investment if and when the printing company rebounds, some analysts say.
Officials at Morgan and Sullivan declined to comment, citing regulatory restrictions on talking about pending underwriting deals.
The Morgan-Sullivan offering provides a peek into the shadowy world of private placements, which are sold to sophisticated institutional investors and don't require many of the rigid regulatory requirements of public offerings.
The deal also underscores the conflicts Wall Street investment banks face when acting as merchant bankers -- using their own money to invest in deals -- and underwriters.
And it reflects excesses in the booming market for new high-yield, high-risk junk bonds, some analysts say.
Morgan's relationship with Sullivan doesn't violate any securities regulations.
Indeed, Morgan and other investment banks typically invest in merchant-banking deals, and it's not unusual for their executives to sit on the boards of the firms involved.
Morgan's close relationship with Brentwood, Tenn.-based Sullivan began in April.
That's when a group formed by Morgan's leveraged-buyout unit, along with other institutional investors and managers, invested $40 million in the printing concern.
Morgan -- which at this point appears unwilling to ante up more money into Sullivan -- currently owns 67% of the company's outstanding common shares and 74% of its preferred shares.
But Sullivan hasn't fared well in recent years.
One of Sullivan's major business lines -- printing the coupon booklets that are tucked into newspapers each week around the country -- is badly deteriorating, triggered by overcapacity and price-cutting in recent years.
With current selling prices and shrinking booklets, Sullivan's losses are likely to reach $35 million from its coupon business for calendar 1994, say analysts who follow the coupon-printing business.
It has had slumping revenue and gross margins, and earnings before net interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization have fallen every year since 1990.
"The company's cash flow from operations must be substantially increased in order for the company to be able to meet its debt service obligations," the offering memo says.
But there's a hitch: Sullivan's coupon business expects to face "continued pricing pressure and negative gross margins," the memo says.
Sullivan adds that it "expects to fund increased operating losses in that business with a portion" of the offering's net proceeds.
"I look at this and question the fiduciary responsibility of a portfolio manager that buys a debt deal with virtually no cash-flow coverage," says Gregory Ekizian, an analyst at Eagle Asset Management in Tampa, Fla.
Here's how the cash from the offering will be spent: Morgan, along with its accounting and law firms, will receive a fee totaling about $9 million.
About $133.5 million will go to repay bank loans.
That leaves $43 million, "for working capital and general corporate purposes," the memo says.
But with 1994 cash interest costs of $25 million and capital spending of $15 million, Sullivan would run through nearly the entire $43 million by December, analysts say.
The deal has two parts: $135 million of senior "step-up" notes due 2004 for Sullivan Graphics Inc., a sister company; and $50 million of senior discount debentures due 2006, plus warrants to buy common and preferred stock of Sullivan Communications.
The Sullivan Graphics' notes will pay annual interest of 7% for the first three years, and 14% for seven years.
(Step-ups are notes with two separate interest rates.
Typically, the note pays a lower rate initially, then "steps up," or jumps to a higher rate.)
The offerings are a risky bet for investors.
Sullivan's total indebtedness is about $300 million, with shareholder equity of just $2.8 million.
Indeed, the company's earnings haven't covered fixed charges in the past four years.
Moreover, Sullivan says its ability to pay cash interest on the debentures beginning in 2000 is almost "entirely dependent upon the earnings of its subsidiaries and the distribution of those earnings."
Analysts cite some questionable assertions in the offering document.
For instance, the memo says the number of pages per issue published by Sullivan "has increased steadily" since the company entered the coupon freestanding-insert market.
On the contrary, Montecito's Mr. Munro asserts that the company's average page counts per issue have fallen to 13.2 in January from 20.7 in 1993's third quarter.
Morgan will compensate investors for the risks with an attractive yield, some Wall Street executives say.
These executives argue that investors in such 144a private placements -- named for the Securities and Exchange Commission rule that lifts certain registration requirements -- are savvy enough to properly assess matters.
They assert that Sullivan has sufficient cash flow to pay the bonds' interest.
And they say Sullivan simply is trying to refinance its short-term debt obligations and change its capital structure to match those of its two major competitors.
The Sullivan deal is ticklish for Morgan.
Two Sullivan directors are Morgan executives -- Frank V. Sica, a managing director, and James S. Hoch, a principal.
"As a result of these relationships, Morgan Stanley Group Inc. has effective control over the management and policies of the company," the offering memo says.
Though Sullivan has stumbled, its senior executives have thrived.
James T. Sullivan, chairman and chief executive officer, received a 1992 salary of $600,000 even as the company lost more than $27 million, according to the memo.
