Prudential Securities Inc. reached an agreement with an independent claims administrator to avoid using long-range projections in setting the value of about 200 real-estate partnerships.
The accord is significant for investors trying to tap into a $330 million reparations fund set up by Prudential as part of an October settlement with federal and state regulators.
Prudential has been accused of misleading investors into buying $8.15 billion of partnerships, about $4 billion of which were real-estate transactions.
The agreement effectively means that investors may be able to receive slightly more in restitution for their Prudential real-estate partnerships than they otherwise would have.
The accord represents a concession by Prudential, the nation's fourth-largest brokerage firm.
Previously, Prudential had used appraisers that sized up the value of real-estate partnerships by using, among other things, discounted cash flow based on 10-year projections.
But this method didn't pass muster with Irving Pollack, the claims administrator; he believed the projections were unrealistic and could overstate the partnerships' value.
Now, in setting the value of real-estate partnerships, Prudential has agreed to use the projects' past performance and current audited operating results.
Still, there's at least as much art as science in the valuation process, says John P. Murray, Prudential's director of corporate-risk management.
"There's no magic in the formula," he says, "and there's a lot of 'Kentucky windage' in it, but we're not going to use a lot of far-out projections."
The claims administrator stressed that the current values of real-estate partnerships haven't been set -- only the method in calculating this so-called residual value.
"We put the kibosh on using projections," says Joel Brenner, a lawyer working with Mr. Pollack.
"But we are going to be monitoring this process on a project-by-project basis," he said.
The informal accord paves the way for the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit to start making settlement offers to thousands of investors.
Residual value -- what the partnerships are really worth -- plays a major role in determining what damages investors ought to receive.
It's difficult to determine the true worth of many real-estate deals: Unlike stocks, many partnerships are illiquid, and thus can't easily be resold in the market and converted to cash.
Prudential suggests that using the new method will reduce the residual value by just 5%.
This means the residual value of all of Prudential's real-estate deals amounts to about $1.1 billion.
But the difference in residual value could be more significant, depending on the real-estate transaction.
"It's not simply a matter of agreeing to some cookie-cutter and butting out of it," says Mr. Brenner.
Despite the Prudential concession, the agreement won't necessarily provide a windfall for investors.
Indeed, the price investors could fetch for many partnerships in the market is barely half what Prudential claims, according to some partnership experts.
Thus, some lawyers are urging their clients to sell their partnerships in the secondary market, to show how little they're actually worth.
If investors decide to sell their partnerships, the money they will receive will be counted as a return of capital, the claims administrator said.
"This will be taken into account in figuring how to compensate a person who deserves to be compensated," says Mr. Brenner.
"Assuming a claimant has a valid claim, what they receive for selling a partnership will be treated like a return of capital."
So far, Prudential has 52,000 claims forms from investors, says Robert Golden, an executive vice president in charge of the settlement process.
Prudential has made 24 settlement offers to investors, 18 of which have been accepted, he says.
Prudential is prepared to send the first settlement checks out this week, mostly involving small claims with no residual-value questions, totaling $100,000.
But investor payouts so far haven't been Prudential's biggest expense in the settlement process: Prudential has spent about $5 million in computers and personnel to manage the claims procedure.
