Intel Corp., keeping up the pressure on rival chip makers, promised to ship its next-generation microprocessor in 1995 and said it will boost spending on new factory capacity this year by 26% to $2.4 billion.
Andrew Grove, Intel's chief executive officer, said at a meeting with securities analysts in New York that the Santa Clara, Calif., company will demonstrate the new chip, code-named P6, on personal computers by this time next year and begin volume shipments by the fourth quarter of 1995.
His remarks were Intel's most specific pronouncement yet about P6, and illustrate its plans to use innovation to maintain the No. 1 position in microprocessors, which provide processing power to the computer industry.
Many analysts only expected token P6 shipments in 1995.
"This is more aggressive than I would have assumed," said Rajiv Chaudhri, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co.
"If there is one word to summarize this meeting it is aggressive . . . .
Intel does not plan to rest on its laurels."
Intel's current flagship, the Pentium, was introduced last spring, about four years after its 486 chip.
Mr. Grove's remarks about P6 would indicate Intel has cut its development time roughly in half.
Though he did not quantify shipments, a company spokesman said Intel uses the word volume to suggest hundreds of thousands of chips.
Mr. Grove also gave some of the first technical details about the chip.
He said P6 will offer an impressive six million transistors on a chip, about twice as many as Pentium.
It will operate about 300 million instructions per second, or MIPS, compared with 100 MIPS for the current Pentium version, he said.
Hooking four P6 chips together would create a low-priced supercomputer with performance of 1,000 MIPS.
Intel's pronouncements come as the company faces increased competition from PowerPC, a new chip backed by International Business Machines Corp., Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc., as well as others that clone Intel's microprocessor design.
The sneak peak at P6 serves to reassure potential Pentium customers that Intel's chip architecture gives them a path to even greater power.
"There is no coincidence that they are doing this just as Pentium is gaining some momentum," said Michael Slater, publisher of Microprocessor Report, a newsletter in Sebastopol, Calif.
Mr. Grove said he expects Pentium to account for 15% of the PC business in 1994.
He did not give a more detailed estimate, but Mr. Chaudhri predicts Pentium shipments at between 6.5 million to 10 million units.
Intel's 26% jump in capital spending growth is off from its pace this year, when spending grew 58% to $1.9 billion.
Yet at $2.4 billion, Intel is spending more than its four largest competitors combined.
Newer factories allow Intel to cram increasing numbers of transistors on each chip and shrink chip sizes.
On the Nasdaq Stock Market, Intel shares closed at $64.25, up 62.5 cents.
