The Canadian government, in a bid to stamp out rampant cigarette smuggling, rolled back tobacco taxes and imposed a surtax on tobacco manufacturers' profits.
The tax cut was opposed by antismoking groups that have urged the government to hold off on tax moves until the U.S. Congress votes on the Clinton administration's proposed 75-cent tax increase in cigarette prices.
Higher U.S. cigarette taxes would make smuggling less profitable.
Cigarette smuggling has surged recently because of the heavy Canadian taxes.
The tobacco industry estimated that about 30% of all cigarettes smoked in Canada are smuggled.
The contraband market is estimated to be as high as 65% in Quebec.
The Canadian government said, effective immediately, it will reduce federal tobacco taxes by five Canadian dollars (US$3.72) on a carton of 200 cigarettes and match any reduction in provincial taxes by as much as C$10 a carton.
The combined reductions would lower cigarette prices to as low as C$23 a carton from about C$47. Illegal cigarettes now sell for about C$20 to C$22 a carton.
Only Quebec and New Brunswick provinces said they will proceed with provincial tobacco tax reductions.
Ontario said it isn't planning any immediate action.
The federal government said its surtax on tobacco makers' profits will increase the federal tax rate paid by cigarette makers to 30% from 21% for three years.
The rise is expected to generate about C$200 million in revenue that will be used to fund an antismoking campaign.
Quebec also introduced a 50% surtax on provincial income tax paid by tobacco makers.
Jacques Kavafian, an analyst at Montreal securities firm Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion Inc., estimated the new levies would reduce Imasco Ltd.'s 1994 earnings to C$3.50 a share from a projected C$4.
Imasco controls Imperial Tobacco Ltd., Canada's largest cigarette manufacturer.
The other major Canadian tobacco companies are RJR-Macdonald Inc., a subsidiary of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., and Rothmans, Benson & Hedges Inc., which is jointly owned by Rothmans Inc. and Philip Morris Cos.
In trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday, Imasco fell C$2.50 to C$39.75 and Rothmans fell C$2 to C$98.
The Canadian government said it also intends to impose an C$8 a carton export tax on shipments of Canadian cigarettes to the U.S. in order to make them less attractive to smugglers.
It also announced tougher enforcement of antismuggling laws and measures to raise the legal age for purchasing cigarettes to 18 from 16.
The contraband cigarettes are mainly a Canadian-made product that is exported duty-free to the U.S. and then rerouted illegally to Canada.
Canadian exports totaled 17.7 billion cigarettes last year, up 77% from 1992.
Canadian antismoking groups said the tax rollbacks would encourage smoking, especially among young people, and lead to an additional 250,000 smoking-related deaths.
Canada's federal and provincial governments have said illegal cigarette sales have caused heavy tax losses for them.
The two levels of government lost a combined C$2 billion last year to smuggling.
Christopher J. Chipello in Montreal contributed to this article.
