Tropicana Products Inc. dreams of the day the whole world wakes up to its orange juice.
The Bradenton, Fla., unit of Seagram Co. has aggressively entered a dozen foreign markets in recent years, pitching its product in a global advertising campaign from Sweden to the United Kingdom to Taiwan.
But converting the world to a morning glass of orange juice won't be easy.
In most countries, orange juice is an occasional drink for any time of day, not part of the daily morning routine.
The Japanese, for example, drink only a 10th the amount of orange juice Americans consume.
And although Tropicana promises higher quality than most local brands, exporting the juice can double or triple the price.
Still, Tropicana is optimistic, especially with the international experience of its parent, Seagram.
It's betting that the quality of its product, which it touts as "closest to the real thing," will have universal appeal.
Tropicana spends 43% of its world-wide ad budget on its "pure premium" product outside the U.S.
Its ads, though tailored a bit to each market, all stress the superior, nearly fresh-squeezed taste of its juice over local brands that are often reconstituted from concentrates.
The juice is so fresh that it's refrigerated, boasts a Tropicana ad in the U.K., not stored at room temperature like most local fruit juices.
The oranges are "soft squeezed" and don't include the bitter rind, declares an ad in Japan.
"Come and try the orange juice that insists on purity," says a narrator in Taiwan, where juices loaded with sugar are the norm.
Like U.S. ads, the foreign ads show a red-and-white straw being poked into an orange.
Occasionally, the company creates a special ad to appeal to a certain culture.
When Tropicana introduced its orange juice in Japan, it aired a commercial showing an American family cheerfully sipping orange juice in tune to "Oh What a Beautiful Morning," while a Japanese narrator enthusiastically cites Tropicana as the most consumed orange juice in the U.S.
"If this was the most popular juice in the U.S., that gave it great credentials," says Kerry Rubie, group president of Europe, Middle East and Latin America for Leo Burnett U.S.A., which advertises Tropicana juices in the U.S. and overseas markets.
"Everyone recognized that the gold standard of orange juice was fresh-squeezed," he adds.
The commercials "are always based on that same strategic principle.
We're reinforcing that idea."
Although the foreign markets are still tiny -- about 15% of Tropicana's estimated $1.3 billion U.S. sales -- the company says it expects to turn a profit in its international operations next year, including investment spending.
"It's one of the beverages where you have a truly global market," says Myron Roeder, Tropicana's president, international group and global marketing.
Tropicana's approach of positioning itself similarly in different markets is much like the strategies used by other global companies, including Coca-Cola Co. and Procter & Gamble Co.
But some critics say the tactic may be a long shot for Tropicana.
"Orange juice starts out by not meaning the same thing everywhere," and therefore may require very different messages, says Stephen A. Greyser, a professor of consumer marketing at Harvard University.
The strategy may work for airlines targeting international business travelers, he says.
But for orange juice, "candidly, I don't see it."
Rivals like Coca-Cola Foods, which sells the Minute Maid brand in the U.S. and Canada, aren't keen to follow Tropicana's footsteps.
"We're not so hung up on marketing orange juice," says Jerry Bell, director of international development for Coca-Cola Foods.
Instead, the company is concentrating on marketing orange drinks, which have a much bigger market abroad than pure juices, he says.
So far, Tropicana's foreign ventures have produced mixed results.
Tropicana says it has made headway in the U.K., where the company convinced consumers that the local juices -- made from concentrate and packaged in plastic, shelf-stable cartons -- were inferior to Tropicana's chilled, not-from-concentrate versions.
But Japanese consumers, even though brand conscious, are proving to be tougher to persuade.
After Japan's fruit juice market liberalized a few years ago, Japanese consumers are certainly guzzling a lot more orange juice, but most people don't care that much about its taste yet.
Rather than paying $3.80 for a 25-ounce carton of Tropicana's not-from-concentrate orange juice, most consumers are flocking to buy the store-brand Brazilian juices from concentrate, which are more sour but cost about half as much as Tropicana.
The Japanese market "hasn't developed a brand-based awareness and commitment that you'd have in the U.S. or U.K.," concedes Mr. Roeder.
Tropicana isn't about to give up, though.
It is now focusing its marketing efforts in Japan on its own less expensive version of juice from concentrate.
Mr. Roeder says Tropicana will continue to expand aggressively in overseas markets.
While growth of all fruit juice sales is 5% at best in the maturing U.S. market, the growth rate is "more than double the U.S." in overseas markets, Mr. Roeder says.
"We see tremendous potential."
Ad Notes. . . .
ACCOUNTS: J.M. Smucker Co., Orrville, Ohio, tapped Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, for its estimated $10 million to $15 million advertising account and dismissed its previous agency, Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, after 35 years.
Wyse created the slogan "With a name like Smucker's, it has to be good." . . . Inc. magazine tapped Anderson & Lembke to create advertising.
Billings on the new account couldn't be determined.
