On Feb. 27, 1988, Azeris in the city of Sumgait on the Caspian Sea responded to the Karabakh vote by turning on their Armenian neighbors.
Dozens were killed as Azeris rampaged through the Armenian quarter.
The February vote was remembered last week in Stepanakert with a concert of music and poetry, but celebrations were subdued.
In the six years since the parliamentary vote, thousands of Karabakh Armenians, and even more Azeris, have been killed in a bitter and largely forgotten war.
Despite the odds -- 180,000 Armenians pitted against seven million Azeris -- the people of Karabakh have held off the Soviet army and the forces of the new Azerbaijani republic.
They now control about 90% of the traditionally Armenian lands in Karabakh, as well as large swaths of Azerbaijani land around the enclave.
Only the northeastern half of the Mardakert region and the northernmost Shaumyan region remain in Azeri hands.
Since mid-December the Azeris have redoubled their efforts at the front.
President Heidar Aliev has tightened internal discipline, recruited thousands of mujahedeen fighters from Afghanistan (as well as mercenaries from Iran and elsewhere) and brought in even more Turkish officers to organize his army.
In his televised New Year's address, Mr. Aliev pledged that this year would see the liberation of all occupied Azerbaijani territory.
Since then, his offensive has bogged down.
The Azeri death rate is reported to be five times that of the Armenians and so high that they do not even collect the bodies for fear of how the Azeri population would respond to the figures.
All this has done little to damp the Azerbaijani government's ardor.
Not surprisingly, the government of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic is skeptical about the peace talks being conducted under the auspices of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and, separately, the Russian government.
Asked which of the peace plans is more likely to bring peace, Robert Kocharian, chairman of Karabakh's ruling state defense committee, told me: "At present, no plan."
The latest Russian-brokered cease-fire went into effect Monday, but there is little hope in Stepanakert that it will endure.
The Karabakh government knows that only its forces can provide some guarantee of security for its people.
It would be prepared to exchange land for peace, but only in a phased withdrawal.
Even then, Karabakh would not give back the Lachin region, which links Karabakh with Armenia and is the corridor through which everything from weapons to food passes.
The Karabakh government would likewise only contemplate the return of the Kelbajar region to the north of Lachin as a demilitarized zone.
Thus the situation is at a stalemate.
So long as Karabakh's forces control territory in Azerbaijan itself, the fledgling republic is unlikely to gain international recognition.
"Our referendum gave an indisputable mandate in favor of the independence of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic," Mr. Kocharian insists, but he is aware that international recognition is "a long process."
Instead, the republic is devoting itself to building up its institutions.
Most crucially, it has turned its autonomous bands of partisans into a regular army.
This change is noticeable at the front, where commanders no longer view the war in terms of defending their region, but in terms of defending Karabakh as a whole.
Conscription for men between the ages of 18 and 45 is universal.
The government, in the hands of the state defense committee, has established a number of perfunctory ministries.
The Foreign Ministry insists visitors acquire visas at a cost of $10, although the visas provoked derision at passport control in Yerevan.
Mr. Kocharian has toured European capitals to press their government's case for recognition, and Karabakh's central bank has even sought credit guarantees of millions of dollars from the international community.
Discipline, both at the front and within the enclave, is strong.
"Karabakh is the only place in the former Soviet Union where there is still discipline," one Armenian told me approvingly.
Indeed, wandering the streets of Stepanakert gives one the uncanny feeling of being in a time warp.
Much of the past six years' devastation has been cleaned up; there is electricity almost around the clock, and most of the population rushes to and from work.
The streets are even swept.
Only occasional air raids, banners in memory of the fighters who have died, and the total absence of young and middle-aged men belie the image of normality.
On Karabakh's front line it is a different picture.
Towns and villages lie in ruins, occupied Azerbaijani cities like Agdam and Fizuli are eerie, desolate wrecks.
But the fighting seems likely to continue.
The crippling losses on both sides have so far damped the ardor of neither.
Both are being strengthened by soldiers from outside (the Karabakh army by fighters from Armenia and the Armenian diaspora).
Russia is supplying both sides and Azerbaijan is buying weapons from (or being given weapons by) Turkey, China and Israel.
The Karabakh army is supplementing its Russian supplies with materiel "liberated" from the Azeris.
Had the Armenians of Karabakh known back in 1988 what suffering they would have to endure to achieve self-determination, would they still have begun their movement?
The unequivocal answer everyone gives -- from Mr. Kocharian down -- is yes.
"Had we not done so," Mr. Kocharian says, "our situation today would have been even more pitiful.
Not one similar situation in the former Soviet Union has escaped armed conflict, and the fact that here the problem started earlier, in 1988, enabled us to get organized.
God knows how the situation would have developed if we had not been prepared in this way for it."
The irreconcilability of the two sides' demands makes a peace deal in the near future doubtful.
The most that can be hoped for at present is an exhausted stalemate.
Mr. Corley has just returned from his sixth visit to Nagorno-Karabakh.
