The Arnold Schwarzenegger of personal computers has arrived ahead of schedule at a store near you.
The machines, which are powered by Intel Corp.'s speedy Pentium microprocessor, are hitting store shelves about a year faster than new computer models have in the past.
The Pentium chip runs nearly twice as quickly as its predecessor.
As a result, video appears less jerky, and switching from, say, a multimedia encyclopedia's dinosaur file to one on space travel takes as little as a second instead of as long as five seconds.
"Americans don't like to wait for anything," says Mark Macgillivray, managing director of H&M Consulting in Sunnyvale, Calif.
"Five seconds waiting for a file to open seems like forever."
In the past, it took as long as two years for sales volume to drive down a new chip's price to the point where the chip could start filtering into homes from the business market.
But competition is so great in the computer industry now that PC makers have cut prices on computers with Pentium chips to below $3,000 from as high as $6,000 last year, and analysts expect those prices to fall below $2,000 by year's end.
On Monday, International Business Machines Corp.'s IBM PC Co. unit cut prices as much as 19%, to as low as $4,149, on Pentium-based ValuePoint desktops for commercial customers.
Helping PC makers lower their prices is the fact that Intel, of Santa Clara, Calif., has cut its Pentium prices to ward off a growing challenge from rival chip makers.
One new competitor, the PowerPC, developed by an alliance of Apple Computer Inc., Motorola Inc. and IBM, is more powerful in certain functions than the Pentium, analysts say, but doesn't yet run all software programs as well.
It will make its debut in personal computers next month when Apple launches its PowerPC line of Macintoshes.
IBM will follow with its own line of PowerPC personal computers later in the year.
Intel also faces pressure from smaller "clone" companies like Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and Cyrix Corp., which have stepped up production of imitations of earlier Intel chips.
Intel says Pentium will account for about 15% of its chip shipments this year, and analysts expect that to rise to more than half by next year.
In the next month, Intel will begin a Pentium marketing blitz aimed at both homes and business, and it will start advertising in retail stores with fliers and video kiosks.
Intel also plans to continue counterattacking its rivals by previewing at a technical conference next week a new Pentium, code-named the P54C.
One version is nearly 50% faster than the speediest Pentium to date, according to an Intel technical abstract.
On March 7, Intel plans to unveil a midrange microchip that could be popular for portables because it uses lower voltage, extending battery life.
Intel, weary of name-copying by clones, is scrapping the 486 designation and calling it the DX4.
The advent of Pentium-based PCs coincides with an explosion of computer sales to homes, with many buyers looking for as much power as possible to run the multimedia programs of tomorrow.
"The buyer is getting more and more aware of what they want, and what they want is performance," says Mal D. Ransom, vice president of marketing for Packard Bell Electronics Inc., a big PC maker based in Westlake Village, Calif.
Indeed, a survey by Intel found that two-thirds of all retail PC purchases in North America last year involved computers powered by its 486 chips, which preceded Pentium as a top performer, and that fully two-thirds of those 486 buyers chose the most expensive machines.
"People are buying at the high end of the market so the market is ripe for sub-$3,000 Pentiums," says Paul Otellini, an Intel senior vice president.
Not everyone, of course, will need to run out and buy a Pentium machine.
The 486 chips that power the majority of PCs being sold now are more than sufficient to run such tasks as spreadsheets and word processing, and even a bigger processor won't speed up access to on-line services that are slowed by too much demand.
"Once they see what a Pentium will do, they won't want to go back.
But 486 is more than a serviceable chip," says Mr. Macgillivray, the consultant.
The most obvious advantage of sticking with a 486 chip, for now, is price: The 486-based PCs cost as much as $1,000 less than a Pentium.
For those consumers who want as much power as possible, there is a range of choices.
AST Research Inc. says it began shipping its new Pentium line of Advantage PCs last week to Computer City, Price/Costco, Sam's Club and Incredible Universe.
Estimated sales prices begin at $2,999.
AST, Irvine, Calif., says it hadn't planned to begin shipping Pentium PCs to retail stores for at least three months, but moved up the date after requests from retail managers.
Packard Bell says it began shipping its Pentium PCs -- the Legend 5000 (priced at about $2,700, including monitor) and the multimedia Legend 5200 (priced at about $3,000, with monitor) -- about three weeks ago.
Packard Bell officials declined to identify the retail outlets, but it sells widely in such mass-market chains as Price/Costco, Circuit City and Sears, Roebuck & Co.
Since it launched its mail-order line of $2,999 Dell Dimension Pentiums last November, Dell Computer Corp., Austin, Texas, says demand has risen so fast that it, too, plans to begin distributing on store shelves "in the very near future."
"People want to buy ahead of the curve," says Thomas B. Martin, Dell's vice president of world-wide marketing.
"They're saying: `I don't know if I need Pentium today, but I might need it tomorrow.'"
Don Clark contributed to this article.
-- WHAT IS A CHIP?
A microprocessor, or chip, is the "brains" of a computer.
It is made up of millions of microscopic circuits that act as switches and are etched into tiny squares of silicon.
-- WHAT DO CHIPS DO?
They run everything from PCs to VCRs and washing machines.
Newer chips allow computers to do more tasks faster.
-- WHO MAKES THEM?
Intel Corp. controls about 80% of the market for personal computer chips.
Motorola Inc. makes chips used in cars, household appliances and Apple computers.
PowerPC, a chip developed by Motorola, Apple and International Business Machines Corp., will soon compete against the Intel line.
