SIT DOWN BEFORE you fall down.
Two projection-screen makers are heeding that advice.
The companies make screens without tripods and say their legless floor-sitters don't wobble and are less tripped over than conventional screens.
A legless projection screen also can hide any clutter behind it.
Quartet Manufacturing, Skokie, Ill., recently started U.S. sales of its Deltascreen, invented in Great Britain by Colin Ide.
Deltascreen comes as big as 70-by-70 inches and pulls up from its floor base to a maximum height of eight feet.
Quartet Executive Vice President Richard Gilbert hopes to sell it to companies in the hotel and hospitality business.
Not likely, counters Richard Lundin, president and chief executive of Da-Lite Screen, another big maker of presentation products.
The Deltascreen is "a neat product," Mr. Lundin says, but too small and costly.
Da-Lite makes a legless screen, the floor model C, up to 12-by-12 feet.
The smallest retails for $368, roughly half the price of the largest comparable Deltascreen, at $695.
But at least two Deltascreen users seem to like it.
"It's not as easy for kids to tip," says Susie Solesbee, media specialist at North Hall Middle School, Gainesville, Ga.
But the 5 1/2 foot-tall Ms. Solesbee says she finds the screen cumbersome to set up.
David Ikla, director of scientific computing at the National Jewish Hospital, Denver, says he's tired of tripping over the legs of tripod screens.
He expects his Deltascreen will eliminate that hazard.
One company remaining firmly on three legs is Apollo, Ronkonkoma, N.Y. President Harry Charlston credits Quartet with innovation in "a pretty backward industry."
But he says a tripod screen is stable "once it's up" and he's "never heard of anyone tripping on the legs."
POOR BUT beautiful.
Some architects are discovering that a tight budget can be a blessing, inspiring creativity and producing solutions almost as good -- or better -- than more expensive ones.
Pershing Square, Los Angeles' oldest square, just reopened.
Reconstruction, which was managed by Maguire Thomas Partners, aimed at reclaiming the five-acre landmark from drug dealers.
It now includes a purple campanile, aqueduct, waterfall, a round pool stabbed by the design of a fake earthquake fault, garden-cum-amphitheater, statue garden, yellow cafe run by the adjacent Biltmore Hotel, and groves of palm, sweetgum and camphor trees.
Landscape architect Laurie Olin and architect Ricardo Legorreta had hoped to pave much of the square with Mexican stone but had to settle for rose-colored concrete, stamped with a basket-weave pattern.
"The concrete isn't better than the stone," says Mr. Olin.
"But it's some of the best concrete I've seen in America."
Mr. Olin recalls wanting to plant a row of trees on the roof of a parking garage in Massachusetts.
Told the roof couldn't bear the load without expensive new supports, Mr. Olin planted his trees in the basement and cut holes in the roof for the branches.
The unexpected result: dappled light on the lower floor.
And a shortage of funds has forced landscape architects Machado & Silvetti to substitute bricks for granite stones in the pavilions and terrace in South Park at New York's Battery Park City.
"It's a richer and possibly better and probably more romantic design," says Machado associate Peter Lofgren.
WITH THIS LIFE preserver, every part of baby stays dry.
Some planes carry small life vests for larger children, but few carry devices to keep infants afloat in case of a water landing.
Life-jacketed parents may try to hold babies in their arms or on seat cushions.
"An infant is really a goner," says John Petrakis, an engineer with the Federal Aviation Administration.
So a Miami company, Hoover Industries, has designed a life preserver that it says keeps babies high, dry and warm.
Made of double-walled nylon coated with urethane, the capsule-like preserver has an internal harness to hold the baby, a window, waterproof air vents, ballast to keep the capsule upright and a line a parent can hold.
Approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Hoover infant life preserver inflates in two seconds.
The company hopes to meet Coast Guard requirements as well, so the preserver could be used on boats.
Japan Airlines has shown interest in the product, says Hoover President Stephen Basinski, and a dozen international distributors have purchased samples.
A rival, Richard Switlik Jr., director of marketing for Switlik Parachute, Trenton, N.J., congratulates Hoover on "a good idea that should be done," but adds that "if it isn't required, the airlines aren't going to do it."
