Something that is not quite ice and not quite snow pelts down from the predawn sky.
Geese honk in the gloom.
A van, headlights on, crunches to a halt and a bundled man with a coffee mug climbs inside.
"What is it, snow?"
"Sleet I think.
Or something in between."
"Call it sneet."
There are more stops, more bundles with mugs.
Then the van swerves off a country lane and merges into the ribbon of red taillights crawling toward Washington, 40 miles away.
With yawns, sighs and shifting overcoats, the van pool settles in for another long night's journey into day.
"We leave home in the dark, we get home in the dark, and we see more of each other than we do of our spouses," says Abbie Cutter, a veteran of the seven-person pool.
"It's a weird way to live."
Never has the life of the exurban commuter been weirder than this winter, when hour-long drives have often stretched into epic treks across tundra-like trails of ice and snow.
For the Waterford pool and others along the Eastern seaboard, this means earlier departures, later returns and many more hours inside the odd cocoon of the commuter van.
"It becomes an alternate family," says Marged Harris, a lawyer with the Environmental Protection Agency.
Like others in the van, she says her hectic job leaves scant time for socializing at work.
And she is so weary when she gets home that she often does little except cook dinner and collapse in front of the TV set.
"This is the most exciting part of my day," she says, watching the traffic grind to a halt.
"After this we all go sit in our little offices and wait patiently to get back in the van."
The Waterford pool is one of the nation's oldest, dating to 1935.
Today, its members all are professionals in their 40s and 50s who work similar hours in downtown Washington.
But they have been thrown together by convenience rather than compatibility and rarely socialize outside the van.
This makes for a curious twice-a-day encounter that exhibits elements of a group-therapy session, an editorial meeting of Car and Driver magazine, and a focus group convened by political pollsters.
"Right now, we're following the national pattern of gender warfare and male bashing," quips Ms. Cutter, who was the only woman in the pool when she began commuting to her job at the National Endowment for the Humanities in 1978.
Back then, Ms. Cutter endured sexist jibes, particularly when she took her turn at the wheel.
"I used to have a docile personality but having five men tell me how to drive changed that," she says.
Joined now by two other women, Ms. Cutter gives as good as she gets.
On a recent morning, as driver Robert Chamberlin swerves from lane to lane in a futile attempt to skirt stalled traffic, Ms. Cutter grumbles: "Here we go again, the Constant Motion school of driving.
Men will go miles out of the way to avoid stopping for even one minute."
Pool members also spar genially over the car heat (pants insulate better than skirts), over whether to listen to music or news on the radio and over suitable conversation (the women gripe about off-color jokes, the men about endless talk of gardening).
Then there are debates over navigation, such as whether to take the "Dulles Gambit," a detour to Dulles Airport to pick up the uncrowded lanes reserved for airport traffic to Washington.
To regulate this and other tiffs, there are firm rules and rituals.
Members pay $135 a month toward the van's upkeep and they rotate turns at the wheel.
The driver determines the heat, the radio station and the route.
Then, on the next ride, the driver moves to the passenger seat and feeds coins to the new driver at toll booths.
For years, tardy passengers had to buy drinks for the others on Friday, when the pool enjoyed beer and pretzels on the drive home.
But here, too, the pool reflects broader social trends.
"Everyone went on diets in the '80s, so we stopped that," says Ms. Harris, the EPA lawyer.
"Now it's the '90s, we've all fallen off our diets and we're going back to beer and pretzels."
The pool's personality also changes as members come and go due to career shifts.
Ms. Cutter's husband, Bowman Cutter, a White House economic adviser, left the pool and later traveled with another former pool member, Douglass Lea.
They spent their 5 a.m. drives plotting a tongue-in-cheek book for commuters, tentatively titled "Commuters Do It Twice a Day."
Its tips include videotaping drives to share with rarely seen spouses, cultivating a Zen-like appreciation of gridlock and lobbying to make commuting an Olympic sport.
"Commuting is like two-man luge -- you get very close to each other," deadpans Mr. Lea, a writer and university professor.
As to why the book hasn't yet been written, he says: "We're commuting too much."
Particularly this winter.
Normally, the drive from Waterford, a village of 250, takes 75 minutes.
In recent months it sometimes has taken double that.
Even on clear days the traffic seems unusually swollen, a trend that provides fodder for endless van-pool debate.
Some, such as Mr. Chamberlin, a Federal Reserve analyst, see the clotted roads as sign of an economic recovery.
Those with a scientific bent (there are three EPA workers in the pool) blame what they call "the solar bubble"; at certain times of the year, the rising sun blinds eastbound drivers, forcing the traffic to slow.
Seasonal changes also influence vanpool behavior.
Most sleep more in winter, hibernating like bears through the dark drives.
Even when visible, the scenery prompts sleep.
"It's just eyewash," Mr. Chamberlin says of the strip malls and housing tracts that clutter suburban Virginia.
Highway 66 may have romantic echoes for rock-and-roll fans, but for those who crawl along it every day it's a drably familiar route.
Neil Hughes, a project manager with the World Bank, is the only working commuter.
In winter, he clips a tiny lamp to his breast pocket so he can read dense reports in the dark.
But most of the others devote the ride to chat -- about everything except work.
On two recent days, the talk lurched from the weather to Whitewater, from Tonya Harding to UFOs, from word games to worries about children's careers.
"Before telling me anything private, my kids will insist, `Please don't tell this to the van pool!'"
Ms. Harris says.
"Of course, I always do."
The group also has shared news of divorces and deaths in the family.
They have had fights and a few splits (one man left after a rift over whether to buy gas at a station selling papers supporting rightwinger Lyndon LaRouche).
And they have cautiously welcomed newcomers.
"I wouldn't call it a hazing, but I did go through an informal trial period," says Mr. Hughes, the newest recruit who joined in 1990.
He quickly proved his mettle as a steady driver and rider.
But not everyone sticks.
Several members' children have tried out during summer jobs but dropped out.
"The young lack stamina," quips Mr. Chamberlin, a 20-year veteran of the van and a son of the pool's founder.
At 8:10 a.m., as the van crosses the Potomac into Washington -- half an hour behind schedule -- the banter thins.
Pocket mirrors come out, tie knots are tightened.
And one by one, passengers climb out beside gray buildings, wearing the slightly tense and already tired expressions of desk workers facing another day of in-baskets, voice mail and interoffice memos.
They will reassemble at 5:30 for the return drive.
Ms. Cutter confesses that this winter has caused her to contemplate a change of career that would allow her to work from home.
But the urge passes.
"If I stopped going to Washington, I'd feel bereft," she says.
"I'd wonder what all the others were talking about."
