Among our favorite candid moments in politics is the 1992 declaration by Alabama's Howell Heflin that Senate Democrats must oppose liability reform because "Jews, labor unions and trial lawyers" are his party's most important financial backers.
Today we'll see if Heflin's Law still holds.
The Senate will get a chance to vote on an amendment by Kansas Republican Nancy Kassebaum that might revive a U.S. industry all but destroyed by America's nutty legal system.
Her proposal would enact a statute of repose to bar lawsuits against makers of small airplanes after their products are 15 years old.
That's hardly radical; lawyers could still sue before the repose statute kicked in.
Yet the plaintiff's bar has been fighting as if this is the end of common law.
That's how it always fights, enforcing a legal Brezhnev Doctrine that treats any concession as the end of the empire.
So yesterday Senator Heflin and South Carolina's Fritz Hollings, former trial lawyers themselves, were out trying to kill the Kassebaum effort on the Senate floor.
They were backed behind-the-scenes by Thomas Boggs (aka Tommy Torts), the Beltway enforcer for the Association of Trial Lawyers of America.
It seems they even had the silent complicity of the Clinton Administration.
White House aides hinted early last year that the National Economic Council would support this modest legal reform, but then it was mysteriously referred to the Justice Department as part of a "study" of the entire tort system.
Reformers later learned there was no such study taking place.
So Dan Glickman, a Kansas Democrat and supporter of a similar bill in the House (with 270 co-sponsors), wrote President Clinton.
Mr. Clinton replied on Feb. 17, finally identifying the study's leader, but Mr. Glickman wrote back and declared himself "very disturbed" at the apparent runaround.
Veteran tort-bar watchers suspect the influence of Commerce Secretary Ron Brown, who happens to have been Mr. Boggs's law partner at Patton, Boggs & Blow.
Mr. Brown well knows the booty that trial lawyers poured into the Clinton coffers in 1992.
This is the same White House that claims to be a friend of American business.
Yet the general-aviation business has been nearly wiped out by lawsuits.
Indeed, such venerable U.S. trade names as Cessna, Beech and Piper have been punished for making planes that actually last a long time.
That's because no matter how poorly the planes are maintained by their owners, or how badly they are operated, the manufacturers get sued as deep pockets after nearly every accident.
Cessna was recently sued in Pennsylvania for breach of warranty on a plane built in 1946.
To settle such claims, U.S. companies have had to price their planes out of sight.
So the U.S. general-aviation industry, which once ruled the world, has seen its unit sales fall to 880 or so in 1992 from 17,811 in 1978.
Piper has filed for Chapter 11 and Cessna hasn't made a single-engine aircraft since 1986.
Some 100,000 jobs have been lost, the kind of skilled, high-paying jobs that Democrats claim they want.
Whatever happened to the Democratic Party of the working stiff who "plays by the rules?"
Of course, working stiffs aren't known for bundling $1,000 checks the way the trial lawyers are.
The party of Ron Brown, Tommy Boggs and Howell Heflin is the party of "L.A. Law."
