A powerful geomagnetic disturbance crippled two Canadian communications satellites, disrupting television and radio transmissions and numerous other services throughout the country.
One satellite hasn't yet responded to instructions beamed from Earth and may have to be written off as space junk.
The other was repaired Thursday night.
The satellites, known as Anik E1 and Anik E2, are operated by Telesat Canada, which is controlled by Canada's major telephone companies.
The incident has raised concerns about the reliability of satellite communications on which many industries now rely.
The disturbance sent a powerful burst of static electricity surging through the satellites.
Static electricity "can be the killer of any satellite," said Earl Main, an Intelsat engineer.
Intelsat is a global satellite broadcasting consortium.
Static electricity has previously interrupted satellite service, but the damage has never been as extensive as that incurred by Anik E1 and E2. Telesat officials said "a failure of this magnitude is unpar alleled in the satellite industry."
The incident knocked out power to the Anik E1 and E2's momentum flywheels that keep the satellites pointing in the right direction.
Telesat officials said the geomagnetic disturbance was 100 times greater than any other previously detected.
They said that they believe the problem wasn't caused by defective equipment.
The flywheels were built by General Electric Co.'s aerospace division, which was acquired last year by Martin Marietta Corp.
The Anik satellites are used by major television and radio broadcasters, department stores, banks, hotel chains, telephone companies and manufacturers.
By late yesterday most disrupted services had been restored as a result of Telesat rerouting service onto other satellites.
The satellite failure blanked out television service to some parts of the country.
In major Canadian cities the broadcasters re-established transmission quickly by switching to underground fiber optic cable.
But in more remote areas, including northern Canada, transmission was interrupted for hours.
Telephone service in parts of northern Canada was disrupted until telephone companies were able to switch to ground lines.
Canadian Press, the country's biggest news service, wasn't able to transmit data for more than seven hours Thursday to more than 100 newspapers and 400 radio stations.
"For a while it looked like a doomsday scenario," said Jim Poling, a Canadian Press vice president.
The incident will be costly for Telesat.
The Anik E2 satellite, which is still out of service, isn't insured and Telesat fears it may face a write-off of 300 million Canadian dollars (US$228.8 million) if it can't be repaired.
