The No. 3 executive at the European Bank for Reconstruction & Development resigned to head and take private one of Italy's biggest financial institutions, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro.
Mario Sarcinelli, 59 years old, said in an interview that his first move will be to take BNL private, cashing in on the enthusiasm that has met other Italian banks, which are privatizing by selling shares on the stock market.
State-owned BNL has been wracked by a scandal related to improper Iraqi credits issued from its Atlanta office during the 1980s.
Mr. Sarcinelli said that the Italian government has recommended him as chairman of BNL and that he is expected to be confirmed at the bank's shareholder meeting April 15.
He intends to stay with the EBRD as vice president, banking operations, south, until then.
Mr. Sarcinelli said he couldn't say when BNL would go private or by what method.
The Italian government has already sold off Credito Italiano, a chunk of a bank called IMI, and it plans to sell Banca Commerciale Italiana SpA through a public tender by the end of February.
Those privatizations have been extremely popular and heavily oversubscribed.
"I have no plan yet," for privatization of BNL, said Mr. Sarcinelli.
"The only thing I can affirm is that it is my intention to privatize.
First, I have to see how the bank is and what can be done.
And I don't think we can disturb the calendar that has been prepared" by the Italian government for the other bank privatizations.
The executive said that BNL could be privatized through a public tender offer or perhaps through an auction or agreed sale with some major foreign or national banking house.
A listing on the New York Stock Exchange, he said, "would be beneficial . . . one day."
The government intends to sell BCI shares in the U.S. for listing on the Big Board.
Mr. Sarcinelli replaces Giampiero Cantoni, who stepped aside last week after giving a statement to prosecutors investigating corruption in his hometown.
BNL said the matter related to Italy's broad corruption scandal and had nothing to do with the bank.
A replacement for Mr. Sarcinelli at the EBRD hasn't been named.
It is likely, however, that shareholders of the EBRD will require another European because the bank's politics require equitable representation among countries that fund the bank.
The president, Jacques de Larosiere, is French.
The first vice president, Ronald Freeman, is an American.
Mr. Sarcinelli couldn't say if his replacement would be an Italian.
