The Securities and Exchange Commission accused the former general counsel of Browning-Ferris Industries Inc. of insider trading by selling shares in the garbage-disposal company before it made a disappointing earnings projection.
The SEC said Howard S. Hoover Jr. "was unjustly enriched by at least $97,500" by selling 15,000 shares of Browning-Ferris stock on Aug. 23, 1991, one week before the company announced lower, revised earnings projections.
The commission noted in the suit that as general counsel, Mr. Hoover "was responsible for formulating corporate policies and procedures to ensure compliance" on insider trading laws.
It is seeking an order for Mr. Hoover to pay back the $97,500, plus a civil penalty.
Mr. Hoover, who was fired by Browning-Ferris within weeks after the sale was revealed in September 1991, wasn't available for comment.
His Washington lawyer, Michael R. Klein, said in a statement that the SEC's decision to sue is "inexplicable."
He said his client's "conduct was and will be shown to have been absolutely proper.
Mr. Hoover knew of no undisclosed material information when he sold his BFI shares."
The SEC alleges otherwise in a civil complaint filed Jan. 10 against Mr. Hoover in U.S. District Court in Houston.
The suit's existence was revealed by the commission yesterday.
According to the suit, the Browning-Ferris general counsel participated in an internal meeting and later discussions about an expected shortfall in the company's earnings.
The suit says the company's assistant comptroller advised Mr. Hoover "on or about Aug. 21" that projected earnings would have to be revised downward, and that the assistant comptroller sought Mr. Hoover's advice on what kind of public disclosure should be made.
As a result, the SEC said, Mr. Hoover knew before he sold what amounted to half his Browning-Ferris shares "that BFI intended to publicly correct its prior earnings projections."
When Browning-Ferris did disclose lower profit expectations a week after Mr. Hoover's Aug. 23 stock sale, the company's shares fell $4 to $21.75.
The SEC took no action against another former Browning-Ferris executive who sold about half his Browning-Ferris shares on Aug. 12, 1991, and was fired at the same time as Mr. Hoover.
The executive, R. John Stanton Jr., who had been chief financial officer, has said he sold the shares because "it wasn't very prudent to have that many eggs in one basket."
The SEC might have had a difficult case against Mr. Stanton.
He sold his shares the same day the company made a public filing with the commission and before some of the alleged discussions about the subsequent earnings shortfall.
Mr. Stanton said from his home in Houston that the SEC has told his lawyer it isn't going to file a complaint against him.
Mr. Stanton says he views that as a "vindication of my position."
A Browning-Ferris spokesman said that the Houston-based company cooperated with the SEC's investigation, but that it had no further comment.
