Could it be the real thing this time?
For the past year, traders and economists have rushed to declare the start of an upward cycle in commodity prices -- and a corresponding upturn in consumer-price inflation -- only to see brief commodity-price rallies falter.
Now, once again, commodity prices are on the rise.
But this time, they are accompanied by surges in other indicators, such as the Leading Inflation Index, an inflation-monitoring device developed by Columbia University's Center for Business Cycle Research.
"All the components of the inflation index have gone up over the past month," says Anirvan Banerji, research economist at the center.
"If all of them are going up, it looks like it's not just commodity prices misleading us again.
I think we will get an uptick in inflation before the year is out."
A typical shift in economic cycles, economists say, begins with an increase in industrial activity that gains momentum from a corresponding, psychologically inspired shift of investment money into commodities.
In time, commodity-price inflation tends to translate to consumer-price inflation.
While there are still plenty of skeptics, some analysts are arguing that, in the U.S. at least, the early stages of this process appear to be in progress.
In recent months, the prices of industrial commodities, especially base metals and textiles, have jumped sharply.
Accelerating the price gains is a huge flow of money into commodities from hedge funds and other big investors wary of the topping of the U.S. stock market and trying to position themselves to profit from a shifting economic cycle.
"At some point it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy," says William Byers, director of futures research at Bear, Stearns & Co.
"We are going into a cycle when commodities will receive much more investment attention, and thus commodity prices probably will rise."
One hypersensitive indicator of commodity-price shifts is the Journal of Commerce index of 18 industrial commodities, a favorite among economists as an inflation predictor.
Mr. Banerji, who helped develop the index, sees an important difference in its performance in recent weeks from its performance during false commodity-price rallies last spring and summer.
For the first time in months, Mr. Banerji says, the growth rate of the Journal of Commerce index has shifted to positive from negative.
"This shows us that deflation has stopped," he says, "and now we're seeing the first signs of commodity-price inflation."
Others, however, believe that significant resistance to a broad-based commodity-price rally may come from economic weakness overseas.
For instance, Edward C. Yardeni, chief economist for C.J. Lawrence & Co., says the recent price gains are mainly the result of strength in the U.S. economy.
"Steel prices have been one of the strongest components of raw industrial commodity indexes, and that clearly is related to the increase in activity by the U.S. auto industry," he says.
Yet Mr. Yardeni doesn't believe the economies of Europe and the Far East are strong enough yet to sustain the rally.
"I think the German economy has hit bottom, and probably should start to recover soon," he says.
"But I don't see any signs that the Japanese economy has hit bottom.
I think this continuing weakness may choke off some of the commodity-price upswing."
One odd exception to the recent commodity-price gains is the price of gold, which tested $400 an ounce late last year but has been flat since then.
Usually, gold is regarded as a good indicator of inflation; Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan acknowledged as much last week during his semiannual report to Congress.
And, lately, lackluster demand for gold from such Far East countries as China and Japan has sapped the precious metal's strength.
The same isn't true of base metals, however.
The prices of nickel, aluminum and copper are up 48%, 27% and 17%, respectively, since late last year.
"The whole base metals complex has shifted from a supply surplus-weakening price environment to a supply deficit-strengthening price environment," says Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man.
"It does suggest inflation pressure, at least from the industrial metals."
More such pressure has come from textile prices, especially cotton.
A global shortage of export-quality cotton has helped push cotton prices up more than 40% in four months, to 78.85 cents a pound for the actively traded March futures contract from 56.15 cents in November, says Sandra Kaul, senior analyst for Smith Barney Shearson.
The strength in metal and textile prices accounts for much of the surge in the Journal of Commerce industrial index, Mr. Banerji says.
"There are three subcomponents of the index: textiles, metals and miscellaneous," a category that includes rubber, tallow, plywood and crude oil, he says.
"Metals are clearly up; textiles are up, especially cotton; but miscellaneous components aren't up at all.
It needs to get a little more widespread before we can say definitely this is it."
And although Mr. Byers believes that commodity prices are now destined to move broadly higher, he thinks some commodities are better bets than others.
"The intelligent approach would be to focus on the markets that have at least a semiattractive supply-and-demand picture," he says.
"That would include cotton, grains, sugar and base metals."
