Wasserstein Perella Inc., trying to rebuild after a series of embarrassing defections, landed its first big fish: Frederic Seegal, former co-head of corporate finance for Salomon Brothers.
Mr. Seegal, 46 years old, was named co-president of the investment banking boutique, sharing the job with Gary Parr.
His job will be to help Chairman Bruce Wasserstein plot strategy as well as beef up the firm's telecommunications and media investment banking activities.
Both at Salomon and Lehman Brothers, Mr. Seegal was involved in several major media and telecommunications transactions, including Time Inc.'s merger with Warner Communications Inc.
Mr. Seegal's hiring represents a coup for Wasserstein Perella, which has been perceived as slipping since the departure in June of co-founder Joseph Perella.
Mr. Perella is now a managing director at Morgan Stanley Group Inc. and a member of its operating committee.
In February, Charles Ward, a Wasserstein Perella copresident, became co-head of world-wide investment banking at CS First Boston Inc.
Mr. Seegal said he believes Wasserstein Perella is moving forward.
"There's a positive momentum here, and I wouldn't have joined if I hadn't felt that."
In addition to hiring Mr. Seegal, Wasserstein recently hired seven other executives at the level of vice president or higher.
The hirings are designed to improve the firm's merger-and-acquisitions business as well as its capital markets activities.
At Salomon Inc.'s Salomon Brothers, Mr. Seegal was known as one of "Three Amigos," a reference to the fact that he shared the title of domestic corporate finance chief with two others, Eric Fast and Eduardo Mestre.
"I have no complaints about Salomon Brothers," Mr. Seegal said.
Analysts said Mr. Seegal's decision to join Wasserstein Perella is a significant vote of confidence in the firm.
"This is the first high-level hiring that Wasserstein has done for a while," said John Keefe of Keefe Worldwide Information Services Inc.
Wasserstein Perella engages in corporate advisory work, merchant banking and corporate finance.
Ranked No. 3 in the volume of completed mergers in 1988, the company has slipped substantially since then.
Following the departures of Messrs. Perella and Ward, rival banks have continued to try to woo senior executives, including Mr. Parr.
Mr. Parr, a financial institutions specialist, couldn't be reached to comment.
