Medical research should focus more on the way that diseases affect women and minorities, according to new guidelines that the National Institutes of Health plans to publish this week.
The guidelines represent the government's most detailed effort yet to broaden the mix of patients used in medical research.
The new standards are likely to hasten efforts by academic medical centers to diversify their studies beyond white male patients.
The NIH's campaign also may have spillover implications for drug-development studies that are largely funded by pharmaceutical companies.
"We're not content to say that you can extrapolate from white-male studies to the rest of the population," said Judy LaRosa, the NIH's deputy director of the office of research on women's health.
Ms. LaRosa noted that government agencies have been pushing since 1986 to see more clinical research involving women and minorities.
The new standards, she said, represent a "significant strengthening" of that campaign.
In recent years, researchers have found a host of medical differences among various groups of Americans.
The Food and Drug Administration noted last year that Asian-Americans show increased sensitivity to certain heart drugs known as beta blockers.
It also observed that African-Americans are less responsive to a class of blood-pressure-lowering drugs known as ACE inhibitors.
Because of such differences, medical researchers said the NIH's new guidelines are likely to be seen as a step toward better science.
Some researchers added, though, that the push for patient diversity may be costlier and harder to carry out than government officials realize.
"It's a very noble idea," said Joseph Simone, physician-in-chief at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
"But it's difficult to get doctors to change their referral patterns."
Dr. Simone said he repeatedly has tried to get doctors in Brooklyn to refer more black and Latino patients to Sloan-Kettering, but has found that local physicians are unwilling to take steps that would shrink their own practices.
Researchers also may find some black Americans reluctant to join clinical trials because of abusive practices in the past.
In the best-known case, the so-called Tuskegee Study, doctors from the 1930s onward deliberately didn't treat a group of black men with syphilis to see how the disease progressed.
-- Set up "outreach" programs that recruit minority and female patients who otherwise might be underrepresented.
-- Include enough women and minorities in certain large-scale trials so that statisticians can accurately analyze whether treatment affects these subpopulations differently.
-- Break out data on various subpopulations, such as Korean-Americans and Japanese-Americans, rather than only grouping them together as Asian-Americans.
-- Refrain from using extra costs as an excuse for failing to achieve diversity.
NIH officials noted that the new standards are only guidelines, not regulations.
But the NIH plays such a major role in funding medical research that few doctors or scientists are likely to try to defy the new code.
In the current fiscal year, the NIH is spending $11 billion to bankroll medical research.
Drug industry officials expressed some uneasiness about the NIH's diversity campaign.
"There's no clear definition about how thin you are supposed to slice things," said John Siegfried, associate vice president for medical affairs at the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association.
"Are you supposed to differentiate between Eskimos living below the Bering Strait and those living above the Bering Strait?"
Still, he conceded: "There's no question that the clinical trial system has been heavily weighted by a kind of paternalism that's consistent with white male society.
It's time for that to change."
Even though drug companies finance most of their own trials, Dr. Siegfried said the NIH's rules are likely to have a direct impact on new-drug studies for cancer and AIDS.
That's because NIH is the main source of development revenue in those two areas.
Furthermore, Dr. Siegfried said, the NIH's practices "carry weight throughout the research community."
Drug companies are more directly concerned with rules set by the FDA, which decides which new drugs will be approved for sale in the U.S.
Last year, the FDA made it easier for women of childbearing age to participate in clinical trials.
While the FDA hasn't addressed all the issues of patient diversity covered in the NIH's new guidelines, an FDA spokeswoman yesterday said that "for the most part, the FDA agrees" with the NIH's goals.
Meanwhile, academic researchers welcomed the call for greater patient diversity, as long as they can get extra funding to help meet those goals.
The NIH said the guidelines are being issued to carry out a mandate from Congress last year to toughen standards on patient diversity.
NIH officials said there will be a one-year comment period in which researchers and other interested parties can suggest changes to the guidelines.
The new guidelines will apply to research-funding applications starting next fiscal year.
