The Supreme Court will clarify when states must provide refunds to taxpayers who have paid levies that subsequently are declared unlawful.
The justices agreed to hear an appeal by a federal retiree in Georgia who claimed that the state improperly denied him a refund.
The case is the latest in a series of high court disputes involving state taxes on federal pensions.
It could affect thousands of former federal employees living in 10 states, according to the Georgia man's lawyers.
The high court's ruling, which isn't expected until this fall at the earliest, also could have implications for corporations that successfully challenge tax laws.
The case stems from a 1989 Supreme Court ruling that states may not tax federal retirement benefits if they don't tax comparable state and local benefits too.
In a follow-up decision last year, the justices said that states generally must provide some sort of "retroactive" remedy, such as paying refunds, when tax laws are struck down.
But last year's ruling left open the possibility that states could avoid paying refunds if they gave taxpayers an opportunity to protest and withhold the disputed taxes rather than pay them.
Some states, including Georgia, have resisted refund demands by insisting that federal pensioners hadn't taken advantage of such opportunities.
Georgia's top court upheld that state's refusal to pay refunds to federal retirees.
The Georgia retiree argued that he hadn't had a practical way to challenge the state's now-rescinded preference for state retirees.
Yesterday, the Supreme Court agreed to hear his appeal.
(Reich vs. Collins)
-- Agreed to determine whether a dredging company accused of causing the April 1992 flood of Chicago's underground tunnels may use federal admiralty law to limit its liability.
The city of Chicago and a property owner are appealing a lower court's ruling that lawsuits growing out of the flood should be governed by U.S. admiralty law rather than Illinois state law, and should be heard in federal court.
The dredging company allegedly damaged the tunnels in the course of replacing pilings at bridges over the Chicago River.
(Grubart vs. Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Co.)
-- Said it would hear an appeal by a woman who was fined by Ohio's elections commission for distributing political leaflets without including her name and address.
The woman argues that Ohio's ban on anonymous campaign literature violates the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech.
(McIntyre vs. Ohio Elections Commission)
-- Declined to consider an appeal by Boeing Co. that challenged the constitutionality of a federal "whistle-blower" law.
At issue were private suits brought under the False Claims Act.
That law permits individuals, acting on behalf of the U.S., to charge government contractors with fraud and keep part of the winnings if their suits are successful.
(Boeing Co. vs. U.S.)
-- Let stand a ruling that said travelers who get bumped from overbooked flights may sue the airlines for their financial losses.
Northwest Airlines had claimed in an appeal that federal law precludes such suits.
(Northwest Airlines vs. West)
-- Refused to intervene in the tangled bankruptcy-law proceedings involving the main pipeline subsidiary of Columbia Gas System Inc.
The justices declined to disturb a ruling that allowed the pipeline unit to pay $160 million in obligations to its retail gas company customers, some of whom also are its corporate affiliates.
The transfer was opposed by a committee of unsecured creditors.
(Unsecured Creditors vs. Columbia Gas Transmission Corp.)
-- Rejected an appeal by a group of Vietnam veterans and their relatives who sought to launch a new round of suits against makers of the defoliant Agent Orange.
Lower federal courts ruled, in effect, that a $180 million mass settlement in 1984 blocked further claims, even by people whose injuries weren't known at the time of the settlement.
(Ivy vs. Diamond Shamrock Chemicals Co.)
-- Let stand a ruling under which Figgie International Inc. could be required to pay consumers millions of dollars in connection with false claims that the company made about its heat detectors.
The lower-court ruling came after the Federal Trade Commission determined that Figgie exaggerated the effectiveness of its heat detectors in protecting against fires.
(Figgie International Inc. vs. FTC)
-- Refused to hear an appeal by Olin Corp. of an order that it divest itself of a business that makes chemicals for cleaning swimming pools.
The FTC had found that Olin's 1985 acquisition of the business from FMC Corp. violated antitrust laws by creating the prospect of reduced competition in the already concentrated poolcleaning chemicals industry.
A lower court upheld the FTC finding.
Olin bought the business for $49.5 million.
(Olin Corp. vs. FTC)
