The Justice Department's No. 2 official, Philip Heymann, resigned, as Attorney General Janet Reno sought to bolster the agency's management of the increasingly hot crime issue.
Citing a lack of personal chemistry, Ms. Reno and Mr. Heymann jointly announced his resignation as deputy attorney general.
In a letter to President Clinton, Mr. Heymann wrote: "The attorney general has concluded that our operational and management styles are too different for us to function fully effectively as a management team at the Department of Justice.
That is a judgment I share."
The departure, which Mr. Heymann said will be effective upon the availability of his successor, appeared to reflect a desire by Ms. Reno both to strengthen management of the department, which repeatedly has suffered high-level personnel problems, and to prepare the administration to play a bigger role in congressional deliberations on pending anticrime legislation.
Last year, the department stayed largely aloof as sweeping anticrime bills started working their way through the House and Senate.
Ms. Reno also appears eager to bolster her standing with the White House, which at times has questioned her loyalty.
Mr. Heymann's resignation took President Clinton by surprise, said one administration official.
George Stephanopoulos, a senior adviser to Mr. Clinton, said Mr. Heymann "is more of a policy guy and less into doing the administrative work they needed with so much going on.
They just needed a better fit."
Ms. Reno, who spends a lot of her time making speeches around the country rather than running the department, needs a deputy who is a solid administrator -- a role Mr. Heymann didn't fill to her satisfaction.
In meetings, she would sometimes become "very demonstrative, emphatic," about her desire that Mr. Heymann get things done in the style she preferred, said a department official.
"Janet really wanted a hands-on approach to running the department, and Phil was more inclined to delegate -- and in some cases delegate to career people," explained this official.
"Janet was uncomfortable with that."
Ms. Reno delegated many issues to Mr. Heymann, often telling reporters that she had asked him to prepare reports on various issues, such as mandatory minimum sentences.
Those reports sometimes were late, and at least two administration officials referred to the deputy's office as a "black hole."
A law-enforcement official said Ms. Reno was bothered by the time it took Mr. Heymann to get her information on abortion-clinic violence, for example.
At the news conference, he countered criticism that he was slow to get things done, saying: "I honestly don't think that things have stuck in the deputy's office."
He released a list of a dozen "recent accomplishments in the deputy's office."
Though his resignation was a surprise, some who know him said they saw signs he was unhappy.
Mr. Heymann, 64 years old, was quiet in meetings, seemingly discouraged, certainly not having fun.
At a meeting last week of U.S. attorneys from around the country, Mr. Heymann was made the butt of a joke by Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell, who nominally ranks below him but actually holds considerable influence because he is a personal friend of President Clinton.
When someone raised a question about the anticrime bill, an issue for which the deputy is responsible, Mr. Hubbell, who officially handles civil matters, said: "You take it, Phil, and I'll correct you."
Members of Congress have criticized the department for its lack of involvement in shaping anticrime legislation.
Mr. Stephanopoulos, speaking on Black Entertainment Television's "Lead Story," said Mr. Heymann's departure wouldn't affect administration efforts to get an anticrime bill passed.
Ms. Reno "will take charge," he said.
"We expect a full-scale effort there."
The department's personnel problems began right at the start of the Clinton administration, when the president's first two choices for attorney general withdrew.
According to a Congressional Research Service Report released by Rep. William Clinger (R., Pa.), the administration still has failed to fill more than one-third of the top positions at the agency, including four of 11 assistant attorney general slots.
Moreover, White House aides complain privately about Ms. Reno's performance.
Several senior aides say she isn't enough of a team player.
At one recent meeting in which Ms. Reno referred to her views in the first person singular, a White House aide admonished her, saying the Clinton administration works as a team.
After the attorney general left the room, the White House staffers gave each other high fives.
Despite complaints about Mr. Heymann's management style, Ms. Reno was quick to praise him yesterday for making improvements in numerous areas, including his efforts to increase cooperation among federal law-enforcement agencies and to run the department's antiviolence initiative.
They both insisted they haven't any significant philosophical or policy differences.
But as his work load continued to pile up -- Mr. Heymann told an associate that his office was dealing with 135 issues -- the deputy began to feel Ms. Reno's disapproval for not having reports she wanted when she wanted them, one department official said.
"I think increasingly he felt he was disappointing her, that he wasn't producing what she needed," the official said.
"It's no fun working for people who believe you aren't getting the job done."
One possible replacement for Mr. Heymann is Charles Ruff, a Washington lawyer who held a number of federal lawenforcement posts between 1967 and 1982, including acting deputy attorney general in 1979.
Before Mr. Heymann was appointed, Mr. Ruff was considered for the deputy's job, but was rejected at least in part because he hadn't paid Social Security taxes for his 71-year-old cleaning woman.
Related problems also scuttled Mr. Clinton's first two choices for attorney general.
But since then, failure to pay taxes for domestic help hasn't hindered the appointment of other nominees, and the new climate may now allow Mr. Ruff's selection.
Paul M. Barrett and Jeffrey H. Birnbaum contributed to this article.
