The Whitewater investigation sent quivers through the Clinton administration, as White House and Treasury officials began delivering documents and testimony to a federal grand jury.
Disclosures that Treasury and White House officials had discussed an investigation involving the Clintons had raised questions about whether the work of regulators had been compromised.
Yesterday, Special Counsel Robert Fiske brought three White House aides -- Communications Director Mark Gearan; Hillary Rodham Clinton's chief of staff, Maggie Williams; and Mrs. Clinton's press secretary, Lisa Caputo -- to the grand jury to talk about their contacts.
Throughout the Clinton administration, the sight of top officials walking into a grand jury provided a clear warning: obstructing Mr. Fiske's investigation or federal regulators will be dealt with harshly.
The Fiske inquiry has had a chilling effect in both the White House and the Treasury Department, where aides said they are reluctant to discuss Whitewater-related issues with their colleagues, even their own deputies.
At the Treasury, for instance, officials acting on behalf of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen confiscated computer equipment and notes -- as part of the secretary's own internal review.
Mr. Bentsen wants to be sure that his officials have cooperated with Mr. Fiske's request for information relating to contacts with the White House regarding the Resolution Trust Corp.'s investigation of the failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
The RTC inquiry dealt with allegations that funds from Madison were improperly diverted to Mr. Clinton's gubernatorial campaigns or Whitewater Development Co.
The former owner of Madison was a partner of the Clintons in Whitewater, an Arkansas real-estate venture.
"I hesitate to say come look in my basement at Treasury because someone would probably call me a pack rat," Mr. Bentsen told a House Appropriations subcommittee.
"But we've been holding back our trash to the point that I've had to use a warehouse in Alexandria Virginia to hold the overflow.
There are 15 special investigators and internal auditors going through our files on my floor alone."
Further, Joel Klein, the deputy White House counsel, said yesterday the White House has complied with Mr. Fiske's subpoena for documents.
A White House aide said that the grand jury was sent about 1,000 pages of documents, gathered from about 40 people who responded to Mr. Fiske's request for information about contacts with Treasury officials.
Tension at the White House will very likely rise next week.
Seven other White House and Treasury figures have been subpoenaed to appear before the grand jury.
One of the officials is presidential aide Bruce Lindsey, who Mr. Clinton said "probably" was the person who first informed him that the RTC would seek a criminal investigation of Madison.
In addition, Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes is scheduled to appear Thursday.
Mr. Ickes has headed the internal handling of the Whitewater matter, and participated in one of the three meetings between White House and Treasury officials that triggered the uproar.
Investigators will be eager to question Jean Hanson, the Treasury's general counsel, who also will testify.
On Sept. 29, she told White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum that the RTC would seek the criminal investigation of Madison, providing an early warning for the White House.
Ms. Hanson has told Treasury officials that she acted after receiving an inquiry from the press about a possible referral, and she contends that she was seeking guidance from Mr. Nussbaum on how to respond.
As Ms. Williams was leaving the courthouse yesterday, she mocked the media attention on the case.
"You can't come out of anything like this and not have a fairly healthy respect for the process," she said.
"I'm really encouraged to be participating in something where the finding of fact is important, as opposed to innuendo and rumor-mongering and gossip and sensationalism."
On Capitol Hill, meanwhile, tempers grew testier.
New York Republican Sen. Alfonse D'Amato called for the resignation of the Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman, following Mr. Altman's recent disclosure that he consulted with the White House about whether he should recuse himself from the investigation.
Democrats are generally acceding to the request of Mr. Fiske to hold off hearings on Whitewater.
But a House Banking Committee hearing scheduled in two weeks for oversight of the RTC is certain to become a forum for Republican questions.
Rep. Jim Leach of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the committee, has requested the appearance of 40 witnesses.
Committee staffers said they expect perhaps a half-dozen to show.
But as of yesterday, Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez hadn't notified the proposed witnesses, and he continued to warn that he wouldn't let the hearing become a colloquy on Whitewater.
"I know the rules, I know the limits and by God, on the appointed hour of the appointed day, I will rule," the Texas Democrat said.
"It's going to be oversight" of the RTC.
Greg Hitt contributed to this article.
