Coors Brewing Co., rushing into the new market for so-called ice beer, unveiled plans to sell its own version, to be called Coors Artic Ice.
Coors, a unit of Adolph Coors Co., Golden, Colo., is licensing an ice-brewing process patented by Canada's Labatt Breweries, a unit of John Labatt Ltd.
The idea behind ice beer is to brew it at such a low temperature that ice crystals form.
The crystals are filtered out, ostensibly changing the beer's taste somehow.
"It supposedly helps create a bolder, cleaner taste and finish," a Coors spokeswoman said.
Coors, the third-largest U.S. brewer, is playing catch-up with U.S. beer giants Anheuser-Busch Cos. and Miller Brewing Co., a unit of Philip Morris Cos., which introduced their ice beers in some markets last fall.
Anheuser calls its version Ice Draft; Miller's is Icehouse.
Though ice beer is too new to have captured a significant part of the U.S. market, Coors wanted to be prepared in case ice beer took off in popularity in the way that light beer did but dry beer didn't, said Emanuel Goldman, analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
"Coors didn't feel that it could sit back and not have an entry in the ice beer market," he said.
In Canada, ice beer has seized 10% of the domestic beer market since being introduced early last year by Labatt and rival Molson Breweries, a unit of Molson Cos. of Toronto.
Labatt, which spent 10 years developing its ice-brewing process, will earn about $4 million a year from the Coors licensing pact, analysts estimate.
The Canadian brewer, which sells its Labatt Ice Beer brand in Canada, the U.S. and Britain, says it expects to sign similar licensing pacts with brewers in other countries.
Labatt has aggressively tried to block competitors from using the phrases "ice beer" and "ice brewed."
Labatt has sued Molson and Miller, claiming they violated Labatt's intellectual property rights.
Miller and Molson have called the suits groundless.
Coors, which plans to introduce Artic Ice in nine markets on Feb. 14, said it will be one of Coors's higher-priced beers, along with the company's specialty brands.
