Mexican authorities said they detained a second suspect in the murder of presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio.
A spokesman for the attorney general's office also said that the government, together with the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, was investigating possible links between the man who has confessed to the assassination and groups in southern Los Angeles.
The spokesman said some of the groups are Mexican, some Mexican-American, but didn't have any more details.
The confessed assassin has occasionally lived in Los Angeles working in a factory, and his father still lives there.
The news of a possible accomplice or of possible involvement by some larger group will likely add to the nervousness in Mexico.
Authorities had hoped that the man who has confessed to the assassination, Mario Aburto Martinez, was a lone, crazed gunman, because that scenario would have reassured Mexicans.
The possibility of a conspiracy had, however, been growing.
The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that Mr. Aburto had told a 16-year-old girl he was wooing that he was part of some political organization and had decided to solve a problem for it.
The girl also said that the 23-year-old Mr. Aburto had told her that he had spent four months late last year in Chiapas, site of a rebellion Jan. 1.
It isn't known whether that trip amounts to more than a coincidence.
The attorney general's office said authorities are holding a man identified as Tranquilino Sanchez because a videotape appeared to show him clearing the way for Mr. Aburto, who got so close to Mr. Colosio that he managed to place a gun almost up against the candidate's head before pulling the trigger.
Mexican newspapers reported that Mr. Sanchez had links to a general who was in charge of Mr. Colosio's security.
Such a connection would support rumors that are linking the assassination to hard-liners within the ruling party who are worried that political reform will throw them out of power.
But a government spokesman denied that Mr. Sanchez was linked to the general, Domiro Garcia Reyes.
Hugo Morales, the spokesman for the attorney general, said Mr. Sanchez, 60 years old, had been hired by a local official of the ruling party to help control the crowd of 4,000 gathered to hear Mr. Colosio give a speech in Tijuana Wednesday evening.
Mr. Morales said that Mr. Sanchez is a former state judicial policeman.
Mr. Morales acknowledged that officials had detained two other men for questioning and released them after deciding they weren't involved.
He also added that, "This is not a concluded investigation."
The spokesman did provide additional details of the confession that Mr. Aburto made to authorities.
He quoted Mr. Aburto as saying that he had been planning an assassination for years and had initially decided to go after President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
Mr. Morales said there is no definite link between Mr. Aburto and anyone in Chiapas, but did say authorities were investigating that possibility.
With uncertainty high in Mexico, the stock market fell almost 3% yesterday.
The market had dropped less than 1% on Friday following extensive efforts by finance officials to maintain calm, but Mexico's IPC index dropped 74.63 points yesterday to 2446.15.
The peso stayed about flat at 3.35 pesos to the dollar, but traders said the central bank apparently needed to intervene in small amounts to keep the currency stable.
"We don't have the candidate from the PRI yet," said Salvador Sanchez, a director at Grupo Financiero Probursa, referring to the ruling party by its Spanish initials.
He added that share prices will stay under pressure until a new candidate is announced, probably after Easter.
Other traders have also begun to raise questions about the health of the economy, which grew just 0.4% last year and which has had to deal with wild uncertainty this year-from the Jan. 1 uprising in Chiapas to the recent kidnapping of one of Mexico's best-known businessmen and now to the murder of the man who was almost certain to win the August presidential election.
Mr. Sanchez added, however, that the stock-market drop wasn't as ominous as it might have been, because the decline came in light trading.
Many Mexican brokers and investors have already taken off for the Easter holidays.
There is little information available about who will succeed Mr. Colosio.
The process by which Mexico's president chooses a candidate to succeed him is the most obscure in Mexico's political system.
Mexican stock-market investors have had to deal with rumors and counterrumors ever since Mr. Colosio was killed Wednesday night.
The most plausible candidate thus far is Ernesto Zedillo, Mr. Colosio's campaign manager.
Mr. Zedillo, 42 years old, is even more like President Salinas than Mr. Colosio was.
Mr. Zedillo, who has a doctorate in economics from Yale University and is said to be exceptionally bright, would be a favorite of investors because he would carry on President Salinas's economic program.
Mr. Zedillo, however, has not been very close to the party and is reportedly facing some opposition from senior PRI officials.
As President Salinas holds meetings trying to build a consensus behind a candidate, he must also deal with the fact that the nervousness pervading Mexico will require a president with considerable political skills and that Mr. Zedillo has yet to demonstrate he has them.
Mr. Zedillo ran into controversy as Education Secretary under President Salinas and caught some criticism for the slow start that Mr. Colosio's campaign had.
The other name surfacing most often is Fernando Ortiz Arana, the president of the PRI.
Mr. Ortiz Arana has more political experience than Mr. Zedillo, but little economic background.
