Three more directors plan to leave the board of International Business Machines Corp., slimming it down to 11 members and giving Chairman Louis V. Gerstner Jr. a new opportunity to put his own imprint on its composition.
John R. Opel, 69 years old, who served as chairman of IBM from 1983 to 1986 and oversaw the massive buildup of plant and personnel that Mr. Gerstner is now disassembling, will be the most significant force to retire.
After passing the reins to Mr. Gerstner's predecessor, John F. Akers, Mr. Opel had retained considerable influence in heading the board's powerful executive committee.
But Mr. Gerstner restructured the board last summer and named himself to replace Mr. Opel as chairman of the executive committee.
Mr. Opel remained a director, but there had been speculation that he would soon leave.
The two other directors who will join Mr. Opel in retiring from the board in April are Thomas F. Frist Jr., 55, chairman of Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp.; and Judith Richards Hope, 53, a senior partner in the law firm of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker.
Neither was steeped in technology, and Mr. Gerstner, no technology veteran himself, is intent on appointing more high-tech-savvy advisers, according to people familiar with the matter.
A spokesman said no successors have been named yet, and there aren't any nominations included in the proxy statement for the annual meeting.
The IBM board won't meet again until the annual shareholder meeting scheduled for April 25 in Toronto.
But Mr. Gerstner could still nominate replacements in time for them to be voted on at the annual meeting, the IBM spokesman said.
Under IBM bylaws, the board's size can range from nine to 25 members.
Since Mr. Gerstner came to IBM in April 1993, eight directors have retired, but so far Mr. Gerstner has named just one new board member, Charles F. Knight, chairman and chief executive officer of Emerson Electric Co.
Other frequently mentioned possibilities are George Fisher, the former chairman of Motorola Inc. who now is at Eastman Kodak Co., and Jack Welch, chairman of General Electric Co., whom Mr. Gerstner has long admired for his ability to turn around a complex and disparate organization.
IBM's announcement of the board departures yesterday included a terse comment from Mr. Gerstner thanking the departing directors for "their contributions."
