Go, defense!
While small-capitalization stocks have outperformed their bigger brethren so far in the current stock market correction, market analysts say it's time for small-stock investors to take a broad defensive posture.
That means taking profits on the sector's highfliers while focusing more attention and investment dollars on issues that will do well amid a continued economic recovery.
The Russell 2000 Index, a leading barometer of small-cap performance, is down 1.8% from its all-time peak on Feb. 2, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average has fallen 3.6% from its Jan. 31 peak.
Analysts warn that while the overall performance of small stocks has been impressive in the retreat, danger still lurks in the small-cap universe, especially among the hot growth stocks.
"The greatest risk is in growth stocks, where you have high expectations, high price/earnings multiples and a lot of aggressive money that could turn and run very quickly," says David Bostian, chief economist and investment strategist at Herzog Heine Geduld Inc. in New York.
No one is counseling investors to dump growth-oriented small stocks wholesale.
Many companies are poised to post impressive earnings growth in coming months, and investors holding such issues in their portfolios should reap the benefits as other investors put increasing premiums on earnings growth and less emphasis on gains spurred by declining interest rates.
But shares of small companies that have already had big gains may be vulnerable to setbacks.
"You'll want to manage your portfolio with a defensive eye and take profits in those stocks that have had big runups," says Susan Hirsch, a specialist in growth small stocks at Lehman Brothers in New York.
Perennially volatile small-stock growth companies tend to be worth less in a rising interest-rate environment, Ms. Hirsch points out, chiefly because alternative investments with lower risk become more attractive.
"A bond yielding 10% with relatively lower risk is a more compelling alternative to buying stock in a company that may grow 15%," she says.
The Lehman strategist recommends staying with selected technology stocks, health-care stocks and economically sensitive issues that haven't enjoyed big gains.
"We set a three-year window, where stocks can really deliver solid, bottom-line growth and are still selling at fairly moderate price-earnings multiples," she adds.
Lehman recommends, for example, Union Switch & Signal Inc. as a small-cap economic-infrastructure play.
The company, which makes fully integrated switching and signal equipment for masstransit systems, is a "turnaround story," says Ms. Hirsch.
The stock, she adds, is trading at a "reasonable multiple" of 21.5 times estimated earnings of 90 cents a share for the current year, up from an estimated 50 cents for 1993.
Lehman also favors two small, growth-oriented health-care stocks: Pharmaceutical Marketing Services, a medical database company, and Community Health Systems Inc., a low-cost operator of acute-care hospitals that has been an aggressive acquirer of community hospitals in rural areas.
Community Health, Ms. Mott says, is trading at 16 times Lehman's earnings estimate of $1.33 a share for this year.
At Prudential Securities, health-care stocks are also in favor, particularly those companies involved in making medical devices.
"We've seen good earnings from medical device, semiconductor and computer software and service" companies, says Claudia Mott, small-cap market strategist at the brokerage firm.
Ms. Mott says small-cap investors "need to be looking at companies that have had good earnings momentum and have reported better-than-expected numbers -- that's where performance will come from," in the current unsettled market.
One of Prudential's current favorites is American Medical Electronics Inc., a manufacturer of medical equipment.
On the new-issues front, market pros are also counseling investors to focus on economically sensitive issues among those in the pipeline.
And, they caution, a number of scheduled issues -- particularly by growth companies -- could be pulled if the correction becomes steep and protracted.
"It will get tougher for large deals to get done, but we haven't seen signs of cancellations or postponement yet" of initial public offerings by companies, says Robert Natale, new-issues analyst for Standard & Poor's.
"The number of offerings will drop more than half, from their current average of more than 50 a month, to under 25, if we get into full correction and if small-caps underperform," he predicts.
At a minimum, a sharp correction will mean that new issues will be priced at the lower end of their proposed ranges because share prices of comparable, listed companies will have declined in the interim, Mr. Natale says.
"We forecast some time ago that the number of offerings and the dollar value of IPOs this year would not match 1993's totals because there would be a correction," Mr. Natale says.
For now, attractive pickings in the IPO pipeline are fairly slim, by his estimation.
He likes Centex Construction Products, a producer of cement, aggregates and gypsum wallboard, expected to go public sometime in late March.
Whether small-caps will begin to underperform the overall market in the weeks ahead is far from certain, market pros say.
"Everyone is playing defensive ball," says Richard Bruno, head of over-the-counter trading at PaineWebber in New York.
"Sentiment is short-term negative.
The question is, does it go long-term negative."
Keith Mullins, managing director of small-stock research at Smith Barney Shearson, thinks the market will turn more acutely negative for small-caps as a whole: He sees a strong likelihood of a 15% to 20% correction in the next three to six months.
"Since 1960, the longest we've gone without a correction of 15% or more in the small-cap market was 24 months," he points out.
"We're now in the 20th month of the current cycle.
Historically, we've now moved into the danger zone."
Mr. Mullins, who like others is concerned about the valuations of the small-cap sector's highfliers, says he favors service-oriented "transaction processors," such as Envoy Computers, a company that processes medical claims and credit cards, and Medaphis Corp., which processes physicians' medical claims.
Small-company stocks reversed two consecutive sessions of losses in subdued trading Friday as bonds posted moderate gains.
The Russell 2000 small-capitalization stock index climbed 0.79, or 0.30%, to end at 263, its session high.
The measurement stayed in a narrow range, never falling below 262.21.
The Nasdaq Composite index jumped 4.34, or 0.56%, to finish at 783.78.
Advancing issues on the Nasdaq Stock Market outperformed decliners, 1,6041,385, on national market volume of 243,699,500 shares and total volume of 285,648,000 shares.
On Thursday, national market volume was 307,222,900 shares and overall turnover was 348,951,000.
Some communications stocks rebounded after falling Thursday on news that the planned acquisition of Tele-Communications by Bell Atlantic had collapsed.
Tele-Communications Class A rose 1 1/2 to 23 7/8, while Bell Atlantic (NYSE) dropped 3/8 to 54 1/8.
Among the smaller issues in the group, Centennial Cellular rose 5/8 to 20 1/8, and Inmac, a Santa Clara, Calif., data communications products firm, gained 3/4 to 8 3/4.
