Crystal Brands Inc., a sportswear company that has several well-known brands, said it filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection.
The Southport, Conn., apparel and costume jewelry maker said in a statement Friday that it sought court protection "to restructure its indebtedness and reorganize its capital structure."
It also said it agreed to consider the sale of its costume jewelry operations, one of the nation's dominant.
Crystal Brands produces sportswear under the Gant, Salty Dog, and Izod brand names, and jewelry under the Monet, Trifari, and Marvella names.
To raise cash, it has already sold its Evan-Picone and Lacoste Alligator SA trademarks.
The bankruptcy-law filing came as no surprise to analysts.
"You have a company with all of these wonderful labels that was badly mismanaged for a number of years," said Laurence Leeds Jr., an analyst with Buckingham Research Inc., New York.
"New management inherited enormous debts, and the debt payments were so large that conducting a viable business was all but impossible."
In a prepared statement, the company's chairman and chief executive officer, Charles Campbell, characterized the filing as "the final step towards beginning the process of returning the company to a state of health."
Company executives couldn't be reached for further comment over the weekend.
The company restructured $419 million in debt about a year ago, an arrangement that was intended to remain in effect through 1995.
In July, it brought in Mr. Campbell, who helped bring Munsingwear Inc. out of bankruptcy-law proceedings, as chairman and chief executive.
"Now, it's anyone's guess what happens," said Mr. Leeds.
"The trademarks are still very viable.
But if they sell off the costume jewelry business, it would be a very small company."
The company also announced that it had received a commitment from Citicorp for a $75 million debtor-in-possession credit facility, subject to bankruptcy court approval, which would provide the company with working capital.
"With our DIP financing in place," said Mr. Campbell, "I foresee no interruption of product flow and the delivery to our customers of the quality merchandise they have come to expect of Crystal brands."
