Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa is promising to address the economic issues at the heart of U.S.-Japan trade tensions, but Uncle Sam may be disappointed in the outcome.
On Friday, Mr. Hosokawa called for sweeping economic change in a major policy speech to parliament.
He said Japan must reform its tax system, cut red tape and take market-opening steps -- measures that could stimulate Japanese domestic demand and thus imports.
But Mr. Hosokawa has just emerged from another brutal round of fighting within his ruling coalition, this time over his failed attempt last week to shuffle his cabinet.
The battle may have undermined his ability to push through painful changes.
Even if Mr. Hosokawa does get his way, Japan could be headed for more conflict with the U.S., especially on macroeconomic policy.
Washington criticizes Tokyo's planned one-year, 5.47 trillion yen ($52.7 billion) income-tax cut as inadequate to revive Japan's slumping economy.
Japanese finance officials say the reduction will be made permanent later this year.
But Japan is in a bind.
Some senior coalition legislators say they favor reforms that would include a tax cut but lead to a net increase in government revenue.
Socialist members of the alliance might derail such a plan, as they did last month, leaving Japan with no tax cut to show Washington.
Yet if the plan goes through, the heavier tax burden could create a drag on consumption and retard imports -- another outcome unfavorable to the U.S.
The immediate hurdle to a trade truce is Japan's resistance to setting numerical import targets for several categories of U.S. goods.
U.S.-Japan trade talks collapsed last month after Tokyo refused American demands that it set numerical targets.
Mr. Hosokawa offered no new overtures in his Friday speech, which came just hours after the U.S. turned up the pressure on Japan by reviving a tough trade measure called Super 301.
Japan's auto industry, meantime, appears ready to strike a deal.
Toyota Motor Corp. said last week that it would consider setting new, nonbinding targets for purchases of U.S.-made auto parts.
Both sides agree, however, that such goals can only do so much to bring down Japan's trade surplus with the U.S., $50 billion in 1993 by Japan's count.
An underlying cause of the gap is that the two governments follow conflicting fiscal policies.
Japan's government, notwithstanding the budget deficits it is racking up during this downturn, tends to spend less money than it collects in taxes.
Economists say Tokyo's thrift diverts money away from consumption and thus suppresses imports.
Washington, meanwhile, spends more than it takes in, stimulating import demand.
As long as that policy gap remains, the trade imbalance is likely to remain wide.
Washington argues that Tokyo can do more to spur imports.
"Our reading of the situation now is that the macro package put forward isn't going to go very far in producing a highly significant decrease" in Japan's overall surplus, says Jeffrey E. Garten, a U.S. undersecretary of commerce.
Tokyo is kicking around some spending ideas.
One is to raise Japan's target for public-works outlays this decade -- 430 trillion yen -- by as much as 100 trillion yen.
But the powerful Finance Ministry resists running budget deficits to fund such a scheme.
Spending to cut the trade surplus would conflict with a goal much dearer to the ministry's heart: saving to finance pension outlays as the population of retirees balloons in coming years.
Hiroshi Nakai, a leading Democratic Socialist, says he thinks legislators are likely to support a tax-reform bill similar to a plan proposed earlier this year by Mr. Hosokawa.
The plan called for a permanent income-tax cut, to be offset in 1997 by a rise in the national sales tax to 7% from 3%.
The prime minister had to withdraw the plan after leftist members of his coalition threatened to bolt the government.
Mr. Nakai believes that parliament -- after another long feud over tax policy -- will compromise on a 6% sales tax.
The bottom line, he estimates, would be eight trillion yen in new tax revenue, which would more than offset the income-tax cut.
"The people won't understand 7%, but they will accept 6%," he says.
"I promised my constituents 6%."
A decision on taxes could come this autumn, legislators say.
Meanwhile, the Health and Welfare Ministry intends to raise in October the national-pension premiums paid by workers and employers.
The household and corporate sectors would each pay an extra 1.3 trillion yen in taxes annually, according to an official in the ministry's pension section.
A net rise in taxes would widen the fiscal-policy gap between the U.S. and Japan.
A more immediate concern, some economists say, is that the prospect of higher sales taxes could discourage consumers from spending their income-tax windfall.
