William Kristol has it right that now is the time to kill the Clinton health plan outright, rather than attempt to present some modified version, but he does not go far enough in the right direction ("How to Oppose the Health Plan -- and Why," editorial page, Jan. 11).
Mr. Kristol is right when he says the president's plan would have a seriously deleterious effect on the quality of medical care; is unnecessary; that there is no health crisis; that the plan would guarantee an unprecedented intrusion into the economy; and would signal a rebirth of centralized welfare-state policy at the very moment that this is perceived as a failure around the world.
Where he goes wrong is in not taking the next step: recognizing that the problem is entirely caused by the insurance system itself, and that no tinkering with it will solve the problem.
Forty-two percent of current medical-care cost is administrative overhead to shuffle insurance paper, and insurance is responsible for added costs that total an incredible 75 cents on the dollar of health costs.
By terminating medical insurance payment for medical care, the federal legislation Mr. Kristol proposes to fix the several problems he discerns in American health care become unnecessary, including making insurance portable from job to job, ending limits on pre-existing conditions, simplifying health-care paperwork, etc.
The present system is akin to insuring the patient's oil changes, when it should be limited to helping him pay for a major car accident.
To that end, super-catastrophic medical insurance purchased by the individual, and not by the employer, is the only kind that should be in place, as suggested by Milton Friedman; absence of insurance deep-pockets would make it necessary for doctors and hospitals to lower fees again to levels people could afford, and would have the secondary benefit of restoring the physician's professional image.
A Medical Savings Account, tax-deductible for the individual (which is not presently the case), and which would accumulate if not spent and rolled into the patient's retirement plan, would encourage the patient's close monitoring of cost, and would represent true "managed care," lowering expenses drastically.
The renewal of the old-fashioned doctor-patient relationship would prevent waste, fraud and abuse -- not the case with the present intrusion of the third-party insurance payer, where there is incentive neither to patient nor doctor to curb costs.
Malpractice reform certainly, as he suggests, should be instituted, but in addition the renewal of a close relationship between doctor and patient in itself would help to lower malpractice claims.
People will be expected to save for medical care again, as they do for college costs and retirement, and those who are negligent will pay a price.
Even Medicare and Medicaid should be replaced by a welfare type of medical care for those in need, funded as in the past in part by doctors' free medical care to the indigent, and by public and private charity, for those who have not been able to save for medical care.
One more thing: little noticed in the insurance system control of medicine has been its obliteration of the ideal of excellence.
The term "health care provider" was introduced early on by insurance carriers -- in a clear attempt to de-professionalize the image of the doctor.
What the term implies is that one doctor is no better nor worse than any other doctor, and that moreover not only are doctors fungible, but the nurses, physician assistants, optometrists, social workers and psychologists, etc., all of who are also "providers," are fungible with doctors, and will be used by the insurance companies in the interests of their bottom line.
Seymour C. Post, M.D.
