The dollar dropped against the mark yesterday on news of an unexpected surge in Germany's money-supply growth, which appeared to eliminate any chance of an early interest-rate cut by the Bundesbank.
But after initially plunging to a new 1994 low, the dollar edged higher on bargain-hunting and on speculation that the German central bank might still cut rates in order to reassure domestic bond and equity markets.
They underwent a blood-letting following the money-supply report.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7040 marks, down from 1.7095 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 104.10 yen, down from 104.60 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4972, up from $1.4895.
About noon Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 103.95 yen and at 1.7073 marks.
The Bundesbank said the M3 money supply, a broad measure of cash in circulation, plus short-term deposits, grew at a seasonally adjusted, annual rate of 20.6% through January.
Under normal circumstances, M3 is the Bundesbank's favored leading indicator of potential inflation.
The latest growth rate was far higher than even the most pessimistic estimates and sent German and other European share and bond prices reeling.
The dollar also spun lower on speculation that the Bundesbank was now in no position to continue its recent policy of cautiously easing key interest rates.
Indeed, the U.S. currency hit an intraday low of 1.6933 marks soon after statements by one central bank official who called the M3 news "alarming."
The dollar hadn't traded as low as 1.6933 marks since Dec. 23, when it was at 1.6925 marks.
There is no "room for further official interest-rate reduction," added Guntram Palm, a member of the Bundesbank's policy-making central council, which is set to meet today to discuss interest-rate policy.
The dollar recovered a bit of ground as some traders speculated that the Bundesbank might ease rates, however reluctantly, in order to reassure the German bond market.
Indeed, the market was divided on just how the money-supply situation would ultimately affect Bundesbank policy, said Belal Khan, senior customer dealer at the Bank of Tokyo in New York.
Money-supply growth of "20.6% is outrageously high and cutting rates is irresponsible," Mr. Khan said, adding: "At the same time, not cutting rates is equally irresponsible because of what it's doing to their bond market."
Analysts also noted that the central bank had tried to play down the short-term significance of the January data in the days prior to its release.
Indeed, during the past several days Bundesbank officials were quick to describe the January numbers as distorted and unreliable.
Analysts noted that the January money-supply figure was inflated by a series of special factors, including cash that many Germans repatriated from offshore accounts as a result of a recent change in tax laws.
But many analysts said the magnitude of the money-supply expansion was still worrisome.
"There was a lack of a real explanation as to why M3 was so far outside of expectations," said Jack Griffin, assistant vice president at Fuji Bank in New York.
"Any way you cut it, it's still a very big number," he added.
Bank of Tokyo's Mr. Khan noted that bargain-hunting was also a factor in the dollar's partial recovery from intraday lows.
"There was interest among U.S. corporations to buy a dollar that is undervalued at below 1.7000 marks," he said.
