General Electric Co.'s struggling European lighting division swung to profitability in 1993, GE Chairman John Welch said.
Mr. Welch, on a two-day visit to Hungary this week, wouldn't disclose exact figures for the division but said GE Lighting Europe will report pretax earnings in a midrange somewhere "between zero and $25 million."
The improved earnings picture puts the U.S. company's European lighting division on a stronger footing with European market leaders Osram, a unit of Siemens AG of Germany, and Philips Electronics NV of the Netherlands, said Charles Pieper, chief executive officer and president of GE Lighting Europe.
The latest news reflects a major turnaround for the GE unit, resulting in large part from integrating operations and moving much of its European light-bulb production to Hungary.
General Electric Co. of the U.S. is not related to the British company of the same name.
GE has been a trailblazer in Eastern Europe, forming the first sizable Western joint venture in the region in 1990 with the Hungarian light-bulb group Tungsram.
GE paid $150 million for an initial 50% stake in Tungsram, gradually boosting its share to 99%.
Tungsram now makes up a key part of GE Lighting Europe.
Restructuring Tungsram over the last four years, however, cost GE much more than expected.
GE said it had initially planned to invest $200 million in Tungsram, but to date has injected $550 million.
On Tuesday, it announced plans to increase its investment even more.
In talks with Hungarian government officials, including Hungary's new Prime Minister Peter Boross, Mr. Welch said he is committed to pouring $30 million to $50 million a year into the Hungarian economy through investments in Tungsram.
Tungsram exports 90% of its products, representing 3% of the country's total exports.
Tungsram is now "well positioned" to be "a major factor in all of Europe," said Mr. Welch.
GE officials said Tungsram will show a net loss for 1993, but is expected to swing to a profit this year.
In 1992, Tungsram reported a staggering loss of nine billion forints ($88.3 million at current exchange rates).
Tungsram has recorded losses since the mid-1980s, a result of the disintegration of the Comecon market.
Most of GE's investment in Tungsram has gone into new product development.
Hungary is home to four of the company's nine advanced research and development centers, including a research and manufacturing facility for energy-saving compact fluorescent bulbs.
In addition, GE Lighting Europe is in the process of closing three of its Western Europe manufacturing facilities -- a 100-year-old factory in Vienna and two plants in the United Kingdom -- and moving that production to Hungary.
About 8,500 people -- or almost half of Tungsram's labor force -- have been laid off since GE acquired its initial stake.
GE reached agreements with Tungsram's union this week, promising a wage increase in line with inflation.
Earlier, GE indicated that it may be hiring back some of the Hungarian workers laid off.
In addition to investing in Hungary's lighting sector, the GE chairman said the company expects to participate in the privatization of Hungary's power plants.
