Honolulu -- The clock on the wall of the Honolulu fish auction, next to the docks at Kewalo Basin, says 7:45 a.m.
Most of the 50 tons of fish unloaded during the night -- sweet-fleshed snappers, green and gold mahi-mahi, bigeye and skipjack tuna among them -- have already been auctioned and carted away for delivery.
What remains under the fluorescent lights on the wet concrete floor are four large pallets stacked high with the new star of Hawaii's waters -- glistening, muscular, silver -- skinned swordfish.
Known in Hawaii by their Japanese name, shutome, they weigh 100 to 200 pounds each.
Clad in blue overalls, Brooks Takanaka, assistant general manager of the United Fishing Agency, a private auction house, is manning his cellular phone.
He is in touch with a pair of big swordfish buyers, Ocean Star of San Diego and Phillips Seafood of Point Pleasant, N.J.
Along the shed wall, another seven buyers, some wearing knee-high Wellington boots, antennas raised on their own portable phones, are talking to clients in Hawaii, the U.S. mainland and possibly Japan.
Auctioneer Wayne Hitashi -- in jeans, a Hawaiian shirt and sneakers -- has been taking bids, pallet by pallet, using a black Magic Marker to write prices on a large white plastic board.
He is at the last pallet.
The first three have sold for prices ranging from $4.05 to $4.40 a pound.
Mr. Takanaka is communicating the results of the bidding to his prospective purchasers in San Diego and Point Pleasant.
The price for the swordfish on the final pallet has reached $3.30 a pound.
"You embarrassed yourself with your opener."
Mr. Takanaka teases one.
"It's just gone to $3.60.
Now it's $3.75.
It's moving fast.
Back in a minute."
He hits a button on the phone and automatically connects with the second company.
Across the floor, a buyer along the wall signals to the auctioneer.
"It's flowing fast today," Mr. Takanaka says.
"It's at $3.90."
He clicks off.
"What a job," says Mr. Takanaka.
"It's like playing poker every day for a living.
How did we ever do business without cellular phones?"
It is 8 a.m.
The price has gone to $4 a pound.
"Anybody else?" asks Mr. Hitashi.
"My client is moving from one building to another," says one of the buyers along the wall.
"We've heard that before," says Hitashi.
"Let's get out early today."
Suddenly, there is a flurry of last-minute bidding.
The price rises quickly to $4.25 a pound, bid by Mr. Takanaka for Phillips.
"Any more?" asks Mr. Hitashi, looking around the room.
"OK, that's a wrap."
Workers begin to move the pallets.
Much of the catch is heading to the mainland in iced air-freight boxes.
Until about five years ago, swordfish were a rarity at the Honolulu auction.
Today, not only are they the auction's top money-spinner, but Honolulu has become the leading port for swordfish in the U.S.
And the change is all the work of a single fisherman named Bruce Mournier.
He is credited with introducing new technology for attracting fish -- a fluorescent light stick that glows for 12 to 14 hours -- and zeroing in on the exact travel routes of Pacific swordfish.
A maverick boat captain and graduate engineer, Mournier pored over Japanese fishing statistics until he spotted a distinctive movement pattern for swordfish about 1,200 miles west of Hawaii.
In June 1988, amid much scoffing from fellow long-liners, Mr. Mournier made a decision to use his boat, the Magic Dragon, to concentrate on swordfish.
The scoffing stopped when he began returning with groaning boatloads of broadbills from his three-week trips.
Word of Mr. Mournier's success spread like wildfire.
"It was like saying 'gold discovered in California,'" says Mr. Takanaka.
Dozens of local boats immediately switched to swordfish, and others came over from the West Coast.
Several Vietnamese fishermen from the Gulf Coast, fleeing fierce competition in the shrimping and tuna industries, were soon in Hawaii, hauling in impressive catches.
Big boats from the East Coast, where the swordfish catch is in decline, have even joined the fray.
Swordfish landings in Honolulu have gone from almost nothing before Mr. Mournier began pursuing swordfish in 1988 to an estimated 11 million pounds annually today.
Mr. Mournier himself is currently hunting Pacific broadbills out of the ports of Los Angeles and San Francisco because those cities are closer to frequent air transportation.
Some observers think Mr. Mournier's move may portend a shift by some boats to West Coast ports such as Seattle, which is as close to the northern end of swordfish runs as is Honolulu.
But in Hawaii, there is still stiff competition for the swordfish licenses issued by the Western Pacific Regional Fisheries Council, the quasifederal agency responsible under the 1976 Magnuson Act for preventing overfishing in the area.
Currently, some 60 Honolulu-based boats are going specifically after swordfish.
Hawaii's chefs, long known for the excellence of their fish preparations, have been quick to take advantage of the swordfish boom.
Dominique Jamain, the Loire Valley-born chef at the Kahala Hilton in the suburbs of Honolulu (where President Clinton stayed on his Hawaiian visit in July), sears the swordfish, tops it with a crust of crabmeat and sesame seeds, and serves it with a warm vinaigrette made with mirin and cilantro.
George Mavrothalassitis, a native of Marseilles who trained at the three-star Archestrate restaurant in Paris and now is executive chef at the Halekulani Hotel in Waikiki, coats the firm flesh of the shutome in herbs, grills it and serves it with a light curry sauce at the hotel's famed La Mer restaurant.
Philippe Padovani, the much-respected executive chef at the opulent Manele Bay Hotel on the island of Lanai, broils the fish and serves it with a sea urchin sauce.
He accompanies the dish with beets sauteed in olive oil and fresh chervil.
Another name appearing more frequently on Hawaiian menus is the opah (or moonfish).
A thick-bodied fish, bright red with white spots and so round it resembles a garish sewer cover with mouth and tail attached, the opah weighs up to 200 pounds.
Opah is being landed in Honolulu in increasing numbers, mainly as a byproduct of the longer range and deeper fishing capabilities of Hawaii's tuna-fishing fleet.
Mr. Takanaka of the United Fishing Agency, whose father and grandfather were fishermen, remembers that an opah -- caught by mistake while fishing for another species -- would occasionally appear on the table at his home, broiled or as sashimi.
If the fish was not consumed at home, it was given away as a gift.
But there was no commercial market for it.
Now, increased availability has inspired chefs to create recipes.
They like preparing opah because its juicy, oily flesh stands up so well to heat.
"It is almost impossible to overcook," says chef Yves Menoret of Honolulu's Hilton Hawaiian Village.
Menoret uses opah for banquets and as an occasional special at the hotel's Bali-by-the-Sea restaurant.
Day in and day out, the best place in Honolulu for opah may be Horatio's, a sprawling fish restaurant at a shopping complex called Ward's Warehouse, frequented by people who work in the nearby financial district.
Chef Michael Bryan grills the opah over kiawe (mesquite) and bastes it with a black bean-chili butter.
The rich sea taste of the fish easily handles the pungent butter.
Opah has also arrived on the mainland.
It is served at the luxurious Grand Bay Hotel in Miami, where it is seared, and served with a sake butter sauce over arugula.
How did the moonfish get to Florida?
It was introduced by a chef from Hawaii.
Mr. Monaghan is a Brooklyn-based freelancer who writes about food and travel.
