"John was a bad boy, and beat a poor cat; Tom put a stone in a blind man's hat; James was the boy who neglected his prayers; They've all grown up ugly, and nobody cares."
Here's a poem to fire any child's imagination.
It builds to a dramatic climax yet leaves so much for the imagination to fill in.
What did John, Tom and James do as uncared-for ugly adults?
And did they move in together and form a law firm?
How did Tom get that stone in the blind man's hat?
What happens to a blind man with a stone up there?
There are dozens of such poems, stories and documents to engage a kid's mind in William J. Bennett's anthology, "The Book of Virtues: A Treasury of Great Moral Stories" (Simon & Schuster, 831 pages, $27.50).
There's a fabulous poem by Hilaire Belloc about Rebecca, the little girl who liked to slam doors:
"It happened that a Marble Bust/of Abraham was standing just/Above the Door this little Lamb/Had carefully prepared to Slam . . ."
And down it came upon her head.
Poor little Rebecca was dead.
Then there's Godfrey Gordon Gustavus Gore, who left doors open.
His parents decided they would have to ship him to Singapore.
Another tale concerns a family of pioneers who were trapped in the Sierra Nevadas through a long cold winter.
Then there is Penelope, who strung along a group of randy bachelors until her husband Ulysses came home from the war and shot them with arrows.
There's a great piece from Willa Cather about a group of boys who get to hang out all night by a lake and talk about lost gold.
These are the sorts of stories kids like to tell their friends about.
But just as any normal red-blooded kid is getting enthusiastic about this book, the refrigerator door looms.
As far as can be determined, Americans are the only people on Earth who attach pious homilies or Ann Landers columns to their refrigerator doors with little magnets.
This represents something fine in the American character, the urge for self-improvement.
But for kids, the refrigerator door homilies are just moralistic tollbooths on the way to the icebox.
In this book the refrigerator door is never far away, for example when George Washington's name appears.
When he was 14, Washington copied 110 rules for civility, of which 59 are excerpted here, including number 17: "Being to advise or reprehend anyone, consider whether it ought to be in public or in private, presently or at some other time, also in what terms to do it; and in reproving show no signs of choler, but do it with sweetness and mildness."
Wouldn't we be ashamed of any kid who could read that entire sentence without having the urge to get up and watch TV?
Alas there is too much stuff here that would appeal to the sort of kid who would exist if kids were designed by adults -- and not very fun adults either.
There are too many pieces with titles such as "You Mustn't Quit" or "Respecting the Flag" or "Jefferson Urges an Examination of Faith."
Picture yourself at 13, with your dad rising from the dinner table, hitching up his pants and declaring, "Gee kids, let's dip into a treasury of great moral stories," and then he pulls this great slab of a book off the shelf.
There's unanimity among the younger set, "Oh no!
Not the virtues book!"
Of course we adults can understand why Mr. Bennett and his assistants Steven Tigner and John Cribb chose this forbidding title.
Using the word "virtue" is itself a statement.
Virtue is a word that fell out of common usage in the early 1970s, replaced by the word "values."
Values are things each of us form.
Virtue is something beyond us.
Built into the structure of existence, virtue exists whether anyone is virtuous or not.
Values change with circumstance; each of us is supposed to have his own set.
The fact that this book rocketed to the top of the New York Times bestseller list suggests that there are a lot of people who feel that values are a thin substitute for virtue.
But unfortunately some parents are going to buy this book as a good deed and then they're going to sit Mary down with the selection, "Plato on Responsibility."
The problem with the values revolution was not that it taught the wrong things, but that it covered such a meager range of human nature.
In today's children's books the language is almost invariably flat.
The books can teach you to respect the environment or to think about social problems such as homelessness, but they don't inspire flights of fancy into the world of magic and eternity.
Can you imagine an angel or Zeus or a fairy coming down to teach values?
On the other hand, anybody who grew up before 1970 knows many of the great stories brought back in this book: John Henry building the railroad, Dolly Madison at the White House, Castor and Pollux.
The message of them all is, "You may turn out to be a bad person."
So something serious is at stake, which is impossible in values stories, where everybody is always good at heart, no matter how they behave.
In the stories in this book, the gods come down and turn people into trees, and diamonds come out of girls' mouths.
Children can have a great time reading these tales, so long as they don't discover that it's supposed to be good for them.
Mr. Brooks is deputy editorial page editor of The Wall Street Journal Europe.
