Major aluminum-producing nations reached an accord to slash global production by as much as two million metric tons, putting the beleaguered industry on track for recovery if producers follow through with the voluntary cuts.
The U.S., Russia, Canada, Australia, Norway and the European Union over the weekend signed a memorandum of understanding, the European Commission in Brussels said in a statement.
While full details weren't disclosed, the accord includes a commitment by Moscow to curb the republic's annual output of the metal by 500,000 tons.
The U.S. and the EU, meanwhile, agreed to refrain from taking trade actions against Russian producers.
And several nations, including Australia, members of the EU and U.S., promised to aid the Russian industry's restructuring.
"This is a confidence-building measure that aims to galvanize each and every one into moving ahead with cuts at their own levels and times," said one official close to the talks.
But some observers expressed skepticism over the pact because of its voluntary nature.
"Who is going to be the guy that will accept the burden, who will say `It's not in our self interest as a single company but as an industry I will take the step and take money out of my shareholders' pockets for the greater good,' " said Peter Merner, an analyst who heads Merner & Associates in New York.
"I think we're going to be waiting a long time before any capitalist will do it."
Moreover, doubts abound about whether Russia's government can force production cuts onto unwilling smelters, many of which operate independently thousands of miles away from the capital.
With spiraling inflation, Russian producers are believed to be in desperate need of hard currency, which can only be earned through exports.
The global oversupply resulted in part from the collapse of the former Soviet Union, whose military-industrial complex had consumed roughly half of the nation's raw aluminum.
On top of that, several long-planned smelting projects in the West came on stream while Russia made its unexpected entry onto the world market.
As a result, the price of aluminum fell last fall to a record low when adjusted for inflation, triggering losses for most of the world's aluminum producers; prices have risen somewhat since then.
Thomas M. Van Leeuwen, an analyst with CS First Boston in New York, said the Russian government has several ways to force production cuts, including halting the importation of alumina, the vital raw material in aluminum production.
If producers follow through with the cuts, analysts expect a relatively fast recovery.
"If the production cutbacks total 1.5 million metric tons or more, it is more than enough to solve the problem," said Stewart Spector, an analyst who writes the Spector Report.
"It would be necessary to begin restarting idled capacity within 12 to 16 months."
Mr. Spector said he believes Western producers will make the expected cuts.
"They now have the excuse to do what they should have done in the first place," he said.
Added Mr. Van Leeuwen, "It doesn't take a rocket scientist to see that everybody needs to step up to the plate."
The Aluminum Association, which represents U.S. aluminum companies, declined comment, saying it was waiting on a statement by the U.S. government about the memorandum.
Under the memorandum, Russia would immediately curb its annual output by 300,000 tons.
Its production reached about 2.7 million tons last year.
Another 200,000 tons would be cut if Western producers made similar reductions, said an official close to the talks.
The total would reach 1.5 million to two million metric tons.
The pact also calls for U.S. producers to refrain from filing trade cases against Russian producers, as they have threatened to do.
The European Union, meanwhile, wouldn't renew a quota set to expire in February amounting to 180,000 tons a year on aluminum imports from the Commonwealth of Independent States.
But a group of smaller U.S. producers might still file an antidumping complaint, which they have already prepared, said one person familiar with the situation.
"They don't feel they're precluded from it" by the memorandum, the person said.
The smaller producers will wait until after the governments involved in the pact meet in Canada Feb. 28 to assess progress in the voluntary cutbacks before deciding whether to file their complaint.
