Vladimir Zhirinovsky's man in Estonia peddles a softer line than his ultranationalist boss, but Pyotr Rozhok still makes Estonians nervous.
"I like Zhirinovsky," the 55-year-old Mr. Rozhok says, pointing to an election poster of his double-chinned boss brandishing a slogan promising to defend all Russians on the territory of the ex-Soviet empire.
That includes Latvia and Lithuania -- and Estonia as well.
In a nation smarting from recent accusations of ethnic cleansing by Russia's foreign minister because the Estonian government hasn't given blanket citizenship to Soviet-era settlers, Mr. Rozhok's activities have attracted public scrutiny.
On Feb. 4, the Estonian Security Police started investigating Mr. Rozhok for "inciting racial, national or religious hatred," based in part on a newspaper interview in which he was quoted as urging retired Russian officers in Estonia to form brigades to defend themselves.
But Mr. Rozhok has denied making such a statement.
If the month-long investigation leads to a conviction, Mr. Rozkok could face as long as a year in prison.
But now Pyotr Rozhok is a free man.
Mr. Zhirinovsky says he had better stay that way.
"I warn the Estonian government, if a single hair on Pyotr Rozhok's head is touched, the Estonian government will have to start thinking about the fate of 900,000 Estonians," Mr. Zhirinovsky says, referring to the indigenous residents who make up a majority of Estonia's 1.6 million population.
"If Rozhok goes to prison, that's the end for Estonia and Tallinn."
Estonian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Mari-Ann Rikken views the case as a potential security issue that needs to be handled calmly.
"We don't want the situation to get out of hand," she says.
The criminal investigation focuses in part on a Jan. 25 taped interview of Mr. Rozhok for an article in Sillamaeski Vestnik, a Russian-language small-town paper, in which he talked about the fate of Estonia's 10,570 pensioned Russian officers.
According to the newspaper article, Mr. Rozhok said those who retired after independence in 1991 shouldn't have to leave Estonia.
Those who retired before then can apply for residence with their families.
But post-independence pensioners must leave at some point with the 2,600 Russian troops still in Estonia.
"The Russian military who have retired here or are in reserve should understand one thing, they live on eternal Russian land," he said in the newspaper article.
"If some Estonian official gets the idea of expelling them, then those Russian officers should . . . create some kind of unit for the defense of their honor and dignity."
Nikolai Yugantsov, head of the Assembly of Russian Citizens, an interest group recognized by the Estonian government, says Mr. Rozhok just wants to make trouble.
"Zhirinovsky only has a few supporters but the more the Estonian government stirs the issue of Rozhok, the more it helps to lift him from his knees."
Pyotr Rozhok, a burly Ukrainian with thinning gray hair and black eyebrows, moved to Estonia in 1959.
For the past 22 years, he has worked at a city port, most recently as a heating engineer.
"I'm a worker," he says proudly in Russian.
He speaks no Estonian.
It was Mr. Zhirinovsky's outspoken support for workers that attracted Mr. Rozhok to the Liberal Democratic Party in 1990.
"Zhirinovsky's very intelligent," he says.
"He doesn't only deal with professors and experts, he talks to collective farmers and workers, so he knows what's going on."
Last May, a year after taking Russian citizenship, Mr. Rozhok became Mr. Zhirinovsky's personal adviser in Estonia.
He refused to disclose the total number of LDP members in Estonia, but boasted during the Russian elections in December, in which a quarter of Estonia's 40,000 Russian citizens participated, that 59.6% cast their votes for Mr. Zhirinovsky.
"I was ridiculed in the press when I predicted that Zhirinovsky would get more than 20% of the vote in Russia," he says.
"The man has the confidence of the people."
Mr. Yugantsov, however, questions Mr. Zhirinovsky's popularity in Estonia.
"There were voting irregularities, some people voted two or three times," he explains.
"However, it's tough not to agree with Zhirinovsky's concern for social problems and living standards.
But to think you have to restore the Soviet Union to solve that is absurd."
The LDP doesn't have its own office, but Mr. Rozhok hangs out at the Stalinesque Russian officers' house, one of the last holdouts of the Soviet era in Tallinn.
Unlike the rest of the capital where symbols of the old regime have disappeared, paintings of Marx and Engels adorn a third-floor hall, a hammer and sickle grace the stage of an ornate theater, whose ceiling is painted with a scene of smiling people marching and carrying red flags.
The Russian nationalist opposes LDP influence ending with tanks rolling through the streets of Tallinn, but he adds he can only advise his leader to use restraint.
"How Zhirinovsky will act in a free situation is unpredictable," Mr. Rozhok says.
"He is a very good person.
But if he's president, he can do what he likes."
