A compromise may be in the works over a controversial accounting proposal that would require companies to deduct the cost of employee stock options from earnings.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board, the chief rule-making body for accountants, has proposed that stock options, which aren't currently charged against earnings, be considered an expense by the company.
But many businesses have vigorously opposed the plan, particularly start-up companies and high-technology concerns that use options to attract executive talent.
The change would take effect with 1997 financial statements.
In the wake of the many protests, the FASB will look at many new proposals, among them a compromise plan that would cause less damage to company earnings.
The compromise, which has been suggested by several business executives, would treat options in two different ways once they are exercised.
Stock that is sold quickly would be considered compensation and would be charged against earnings.
Stock that must be held and isn't sold quickly would be considered an equity stake in the company and wouldn't be deducted from earnings.
Such a distinction would substantially reduce a company's cost in granting stock options.
Executives of several major corporations are privately promoting the compromise, although they publicly oppose any change at all in how companies account for options.
The compromise "would reduce the impact on profits and be acceptable to my company as the lesser of two evils," said the chief financial officer for one big company.
Dennis Beresford, FASB chairman, said the equity compromise "is something we will consider" during the board's April 18 meeting at the organization's Norwalk, Conn., headquarters.
Compensation consultants, academics, investment bankers and accounting-firm executives are expected to attend next month's session, which is scheduled to discuss the stockoption proposal.
"If any of them are able to come up with a formula approach" to reduce the profit penalties from charging options, "we'd certainly have to look at it," Mr. Beresford said.
He spoke from San Jose, Calif., where the board was wrapping up seven days of hearings on its options proposal.
The board has received a storm of protest over the proposed rule, which has generated more opposition than any other change the group has made since it was founded in 1973.
While the board was holding public hearings in San Jose Friday, thousands of employees from hightech companies rallied at a nearby conference center to oppose the options proposal.
Led by a marching band, the rally was addressed by state officials and federal legislators opposing the proposal.
Executives said that any willingness by the FASB to look at a compromise is a good sign.
"Consideration of the equity proposal shows that the FASB has an open mind, which is healthy," said Thomas Jones, executive vice president of Citicorp.
"But the right solution is to stick with increased disclosure."
Timothy Lucas, the FASB's research director, said the equity compromise is just one of many that have been suggested.
Another possibility, he said, would be to reduce the size of the charge by eliminating stock-price volatility from the proposed formula to value the option.
However, executives are pushing more strongly for the equity compromise.
"This could be an excellent compromise," said Peter Chingos, a partner in the accounting and consulting firm KPMG Peat Marwick who specializes in executive pay.
The plan would promote stock ownership while still charging a portion of options' cost against earnings, he observed.
Susan Eichen, a principal at William M. Mercer Inc., added: "Anything that reduces some of the earnings charge would placate some of the critics.
But some people won't be happy unless the FASB proposal goes away entirely."
For instance, companies with broad stock-option plans might still balk at requiring low-level employees to own shares for a long time after exercising their options.
With such a mandate, options "will not be as attractive to rank-and-file employees," observed Pearl Meyer, who heads her own compensation consulting firm in New York.
