Aggressive investing by hedge and commodity funds has spawned a new rally in the prices of industrial metals such as copper and aluminum.
"Funds are seeking alternative outlets to sagging bond and equity markets," says Phillip Crowson, chief economist at RTZ PLC, the world's biggest international mining corporation.
"The attitude of funds to metals markets is `Heads I win, tails you lose.'
If prices rise, they hold on for further capital gains; if they fall, metals become even better bargains and they buy more," he says.
Increasing investor interest in once-esoteric industrial metals futures contracts has improved the depth, or "liquidity," of these markets and made them more attractive to big players such as hedge funds.
"Open interest," the number of contracts outstanding on the London Metal Exchange, or LME, is worth around $3 billion a day, Mr. Crowson says.
Yet despite the market's growth, it isn't so big that the huge trading of hedge funds can't have a major impact on it.
"The funds can exert substantial leverage on prices," Mr. Crowson says.
The prices of London's two most widely traded contracts, copper and aluminum, have risen sharply in recent weeks, both because of interest from big investors and improved buying by industrial users of the metals.
At $1,344 a metric ton, or 61 cents a pound, aluminum futures on the London Metal Exchange are at 19-month highs and are 28% above last November's lows.
Copper, at 93 cents a pound, has risen 22% since its November low and is now at a six-month high.
"Whenever copper quotes dip, the metal is promptly bought by merchants and funds," says Ted Arnold, London-based metals analyst for Merrill Lynch & Co.
"When metals merchants take profits, the funds buy more."
Similar strategies are applied to aluminum, dealers say.
"Funds are wading into aluminum and other metals with gay abandon," says a report of Brook Hunt & Associates, a metals consultancy based in the U.K.
With inflation fears increasing, these funds see inflation-sensitive metals contracts as an attractive investment, the consultancy says.
Many hedge and commodity fund managers use mathematical computations to do their trading, but fund managers also follow fundamental factors affecting supply and demand, analysts say.
And in the past quarter, demand for industrial metals has improved, particularly in North America and Asia.
"Burgeoning U.S. copper demand is causing shortages around the world," says Karen Norton, an analyst at BillitonEnthoven Metals Ltd.
She says Latin American production destined for Europe is being diverted to the U.S., and American copper miners are working quickly to meet domestic orders.
Illustrating the boom in U.S. copper demand, Comex futures prices are trading at levels more than three cents a pound higher than LME quotes and are encouraging arbitrageurs to buy in London and sell in New York.
Copper inventories at both the London and New York exchanges are dropping, meanwhile.
Comex stocks fell to 43,000 short tons last Wednesday from 126,000 in February 1993, while LME inventories have declined 67,000 metric tons since Jan. 1 to 532,000 on Thursday.
Confidence also is returning to the aluminum market following an agreement by Western and Russian producers to cut output by 1.5 million metric tons.
"Each announcement of an output cut precipitates a wave of buying," says Mr. Arnold of Merrill Lynch.
Yet Mr. Arnold says he doubts the agreement will be effective in actually limiting exports.
For example, he says, it will be difficult to monitor purported output cuts by producers such as Russia.
"The higher the prices, the greater the incentive to cheat and sell," Mr. Arnold says.
World-wide aluminum inventories exceed five million metric tons, an amount equal to about 130 days of global consumption, says Brook Hunt & Associates.
So there are more than sufficient supplies to satisfy demand.
Analysts also are becoming cautious about the high levels of copper prices.
Many funds that have invested in copper are banking on a surge in imports from China, a major consumer, dealers say.
In a lengthy study of China's economy and copper industry, however, Brook Hunt predicts China's refined copper imports will tumble nearly 60% to 150,000 metric tons this year.
European and Japanese purchases are also likely to be slow until economies revive in the third quarter of this year, Ms. Norton of Billiton projects.
With the exception of the U.S. and Asia, industrial consumption of minerals worldwide is slow, Mr. Crowson of RTZ says.
Prices of iron ore, coking coal and some other bulk commmodities that aren't affected by fund investment are still plumbing new lows, he says.
