Germany has just learned that more than four million of its workers are unemployed, a postwar record.
The industrial powerhouse of Europe is in trouble and its industries are trying to lighten the ship.
The January statistics were a shock to Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government.
Economics Minister Guenter Rexrodt said that "high unemployment threatens not only our economic order but also the foundations of our society."
That could be an exaggeration.
The U.S. also suffered heavy layoffs in its recession, which began before Germany's.
With recovery American industry is leaner and meaner and showing strong productivity gains.
Germany may do the same when recession has run its course.
But then it may not.
If it doesn't it will be because the German economy carries a lot more baggage than the American economy.
Its total tax burden, although by no means the highest in Europe, is some 25% above that of the U.S. relative to its size.
That's because Germany is a more advanced welfare state.
It hasn't been so long ago that many Germans and other Europeans would regard that observation as praise.
They were happy with, and even proud of, welfare state institutions.
On a continent that has had more than its share of civil and political strife in this century, it was often assumed that the welfare state contributed to stability by giving the total population, rich and poor alike, a sense of social justice.
The price was admittedly high, but Europeans for good historical reasons placed a high value on social and political order, and were willing to pay for a system that promised to deliver that.
The widespread perception that the welfare state delivered "free goods" also contributed heavily to its political appeal.
To be sure, there was concern in the 1970s and 1980s about "Eurosclerosis" but in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Europe was reaping the fruits of the European Community's destruction of trade barriers and its prospects looked bright.
Many Germans in particular felt that they inhabited the best of all possible worlds, one in which they enjoyed good pay, long vacations, a fairly efficient national health care system and many social welfare benefits.
Now, after more than a year of renewed Eurosclerosis, all that has changed.
European governments, faced with mounting budget deficits, debt financing problems and popular resistance to further tax increases, are finally having to pare away welfare state benefits.
Germans will get shorter holidays, the Dutch less generous disability pay, the British higher drug costs, and all governments, with 11% of the European Union work force unemployed, are contemplating cutbacks in unemployment benefits.
This is not going down well with electorates.
There are strikes in Germany, Belgium, Spain and Portugal and a political upheaval in Italy.
French farmers and fishermen express their discontent in dramatic ways, by dumping manure on the steps of government buildings or soaking imported fish with diesel oil.
In other words, the politics of the welfare state have reversed themselves, with social programs now a political liability rather than a way to win votes.
This time, the political fallout is broader than in the past.
Europe's socialists lost their way a long time ago.
They failed to see soon enough that the nationalization of industry, part of the socialist credo for decades after World War II, would turn on them with destructive force.
This realization struck with special impact in Britain, where the Labour Party in the 1970s was shocked to learn that heavily featherbedded state industries such as British Steel, British Motors and British Rail -- once politically useful for distributing patronage -- had turned into budget eating monsters.
Labour went down to defeat in 1979, Maggie Thatcher began selling off these huge liabilities, and Labour has never regained its former power.
Today, all of Europe, including that great socialist laboratory with its headquarters in Moscow, is being privatized.
State industrial patronage has destroyed both the Christian Democratic and Socialist parties in Italy and badly damaged Socialists in France.
No one dares utter that old line about how utopia arrives when the state controls the "means of production."
The welfare state is different, however.
It has not been the exclusive property of socialists, but has been defended as well by the likes of Helmut Kohl and John Major.
Everybody tiptoes around the issue of whether it finally may become necessary to take an ax, rather than merely a penknife, to the costs of this kind of system.
Swedish economist Assar Lindbeck offered a brilliant analysis of the welfare state's problems in a paper delivered last October as part of a lecture series sponsored by de Nederlandsche Bank in Amsterdam.
He constructed a balance sheet of achievements vs. costs.
His conclusion was that yes, indeed, welfare states of Europe are very much in need of reform.
The fundamental problem of the welfare state that he cited will come as no surprise to its critics over the years: When it gives too much to those who are idle and takes away too much from those who are not, it destroys the incentives of both to work and produce.
Theologian Michael Novak describes this as the "moral hazard" of the welfare state, its tendency to generate sloth and even dishonesty as seekers of benefits begin to cheat the rules and the most heavily burdened taxpayers begin to cheat the tax collector.
There are other serious problems.
Labor mobility is reduced because laid-off workers prefer to draw unemployment compensation rather than seek work and often feel tied by the social system to their jobs and communities.
Family structures are destroyed as the state takes over family responsibilities.
For all these reasons, European economies are less adaptable, less able to weather and pull out of recessive business cycles.
Longer term problems, such as the the aging work force and the social problems generated by immigration, are aggravated as social benefits diminish productivity and at the same time attract immigrants.
Of course, young immigrant laborers help support retirees, but they now have arrived in such numbers that they are no longer welcome in much of Europe.
While Europe's politicians are trying to get out of this web with their skins, Bill Clinton is inviting his fellow Democrats to get further in.
Congressional Democrats should ask Guenter Rexrodt if he is enjoying political life these days.
