It's easy to see why John F. McDonnell, chief executive officer of McDonnell Douglas Corp., is in the Clinton administration's "Happy CEO File."
The file -- actually two bulging black binders maintained in the Commerce Department -- recounts how Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown touted McDonnell's F/A-18 fighter-strike planes to the Malaysian defense minister at last year's Paris Air Show.
Malaysia eventually bought eight planes for $643 million.
And Mr. McDonnell wrote to Mr. Brown applauding his "support of U.S. industry."
Another pleased executive is John Bryson, chairman of SCEcorp.
After the giant utility pulled out of an energy project in Mexico last fall, Bryson aides asked the Commerce Department for help in getting a $150 million investment returned.
In December, he wrote that not only was the money returned with interest, but the the company was reimbursed for expenses as well.
"I appreciate your support in these efforts," Mr. Bryson wrote the Commerce Secretary.
Mr. Brown is only one of the officials business turns to for help in the Clinton administration.
Throughout the government, a network of fixers and facilitators -- many of them, like the commerce secretary, formerly deeply involved in fundraising for the Clinton campaign or the Democratic Party -- are laboring to cement a relationship with what is normally one of the most Republican constituencies in the nation: big business.
Other Democratic presidents have tried to court business, but usually with only tepid results.
"My father always told me that all businessmen were sons of bitches," John F. Kennedy once roared in the midst of a steel-price confrontation, "but I never believed it till now."
Jimmy Carter publicly pilloried oil companies in the midst of the 1979 energy crisis.
But even the public spat between the Clinton White House and the business community over the president's health-care proposal has, so far at least, failed to cool the administration's desire to help business do business.
Companies and trade groups have no single point of entry in the Clinton administration.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, a former Texas senator, hears from the oil patch; White House Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty, a former natural-gas executive, often deals with Fortune 500 chiefs; Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman and National Economic Council Chairman Robert Rubin are envoys to Wall Street.
But what's striking is the number of favor-doers with backgrounds in political finance.
Commerce Secretary Brown, for example, is a former Democratic national chairman; White House public liaison director Alexis Herman was deputy chairman; Melissa Moss, who runs the Commerce Department's business-liaison office, was the party's chief fund-raiser.
Amy Zisook, a top aide to Ms. Herman, was a top fund-raiser for the party.
"Major fund-raisers for the Clinton campaign are now in positions where they can repay the favors," charges Ellen Miller, executive director of the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan group in Washington, D.C.
"It is business as usual, and Clinton promised us change."
Moreover, it's clear that companies have changed their political giving patterns to reflect the shifting tide of political power.
Data from the Center for Responsive Politics show that in both the first six months of 1991 and the like period in 1993, industry and interest groups donated just over $14 million in unrestricted "soft money" to the two major political parties.
But in 1991, when they were out of power, the Democrats got only $3.4 million of it; in 1993, when they were in power, they got $8 million.
General Electric Co. exemplifies the shift: It split $31,325 almost evenly between the two parties in the first six months of 1991, but during the first six months of last year it gave nothing to the Republicans and $50,250 to the Democrats.
The White House denies any link between campaign contributions and the dispensing of favors; it says what it does for business is designed to boost economic growth and enhance U.S. competitiveness.
"These aren't favors," Mr. Brown says.
"Our total focus has been to work in partnership with the private sector to create sustainable economic growth and high-wage, high-quality jobs for American workers."
But whatever the motivation, it is clear that an elaborate system has been set up throughout the administration to keep businesses happy.
In the Bush years, companies unhappy with pending regulations usually headed first for Vice President Dan Quayle's Competitiveness Council.
In this administration, the first stop is often Sally Katzen, administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, a branch of the Office of Management and Budget.
A review of her meeting records since last September shows she held 23 meetings with individuals from companies or trade groups, compared with six meetings with public-interest groups.
In one instance, the Environmental Protection Agency proposed a rule expanding the pollution studies required for private construction projects.
Developers such as California's Irvine Co. balked, as did powerful trade groups representing home builders and developers.
The opponents met with Ms. Katzen and EPA officials in October, and she helped fashion a compromise limiting occasions in which new studies were required.
"The end result was better than EPA's proposal," says Monica Florian, a senior vice president at Irvine.
"There was a willingness at that level to recognize that these groups and organizations had some points worthy of thinking about."
Ms. Katzen also helped the auto industry weaken the EPA's plans to require that trucks install equipment to capture fumes released during refueling.
In the compromise, only light trucks and minivans will be subject to the same requirements as cars, and the new light-truck standards won't take effect until the next century.
Another contact point for businesses is the White House's public-liaison office, which in previous administrations catered largely to constituent groups.
Officials representing bio-technology firms turned to Steve Hilton, the office's deputy director, to arrange meetings aimed at getting relief from price controls in the Clinton health plan.
Executives from Gap Inc. clothing stores also enlisted the public-liaison office to arrange a meeting to persuade the architects of the Clinton health plan to change the way part-time workers were to be treated; the administration has promised to advocate the change as the legislation moves through Congress.
Currently, Mr. Brown's Commerce Department appears to be the major port of call.
More than 300 business people are vying for about 25 seats on the airplane the Commerce Secretary will be taking to Russia next month.
Among Mr. Brown's suitors for the trip is tobacco giant Philip Morris Cos., which last fall asked the Commerce Department to help collect $78 million it is owed by the Russian government.
The trip's popularity grew after Mr. Brown traveled to South Africa and sparked negotiations between U.S. companies and South Africans on seven projects.
All this activity worries Republicans, who are learning what it means not to have business as a solid backer.
William Kristol, who was Vice President Quayle's chief of staff, says, "It is harder for Republicans on the Hill to be resolute in fighting" Clinton proposals, such as his health-care plan, "if the business community is splintered."
