Just one year after his spectacular jump from General Motors Corp., Volkswagen AG's J. Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua said the struggling German auto giant is moving "faster than you expect" in its turnaround effort.
Even as Europe's largest car maker officially announced a staggering 1.94 billion mark ($1.15 billion) loss for 1993, and predicted sharply narrowed losses for the first quarter of this year, a relaxed, energetic Mr. Lopez, chief of VW's production and purchasing, gave an upbeat account of the company's prospects during a rare briefing for reporters Wednesday night.
Mr. Lopez asserted that VW, currently saddled with a boxy, uninspired line of cars, is pinning its recovery hopes on "magical," yet-to-be-launched new products like an updated VW Beetle patterned on a well-received concept car shown at auto shows in the U.S. earlier this year.
"We will be in very good shape.
We will be as competitive as anyone," Mr. Lopez said.
North American, Latin American and Asian markets will offer VW steady growth even if European markets stagnate, he added.
Separately, VW Chairman Ferdinand Piech reiterated his pledge to return VW to break-even performance this year, and said the company doesn't expect any more "surprises" like the discovery in September of a gaping 1.84-billion-mark loss at VW's Spanish unit, SEAT SA.
Mr. Lopez's wide-ranging comments come after nearly a year during which he largely stayed out of public view amid accusations by GM that he and several associates took boxes full of sensitive GM purchasing and product data.
The U.S. Justice Department and German authorities are investigating Mr. Lopez's activities during and after his departure from GM in March 1993.
No charges have been filed.
A spokesman for the Darmstadt public prosecutor's office said Wednesday, "if we didn't have clear grounds for suspicion, we would have discontinued the investigation long ago."
Mr. Lopez and VW have acknowledged that he or certain associates may have had secret GM materials in their possession when they switched to VW from GM.
Mr. Lopez says he destroyed the GM information to prevent it from getting into VW hands.
Mr. Lopez said the controversy surrounding him hasn't distracted him from the job he was wooed from GM to do: make massive improvements in VW's productivity and costs.
"Negative articles about me every day in the press last summer were very difficult, but the worst for me personally is over now," Mr. Lopez said.
Already, he said, VW has lowered its break-even point from 108% of capacity utilization to 79% last year.
Now, VW is aiming for break-even rates of 74% of capacity this year and 65% in the "near future," Mr. Lopez declared.
For the first quarter of this year, VW predicted that it would be unprofitable as a group, although the losses would be about one third as bad as the 1.25-billion-mark loss in the year-earlier first quarter.
For the VW German parent company, first-quarter results will likely be around break-even compared with a 917-million-mark loss in the previous year.
Still, VW has plenty of hill left to climb, particularly as the European vehicle market heads into a second weak year.
In a European market that contracted 15% last year, VW group sales plunged 20% to 1.9 million vehicles from 2.4 million vehicles in 1992.
Its market share, meanwhile, slipped to 16.4% from 17.5%, according to figures provided by the European Automobile Manufacturers' Association.
Chief Financial Officer Werner P. Schmidt also confirmed that SEAT, the Spanish unit, won't get out of the red this year despite the massive debt forgiveness and liquidity injection package from the parent company.
But losses at SEAT will be more than halved from last year's levels, and hopefully will be balanced out by improving results at VW's Audi AG unit and a turnaround in VW's North American operations, he said.
Last year, VW of America lost 388 million marks compared with 100 million marks in 1992, as VW sales shriveled to 50,000 units.
But a buoyant Mr. Lopez insisted that VW could expand U.S. sales to around 500,000 vehicles a year, or about 5% of the car market, in five years time.
Separately, Mr. Lopez said a turnaround in the European car market could come by spring of 1995.
Even without a sizeable upturn in Europe, Mr. Lopez said that by 1996 VW would be able to offer full employment to the 100,000 German workers it put on a four-day work week for 1994 and 1995.
However, Mr. Lopez's boss, Mr. Piech, took a more cautious line.
He said he would consider continuing the four-day work week beyond 1996.
