Martin Amis has finally reached middle age.
In the past he has been notable for his brashness, his scorn and his abundant verbal gifts, which often serve only to congest his vigorous prose.
Mr. Amis's novels, such as "The Rachel Papers," "Success" and "Other People," have not been to everyone's taste.
Though he has long been considered one of England's best young writers, the key word is "young": The books, until the recent "London Fields," were brilliant but immature.
Now, at 44, Mr. Amis makes his bid for adulthood with a collection of essays, "Visiting Mrs. Nabokov and Other Excursions" (Crown/Harmony, 274 pages, $20).
The pieces were written over a period of some 20 years, and place Mr. Amis firmly at the midlife point.
A nostalgic essay on John Lennon proclaims him an unregenerate 1960s kid, while a cooler one on a recent Rolling Stones concert reveals the incipient old fogey.
"In the high tradition of all the best pop concerts," he writes, "you were treated as if you had come to sate some vile addiction rather than simply to exchange cash for entertainment."
The collection as a whole is an uneven assortment, including some really excellent literary interviews (Anthony Burgess, V.S. Pritchett), criticism (Philip Larkin, Madonna) and investigative work (on international chess, for example, and high-tech moviemaking), as well as a few pieces of frippery for high-paying magazines such as Esquire.
Mr. Amis would have done well to omit this last category.
Such filler, along with a few pedestrian efforts such as his interview with Graham Greene -- where Greene tells Amis, all too truly, "As you see, I've got nothing new to say" -- cheapen what could be a more wonderful, slimmer, collection.
For if Mr. Amis's mind is not extraordinary, it is excellent, and he distinguishes himself most in his appreciation of other writers.
The literary interview, says Mr. Amis, is dying.
"It was with dread/detachment/high hopes that I approached X's townhouse/office/potting shed.
The door opened.
He is fatter/smaller/taller/balder than I expected. . .."
Fortunately, Mr. Amis himself breathes new life into the convention, and when dealing with writers for whom he feels real empathy, such as John Updike and Burgess, he is at his best.
Even on an average day, however, he has a rather unfair advantage over other interviewers in that, as Kingsley Amis's son, he grew up around many of the writers he makes his subjects: Larkin and J.G. Ballard he knew intimately, while Mr. Updike, Burgess and John Braine were friendly acquaintances.
He therefore has more access to the intimate, unguarded moment, the easy confidence.
Burgess, for instance, gossips and drinks with him.
And Mr. Ballard ("Empire of the Sun") lets down his guard: "It's very difficult to remythologise one's life . . .
You need a new set of dreams, landscapes, forests.
And what happens?
I just sit with a whiskey and soda, watching The Rockford Files."
Perhaps best as an interviewer, Mr. Amis is also good when wrestling with the bizarre phenomena of popular culture.
A "review" of Madonna's "Sex," for which Time Warner flew him by Concorde to New York to examine the top-secret galleys, sums up the tome by saying that it "could have been assembled by a corporate computer: pornography, religion, multi-ethnicity, transsexuality, kitsch, camp, worldly power, self-parody and self-invention."
Another publicity machine, Isaac Asimov, is brutally dismissed with a few bombastic examples of his "inexhaustible, all-conquering self-love."
He tries to turn his average collection of showbiz memoirs into Nabokov's "Speak, Memory," Mr. Amis laughs.
While in his occasional pieces Mr. Amis tends to be a little slick, "Visiting Mrs. Nabokov" contains a few fuller-bodied essays that show that the author has indeed reached maturity.
"Chess: Kasparov v.
Karpov" explores the dark and duplicitous world of top-level chess, and is fascinating.
Another winner is "RoboCop II," a half-admiring, half-derisive account of Mr. Amis's visit to the film's set in Houston.
Here he evinces an anthropological flair for catching the poses and jargon of a self-contained community.
On-the-job moviemen, he says, have "an air of exalted exhaustion, of priestly fatigue," and he smiles at Hollywood's use of the word "dignity" for the period of commercial success that the role of RoboCop has provided for actor Peter Weller.
If the lesser articles in this book -- "Watford in China," "Cannes," "Snooker With Julian Barnes," "Poker Night" and others -- are unworthy of the better ones (which include a wary, measured interview with Roman Polanski and an article on the nuclear mavens of Washington), that is not too important.
What is important is that the collection as a whole establishes Martin Amis not only as a flashy stylist but as a penetrating critic.
More surprisingly, it establishes him as a newly arrived member of the older generation.
He is no longer a "young" writer, and his work is the better for it.
Ms. Allen is a free-lance writer in Hudson, N.Y.
