An American Stock Exchange search committee will recommend tomorrow that its board of governors name Richard F. Syron, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston president, as the exchange's new chairman.
If approved by the Amex board and if he accepts the job, the 50-year-old Mr. Syron would succeed James Jones, the former Oklahoma congressman, who left the exchange last summer to become the U.S. ambassador to Mexico.
Since Mr. Jones's departure, Jules Winter has served as acting chairman of the exchange.
Though officials close to the search cautioned that the Amex board could veto the committee's recommendation, people on the Amex board said it was unlikely the board would reject Mr. Syron.
"Considering how long it has taken to find a candidate, it would be pretty unusual if we didn't go along with this," said one person on the board.
Some industry executives suggested that one of the reasons the search took so long was that nobody wanted the job.
The American exchange is running a far-distant third to the New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq stock market, which have garnered the major share of new stock listings in recent years and have enjoyed most of the boom in stock-trading volume.
But according to people familiar with the Amex, the search committee interviewed about 75 candidates before deciding on a "short list" that included Wendy Gramm, former chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Mr. Syron has been president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston since January 1989 and before that was president of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston.
A Boston native with a doctorate in economics from Tufts University, he joined the Fed's staff in 1968 and later served as special assistant to then-Fed Chairman Paul Volcker.
While on leave from the Fed, he served as deputy budget director for Massachusetts and a deputy assistant secretary of the U.S. Treasury in the Carter administration.
Some industry executives think none of Mr. Syron's past experiences will be as challenging as the Amex position."
The Amex is at a crucial juncture," said Muriel Siebert, who heads a brokerage firm that bears her name.
"The next chairman is going to have a harder job because of all the growth on Nasdaq."
David Wessel in Washington, D.C., contributed to this article.
