Edward S. Rogers, chief executive of Rogers Communications Inc., said the U.S. cable-television rate cut ordered last week has "significantly impaired" the value of Maclean Hunter Ltd., making his 2.79 billion Canadian dollar (US$2.07 billion) takeover bid "even more attractive."
Mr. Rogers predicted that cash flow from Maclean Hunter's U.S. cable assets will drop by 10% to 15% in the wake of a 7% reduction in the basic cable rate, which was ordered by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission.
As a result, he now values Maclean Hunter at least at C$1 (74 U.S. cents) per share less than the C$17 a share Rogers is offering.
Mr. Rogers also contended that the collapse of Bell Atlantic Corp.'s planned acquisition of Tele-Communications Inc. means it will be tougher to find a buyer for Maclean Hunter's U.S. cable operations.
Rogers has said it would sell Maclean Hunter's U.S. cable systems and use the proceeds to repay banks that would finance its proposed acquisition.
Maclean Hunter also is seeking buyers for the assets, as part of an effort to demonstrate it can offer shareholders as much or more value than Rogers.
But many analysts dismissed Mr. Rogers's comments as more saber-rattling in the escalating battle with Maclean Hunter.
"I don't see this small decline in value as being very material in the long run," said Andrew McCreath, an analyst at Gordon Capital Corp. in Toronto.
The U.S. cable operations' cash flow might fall about 5%, reducing the value of Maclean Hunter shares by about 42 Canadian cents, he said.
Nevertheless, fears that Mr. Rogers would walk away from his bid after the FCC ruling pushed Maclean Hunter's shares down late last week.
The stock finished unchanged Friday at C$16 a share, after trading for as little as C$15 a share during the day.
But Mr. Rogers said he plans to leave his bid on the table at least until the March 15 expiration date.
After that, he said, "We'd have to look at whether or not to extend the bid if we haven't had two-thirds acceptance," and at which price.
Still, Mr. Rogers acknowledged the Canadian banks that have agreed to finance the proposed acquisition haven't displayed "one scintilla of concern" over any decline in values.
Mr. Rogers is also fighting to make sure he is able to bid for any assets Maclean Hunter decides to sell.
In a provincial court hearing yesterday in Toronto, Rogers argued it should have access to data rooms set up by Maclean Hunter for prospective bidders for its U.S. and Canadian cable assets, without having to agree to withdraw its takeover offer and to hold off on renewing such an offer for at least three years, as Maclean Hunter has requested.
The judge didn't immediately issue a ruling.
Maclean Hunter's president, Ronald Osborne, declined all comment.
