Brace yourself for a new world.
It's a world in which invisible communications networks gird every major metropolitan area, link workers inside office buildings and warehouses, and surround the Earth via flotillas of satellites.
It's a world in which wireless devices combine the functions of telephones and computers, sending and receiving voice, text and graphics, and sifting through reams of information on behalf of their human masters.
It's a world in which we are all reachable -- anytime, anyplace.
And it's a world about which the main question isn't if, but when.
"It's amazing," says Ira Brodsky, president of Datacomm Research Co., a Wilmette, Ill., telecommunications consulting firm.
"You get this sense that it's a volcano about to erupt."
In some ways, it already has.
About 30 million cellular phones are in use worldwide, a number expected to grow to nearly 100 million by the year 2000.
Pagers blanket the world, in many places as a substitute for inadequate or nonexistent telephone service; about three million are in use in China, compared with 100,000 three years ago.
But the really powerful stuff lies just ahead.
Much of the foundation will be laid in the next year or two, and the vision of the wireless world described above should be a reality within five to seven years.
All of which leads to the first question: Why now?
The easy answer: technology.
For years, technology and costs have conspired to ensure that most communications flow through wires, and the gadgets we use to communicate -- phones, faxes, computers, whatever -- were tethered to those wires.
But advances in microchips and software -- and the building of sophisticated wireless networks -- are quickly changing the equation.
Start with microchips and software, where developments have allowed the miniaturization of cellular phones, driving down prices and driving up performance.
Motorola Inc., Schaumburg, Ill., for instance, was able to put hundreds of radio parts on a 2-inch-by-3-inch circuit board in 1986 -- a feat that allowed it to introduce a hand-held cellular phone for about $2,500.
Now, with microprocessing power doubling every 18 to 24 months, a lighter, smaller, more-powerful phone is available -- at one-tenth the cost of the 1986 model.
Another breakthrough, just now taking hold: using the latest microprocessors to move cellular technology from analog -- which converts speech to sound waves -- to digital, which converts not only speech but also text, graphics and video to a stream of ones and zeros.
Digital information, unlike sound waves, can be compressed or transmitted in bursts of packets, greatly speeding up traffic.
It's also free from static interference and transmission error that currently make using a wireless analog modem difficult.
Right now, the two data-only national digital networks -- Ardis and RAM Mobile Data -- are crude predecessors, the telex machines of their era.
But this year, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., Kirkland, Wash., among others, will be laying a more advanced digital system of computers and signal processors on top of its existing analog cellular system; in two to three years, that will allow users nationwide to send both their voice and their data from a single wireless device.
Moreover, companies will start next year to build a new kind of microcellular digital networks, called personal communications services, or PCS, which use low-power, high-frequency radio waves.
Current cellular transmissions move from cell to cell -- geographic units, each of which is equipped with a high-powered transmitter.
Microcells will be much smaller, allowing the phones to use less power and smaller batteries, reducing the size and costs.
Low power also means the ability to use the entire frequency all over again in each microcell-transmission area.
Current cellular operators must avoid using parts of their allotted frequency to prevent radio interference with calls in adjoining cells.
Some people think PCS networks will be up to 20 times as efficient as existing analog cellular systems, and provide vastly better services and quality.
But the wireless world is going to be wider and deeper than regional digital networks.
A Motorola-backed venture, Iridium Inc. of Washington, is racing a half-dozen other companies to put up a world-wide wireless satellite system by 1998.
Iridium's system would beam voice, data, fax or physical location from a small hand-held set, anywhere in the world, to any other place.
At the opposite extreme, companies such as Metricom Corp., Los Gatos, Calif., have developed transmitters as small as bricks that can be hung from utility poles, creating wireless networks inside buildings, on campuses or in downtown areas.
Another company is testing wireless clipboards for nurses; yet another is testing data-entry devices for store clerks.
The devices that will link people to the networks are also in a primitive state right now.
People are jury-rigging palmtop computers to bulky external wireless modems, or groping for hours to get data into their new hand-held communicators, known as personal digital assistants, then hooking them up to special gear to send data even over a telephone line.
But this year, Motorola and others will introduce credit-card-size wireless modems that slip into hand-held communicators and portable computers.
Motorola will also introduce an improved personal communicator this summer that will be fairly adept at wirelessly sending text, graphics and maybe even voice, provided a wireless network exists in your neighborhood.
In two to four years, another feat of integration will occur, as the functions and capabilities of cellular phones, pagers, faster microprocessors, color screens and more powerful batteries are blended together in hand-held devices costing $400 to $500.
Things like cellular phones and pagers will exist on single microchips, making them extraordinarily cheap and capable of being built into a single device that does it all.
So much for the technology.
Now, the hard part: Why would consumers want this?
Some skeptics, in fact, question whether they will.
"We get so caught up in our technological underwear that we don't recognize that the rest of the country can't run its VCRs yet," says Don Valentine, a venture capitalist at Sequoia Capital, Menlo Park, Calif.
"There's a lot of big-company hype going on, not unlike the interactive-TV business.
The key issue is, what is any of this going to do that the user can't do now, for which he is going to pay a great deal of money?"
A measure of skepticism may be justified, but consider this: Many of the doubters are the same people who asked a few years ago why anyone would want a phone in his or her pocket when there were so many telephone booths around.
Evidence abounds that people do want mobility and instant access to messages and data.
Look not just at the explosion of cellular phones and pagers, but at the growth of portable computers, electronic-mail users and Internet subscribers.
They want information now, all kinds of it, and they will want it a lot more when new software, devices and networks inevitably combine to create valuable services and functions that don't exist today.
Last month, a consortium called General Magic Inc. began shipping software that allows users of wireless hand-held devices to create electronic "agents" that will go out on the wireless network to do all kinds of time-consuming chores on your behalf.
Next year, for instance, you will be able to post a "personality agent" on Mead Data Central Inc.'s compendious Nexis text-retrieval system that will send you articles it knows you are interested in.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. will launch an intelligent network called PersonaLink this summer that will filter your messages, making sure you get important ones while electronic junk mail goes in the trash.
In fact, the network will let you send out electronic "requests for proposals" that turn the concept of junk mail on its head.
Your RFP could, for example, ask the electronic agents of service providers on PersonaLink to return bids for a two-week May vacation in Hawaii to your PersonaLink mailbox.
Most market researchers -- and most people in general -- haven't spent a lot of time thinking about all the other possibilities of powerful networks and powerful devices.
But the uses are limitless.
To cite a couple of examples: Qualcomm Corp. of San Diego tracks 40,000 trucks via satellite, constantly monitoring their locations and even engine conditions.
And Cincinnati Microwave Inc., Cincinnati, has developed a wireless system for vending machines to talk to a computer at headquarters, ordering more goods or reporting vandalism.
Motorola, in fact, says anything that has a switch, including car engines, can be turned on or off by a wireless network, and it plans to try to sell the idea to the masses.
Would people buy a wireless device if it prevented the theft of their Taurus?
At the same time, the wireless world is going to be a hostile environment for those companies that can't adapt to it.
Ardis and RAM, the wireless-network pioneers, may be in for a tough time because they transmit only data and are slow, while new digital cellular technology will carry voice and data, and be much faster.
The telephone and cellular companies have invested many billions of dollars in outmoded technology, but must invest billions more to convert to digital transmission or to take over the PCS networks.
Similarly, retailers and distributors have invested billions in brick and mortar and services that may be outmoded when "virtual stores" can be shopped on a wireless device.
What need is there for a film-distribution company when Al Pacino can rent space on a satellite network to beam his new movie to 3,000 theaters?
These companies are going to have to attack their own dated delivery systems -- or somebody else will.
George Gilder, author of a book due out soon on emerging wired and wireless networks, says: "The hour of the cannibal is at hand."
It's too soon to know who the winners and losers will be.
As Mr. Brodsky of Datacomm points out, it will take a while, maybe half a decade, for wireless purveyors to "get all the ducks in a row."
The industry's biggest obstacle is a lack of software needed to simplify the use of incompatible networks, and to provide compelling wireless applications programs.
But eventually, the devices and networks will be ubiquitous, and the biggest ultimate effect may be to oddly increase the pace of society by liberating people from the physical constraints of time and space.
Much of the work and communicating we now do will be done by wireless servants and alter egos, while we are doing something else, somewhere else.
"This is a revolution," says Mr. Brodsky, "that a lot of people don't see."
Mr. Hill, chief of The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau, served as contributing editor of this Report.
QUALCOMM Inc.'s vice chairman and chief technical officer, Andrew Viterbi, estimated that Qualcomm's CDMA technology offers a sevenfold improvement in wireless transmission capacity over a rival digital cellular technology called TDMA, not over existing cellular systems as reported in Friday's special Report on Telecommunications.
(WSJ Feb. 17, 1994)
