The bond bulls are running scared lately and investors are getting trampled.
So even if bond prices bounce back from their recent emotional sell-off, the longer-term outlook is cloudy, analysts say.
And some pros believe things are going to get worse before they get better.
Yields on long-term Treasury bonds surged to 6.62% Friday, their highest since July.
The bond market closed early at 2 p.m. EST.
That hastily arranged closing fueled some talk -- strongly denied by bond dealers -- that the dealers had fled the field in order to cut their losses.
No matter why the bond market closed early, it is clear that bond investors are no longer giving the growing U.S. economy the benefit of the doubt about inflation.
Inflation is bad news for bond investors because it makes an investment with a fixed rate of return less attractive.
Investors had thought that despite the economy's growth, inflation was remaining in check.
But now investors are worried that inflationary pressures are increasing, even though most economists say the opposite.
"The market is readjusting to a change in psychology," commented John Costas, head of government trading at CS First Boston Inc.
Most Wall Street traders "have never seen such bearish sentiment before," he said.
"It's a bear market.
People have stopped the denial process and are selling," said Paul McCulley, chief economist at UBS Securities Inc.
For their part, officials at the Public Securities Association, a trade group whose members include the primary dealers of Treasurys, said that the market conditions had nothing to do with their recommendation Friday morning that the market close early.
On Thursday, the PSA received numerous queries about whether it would recommend an early close in advance of the Presidents Day weekend.
But it said that it wouldn't.
PSA officials said that they didn't realize until Friday morning that the Chicago Board of Trade had recommended an early close of the futures market, even though the CBOT had sent out a news release about the early close nine days earlier.
So in the midst of a panicky sell-off, the PSA announced the early closing.
The U.S. bond markets were closed yesterday for the holiday.
"In a convoluted way, perhaps they figured that not leaving it open to the regular hour on Friday would help to avoid any more mischief," said Barbara Kenworthy, a portfolio manager at Dreyfus Corp.
"There's no connection between the market plunging and the PSA recommendation for an early close," said CS First Boston's Mr. Costas, who is also vice chairman of the PSA's primary dealers' executive committee, which recommended that the market close early after consulting other Wall Street firms Friday morning.
"That would be an absurd inference to draw," added Mr. Costas.
What sparked all the selling was the Fed's move earlier this month to raise the federal-funds rate, which banks charge each other on overnight loans, to 3.25% from 3%.
The move was supposed to nip inflationary pressures in the bud.
And it may very well have.
But instead of inspiring confidence in bond investors that the Fed is in fact fighting inflation before it becomes a problem, the rate boost has investors wondering when the next rate increase will be and whether bond yields can stay where they are much longer.
More so than at any other time in the past year, the bond market will be closely listening to what Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan has to say about all this.
He is scheduled to deliver his semiannual Humphrey-Hawkins testimony before a House Banking subcommittee this morning.
There are several signs that things are likely to get worse before they get better.
One is the Dow Jones Utility Average, widely seen as a contrary indicator of trends in long-term bond yields.
It measures the stock-price changes of 11 electric utilities and four natural-gas companies; many analysts believe it anticipates major changes in interest-rate cycles.
That's because utilities tend to pay high dividends and often attract the kind of conservative, yield-oriented investors who also buy bonds.
When investors expect bond yields to rise, they sell off utility stocks, betting that a rise in bond yields will make these stocks less valuable.
For much of last year, the utility stock-price average rose in advance of a precipitous drop in long-term bond yields to 5.79% in October.
For much of this year, however, the utility average has been falling.
Since the start of the year, it has dropped 18.52 points, to 208.54 as of Friday, the lowest point in 22 months.
Another omen is the revisions many analysts on Wall Street are making to their rosy forecasts for interest rates this year.
The day the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates, Goldman, Sachs & Co.'s director of economic research, Robert Giordano, was predicting another drop in long-term interest rates to the levels seen last year.
But on Friday, Mr. Giordano told the Dow Jones News Service that he wouldn't be surprised if the 30-year bond yield rose to 7%.
The technical research department at Smith Barney Shearson Inc. sent a report titled "Bond Alert!" to clients on Friday.
The report said that "with a higher probability of additional risk, we strongly recommend that investors in the bond market who have not taken protective measures do so immediately."
The report warns of the possibility of long-term rates rising to anywhere between 6.90% and 7.30%.
Another concern is a flood of Treasury securities slated to be sold this week.
The Treasury is scheduled to sell $17 billion of two-year notes tomorrow and $11 billion of five-year notes Thursday.
Many on Wall Street believe that part of what weighed down the market last week was primary dealers unloading large holdings of unsold three-year and 10-year notes and 30-year bonds from the Treasury's huge quarterly refunding the week before.
With investors worried about interest rates, Wall Street may force the government to push yields substantially higher to make underwriting the two auctions worthwhile.
Many on Wall Street think the sell-off has been overdone.
One of them is Ms. Kenworthy of Dreyfus.
"Some of this is an overreaction," she said.
"We all need to do a reality check."
If investors think the Federal Reserve is getting set to raise short-term interest rates another 1 to 1.5 percentage points to fight inflation, they "should be cashing out" of the bond market, she said.
"But I don't believe that is happening," she said.
"There is not enough incipient inflation to warrant that kind of tightening.
The price of 30-year bonds has dropped too far and they represent "good value," Ms. Kenworthy says.
But she adds: "You have to be pretty stouthearted to jump in there now when the market psychology is so nasty."
Moreover she recommends that investors in junk bonds watch their holdings carefully.
"With stocks selling off, junk bonds might be subject to somewhat of a correction," she said.
Junk bonds often trade like stocks because their prices are very sensitive to changes in the health of a company.
The best thing that happened to bond traders Friday was that they got to go home early.
For the second day in a row, prices of U.S. Treasury securities took a sound beating at the hands of increasingly bearish sentiment.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond sank more than a point, or more than $10 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 95 3/32.
Its yield rose to 6.62% from 6.54% on Thursday.
Other maturities were also battered.
The 10-year note, for example, dropped more than 5/8 point, as its yield soared to 6.07% from 5.98% on Thursday.
Treasurys maturing in more than five years were the worst performers Friday.
Traders said that was because investors were moving cash out of riskier longerterm securities and into the relative safety of the short end.
Also dropping sharply were mortgage-backed, corporate and municipal bond prices.
Several corporate junk bond deals set to be sold this week may be postponed until the Treasury market quiets down, syndicate officials said.
Thomas D. Lauricella contributed to this article.
