The European Union Commission said a plan to restructure the steel industry of member nations is back on track after steelmakers indicated they would make new cuts in capacity.
Chiefs of leading private steel companies sketched out cuts aimed at meeting a target of reducing crude steel capacity by a minimum of 21 million tons.
In exchange, the commission said it now hopes to launch by November a promised $274.9 million rescue package aimed at helping the industry meet restructuring costs, including severance packages to laid-off workers.
The plan originally was to be completed last September, but the timetable has slipped because of disagreements among EU countries over subsidies and other matters.
Italy is expected to shoulder much of the reduction.
Germany, where a number of steel companies are considering linkups, is also expected to provide significant cuts.
Per-capita investment was 140% higher in eastern Germany than in western Germany in 1993, the first time figures for the former communist country outpaced its western counterpart.
From 1991 to 1993, $203 billion was invested in eastern Germany -- $171 billion by the private sector and $32 billion by the government.
Following eastern Germany's unification with the west in 1990, the region's economy collapsed and more than a third of its jobs disappeared.
Eastern Germany's gross domestic product grew an inflation-adjusted 9.7% in 1992 and 7.1% in 1993.
Monthly disposable income in eastern Germany was $862 a person, or about 62% of the western German level, in the second half of 1993, compared with about 41% of the western standard three years earlier.
Up to $4 billion a year in drug money floods into Colombia's economy, according to a new report by the independent Foundation for Higher Education and Development.
Much of the profit from illegal drug trade is laundered through construction projects or the import of goods such as luxury cars.
Drug-money laundering artificially makes various imports cheaper and raises demand for property and durable goods.
Russia may ease new high import tariffs for companies that invest in the country, Economics Minister Alexander Shokhin said.
Foreign companies that invest heavily in Russian industry could be granted exemptions from levies of up to 50% on imported vehicles, for example.
The minimum for such investments wasn't specified.
On March 15, Russia raised tariffs on a broad range of imported food and industrial products in an effort to protect struggling domestic producers.
The tariffs might not cause a jump in prices, because they already are at the limit of what most consumers can pay.
Drinkers in the dusty Australian outback town of Tennant Creek stockpiled beer, wine and hard liquor to get through yesterday's "grog-free day."
The Julalikari Aboriginal Council designated a day without drink in an effort to combat the alcohol-related problems in this town, which folklore says was established on the spot where a beer cart broke down.
The town's 14 liquor outlets backed the dry day, but residents mostly voiced complaints.
Major Japanese corporations offered their employees the smallest wage increases since World War II.
The offers were made to members of the Japan Council of Metal Workers' Unions, covering the steel, electrical appliance, automotive and shipbuilding industries.
While the companies employ only 5.4% of Japan's work force, their wage offers tend to set the tone for remaining negotiations.
Labor unions representing the employees of electrical appliance makers have rejected offers of 3% wage increases.
Last year, their workers got raises of 3.6%.
The smallest wage-increase offers came from the loss-plagued steel industry.
The "Big Five" steelmakers jointly proposed a rise of 1.6%, down from 2.7% last year.
Shipbuilders proposed increasing wages by 3.3%.
Wage-increase offers at auto makers hovered around 3%.
Economists fear the low level of wage increases could hamper Japan's economic recovery by reining in consumer spending.
Personal consumption accounts for roughly 60% of the Japanese economy.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
An agreement allowing Japan's vehicle exports to the EU to rise by 0.4% this year has raised hackles in Italy, where car makers say Japanese producers would get a big increase in their share of the Italian market. . . .
Black and Asian workers in Britain lost their jobs at a rate seven times as high as white workers from mid-1992 to mid-1993, a labor group said.
