DURING A HOLIDAY trip to the Midwest, it was possible to fill up a gas tank for the pleasant price of 85 cents a gallon, and listen to relatives happily swapping stories about paying a mere 75 cents days earlier.
So this is a good time to look back at the myths perpetrated last summer about the devastating impact the new 4.3-cent-a-gallon gasoline tax would have on the nation's economy.
The facts are that the members of Congress who made those dire predictions were wrong, that gasoline prices are lower now than before the tax passed, that this development wasn't a total surprise, and that a golden opportunity to more seriously address both the deficit and energy policy was frittered away.
For those whose memories have slipped, here's a quick recap: Last year opened with much wailing and gnashing of teeth about a federal budget deficit that was at $300 billion a year and climbing toward $400 billion.
In response, President Clinton presented a deficit-cutting bill in which he ditched some campaign promises in order to attack the red ink.
The centerpiece was a broad-based energy tax, the infamous BTU tax, that was to raise $72 billion over five years.
The BTU tax was instantly unpopular, and the Senate killed it.
But having piously proclaimed the evils of the budget deficit, senators couldn't just leave a $72 billion hole.
So the fallback became a 4.3-cent-a-gallon gasoline tax, which would raise $24 billion over five years.
THE GAS TAX passed, though at times the congressional debate suggested a gun was being held to the head of the economy.
"It will have a ripple effect throughout our economy," declared Wisconsin Democrat Herb Kohl.
"It will affect the trucking industry and prices that people pay and jobs.
It will affect the airline industry and what people pay for tickets, as well as jobs.
It will have a real negative effect on the economy."
Echoed Republican Frank Murkowski of Alaska: "This tax is going to steal American jobs and make us less competitive overseas."
The reality six months later is that American jobs are being lost -- but they're being lost in the oil patch because energy prices are so low.
An American Automobile Association survey shows that the average price of a gallon of regular unleaded gasoline in mid-December -- after the gasoline tax was put into effect -- was $1.09 a gallon, three cents less than at the time of the Senate debate.
The most accurate prediction, it turns out, came from Louisiana Democrat John Breaux, who declared that in inflation-adjusted terms, gasoline will be "cheaper than it was in 1990, cheaper than it was in 1985, cheaper than it was in 1980, 1975, 1970, 1965, and yes, it will be even cheaper with the tax than it was in real terms in 1920."
This is happening because world oil prices are dropping through the floor and Americans are gobbling up cheap imported crude.
Oil is selling for below $15 a barrel, $10 a barrel less than it did three years ago during the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait.
Through the first 11 months of 1993, the U.S. imported an estimated 8.5 million barrels of this cheap oil a day, up from an average of 7.9 million barrels a day a year earlier.
And keep in mind that this flood of cheap oil has developed before Iraq's big oil fields are reopened to the world.
ONE DIDN'T HAVE to be clairvoyant to see this situation coming.
If lawmakers were truly as concerned about the deficit as they claimed, they could have passed a gas tax twice as big -- and doubled the dent put into the deficit -- and motorists still wouldn't be paying a significantly different price for gasoline now than they were beforehand.
More important, sliding oil prices gave America a rare -- and missed -- opportunity last year to conduct a calm debate about its overall energy policy, and whether it really wants to continue binging on imported oil or instead start paying more attention to long-term domestic energy sources.
This isn't to say a gasoline tax is a great thing.
Gas taxes are, in fact, a little nasty, regressive and uneven in regional impact.
Candidate Bill Clinton, who later pushed the gas tax, said it himself in his campaign when he declared that he opposed "a backbreaking federal gas tax."
But deficit reduction requires doing something nasty somewhere, particularly telling middle-class Americans they will have to either accept smaller versions of the entitlement programs they've grown to expect or to pay more for them.
The other option is to leave more bills to be paid by the next generation of Americans, a choice that would be irresponsible and painful in its own way.
If lawmakers believe their own deficit rhetoric -- a pretty big if -- then they blew a big chance to do more about it last summer.
