The dollar barely budged against the yen yesterday, as the market showed little reaction to the continuing standoff in U.S.-Japan trade relations.
The U.S. currency also had only halting movement against European currencies, with traders hesitant to stake large positions ahead of the Bundesbank's fortnightly policy-making meeting today.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7233 marks, down from 1.7305 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 103.80 yen, up slightly from 103.70 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4765, up a bit from $1.4735.
About midday Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 103.65 yen and at 1.7250 marks.
The dollar had plunged against the yen Monday after Friday's collapse of U.S.-Japan trade talks.
"The tremendous emotional outpouring that followed the breakdown in trade talks has finally settled, and we're consolidating in a fairly tight range," said Stephen Flanagan, vice president at PaineWebber Inc.
The dollar fell moderately yesterday after President Clinton said that his top advisers will make recommendations "in the next few days" on trade actions.
But traders said that even the Clinton announcement wasn't enough to drive the dollar below earlier intraday lows.
The low of 103.08 yen was reached during Asian trading, soon after Japan released data showing its trade surplus remained at high levels in January.
In addition, Japan gave every indication it would continue to stand up to U.S. pressure for more trade concessions.
Japanese trade negotiator Nobutoshi Akao hammered the U.S., saying its position was "a betrayal of trust" following the successful completion of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or GATT, last December.
In addition, traders fear the unpredictable consequences for the dollar if a full-fledged trade war develops with Japan, Mr. Flanagan said.
Recent yen strength has been mainly based on perceptions that the U.S. will try to push the yen higher to hurt Japanese exporters and so force trade concessions out of Japan.
"One can make an argument for a dollar move in either direction," Mr. Flanagan said, adding: "The yen could weaken on fundamentals or strengthen on U.S. jawboning."
A trade war, he noted, would weaken Japan's flagging economy and possibly drag the yen down with it.
On the other hand, he said, the market "is psychologically well-ingrained to the idea that the dollar will trade lower as a way of correcting the trade imbalance."
Indeed, the dollar hit its intraday low on news that Japan posted a trade surplus of $6.11 billion in January, up 17% from the $5.22 billion a year earlier.
That news renewed fears that the U.S. will try to talk up the yen as a way of curbing the imbalance -- though U.S. officials have been generally reticent on exchange rates since trade talks broke down on Friday.
Japan's trade surplus with the U.S. alone jumped to $3.13 billion in January from $2.93 billion a year earlier.
But with the trade surplus numbers more or less in line with expectations, the dollar drop was modest.
Mr. Flanagan said the market could again push the dollar down toward Monday's low of 101 yen, once the market has a clearer idea on the U.S. trade strategy.
Meanwhile, the dollar softened moderately against the mark on the view that the Bundesbank is unlikely to cut its key Lombard and discount rates today, despite the window of opportunity that has presented itself with the dollar's dramatic weakening this week.
