Heiko Thieme likes to play with rocket fuel: tiny, risky stocks that might pay off big.
He often invests in them through private placements, which aren't available to the general public.
For the past three years, such stocks have helped propel Mr. Thieme to the top of the mutual-fund rosters.
But lately, his high-flying picks are sputtering.
So far in 1994, his American Heritage Fund is down about 5%, while the overall market is up about 1%.
His portfolio was torpedoed last week by its second-biggest holding, Spectrum Information Technologies.
American Heritage was the largest single holder of Spectrum, which lost some 40% last week and is down nearly 70% since John Sculley, former head of Apple Computer, took the helm in October.
On Feb. 7, Mr. Sculley jumped ship, charging, among other things, that Spectrum had deceived him about its financial situation, which the company then had to restate.
Undaunted, Mr. Thieme bought more Spectrum stock even as it plunged.
"Look, I'm an aggressive growth fund.
I'm here to take risks," he says.
Mr. Thieme's predilection for risk is evident in his fund's other holdings, too.
He keeps 10% to 15% of his portfolio in private placements, or restricted securities that don't trade publicly; he owns stocks in companies so small you won't find them in newspapers' daily listings for the Nasdaq Stock Market; and he used 5% to 10% of the fund's portfolio to gamble on short-term price blips.
What's more, he sometimes uses borrowed money to try to juice up the fund's returns.
In the past three years, the wagers have paid off.
American Heritage is the top general stock fund in the U.S. for the three years through Feb. 3, nearly tripling its value, according to Lipper Analytical Services.
Predictably, red-hot results have attracted a flood of money.
The fund dwindled to about $1 million on terrible performance when Mr. Thieme, a German-born manager who for years served as a consultant to Deutsche Bank, took it over in February 1990.
Since then, its assets have swelled to about $150 million.
Still, there are some detractors.
Stan Trilling, a PaineWebber broker in Los Angeles, says he doubts many investors realize how much of Mr. Thieme's success comes from getting small companies to sell him cheap stock in private-placement deals.
"I went in to pitch him on" a particular stock, Mr. Trilling recalls.
"He said he was only interested if he could get it at a discount" from the prevailing market price.
Such a discount helped boost the performance of Mr. Thieme's biggest pick, Senetek.
The small British biotechnology company is working on a drug to treat male impotence, and Johnson & Johnson plans to market the drug in the U.S. if it is approved here.
During the past year and a half, Senetek shares soared to above $5 from about $1.
But Mr. Thieme's paper gains are even larger.
He bought 1.9 million shares in a private-placement deal in September 1992 at 50 cents a share, about half Senetek's publicly traded price around that time.
Mr. Trilling suggests that it's those sorts of maneuvers, more than stock-picking skills, that have vaulted Mr. Thieme to the top of the performance rankings.
"He has sexy numbers, but he's not for me," says Michael Stolper, a San Diego investment consultant.
"There are points of aggressiveness in Mr. Thieme's investment style that make me uncomfortable . . . .
There's not an ounce of humility in the man."
For his part, Mr. Thieme agrees that many of his investment positions are high risk.
But he points out that he also invests in big companies such as International Business Machines, Westinghouse Electric, Citicorp and Philip Morris, often when their stocks have been beaten down.
Mr. Thieme concurs that he often buys stock from small public companies at a discount from public-market prices.
American Heritage is restricted from selling this stock for a period of time, which can range from as little as a month to as much as two years.
The discounts are often 10% to 40%, he says, but can run as high as 50% to 70% on the most speculative stocks.
However, Mr. Thieme pooh-poohs the idea that discounts drive his good three-year record.
They make only a "negligible" contribution to overall results, he says.
Yet, in the same breath, he boasts that he fights to reap "as much as we can conceivably justify" in discounts.
Several things may impel companies to offer discounts on their stock to big buyers.
They may need money quickly, or may not want to put up with the expense, or the scrutiny, of a public stock offering.
Some money managers consider such special treatment unfair.
"If a stock is trading at $20, why should somebody have the right to buy it at $18?" demands Brett Brubaker, president of Abraham & Sons in Chicago.
"I'm ticked.
That's not fair."
Asked why companies give him discounts, Mr. Thieme says that having American Heritage as a holder confers some prestige and legitimacy on a company.
"If we're in, and we're the No. 1 fund for the past three years, Wall Street trades on perception," he says.
Until lately, having Mr. Thieme as a shareholder provided another benefit.
He often touted his favorite stocks on business television network CNBC, where he was a regular guest.
But Mr. Thieme recently was told his services on CNBC wouldn't be required as often as before.
Peter Sturtevant, vice president of daytime news at CNBC, says the cable network has nothing against Mr. Thieme, but wants to get fresh faces into its mix.
"Every once in a while we shake up the list of names," he says.
But Mr. Thieme isn't happy about the way CNBC gave him the cold shoulder.
"They said don't bother to come unless we call," he fumes.
"I'm not a little weasel."
In any case, Mr. Thieme is at no loss for new plans.
He intends to start a more conservative mutual fund soon, and also to launch a hedge fund, a private investment partnership for wealthy investors.
He's also toying with the idea of trying to convert American Heritage from an openend mutual fund to a closed-end fund.
Unlike open-end funds, closed-end funds issue a fixed number of shares, which trade publicly like normal stocks.
That setup relieves closed-end fund managers of having to cope with a flood of redemptions in times of loss, or a cascade of new money to invest when performance is good.
If American Heritage were closed-end, Mr. Thieme says it could ease the pressure on him to produce short-term results.
"Wall Street thinks . . . long-term is next Monday," he says.
