The three major broadcast networks, frustrated with the quality of the television ratings provided by A.C. Nielsen Co., said they are setting up their own experimental ratings service.
The $20 million test system, network executives said yesterday , is meant to be more accurate and more user-friendly than Nielsen's current system.
More than $10 billion annually in advertising time on the three networks is bought and sold based on the Nielsen ratings.
The three-network project, called the System for Measuring and Reporting Television, is being developed through the Committee on National Television Audience Measurement, whose members are Capital Cities/ABC Inc., CBS Inc., General Electric Co.'s NBC and the National Association of Broadcasters.
It will begin testing in 1995 and could be turned into a national system to rival Nielsen's in three years if Nielsen doesn't make changes, executives said.
"If we feel the need, we're prepared to go that route down the line," said Peter Chrisanthopoulos, an ABC executive vice president.
Nielsen, a unit of Dun & Bradstreet Corp., has had a monopoly on national television ratings since a competitor, Britain's AGB Television Research, folded its U.S. operations in 1988 for lack of financial support from the industry.
Plans for another national measurement service from Ceridian Corp.'s Arbitron Co. were abandoned in September 1992.
Contam has been tracking what it says are problems with the Nielsen system for the last several years, including possible understatement of the number of young viewers and declining cooperation rates among households that have been in the Nielsen sample for a long time.
"When you're dealing with a monopoly, service deteriorates to some degree, and the ratings data are not as accurate as you'd like them to be," Mr. Chrisanthopoulous said at yesterday's news conference to announce the experiment.
Nielsen's current system both "understates and overstates" viewing, said Nicholas Schiavone, an NBC vice president and chairman of Contam.
It is "not good enough" for the future, when measurement will get more complicated as the number of channels multiplies, the number of TV sets grows and sets become more portable.
John Dimling, president and chief operating officer of Nielsen Media Research -- the Nielsen unit that does the ratings, played down the significance of the potential new rival, saying he welcomed what Nielsen could learn from it.
"I'm sure the networks want improvements made faster than we or anyone else can make them," he said, but added, "I don't view this as an attack on Nielsen."
He said Nielsen's own goal is to improve the way it measures television.
"I hope they come up with something we can use," he said.
Contam hired Statistical Research Inc., Westfield, N.J., to run the test system, based on a prototype that has been operating since June 1993.
The estimated $20 million cost is about equal to what the three networks currently pay Nielsen annually for ratings.
Nielsen's system requires rewiring the television sets of the 4,000-household sample used to determine the ratings.
Statistical Research expects that participants in its 500-household test will be more accepting of its pencil-thin device, which attaches to the TV set without additional wires.
The device detects whether the set is on and, to determine which show is being watched, reads a universal program code that will be embedded in the show's signal.
The data are then sent via household current and phone lines to Statistical Research.
Statistical Research uses a remote-control device to determine who is watching the TV set.
Nielsen's similar system, known as a Peoplemeter, has been criticized for being too complicated, particularly for children.
Statistical Research has been experimenting with having the device actually talk to viewers and letting them talk back, instead of pushing a button.
One network executive said Contam may also decide to abandon altogether measuring children's viewing.
Betsy Frank, a senior vice president at advertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi, said the Contam experiment is a good idea that will help the entire industry prepare for the future.
"Clearly, the networks have had gripes with Nielsen for some time," she said, "and now they're putting their money where their collective mouths are."
As for the test ratings being produced by the companies that would sell off of them, Ms. Frank said, "Certainly this will make people question whether the interpretation of the numbers is self-serving, but there's confidence in Statistical Research as being ethical."
"The whole industry is feeling the hot breath of the future as a strain on existing technology," said Jerry Dominus, a senior vice president at WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson ad agency.
"Clearly, everyone will welcome the improvement, but I just hope people are prepared to fund it," he said, referring to AGB, which folded for lack of financial support from most of the industry.
