The use of permanent hair dyes does not increase the risk of cancer, according to a large seven-year study by the American Cancer Society.
The study, published in today's issue of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, was designed to address concerns raised by several studies over the years that suggested that women who regularly dye their hair raised their chances of developing certain cancers.
But the new study involving more than a half-million women between 1982 and 1989 found no link between hair-dye use and cancer of the liver, breast, lung, bladder, cervix or blood-forming cells.
Only prolonged use of black hair dye was tied to two uncommon cancers.
The researchers said the study, which when fully completed will involve interviews with more than one million women, specifically focused on use of permanent hair dyes, which account for the bulk of the commercial hair-dye market.
The biggest-selling brand of permanent hair dye is the Nice N' Easy brand sold by Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.'s Clairol unit.
For years, researchers have wondered if hair dyes contributed to the rising incidence of certain cancers among women, especially since some hair-dye ingredients damaged human cells in test-tube studies and in animals.
Despite a lingering cloud of concern over the products, hair-dye use has grown sharply in recent years, reflecting the aging of the baby-boom generation.
In the 12 months ending last November, hair-color product sales in the U.S. rose 14% to $730.3 million, according to Information Resources Inc.
The new research, led by Michael J. Thun of the American Cancer Society, found that women in the study who used hair dyes actually had a slightly lower risk of all fatal cancers, compared with women who never used hair dye at all.
The researchers did find that women who used black hair dye for at least 20 years increased their risk of developing two uncommon cancers, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and multiple myeloma.
The study's authors said only five women in the study developed the cancers.
But because previous studies had found a link with cancer and the black hair dyes, the researchers suggested that certain ingredients in these types of dyes be eliminated, or that the products contain labels warning against prolonged use.
