Japan's financial markets are giving traders a nerve-racking rollercoaster ride that isn't likely to end soon.
Stock and bond prices and the yen have been gyrating wildly so far this year.
Ten times since the beginning of the year, the Nikkei Average has moved at least 2% in one day-the equivalent of an 80-point shift in the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
The yen has swung between 113 and 101 to the dollar.
The government bond market has plunged, with yields rising to 3.6% from 2.95%, wiping $40 billion out of the market.
Traders say the factors rocking the markets -- including political turmoil, international trade friction and billion-dollar spending packages -- aren't likely to disappear for a long time.
Tokyo has always had unusually volatile markets, owing in part to a relatively small number of big shareholders and bondholders.
When a company such as Nippon Life Insurance, which controls $300 billion in loans and investments, makes a market move, it's usually a big one and can easily send prices on a roller-coaster ride.
But several forces are converging to make Tokyo's volatility especially intense.
One is the shaky political situation that finds a coalition government leading a nation accustomed to 38 years of rule by a single political party.
The government recently proposed a $140 billion economic stimulus package aimed at bolstering Japan's sluggish economy.
While it may help the economy, the program's high price tag has given the bond market a bad case of the jitters.
Then there is the continuing trade friction with the U.S., which has sent the value of the yen soaring.
Japanese companies depend on exports for much of their profits, and a higher yen makes their goods more expensive in foreign markets.
The pace is taking a toll even on Tokyo's seasoned traders.
"A long-term view?" said Richard Lemmerman, the head of stock arbitrage at Lehman Brothers Japan.
"Is 30 seconds long-term?"
He moans that "you don't have time to do anything but trade.
Everybody will pass out if it keeps up like this."
Across town at Sumitomo Life Insurance Co., bond investment manager Tomonari Kadoumi is giving up on his market.
"We're supposed to close our books for the end of the Japanese fiscal year in March so we wanted a calm market," he said.
"We've stopped all new investments."
Meantime, he and other managers chug-a-lug caffeine-laced Japanese "health" drinks and Chinese tea as they stare into their computer screens, hoping the market will slow down soon.
While the markets are scary, they can also be very lucrative for the nimble.
Traders making all the right moves can earn in a day what they might ordinarily earn in a year.
"It's good for us, no matter which way the market goes, as long as it's volatile," said Tom Steen, manager of Pacific Rim derivatives at Baring Securities (Japan) Ltd.
Although some big investors are believed to have been burned badly in the recent volatility, Baring is thought to have made several million dollars by taking advantage of the turmoil that struck the futures market during one of the frequent political upsets of recent weeks.
The firm won't comment.
Traders also suggest that Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd. may have been a big winner, profiting on the quick sale of more than $10 billion in bond futures ahead of the bond market's big plunge.
IBJ won't comment.
The trading profits are in sharp contrast to the drubbing that many other long-term investors have taken during the past several weeks.
"For fundamental investors, it's been a slaughter," said Richard Breitenecker, a trader at Cresvale International Ltd.
"I'd hate to be an equities salesman here."
Some of the market moves have been outright confounding to the experts.
Many economists in Tokyo say economic fundamentals suggest the yen should have moved toward 115 yen to the dollar, not the 100-yen level that has actually been the case.
Even savvy Soros Fund Management took a $600 million beating when the yen went the wrong way, although a substantial portion of that loss has since been recouped.
Many European stock markets rebounded from the previous session's broad sell-offs, but sentiment was unsettled.
London stocks ended mixed, as early gains gave way to pressure from weak markets for futures and British government bonds.
Frankfurt shares recovered slightly, helped by U.S. stock and bond markets' rebounds a day earlier.
Tokyo stocks fell broadly Thursday in trading tamed by uncertainties about financial markets abroad.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 114.87, down 0.33, reflecting lower American and Asia/Pacific markets and higher European markets.
Coal stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 104.78, up 1.38, or 1.3%, with QTC Resources of Australia posting a 4.6% gain in its local currency.
Plantations stocks trailed at 225.78, down 7.68, or 3.3%, with Kuala Lumpur Kepong of Malaysia sliding 6.4% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 1.6 points to 3246.5, down from the intraday high of 3278.6.
The FT 30-stock index rose 8.4 points to 2540.2.
Volume shrank to 677.3 million shares from 763.3 million shares a day earlier.
Weaker gilts, or government bonds, and stock-index futures pressured the stock market, undermined further by a lower opening in New York.
News that Germany's Bundesbank had left interest rates unchanged didn't surprise London investors, yet added to the bearish factors fueling fears that world interest rates are on the rise.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index rose 17.57 points to 2037.90, after skidding 46.72 points the previous day.
But given recent bond-market volatility, trading was cautious, and activity dwindled.
In Paris, stocks ended higher, though off their highs, rebounding from the previous day's rout.
In Amsterdam, shares rallied on better-than-expected corporate earnings, as well as gains on other bourses, a firmer U.S. dollar and hopes that European central banks will resume cutting short-term interest rates.
In Madrid, stocks surged 1.4%, buoyed by the Spanish central bank's surprise cut in its benchmark interest rate to 8% from 8.5%.
In Milan, a market measure including issues traded electronically jumped 1.4% in a technical recovery, aided simply by tranquility in other financial markets.
In Zurich, equities rose 1.2% on bargain buying among blue chips in generally calmer dealings.
In Stockholm, shares recovered some losses caused by recent bond-market turmoil but gave up highs when the market was up 1.5% because of the threat of a German metalworkers strike.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which plunged 471.85 points Wednesday, lost 138.91 to 19605.86.
In trading Friday, the Nikkei index rose 206.32 points to close the morning session at 19812.18.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 280 million shares, diving from 401.2 million shares a day earlier.
Retreating issues trounced advancing issues 783-248.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which skidded 29.54 points Wednesday, declined 13.61 to 1602.33.
Despite a moderate rebound in the Japanese bond market, trading was quiet, given the Japanese yen's renewed strength in currency dealings and persistent worries about Japanese interest rates.
Investors weren't dismayed by reports that the U.S. would revive a procedure allowing the government to take punitive trade sanctions against Japan if it is judged to have unfair trade policies.
Indeed, while trade sanctions were considered unlikely, given the U.S. concern about implications for the global economy, investors believed the threat of such action may prompt the Japanese government into action to provide balm for Japan's economic ailments.
In Hong Kong, shares lost ground to end at their weakest level in 2 1/2 months.
The market rallied at the opening but quickly fell, despite a provision in Hong Kong's fiscal 1995 budget to cut corporate income taxes, as investors were more concerned about interest rates.
In Singapore, prices slumped 1.8% on lower-than-expected earnings in the shipyard sector, while the broad market drifted amid concern about volatile dealings and interest-rate worries in overseas bourses.
In Kuala Lumpur, stocks sank 1.4%, after early gains from bargain hunting were wiped out when investors sold quickly as the Tokyo market dropped; prices fell across the board in heavy profit-taking on negative cues from other bourses.
In Taipei, the market rebounded, almost erasing the previous day's decline, but volume was the lightest this year; as the level of margin loans for buying stocks on credit has decreased, so has the selling pressure that had driven the market down about 15% during the past three weeks.
Manila shares fell as an early technical rally was stopped by profit-taking; a cautious mood pervaded the market because of overseas exchanges' weakness, which also took its toll in Wellington, where equities lost early gains to finish lower, deepening the market's loss to about 9% since early February.
In Seoul, prices fell for the third-straight day as bearishness didn't let up; individuals sold heavily while institutions sat on the sidelines.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
