"For sale: one pig, 550 pounds, handsome and pink."
This classified ad didn't appear in any newspaper, nor was it pinned to a bulletin board.
It was scrawled on a 1,000-lire note that seems to have made its way, wallet to wallet, from Verona to Carpi, a trip of 54 miles.
There, it joined a private collection.
Whether this particular piggy went to market isn't known.
A penny doesn't seem to be enough for one's thoughts in Italy, where it's a national pastime to make statements, ask questions and sell things on paper money.
The preferred medium is the 1,000-lire note, which is worth about 60 U.S. thoughts.
Messages range from the spiritual ("I've seen the Madonna") to the outerspatial ("Yesterday, I saw a flying saucer").
They include chain letters, lottery numbers, vulgarities and complaints about school.
One student filled a 1,000-lire bill with notes for a history exam.
The names of politicians, soccer teams and heavy-metal rock groups vie for the white space where watermarks of Marco Polo and Maria Montessori lie hidden.
Why do Italians vent their feelings on money?
Does the desire for self-expression overflow the normal channels?
Is the impulse Jungian or Freudian -- or perhaps a form of foolscapophobia?
People have actually studied this.
"Writing on a bank note is both mischievous and creative," according to Sira Sebastianelli and Ivan Battista, Rome psychologists who have published a 140-page book on the subject.
"But it's also a desire to leave behind a sign of oneself, of one's existence, often of the existence of an alter ego unknown to oneself, a double which erupts unforeseen, a shadowy part that we didn't suspect was so strong and present."
Or maybe it's simpler than that.
Says Anna Grasso Rossetti, a graphologist and psychologist from Brescia: "Some people think that, at the rate society spends, money has become the cheapest and most immediate means to make something known to someone: even more than the mass media."
Pick up Grandpa."
The experts on money scribblers say love is the hottest topic in circulation.
A collector in Rome, who moonlights as a tollbooth attendant, published a book of 1,000-lire squibs.
Here are some examples of putting your mouth where your money is:
"A kiss is like whiskey -- it's better double."
"A kiss is like a boxer -- it knocks out your heart."
"A kiss is a nice way of spitting in someone's mouth.
Do you want to be spit on?"
The Carpi collector, Oscar Sacchi, doesn't psychoanalyze his fellow citizens, but he does spend hours amassing and sorting his 12,861,000 notes in thousand-lire denominations.
He prides himself on his collection, and his listing in the Italian edition of the "Guinness Book of Records."
He holds the record for a "collection of bank notes bearing writing or drawings by unknown hand."
Collecting, he says, is not only fun, it's a good investment, too.
"I netted about eight million lire last year from exhibiting my collection," Mr. Sacchi says.
"I would have made only about two to two-and-a-half million if I'd invested the money in treasury bonds."
The 47-year-old part-owner of a Carpi-based clothing-label company is well-known locally both for his collection and for acting stints as the village idiot.
His collection grows daily as he makes the rounds of this Renaissance town in north-central Italy.
"Got anything for me today?" he asks taxi drivers, newsstand owners and bartenders.
They reach for small piles of bills they have set aside for him.
He thanks them and pays up.
Although the love category is the largest in Mr. Sacchi's collection, worth 4,531,000 lire by itself, the collection also includes 203,000 lire in the "drastic and pessimistic" category, and 76,000 lire in the "Mafia and drugs" category.
One poignant letter to nobody in particular, put into circulation like a bottled message at sea, was written, so it seems, by a victim of the Mafia:
"I'm a girl from Reggio Calabria with Mafiosi parents and brothers.
Two of my brothers have been killed.
I met a good clean boy at the beach, and he has asked me to marry him.
He doesn't know about my family.
I want to go live with him, but my parents are giving me an apartment, and they won't let me leave Reggio.
He's agreed to move here, but he doesn't know anything about my family, and I'm afraid to tell him the news.
I talked to my big brother, who advised me to keep quiet and said afterward he'd take care of it.
I'm afraid that when he finds out, he'll feel betrayed.
I love him, I'm undecided and afraid.
Psychologists like Ms. Sebastianelli and Mr. Battista believe these direct cries for help, along with the other, lighter messages by jokesters or adolescents in love, reveal a young Italian population that is reaching out for attention.
Ms. Rossetti, the graphologist, has extensively photographed outdoor graffiti to compare them to their portable counterparts on bank notes.
She has concluded that all message writers have three main characteristics in common.
"One, they're infantile.
Two, they have the desire to affirm their existence, to leave their mark," she says.
"And three, they're lacking in affection" -- except for those who write love notes.
An example of Ms. Rossetti's analysis: A name written in round attached letters, wider than they are long, was written by someone "sweet, affectionate, desiring to reveal her feelings with a romantic approach.
Her only fault: a little materialistic egoism."
Not all these longhand lonely hearts are young, of course.
One personal ad placed on a 1,000-lire note reads: "Companion sought, about 55 years old.
I've been retired three years, and own apartment and garage."
He gave his phone number.
Oddly enough, two years into Italy's corruption scandal, neither 1,000-lire notes nor subway walls show deep anger toward politicians.
Graffiti artists encourage and thank those conducting the investigation, such as the main public prosecutor, Antonio Di Pietro -- "Grazie Di Pietro!"
They occasionally mock a politician under investigation, like the bank note with a drawing of former Prime Minister Bettino Craxi dressed as a jailbird.
But they don't go much further.
"Everyone talks about politics all the time, but they're holding back, exploring what their neighbor thinks," says sociologist and columnist Francesco Alberoni.
In elections this March, he adds, "half the politicians will be sent packing -- that gives people satisfaction."
Meanwhile, Italians are turning their public scribbling to more important matters, like making fun of carabinieri, the military police.
Carabiniere jokes in Italy are like Polish jokes in America, or Russian jokes in Poland.
A 1,000-lire bill reads: "How to make a carabiniere angry: Turn over."
On the other side, it reads: "Turn over."
