Good news for laid-off, unemployed executives: The stigma is fading.
Ask Scott Northcutt, who may hire as many as 110 executives this year for middle-management positions at Dollar General Corp., a discount retailer.
To him, the unemployed are opportunities.
From his office in Nashville, Tenn., Mr. Northcutt scours the retailing marketplace for companies or stores that are about to close, then looks to see who's available.
"I'm in the recruiter's catbird seat right now," he exults.
Times certainly have changed.
Not long ago, an unemployed executive was seen as damaged goods.
Resumes were artfully written to obscure when a person stopped working.
An interviewer's question on "current job situation" was met with hemming and hawing.
Worse, in many cases the interview just didn't happen.
"If I go back 10 or 15 years, it used to be that someone got laid off because of their own performance," says Bill Maltarich, vice president of human resource management at TRW Inc. in Cleveland.
"We'd be skeptical of that person.
And you know what: We were usually right."
But the last decade changed the mind-set of white-collar America.
The merger-manic 1980s forced out thousands of executives, managers and professionals.
Then the merger era gave way to the streamlining, restructuring and downsizing of the 1990s, turning out waves of competent executives.
"Walk down Main Street in virtually any town and stop 100 people.
I'll bet you that 70 of them either know someone who's been laid off, have a relative who's been laid off or have been laid off themselves," says Richard Pinola, president of recruiter Right Associates.
Indeed, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says there are nearly one million unemployed managers and professionals.
As a result, many interviewers have a new view of out-of-work managers.
"Given the economy and reorganizations and such, it's much more understandable that someone got hit in the neck with a piece of shrapnel," says Monte Bradshaw, a vice president at Cleveland-based recruiter Christian & Timbers.
About 18 months ago, Tom Stoudt found himself out of work.
His employer, a Philadelphia life insurer, was on its third major round of job cuts, looking to lay off 100 people.
With little direct management responsibility, Mr. Stoudt's position as vice president was vulnerable.
Offered a lower-level post, Mr. Stoudt, now 55 years old, chose to take a severance package and use his "10 good years" of work life doing something new.
He started his job search in January 1993.
"I was always up front with the fact that I was downsized out of a job," Mr. Stoudt says.
"I can't say the layoff ever hurt my chances."
In October, he signed on as a vice president at Response Analysis Corp., a Princeton, N.J., research firm that once was a client of his.
Many corporate interviewers are likely to have lost jobs themselves.
Dennis Lunder, executive director of marketing communications at the card company American Greetings Corp., has had to look for work six times in his nearly 30-year career.
Recruited from California by Bowman Distribution in Cleveland, he recalls that he cut their 70% turnover rate among district managers.
He did so well, he says, he forced himself out of a position.
At American Greetings, he says, "we look at why people may have been in a string of positions," rather than just tossing a prospect aside.
Dollar General's Mr. Northcutt is one of the newly sensitive breed of manager.
In the mid-1980s, as an executive at Begley Co., a drug chain in Richmond, Ky., that was facing a takeover, he joined Dollar General rather than have an uncertain future.
But he stayed an extra week at Begley, he says, to lay off 100 people.
"I didn't want a stranger to do it," he recalls.
He thinks of those days now when he hires.
"There were a lot of good people" among the 100 he cut, Mr. Northcutt says.
"It's not a performance issue for many of these people."
While the stigma is fading, the pace of change varies.
In fast-growing industries with few layoffs, unemployed executives are viewed with suspicion; why lose a job when companies are growing?
There are regional differences as well.
Companies in the more conservative Midwest, with their multitiered corporate structures, don't look to the unemployed as often as those in transient California, where job-switching is a fact of life.
But the longer on the unemployment line, the worse a candidate starts to look.
The interviewer-hirer's age also matters.
Older generations "were built on the idea that if you were competent and capable, you didn't get fired," says Mortimer Feinberg, whose New York firm BFS Psychological Associates Inc. screens executives.
And recruiters often are reluctant to give corporate clients names of unemployed executives, lest it appear they aren't searching hard enough.
Indeed, firings or layoffs often are used as a tool by interviewers.
Dr. Feinberg asks executives when they first saw signs that the ax was coming.
"If it came as a real shock, I begin to wonder `Why didn't you see the signals?'" he says.
"It's a psychological competence gauge."
Moreover, self-imposed stigma can foil job opportunities.
"One of the biggest services we provide is reminding people how they got to the job they were in: chief financial officer, vice president, product manager," says Right Associates' Mr. Pinola.
Growing smaller companies, where much of the job growth is, and those in smaller cities are beginning to jump at unemployed executives.
When Robert Meuleman, chief operating officer at Amcore Financial Inc. in Rockford, Ill., was hunting for someone to run his banking company's administrative and data processing operations, he had the choice between an executive and the executive's boss, who were losing their jobs at a major bank.
He took the subordinate.
In another case, he hired the former president of a small bank to run one of his groups.
At Amcore, in out-of-the-way Rockford, big-company layoffs make for good pickings.
"Maybe companies do and maybe companies don't keep the best of what they have," Mr. Meuleman says.
"We're finding people."
