THESE WORDS ARE being written on a computer running Microsoft's DOS and Windows software, the underlying programs that control nearly all IBM-compatible PCs.
Big deal, you say, that's a pretty common setup.
But the computer in front of me isn't an IBM-compatible model.
It's an Apple Macintosh, which everyone knows can't run DOS, Windows or application programs that require them.
Macs are naturally incompatible with that software, which is one reason many folks hesitate to buy them.
I'm composing this column, however, on a new kind of Mac -- one of Apple Computer's ground-breaking line of ultra-fast Power Macintosh models that's equipped with a software program called SoftWindows.
That package, from Insignia Solutions of Mountain View, Calif., ingeniously mimics an IBM-compatible, running DOS and Windows, on the Power Mac -- without any special hardware.
Applications meant for Windows computers then run on the Mac, because it appears to them to be an IBM-compatible.
Apple is installing SoftWindows on certain Power Mac models.
Why is Apple doing this?
To some extent, it's a matter of survival.
While the Mac's system software and user interface are superior to the DOS-Windows combination, most new programs are issued first in Windows versions and sometimes never appear in a Mac version.
And many people buying a computer for home or small business use feel uncomfortable with machines incapable of running the DOS and Windows software used by their employers, suppliers or customers -- even though Mac software usually can handle the files created by many of these programs.
So Apple is hoping that SoftWindows will sell Macs to "fence-sitters" -- people who generally would prefer a Mac, but want the security of buying a machine that can run DOS and Windows.
In fact, Apple has a second model, less publicized than the Power Mac, aimed at such fence-sitters.
IT'S A $1,500 QUADRA model, still quite fast, that also can run DOS and Windows.
The Quadra 610 DOS Compatible doesn't use or need the Insignia software, because it has the guts of an IBM-compatible built in -- including an Intel 486SX/25 microprocessor -- as well as normal Macintosh circuitry.
It's two computers in one, which can operate independently and simultaneously.
You can switch between the PC and Mac parts of the machine by just hitting a couple of keys.
After using both machines for a few weeks, I found they do work largely as advertised.
But both have significant limitations, and neither replaces an IBM-compatible computer.
They are strictly for people who mainly intend to use Mac software and want only occasionally to run a couple of DOS and Windows programs.
Like all attempts to emulate one computer or another, they're not ideal.
SoftWindows adds at least $500 to the cost of a Power Mac.
The software is costly, with a list price of $499 if bought separately, and it requires your Mac to have a whopping 16 megabytes of memory and extra hard disk space in order to simulate a four-megabyte PC.
As a result, the cheapest model Apple offers with SoftWindows included is about $3,000 with a monitor and keyboard.
In addition, SoftWindows only runs about as fast as a 386 chip, now obsolete, or a slow version of the 486, depending on which programs you use.
Worse, SoftWindows looks to your software like an old PC with an ancient 286 chip, so some newer programs won't run on it.
For instance, I couldn't install Visio, the business graphics package, which is a classic example of a Windows program that's unavailable in a Mac version.
INSIGNIA PROMISES a version late this year that will appear to be a true 486, but SoftWindows can't handle PC multimedia software because it doesn't emulate sound cards.
The more obscure DOS-compatible Quadra with real PC hardware is a better way to go.
It's less expensive and faster, and because it uses a true 486 chip, current Windows programs react well to it.
But, like SoftWindows, it doesn't handle PC sound or music.
To get the best speed, you must add memory to the PC part of the machine, raising the $1,500 price -- which doesn't include a monitor or keyboard.
Even then, you've got only an entry-level 486.
And only DOS is included.
You must buy and install Windows separately.
Macintosh owners can upgrade to either type of machine.
Apple offers a variety of upgrades, from $700 to $1,900, that turn many Quadra models and a few other recent Macs into Power Macs.
Check your dealer to see if your model is eligible.
Add at least $700 on top of that (for software and extra memory) if you want to run SoftWindows on your newly upgraded machine.
It's cheaper and easier to turn a Quadra 610 or a Centris 610 into a part-time IBM-compatible.
You just buy a special $399 Apple DOS Compatibility card, with the guts of a PC on it.
Bear in mind that this option only adds IBM compatibility.
It won't turn your machine into a Power Mac, and won't run Mac software any faster or better.
So far, Apple isn't selling an IBM-on-a-card for the Power Macs.
Current and prospective Mac owners likely will welcome these IBM-compatibility features.
But they hold a danger for Apple itself.
If Mac users start discovering and relying upon more and more Windows programs that aren't available in Mac versions, they may decide that their next computer should be a real IBM-compatible.
