Personal computer makers in Intel Corp.'s camp are preparing an ambush on the enemy.
An army of PC makers plans to storm the market this week with announcements of machines that use a robust new version of Intel's Pentium chip, in hopes of stealing some fire from Apple Computer Inc.
Next Monday, Apple will launch its much-awaited new Macintosh line, using the PowerPC chip, which it designed with International Business Machines Corp. and Motorola Inc.
The PC makers' assault is set to coincide with Intel's planned announcement today that it will ship a new version of its Pentium microprocessor, which controls the most powerful PCs.
AST Research Inc., Hewlett-Packard Co., Gateway 2000 Inc., Advanced Logic Research Inc. and Unisys Corp. said they will announce today their plans to ship PCs powered by the new Intel chip, the P54C, as early as next month.
Others, including the IBM PC Co. unit, Digital Equipment Corp. and Compaq Computer Corp. are also expected to discuss their plans to start shipping PCs using the Intel P54C chip.
With all the PC makers rushing to join the fray with Intel's new chip, "we'll see the most number of desktop and portable computers ever introduced" at one time, predicted Computer Intelligence, a market research firm.
The arrival of the new Pentium chips from Intel surprised even PC makers, which were prepared to announce their new systems in May.
But Intel moved up its launch, analysts said, to try to steal thunder from Apple's planned introduction of Macintosh computers that use the PowerPC chip developed by Apple, IBM and Motorola as a challenge to Intel's domination of the market.
The new Pentium chip is a souped-up version of the old Pentiums, which Intel introduced last spring.
The chip, available in two variations, has an internal clock that runs at a speed of 90 megahertz or 100 megahertz, compared with speeds of 60 megahertz and 66 megahertz for the Pentium versions that were shipped last spring.
Market analysts say the latest Pentiums now slightly exceed overall performance of the first iteration of the PowerPC chip, the 601.
That PowerPC chip is somewhat more powerful than the slower Pentiums Intel has been shipping since last year.
The new Pentium PCs are priced to compete against Apple's new PowerPC machines, which analysts believe will range in list price from $2,400 to $4,000.
AST, of Irvine, Calif., said its new Pentium PCs will range from $3,500 to $4,500.
Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, Calif., said its new Pentium PCs will be priced at about $5,000.
Advanced Logic, Irvine, Calif., which expects to ship its new Pentium systems in four to six weeks, has priced its new Pentium machine at $4,200.
Machines based on the year-old Pentium sell for about $2,500 and are expected to sink below $2,000 by year's end.
In past years, four to five years elapsed before PCs based on a new Intel chip generation hit the $3,000 price point.
At current prices, Intel hopes to break from past patterns by making Pentium PCs an instant hit in the home market.
It has budgeted $150 million for advertising to make that happen.
But Intel's performance lead over the PowerPC isn't expected to last long, because Motorola is expected to ship a new PowerPC chip, the 604, late this year.
Analysts say it will outperform the latest Pentiums.
Both sides will leapfrog each other as successive generations of the rival chips hit the market.
Intel also plans to announce a new chip called the DX4, a version of the widely used 486 chip that runs about 50% faster than the fastest existing 486 chip.
