What does it mean to be a conspirator?
More than anything else, that question has shaped the trial of the four men accused in connnection with the World Trade Center bombing.
Although evidence of participation varies from defendant to defendant, prosecutors have labored to show that all of the men were sufficiently implicated to fall under the broad umbrella of conspiracy law.
Today, federal Judge Kevin T. Duffy is expected to instruct the jury on the meaning of conspiracy, as well as on the other legal questions at issue in the 19-week trial.
If Judge Duffy uses a standard legal definition of the term, the judge is likely to advise the jurors that a defendant is guilty if he knowingly agreed to participate in the plan to destroy a building -- even if he committed no overt act in furtherance of such a plan.
Under the law, only one co-conspirator need actually take a step to commence a conspiracy.
The four men are charged primarily with conspiracy in the explosion that occurred a year ago this Saturday.
The blast, which prosecutors have called the "single most destructive act of terrorism" ever committed in the U.S., killed six people, injured more than 1,000 and resulted in hundreds of millions of dollars in property damage to the Manhattan landmark.
As courts have interpreted conspiracy law, an agreement to conspire can be tacit, and can even be entered into by people who have never met each other or visited the crime site.
Judges sometimes tell jurors that the evidence needed to convict one person of conspiracy needn't be as strong as evidence against the others.
Those are "pretty damning instructions," says Mark Pomerantz, a former prosecutor, now with Rogers & Wells in New York, who believes that the trade center defendants are in "mortal danger" of being convicted.
Because courts interpret conspiracy so broadly, and because it sweeps in allegedly central players with more marginal ones, the law is criticized frequently by civil libertarians and criminal law scholars.
But that is also why it is a favorite tool of prosecutors.
A central characteristic of the trade center case is that it has drawn together co-defendants against whom the government has different levels of evidence.
No witnesses saw any of the defendants drive the yellow Ryder rental van containing explosives into the skyscraper's basement last Feb. 26.
But in closing arguments to the jury of eight women and four men, the government was able to tie together random bits of evidence so that hazy connections between the defendants appeared much clearer.
"To an outside observer, the summation sounded like a prosecutor's dream case -- they were able to explain the conspiracy in a way that everything connected up," says Walter P. Loughlin, a former prosecutor now with the New York law firm Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander & Ferdon.
Testimony and forensic evidence appears strongest against three of the defendants, experts say.
It is the most formidable against Mohammad A. Salameh, the Palestinian immigrant who rented the van, and against Nidal Ayyad, the AlliedSignal chemist who ordered critical chemicals and on whose computer was found a letter threatening more bombings; and only slightly less formidable against Mahmud Abouhalima, who witnesses place in the apartment where the bomb was made.
The evidence is not as strong against Ahmad Ajaj, who took an explosives course and brought bombmaking manuals into the country from the Middle East.
He traveled on the same plane as Ramzi Yousef, another alleged co-conspirator who has since left the country, but otherwise wasn't clearly linked by any witnesses to the other defendants.
The weight of the multilayered evidence left Mr. Salameh's attorney, Robert E. Precht, in the position of having to concede the existence of a conspiracy during his closing argument last week.
He argued that his client was a dupe who should not be convicted under conspiracy laws.
The defendants, who are also charged with destruction of property and other crimes, all face life in prison without the possibility of parole.
Following the summation, Mr. Salameh distanced himself from his lawyer's argument, saying it did not represent his views or the strategy that they had agreed upon.
Mr. Loughlin and others caution that jurors in conspiracy trials have reacted favorably to defendants on the fringe of a crime who argue that the government has abused the law by casting too wide a net, which in essence is what the trade center defendants are claiming.
One advantage for defense lawyers is that they don't have to convince jurors to reject the government's overall evidence of a conspiracy in order to get an acquittal for an individual defendant.
They simply must convince jurors to find reasonable doubt about whether there is enough to tie the particular defendant to the crime, explains Mr. Loughlin.
In a drug or mob case, the classic defendant who this works for is a roommate who can plausibly argue that he simply answered the phone.
But given the facts of the trade center case, that may be difficult.
Prosecutors argue that it would be "impossible" for anyone who spent time in the tiny Jersey City, N.J., apartment where the bomb allegedly was constructed to be unaware of how the chemicals would be used.
Witnesses place Mr. Salameh and Mr. Abouhalima there on an almost nightly basis, and a stain in the ceiling dovetails with rare parts of the trade center bomb.
Although Mr. Ayyad did not spend time at the apartment, he shared a bank account with Mr. Salameh, and several witnesses said he purchased chemicals of the type later delivered to a storage shed allegedly used by the others.
Two witnesses said he tried to buy chemicals even after the bombing, implying that another attack was being planned.
The fringe defense may work most effectively for Mr. Ajaj.
After landing in the U.S. with the bombmaking manuals, he was jailed.
The evidence tying him to the others is inconclusive.
He contends he was an Islamic militant, involved in fighting in Afghanistan.
While he can be convicted of conspiracy and the other crimes, even though he was in jail, he can be acquitted if jurors find there is reasonable doubt that he was part of the crime.
