It's been obvious for some time now, as the Whitewater saga rolls on, that the seizures of moral indignation that periodically afflict various quarters of the media are becoming more frequent.
These episodes, which have all the earmarks of an obsessive disorder -- and which are characterized by repeated hand-wringing about "excessive coverage" and the like -- can by now be predicted well in advance.
That is, their pattern of recurrence shows that these fits almost invariably strike whenever the nation's press is onto a significant and substantial story eminently worth the attention it is getting, such as violent crime -- such as Whitewater.
We are just now beginning to hear the first rumblings of agitation and accusation that television news is devoting too much time to reporting violent crime.
This plaint was triggered by a new study from the Center for Media and Public Affairs, which holds that the statistics don't bear out the picture of a crime-ridden society seen so often on the evening news.
Neither these statistics nor the journalists gathered recently on CNN to bemoan excessive crime coverage are likely to impress citizens living in the real world.
As to Whitewater, it began to be clear a week or so ago (as the Whitewater coverage hit the screen full stride) that feverish charges of "feeding frenzy" and "excess coverage" were on the rise.
That Sunday, on CNN's "Informed Sources" -- where journalists gathered to discuss this grave issue -- media critic Ellen Hume delivered an impassioned assault on the Whitewater coverage.
Such was her excitation that Ms. Hume, whom the fevers seemed to have carried off altogether, plumb near bounced off her chair while decrying the lack of restraint shown by fellow journalists.
Still, none of the hair-tearing about media overkill could stop the surge of Whitewater reportage and debate.
This is not to say that coverage didn't have its lighter moments.
On NBC's "Meet the Press," the same Sunday, former New Yorker Washington columnist Elizabeth Drew succeeded in publicizing one of the sharper political rejoinders of the week -- uttered by New York Sen. Alphonse D'Amato.
The senator had been moved to respond (on the Senate floor) to President Clinton's ringing defense of the first lady ("I have never known anyone with a stronger sense of right and wrong than Hillary Clinton").
"That," retorted Sen. D'Amato, "would seem to be the problem."
"What had he meant by that?" asked the sly Ms. Drew, who knew exactly what he had meant.
Mr. D'Amato proceeded, as expected, to recite a list, by no means complete, of some of the tawdrier characters with whom the Clintons have had dealings one way or another.
Meanwhile, administration spokesmen were busy making appearances of their own, and occasionally showing some strain.
The new presidential counsel, Lloyd Cutler, lost his temper on "This Week" and proceeded to lecture David Brinkley on journalistic ethics.
Presidential Counselor David Gergen showed up at a Los Angeles Times editorial breakfast (carried on C-Span), where, looking a trifle dazed, as is only natural for one recently emerged from hiding, he spoke of fire walls and judgment calls and generally labored diligently to answer questions on Whitewater and the Clintons.
Other supporters of the first couple took to the airwaves as well, New York Times columnist Anna Quindlen among them.
On the syndicated radio show "Imus in the Morning," Ms. Quindlen, only one among many journalistic sages who have taken to giving the Clinton's media advice, said she didn't think the first lady should hold any press conferences.
She did, however, make the high-minded suggestion that Mrs. Clinton find some TV show where she could answer viewers' questions.
This strategy, the columnist earnestly explained, would help the first lady create "the illusion" that people were partaking in the questioning.
Both the first lady and the president indeed had some need of advice last week, as talk of White House-related scandals reached their peak with the resignation of Webster Hubbell.
On all three networks, this was the story that led the evening news.
"Good evening," began the NBC news with Tom Brokaw.
"This must be one of those days when the Clintons wonder whether it's all worth it. . . .
Whitewater washed all over them and their carefully arranged new jobs agenda."
On CBS, Dan Rather began with word that "Another high-ranking member of the Clinton administration was pulled down today in the spreading undertow of Whitewater."
Stranded in Detroit, where the big story was supposed to be jobs, Peter Jennings instead found himself anchoring an extended lead item about Mr. Hubbell and the Rose Law Firm, all against a wonderfully irrelevant background of cars rolling off an assembly line.
"World News Tonight" nonetheless remains the first network news show to have provided a lengthy overview of Whitewater (reported by James Wooten), which served notice that reportage on this affair wasn't going to go away any time soon.
Another report, by ABC's Cynthia McFadden, provided one of the more eloquent testaments to the current condition of the once-proud Rose law firm.
The setting was a large charity benefit in Little Rock -- where the cameras caught the Rose table entirely surrounded by empty chairs.
For sheer toughness and color, though, no Whitewater reporting exceeded that of NBC's Lisa Myers.
The high point of her two-part series, aired last week, had James McDougal (the Clintons' former business partner) holding forth in his softly menacing voice and looking for all the world as though he had stepped out of "Citizen Kane."
The watchdogs of journalism howl, but the Whitewater caravan rolls on.
Awards time has come round again, this time with the Rabbi Baruch Korff Citation for Meritorious Service.
This award, presented to journalists who have distinguished themselves by zealous and unflagging devotion to a sitting president, is named for the Providence, R.I., rabbi who became Richard Nixon's most ardent champion, even unto the final hours of his presidency.
It can come as no surprise to her many fans that the hands-down winner of the Korff award this year -- and probably next year -- is Eleanor Clift of "The McLaughlin Group" and Newsweek, the most tireless of the first couple's cheerleaders.
We could cite, in particular, the heartwarming Newsweek interview with the first lady, wherein journalist Clift assured Mrs. Clinton, in effect, that inquiries into her Whitewater dealings all came from people who wanted to launch careers, who wanted to burn witches, who didn't share Ms. Clift's own theory that the first lady resisted making her records public because "you have a thing about privacy."
Congratulations, Eleanor.
Nobody could be more deserving.
