Texaco Inc. said it settled $1.1 billion of claims involving a royalty dispute with Louisiana for $250 million, putting to rest a legal wrangle that has plagued the company for a decade.
The out-of-court settlement calls for Texaco to pay the state over a three-year period, with a first installment of $150 million due shortly after the agreement receives final approvals.
An additional two payments of $50 million each will be made over the following two years.
The company said it has set aside reserves that will cover the full settlement, so there won't be any charges to earnings.
As part of the agreement, the White Plains, N.Y., oil company also said it will launch an expanded exploration program in the state, which will result in the creation of 500 jobs.
The program will trigger $152 million of spending over five years by Texaco and other companies that might become involved.
Louisiana has always played an important part in Texaco's oil and natural-gas production, with acreage there accounting for about 22% of the company's U.S. oil production.
Indeed, Texaco has been a significant player in the state, especially in gas production, since early in the century.
Many of the 50 leases in dispute were acquired more than 60 years ago.
Texaco said that putting an end to the suit, which would have gone to trial in October, is a major accomplishment.
"It gives us clear title on significant acreage," said Alfred C. DeCrane Jr., Texaco's chairman.
"We couldn't do any major work on these leases, because we faced the threat of losing them."
Wall Street analysts expect resolution of the litigation will allow Texaco to increase its U.S. production and add to its domestic reserve base, since it will be able to once again aggressively explore and develop oil prospects in Louisiana.
Bernard Picchi of Kidder, Peabody & Co. said the odds are good that Texaco will be able to squeeze additional barrels out of the state.
"There's been a revolution in the type of technology available for exploration and production since the company got tied up in the dispute more than a decade ago," he said.
The settlement is also important to New Orleans-based Louisiana Land & Exploration Co., which had leased Texaco some of the land in dispute.
In fact, Louisiana Land, as a co-defendant in the suit, has agreed to pay Texaco $5 million toward the settlement.
Benton Oil & Gas Co., an oil and gas production company based in Oxnard, Calif., also stands to gain.
Benton owns a working interest in three of the leases involved, representing almost all of the company's U.S. oil production and reserve base.
With the dispute put to rest, the company said lenders will now allow it to borrow against these reserves, improving the company's financial flexibility.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Texaco closed at $67 a share, up 37.5 cents, and Louisiana Land closed at $40.25 a share, up 12.5 cents.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading, Benton closed at $4.34375 a share, up 3.125 cents.
The dispute, which Texaco said surfaced in the early 1980s, involved claims by Louisiana that Texaco had underpaid its natural-gas royalties to the state dating to 1970.
A Texaco spokesman said the original amount sought by Louisiana was $387 million, and the number grew as time passed.
The state claimed that Texaco was obligated to pay royalties on the gas it produced based on the market value of the gas rather than on the contractual price the company was actually getting.
The Texaco spokesman said that the contracts, which were typically struck on a long-term basis, fetched considerably less than spot, or noncontract, commitments.
The state alleged that Texaco should have sold a certain portion of gas from state leases as new contracts, which would have commanded higher prices.
Louisiana's claims became entangled in Texaco's bankruptcy proceedings in 1987, which turned the state into one of the company's major creditors.
Upon the company's emergence from the proceedings, the claims were remanded to bankruptcy court in Louisiana.
The settlement must still be approved by Louisiana's Mineral Board as well as a federal district court judge in the state.
