The faculty expects immediate $10,000-a-year raises or, at the very least, one-time $10,000 bonuses.
The admissions office becomes flooded with inquiries and applications, mostly from prospective students who expect to go to the school for free.
Parents of at least 10 applicants who received rejection letters, either for admission or financial aid, demand the billionaire's home address so they can complain that his money isn't being spent wisely.
Such is the fate of the Peddie School -- a private secondary boarding and day school with 482 students -- since philanthropist and Peddie graduate Walter H. Annenberg decided six months ago to give it the educational equivalent of a winning lottery ticket.
While many boarding schools are hurting because of a decline in the number of prospective students who can afford to pay their rising tuitions, Peddie is sitting pretty.
As a result of the Annenberg gift, school officials say, they will be able to build a more diverse student body and enhance learning.
"The gift gave a tremendous boost to everybody associated with Peddie -- faculty, students and alumni," enthuses Thomas A. DeGray, the school's head.
"We love walking around, puffing out our chests and saying, `Yeah, I go to Peddie.' "
The money, which catapulted Peddie from nowhere on lists of boarding-school endowments to the top seven, arrived by wire last month.
Under the donation's terms, only interest, not principal, can be spent.
School administrators had already decided -- after huddling with key board members during two off-campus retreats -- to have five different money managers invest the gift.
They hope for a return of at least 5% or 6%, or $5 million to $6 million a year, a hefty addition to the school's current $10.5 million budget.
Mr. Annenberg stipulated that 55% of the new funds be used for financial aid.
How to spend the rest sparked a veritable avalanche of suggestions from faculty, administrators and outsiders.
Some wanted to build new dorms.
Others proposed constructing a new hockey rink, squash courts, a student center and an expansion of the dining hall.
At the same time, school officials were inundated with offers from money managers to provide investment advice, from architects, who assumed a campus building boom was in the offing, and from artists seeking commissions for busts or portraits of Mr. Annenberg.
In the end, capital improvements -- and artworks -- were ruled out.
After all, thanks largely to more than $40 million in previous Annenberg gifts, the school's postcard-pretty campus already boasts an arts center, a new $7.8 million library, a huge athletic center, new dorms and a state-of-the-art computer network.
Instead, Peddie decided to use 20% to 25% of the investment income to nearly double the salaries of the school's 72 teachers and staff members over five years.
Mr. DeGray hopes that will satisfy the school's employees, who earn on average about $25,500 a year and who were arguing for raises because their salaries are in the bottom third in the ranks of prep school compensation.
By 1998, he says, Peddie's average salary should jump to the top quarter.
Some faculty members are withholding judgment.
"I'm going to see what specifics are given before I state whether I like it or not," says Frank Towne, a chemistry teacher who has been at Peddie 31 years.
The rest of Mr. Annenberg's gift will be spent on educational initiatives, including an experimental, longer-year curriculum for 30 select sophomores.
The school also hopes to add at least four faculty members.
The increase in financial aid will have the greatest impact on the school, Peddie officials believe.
Last school year, only 28% of its students received aid, totaling about $1.5 million.
Next year, the budget will double and about half of all students will benefit.
Peter A. Quinn, Peddie's admissions director, intends to diversify the student body, admitting more minority candidates as well as middle-class applicants who could not normally attend a school that costs boarders $18,900 a year.
He emphasizes that he doesn't wish to compete with top-tier prep schools and only accept kids "who get straight As and star in lacrosse and play four instruments," but also students who show a lot of potential.
"There's been some anxiety on the part of alumni and on the part of parents of current students with younger siblings, that suddenly we're going to be a place that you cannot get into unless you're some sort of brain surgeon," he says.
"And that's not what we want."
(Virtually all Peddie graduates go on to college, with about 15% attending the nation's top schools.)
Mr. Quinn will certainly have a larger pool from which to choose new students.
Applications for next fall, due no later than Jan. 31, have more than doubled to 260, with another 40 expected.
The increase, officials say, is unquestionably due to news of Mr. Annenberg's gift.
"The only reason we applied was to get some of that scholarship dough," says Rich Friedman, executive editor of Byte magazine and the father of a 13-year-old.
"Quite frankly, I never heard of the Peddie School" before the gift.
Mr. Friedman adds, though, that he has been very impressed with the enthusiasm of the school's admissions staff.
Mr. Quinn says he isn't worried that some applicants have been attracted by the school's new-found largess.
"I don't really care how they know about us, as long as what they hear is positive," he says.
Peddie students say they've been hearing a lot of positive things lately about their school -- often for the first time.
"Before, I'd be home and I'd say I went to Peddie and I'd draw blank faces," recalls Jack Harris, a 17-year-old senior from New Canaan, Conn.
"I work at a golf course, and now all the golfers come up and say, `You're the kid who goes to Peddie!' "
Not surprisingly, the 85-year-old Mr. Annenberg, a C student who graduated from Peddie in 1927, has become a hero on campus.
Peddie held a "Thanks Walt Day" to honor the former publisher and U.S. ambassador last October.
His words, "Strive for the highest quality of citizenship," appear at the entrance to the Annenberg Library in the Annenberg Building.
Mr. Annenberg, who recently announced he was also donating $500 million to reform public education, has been giving money to Peddie since the day he graduated, when he contributed $17,000 for a new track.
Asked if more donations are anticipated, Mr. DeGray replied, "Obviously, we don't expect more.
Or I don't."
"But we wouldn't turn it down," added assistant head Penney Riegelman.
