Foster care for kids in trouble is another reason why we keep saying that the nation's welfare problem is bigger than the debate over AFDC and work requirements suggests.
Beginning with the demise of orphanages in the first third of this century and especially after the rise of child-abuse sensitivity in the late 1960s, this government program for children from unfit homes has been a regular if not often successful part of the social-service landscape.
It sends court wards to "parents" who have contracted to care for them until the children are allowed to return home or are settled with appropriate families.
In an imperfect world, some provision of this sort will always be needed.
But now it's apparent that this option has gotten out of hand.
After a stable stretch through the early 1980s, the quickening dissolution of weak households caused the number of "substitute-care" kids (those in foster and group homes and shelters) to rise to 442,000 nationally by 1992, up from 262,000 a decade earlier.
In California, the nadir of a rootless welfare culture, the trend is even more dramatic.
Nearly 90,000 foster cases were "open" at the end of last year, vs. 37,563 in 1983.
Where a child qualifies under welfare or other federal designations, local officials may desire to fob the case off on U.S. taxpayers, who would carry most of the load.
Payments to foster parents grew more than 10 times in California from 1970-89.
However, the real price of foster care exceeds what may be a $10 billion annual tab nationwide.
"Former foster children are disproportionately represented in juvenile and adult prison populations, among the homeless, and on state assistance rolls," says Conna Craig, president of the Institute for Children in Cambridge, Mass.
"By contrast, evidence suggests that children of similar backgrounds who enjoy greater family permanency, such as adoptees, fare as well as those who grow up with their biological parents."
Foster children typically are routed from home to home over a period of months and even years as they wait either to be adopted or emancipated or for their natural parents to shape up (the law, critics such as Ms. Craig argue, is unduly indulgent of lousy mothers).
Only about 10% of those in foster care at any one time are eligible for adoption, and the experience is probably leaving the others worse off than when they entered the system.
With the upsurge in crack and HIV babies, the number of infants coming into the program has almost doubled in the past five years.
With the bias to perpetuation of state-arranged custody, this means a good number of tots are walking before they ever have a real home.
About 40% of the nation's foster children are black.
This is greatly a function of the conditions of the urban underclass (and therefore, tied back to the AFDC question).
But tragically contributing is a deliberate strategy of the National Association of Black Social Workers (endorsed by the NAACP's executive committee) to thwart the adoption of these kids by nonblack parents.
Without that outlet, these children are being consigned to 30% longer stays on the foster circuit than normal.
The association's belief that blacks raised by whites lose their sense of identity is rejected even by left-liberal politicians.
Democratic Senators Howard Metzenbaum and Carol Moseley-Braun have a bill to forbid federally financed adoption agencies to discriminate based only on race.
It passed the Senate last week and now moves over to the House.
Another suspect factor is the "special needs" categorization imposed on many foster children, sometimes by virtue simply of their age.
This contributes to the dubious notion that some kids in the program are just not adoptable.
In fact, there are waiting lists for virtually all manner of youngsters.
Encouraging earlier adoption could save taxpayers a billion dollars a year, according to Ms. Craig.
It could also break the cycle that has made third-generation foster status an unsurprising trait among teenage mothers.
The best answer to restoring order on America's streets and in its schools is a renewal of responsibility among birth parents (plural).
A program called Families First in Michigan is offering remediation in that spirit.
Apart from progress there or the presence of an adequate extended family, a revival of (enlightened) orphanages or the expediting of adoptions would seem imperative.
To deny some kind of footing for these desperate kids is as cruel as it is socially destructive.
By forging a new consensus, legislators and think tanks are clarifying the policy choices to show that tax reform is at the heart of health care reform.
