Some time ago, in the third or fourth month of the $10 billion takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc., the focus seemed to shift from the question "Who's going to win?" to "When will it end?"
For investment banker Felix Rohatyn, it has been like running up a series of sand dunes.
One takeover stock trader compares it to a trip to the dentist.
At a meeting with stock traders this month, QVC Network Inc.
Chairman Barry Diller called it "the deal from hell."
A New Yorker magazine cartoon captured the sentiment two weeks ago by picturing a bearded end-of-the-world prophet carrying a sign that read: "The End of the Sale of Paramount is Near!"
And indeed, the outcome could conceivably be determined tomorrow , when final bids are due.
"It's been very difficult, technically, legally and emotionally," frets Mr. Rohatyn, Paramount's adviser at Lazard Freres & Co.
"With the timetables, deadlines and crises, it's been probably one of the most difficult things I've ever been involved with from the point of view of personal wear and tear on everybody."
For the participants, the battle has become a never-never land of canceled plans and endless meetings at hotels and investment bankers' and lawyers' offices.
Paramount lawyer Richard Beattie, for example, had to bow out of a trip to China last fall with David Rockefeller.
Says Mr. Diller: "This is not normal life.
The biggest drain on my energy is to constantly try to remember that this is not real life."
At four months and 19 days, Paramount is just about to pass the length of the 1989 fight between Paramount and Warner Communications Inc. over Time Inc.
And that fight didn't really begin until three months after the Time Warner deal was announced, when Paramount made a hostile bid for Time.
By comparison, some of the takeover battles that are remembered as riveting classics -- for Bendix Corp., Conoco Inc., RJR Nabisco Inc. and Getty Oil Co. -- were over within six weeks.
Although they remain few and far between in the early 1990s, high-profile hostile takeover battles seem to drag on far longer than those a decade ago.
One reason is the thicket of defensive structures built up in the 1980s to deter corporate raiders and give boards and shareholders more time to respond to legitimate bids.
Chief among them is the poison pill, which boards can use to make a hostile bid prohibitively expensive.
Several lower-profile deals of the late 1980s lasted far longer than the Paramount contest.
It took eight months, 14 days for Tyson Foods Inc. to wrest control of Conagra Inc. away from Holly Farms Corp. in the 1988-89 "chicken wars."
For the first two months, Paramount -- a movie, television and publishing concern -- maneuvered to protect its friendly merger with Viacom Inc. and keep QVC at bay despite Mr. Diller's higher bids, while both bidders gathered multiple partners to gain extra financing.
In the third month, two Delaware courts ruled that Paramount's board had acted against its shareholders' interests and ordered a new round of bids.
Since Christmas, cable-TV concern Viacom and home-shopping company QVC have been exchanging minor changes to their offers in a slow-motion auction.
Paramount has signed new merger agreements with QVC and then Viacom again.
And Viacom even had time to put together an $8.4 billion takeover of Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., the video-cassette rental chain.
The siege has robbed Viacom adviser Robert Greenhill of time he could have used to build the investment banking side of Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
Another Smith Barney banker, Michael Levitt, spent parts of the Christmas and New Year's days negotiating with Blockbuster, and says he hasn't had a full day off since the contest began.
Despite criticism of this time-consuming auction, Mr. Rohatyn says it was necessary to allow a fair airing of the competing offers, both with "two-tier, cash-and-paper bids where the securities end is more and more difficult to evaluate."
Takeover traders have been particularly dispirited because Paramount stock has gone downhill since mid-November, just before the court actions.
The lengthy auction process has eroded their profits by adding to their financing costs of carrying their positions as they wait for big blowout bids they hope may herald the end of the battle.
Frank Biondi, chief executive of New York-based Viacom, who is supposed to run the mammoth proposed combination of Viacom, Paramount and Blockbuster, says he couldn't escape the battle even when he jetted off to Miami recently for a trade show.
"The only thing anyone wanted to talk about was the deal."
Home life has been disrupted too, Mr. Biondi says.
"For one thing, I'm not there."
His children, ages 15 and 18, miss going to movies and sporting events with him.
And what happens when he does manage to squeeze in some quality time with them at home?
They, too, bug him about what's going on behind the scenes and who's going to win.
Their friends also bug them, he adds, noting that he is especially careful to remain mum around the house about any confidential developments.
Paramount's chairman, Martin Davis, Mr. Diller's nemesis in the contest, was so taken with the New Yorker cartoon that he acquired it, having first warned his own advisers that he didn't want to get into a "bidding war" for it with them.
When last seen in his 42nd-floor office, Mr. Davis had a victor's smile on his face, as far as the artwork goes.
But the strain of the prolonged battle is showing in other ways.
Once the designated chief executive in the friendly merger with Viacom, first announced on Sept. 12, Mr. Davis now has little role in Paramount's future no matter who wins.
Looking pale, the health-conscious executive noted recently that he was wrestling with his third cold since the fight began.
The following U.S. Treasury, corporate and municipal offerings are tentatively scheduled for sale this week, according to Dow Jones Capital Markets Report:
Bowater Inc. -- $75 million of preferred and $100 million of preferred redeemable increased dividend equity securities via Merrill Lynch & Co.
Connecticut Light & Power -- $280 million of debt in two parts via competitive bid.
People's Republic of China -- $1 billion of 10-year global bonds via Merrill Lynch.
ACF Industries Holding Corp. -- $200 million of five-year senior secured zero coupon notes via Merrill Lynch.
ACF Industries Inc. -- $250 million of 10-year senior notes via Merrill Lynch.
Amli Residential Properties Inc. -- initial 9.2 million shares, via Merrill Lynch.
Benetton Group SPA -- 5 million American depositary shares, via Merrill Lynch.
Consep Inc. -- initial 2.5 million shares, via Prudential Securities Inc.
Digital Link Corp. -- initial 2.3 million shares, via Bear, Stearns & Co.
Empresas La Moderna SA -- initial 10.6 million American depositary shares, via Morgan Stanley & Co.
Esmor Correctional Services -- initial 833,333 shares, via Janney Montgomery Scott.
IGEN Inc. -- initial 2.6 million shares, via Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Istituto Mobiliare Italiano -- initial 11.7 million American depositary shares, equal to about 35 million shares, via Morgan Stanley.
Mainstream Data -- initial 2 million shares, via Piper Jaffray Inc.
Mapinfo Corp. -- initial 1.4 million shares, via Robertson Stephens & Co.
Morgan Stanley Africa Investment Fund -- initial 4 million shares, via Morgan Stanley.
Oncor Inc. -- 3 million shares, via Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
Pacific Gulf Properties -- initial 3.9 million shares, via Alex. Brown & Sons Inc.
ParcPlace Systems Inc. -- initial 2 million shares, via Robertson Stephens.
Post Properties -- 4 million shares, via Merrill Lynch.
Renaissance Communications Corp. -- initial 4.7 million shares, via Goldman Sachs.
Repap Wisconsin Inc. -- $400 million of two part debt offering via CS First Boston.
Repligen Corp. -- 2.5 million shares, via Lehman Brothers Inc.
Republic of Portugal -- 750 million ECU of 10-year global bonds via Morgan Stanley, Dresdner & Co. and Paribas Corp.
Rochester Telephone Corp. -- 5 million shares, via Salomon Brothers.
Scandinavian Broadcasting Systems SA -- 2.8 million shares, via Prudential Securities.
Stone Container -- 21 million shares, via Salomon Brothers.
Storage Equities Inc. -- 3 million shares, via PaineWebber Inc.
Walden Residential Properties Inc. -- initial 7 million shares, via Salomon Brothers.
Western Digital Corp. -- 6.1 million shares, via Kidder Peabody & Co.
Western National Life Insurance Co. -- initial 32.5 million shares, via Merrill Lynch.
Los Angeles Department of Water & Power -- $277 million of various 1994 electric plant revenue and revenue refunding bonds, via competitive bid.
Gwinnett County School District, Ga. -- $141.5 million of improvement bonds, via competitive bid.
Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority, N.Y. -- $665 million of general-purpose revenue bonds, via a Bear Stearns group.
San Diego -- $430 million of pension-obligation bonds, via a Merrill Lynch group.
New York State Dormitory Authority -- $230 million of revenue bonds, via a Goldman Sachs group.
New Hampshire Turnpike Authority -- $105 million of bonds, via a Bear Stearns group.
