When we arrived here, we thought we knew how to operate a business.
My husband came with extensive manufacturing, engineering, consulting and employee-relations experience.
And I had developed a business unit within a major American direct-sales corporation.
Still, within six months of our arrival we experienced a more than 100% turnover in our staff.
With the Hong Kong unemployment rate below 2%, employers often find they do not have the upper hand.
Here are some of the ways we've learned to cope.
-- Spare no expense hiring a reliable local office manager.
Your office manager will serve as your confidant, your whip and your conduit to the staff.
Local hires much prefer discussing problems with another local hire -- the idea of taking a problem to the boss is pretty daunting.
Office managers also alert you to local holidays and customs.
Take typhoons, for instance.
My husband and I aren't exactly familiar with what needs to be done when a typhoon signal No. 8 -- when everyone in Hong Kong runs for cover -- goes up.
When typhoon "Tasha," a No. 8, hit the territory last summer, our office manager told us what to do.
-- Give your office manager the tools to convince people that they would want to work at your company.
We still make the final decision on hiring.
But now our office manager conducts all preliminary interviews in Cantonese and English -- and does the background checks.
Well-briefed on the territory's labor market, the office manager speaks directly to the things that concern prospective employees most: making money and advancing through the company's ranks.
-- Design a package of perks to lure the best, most experienced employees into your fold.
We decided to pay salaries that ran 10% to 20% above market levels.
There is no greater temptation here than a well-paying job.
Workers will leave for $50 extra a month.
Also, we designed incentives, directly related to performance, that could lead to twice-yearly bonuses.
-- Create a positive working environment.
Engendering a friendly atmosphere in the office makes it harder for employees to wander from the fold.
Host occasional dinners and karaoke outings.
Sponsor an annual weekend trip to Macao.
Celebrate birthdays with a cake and maybe a lunch for the "whole gang."
This makes people want to stay and also lets you get to know your employees: the stuff from which loyalty is grown.
-- Never directly criticize an employee.
Our employees have proven overly sensitive to criticism, often no matter how constructively relayed.
We quickly discovered that indirectly communicating a problem is preferable.
If a certain order has been repeatedly mishandled by an employee, ask the office manager to speak with him about it.
If you decide to approach the employee directly, start by saying, "I need your help in improving this situation."
Don't worry -- he'll get your message.
But he'll also be reassured that you, the boss, think he can do the job.
-- Consider women, and younger people of both sexes, for management positions.
Women have excelled in our office, as have younger people.
Our office manager is a 32-year-old woman who, by her own reckoning, was given much more responsibility at her age than would have been possible at other firms.
Creating such opportunities is a great way to beat a loose labor market.
-- Strike a balance between not taking yourself too seriously and maintaining the respect of your employees.
Impatience in Asia is the worst of sins; one of my first local hires quit after I lost my cool.
Discretion and patience are the better part of maintaining a working office.
Ms. Lloyd is managing director of DD Traders Inc.
