Bank Negara, Malaysia's central bank, has a reputation that's unique among the world's monetary authorities: While it has the powers and responsibilities of a Federal Reserve, it's also known for the swashbuckling, speculative habits of a George Soros.
After years of roiling other peoples' currencies and financial markets for its own profit, the bank is getting a taste of its own medicine as it battles some of the world's biggest speculators for control of its own currency, the Malaysian dollar.
International hedge funds, banks, mutual funds and other high rollers have placed billions of U.S. dollars of bets on the Malaysian dollar in recent weeks, expecting the currency to rebound as much as 20% by summer.
Fidelity Investments and GT Capital Management Inc. are participating in the wager, as are currency specialists such as Ezra Zask Associates Inc.
Bank Negara is aggressively countering the speculators' bets, as it fights to keep control of its monetary policy and forestall the harm that an appreciating Malaysian dollar would do to exports.
Largely through cagey exercise of its central-bank powers, Bank Negara seems to have muscled its way to victory so far.
"There's no question that Negara is winning," concedes the head of proprietary trading at a big U.S. bank.
He and other traders estimate that speculators have already lost several hundred million U.S. dollars in the showdown since late December.
Bank Negara officials, meanwhile, wouldn't comment.
A critical weapon in the bank's arsenal has been its ability to abruptly rewrite Malaysia's banking rules in ways that leave foreign speculators high and dry.
Through moves that effectively curbed local banks' ability to trade with the speculators, and to pay interest on Malaysian-dollar deposits to foreign institutions, the central bank has pinioned many foreign investors in money-losing positions.
"Whenever you have a small currency in a controlled market where you hold most of the trump cards, you can load the dice and change the house rules as much as you like," says a former European central banker.
"You can make the speculators look like fools."
Bank Negara cut a swath through currency markets in the 1980s through what traders called its "lightning raids."
The central bank would routinely roil markets by coming in late in the afternoon with trades as large as $250 million at a time.
And because currency markets were smaller and easier to manipulate in those days, such bets were enough to move the price of some currencies 1% in a day.
Certainly, Bank Negara "knows how a speculator's mind works and, therefore, knows how to take the speculators out," says Ronald Layard-Liesching, director of research at Pareto Partners, a London international fund manager.
The latest clash has become so ferocious and the stakes have risen so high that even the biggest, most secretive hedge fund managers have begun cold-calling journalists in hopes of embarrassing the Malaysian central bank into backing off.
Among other things, they accuse Bank Negara of manipulating exchange rates to hide its own trading losses, and of sabotaging Malaysia's economy in the process.
The currency brinkmanship has had dire consequences for Malaysia's financial markets.
As the Malaysian dollar slid 8% in the past month, stock prices in Kuala Lumpur tumbled nearly 22%, wiping out nearly a third of the value of foreigners' stockholdings and reversing a large part of the stock market's torrid 1993 gains.
"There will come a time when the country needs friends, needs to attract foreign investment, and will have a harder time convincing investors that it's a level playing field," says Ezra Zask, who runs the Norfolk, Conn., currency-trading firm of the same name.
In the long run, the booming Malaysian economy, not speculators, is likely to undo Bank Negara's currency gamble.
The economy has expanded at an average 8.6% annual clip in the last six years.
The nation boasts a stable government that promotes economic growth; a large trade surplus; and an export market that is highly competitive, even by Asian emerging-market standards.
"It is our view that the fundamentals will still prevail and that, over time, the currency will appreciate relative to the U.S. dollar," says Thomas J. Steffanci, Fidelity's head of fixed-income in Boston.
On the strength of such views, huge amounts of money have poured into Malaysia from abroad in recent years.
Late last month, those capital inflows turned into a torrent after Bank Negara suddenly drove the Malaysian dollar down 5.6% over a six-day period beginning Christmas eve.
The central bank had executed a similar maneuver at the end of 1992, reportedly to mask currency losses and to increase the value of its foreign-exchange reserves in local currency terms.
Bank Negara did report losing the equivalent of about $3.6 billion during 1992, but some Western central bankers and traders suspect that those losses may have been as high as $6 billion and that Bank Negara hid their full extent by rolling them over into 1993.
Indeed, last Friday, Malaysia's finance minister, Datuk Anwar Ibrahim, acknowledged that the central bank would report additional foreign-exchange losses for 1993 but didn't disclose the amount.
After the Malaysian dollar's year-end tumble in 1992, the currency had bounced right back.
Expecting a similar rebound this time around, global speculators and investors started snapping up Malaysian dollars at the turn of the year to participate in the rally.
The upshot was that "what started originally as a simple year-end `window dressing' exercise" soon degenerated into a "show of strength between the central bank and foreign portfolio investors," according to a report from Lehman Brothers Inc. to clients this week.
At first, the recent bullish plays on the Malaysian dollar looked like a self-fulfilling prophecy.
In the first few days of 1994, the frenzy of speculative buying caused the currency to recover roughly half the ground it had lost against the U.S. dollar between Christmas and New Year's.
But in the first and second weeks of January, Bank Negara blind-sided these investors by changing Malaysia's banking rules and by driving domestic interest rates through the floor.
Traders say that at one point Malaysian interest rates for foreigners were actually negative.
"To get rid of Malaysian dollars, you had to pay someone to take them," says a trader at a U.S. bank.
Such rock-bottom rates meant that highly leveraged speculators -- who had, in effect, borrowed other currencies to buy Malaysian dollars -- started losing money on their positions, since they were paying more for their borrowings than they were getting back on their investments.
Helping Bank Negara to turn the tables were rule changes that forced Malaysian banks to increase their interest-free deposits at the central bank and penalized them for holding foreign funds that weren't trade-related or intended for investment in plant, equipment or stocks.
While Baring Securities Ltd. told clients that the measures were long overdue and necessary to curb the inflationary impact of the huge capital inflows from abroad, it added that they also "seem designed to punish the speculators."
Like a prize-fighter with an opponent on the ropes, Bank Negara moved to pummel speculators again Saturday: It forbade local banks from selling short-term fixed-income investments to foreigners and required domestic banks to park deposits from foreign institutions in non-interest bearing accounts at the central bank.
The move also sent the Malaysian dollar 1% to 1.5% lower against the U.S. dollar, further eroding the value of foreigners' Malaysian holdings.
"A significant number of people are trying to get out at the same time," says Mr. Zask.
But other investors are staying put.
Mr. Steffanci says Fidelity's Global Bond Fund and Short-Term World Income Fund continue to hold Malaysian dollar-denominated securities.
Christian Wignall, chief investment officer at GT Capital in San Francisco, says his firm regards the weaker Malaysian dollar "as a buying opportunity."
Meanwhile, bankers say that Bank Negara's own trading losses are forcing it to reform its gun-slinging ways.
Last week, the Malaysian finance minister disclosed that in early 1993, Bank Negara was told to stop its "extra trading activity."
Traders say that since then, the bank has pulled back, adopted a lower profile and shaken up its trading-room personnel.
"They are a lot more discreet than they used to be," says one London trader.
He added: "They are getting more sophisticated."
