The proverb says "a good name is rather to be chosen than great riches."
This belief is embedded in English and American notions of fairness, defamation, due process and presumption of innocence.
It is the premise for our justice system's hallmark that no individual can be pronounced guilty of a crime by his government unless he is indicted, tried and convicted.
Sadly, this principle was utterly abandoned in yesterday's release of Lawrence Walsh's final report on Iran-Contra.
For seven years, Mr. Walsh has been investigating the 1985 strategic initiative involving arms transfers to Iran and the unauthorized diversion of funds from this initiative to support Nicaraguan freedom fighters.
Yesterday, his report accuses -- falsely, unfairly and without proof -- Ronald Reagan, George Bush, former Attorney General Ed Meese and other former cabinet officials of a convoluted conspiracy.
Even the federal appeals court ordering release of the report sought to distance itself from a massive document disclosing secret grand-jury material and "rife with accusations of guilt of criminal conduct against persons never indicted or convicted."
The court agreed that Mr. Meese's and others' due-process arguments were "powerful" and of "considerable merit," and that release of this defamatory report would "compromise" the rights of these public servants.
How then could Mr. Walsh's musings be given judicial sanction?
The special panel, in a lengthy opinion, confessed that this independent counsel was an officer performing "an executive function almost entirely without oversight from the Executive Branch of government."
Moreover, as a result of the Supreme Court's 1988 decision in Morrison v.
Olson upholding the constitutionality of the independent counsel, Mr. Walsh could not be supervised by Congress or the judiciary.
In other words, this prosecutor answers to no one.
The court meekly concluded that "unfortunately for . . . the tradition of fairness," Mr. Walsh's false and unsubstantiated criminal allegations will be aired.
All the court could do was promise to remove its "imprimatur" from his charges so as to alleviate any "misconception" that these "unlitigated accusations" obtained judicial approval.
But fairness, and the due-process clause of the Constitution, entitle American citizens -- even those poor souls caught up in the political machinations of Washington -- to more.
We have clear and longstanding rules ensuring the secrecy of grand-jury proceedings and criminal investigations.
We have precedents that prohibit "hit and run" criminal reports that fail to indict and offer no authoritative forum for the vindication of the accused.
The Supreme Court held in 1971 that "where a person's good name, reputation, honor or integrity is at stake because of what the government is doing to him, notice and an opportunity to be heard are essential."
Earlier, the court insisted that this opportunity be more than "a mere gesture."
Yet the targets of Mr. Walsh's investigation were never given a proper opportunity to defend their reputations in these star-chamber proceedings.
As one of a team of pro-bono lawyers working on behalf of Mr. Meese, I am acutely aware of the injustice of the investigation and its published report.
Although Mr. Meese was charged with masterminding some pervasive coverup of the alleged Iran-Contra scheme, he was not allowed to read the entire report in advance of its publication -- or photocopy pages of the report that pertained to him.
He was denied access to court filings, including motions and papers that affected his rights.
He could not rely on grand-jury evidence or confront his accusers.
And he was told by the court he couldn't even talk to others with whom he was alleged to have conspired!
Thus, the independent counsel pronounced Ed Meese "guilty" of crimes while skipping such inconveniences as indictment and trial.
As the highest-ranking law officer in the country, the former attorney general could not have dreamed of carrying out such a biased prosecution.
The Walsh account is a bizarre blend of fantasy and contradiction.
It admits the investigation failed to uncover sufficient evidence to "justify prosecution" of some claims and that charges against Ed Meese could not be proved "beyond a reasonable doubt."
With a cost in excess of $40 million, this report represents a feeble attempt to divert attention from the independent counsel's dismal Iran-Contra conviction record and from his own culpability for violating rules of professional responsibility and federal law, including criminal procedural requirements and statutes protecting classified documents.
At the conclusion of the Watergate proceedings in 1975, Leon Jaworski, the "forefather" of independent counsels, issued a Watergate Prosecution Force Report.
In it he warned that the most important element in terms of our constitutional system of government "is the notion of fundamental fairness for those who, after investigation, have not been charged with any criminal misconduct."
Where no such charges are brought, it would be irresponsible, unethical and an abuse of power to issue a report suggesting criminal conduct on the part of an individual "who has no effective means of challenging" such allegations.
But the independent counsel law, as drafted in 1978 and re-enacted in the early 1980s, foolishly permits a final report to be issued even when no indictable wrongdoing has been discovered -- thus inviting accusation and innuendo and denying those accused a chance to respond in an authoritative forum.
For all Mr. Walsh's excessive zeal in these investigations, the law itself shares part of the blame for this last public assault on honorable men.
Those who have questioned Morrison v.
Olson and the constitutionality of independent counsels -- and those who now dispute the advisability of renewed independent counsel legislation -- have been vindicated by this report and the irresponsible investigation leading up to it.
The whole mess constitutes an abuse of power of the first order.
Even the special Iran-Contra court acknowledged that its decision to release this report "may be a dangerous precedent."
As Justice Scalia's dissent in Morrison v.
Olson pointed out, while many political power struggles wind their way through the judiciary clad in "sheep's clothing," the independent counsel is a wolf that "comes as a wolf."
Such unbridled prosecutorial power has no place in our American system of separated and divisible powers.
Mr. Bredemeier is general counsel for Landmark Legal Foundation, which represents former Attorney General Edwin Meese in the Iran-Contra proceedings.
