The U.S. government has begun initiatives dubbed "Showcase Germany" in a drive to integrate foreign and commercial policy more closely to support U.S. business abroad and spur job creation.
The program in Germany to coordinate diverse government resources to serve U.S. business interests and exports could become a global prototype for U.S. missions, said U.S. officials in Frankfurt to open a Business Information Center.
The Showcase effort aims to break down traditional bureaucratic barriers between consular, commercial and information officers to offer more direct services to businesses.
For example, consular staff have instructions to speed handling of passports for U.S. business people and U.S. visas for German business people.
The program also envisions a strategic approach to target German companies that are potential buyers of U.S. goods and to help U.S. exhibitors at trade fairs.
In a claim for an injury blamed on repetitive motion, a British woman was awarded $118,000, her union said, terming the Inland Revenue settlement the largest yet in the country.
The 47-year-old plaintiff was a typist at Britain's tax agency and developed arm pains in 1990; she retired last July and is registered as disabled.
Just three months ago, Britain's High Court rejected another injury claim linked to repetitive strain, ruling the term medically meaningless.
Last year, several settlements were paid in Britain to keyboard users claiming repetitive stress injuries, including $67,300 to a bank secretary.
Eastern German insurance workers agreed to a contract that will raise their wages to 87.5% of their western counterparts' pay by Sept. 1, HBV union and industry officials said.
The accord also provides older and long-term employees protection against being fired.
Insurers said the deal is more generous than industry pacts in the western region, because eastern workers face more serious economic problems, such as higher inflation, as reunification efforts continue.
West African food supplies are being threatened by swarms of locusts that can devour 100 tons of vegetation a day, United Nations officials said.
Senegal, Mauritania and southern Morocco have been hit hardest.
The damage from the desert locusts isn't expected to match that of a 1988 invasion that devastated crops in parts of Northern Africa.
But officials of the West African countries, donor nations and international institutions, meeting in Rome, worried that the locusts could push north to Algeria and south to Gambia, Guinea-Bissau and Guinea.
Several African nations have applied sprays to prevent swarms from breeding and advancing.
Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela postponed tomorrow's signing of a broad free-trade agreement, as Mexican authorities sought to resolve a rebel uprising.
The accord, which Mexico pursued to diversify its trade further beyond North America, covers farm goods, dispute resolution, illegal practices, safeguards, investment and intellectual property rights.
Since Mexico signed a pact with Chile in 1991, bilateral trade mushroomed 60%.
Separately, foreign investment in Chile last year soared 53% to $2.68 billion from a year earlier, mainly in industries and mining; 43% of the total came from U.S. investors.
CRIME CRIMPS U.K. SHOPKEEPERS
The British Retail Consortium said shopkeepers had $3 billion in losses last year from shoplifting and burglaries.
Crime slashed the small retailers' earnings almost 25%, the organization said, noting the situation prompted many stores to go out of business.
A study of 54,000 stores in the U.K. found that half had been vandalized, and the cost of security equipment to deter or combat crime soared.
Police recorded more than one million arrests involving small shops last year.
Corporate bankruptcies in Japan eased 0.9% to 14,041 in 1993, marking the first decline in three years, but a record 61% of the failures were caused by recession, a credit research organization said.
Of the total, 8,534 cases resulted from poor sales, slumping exports or other causes linked to Japan's three-year-old recession, Teikoku Data Bank Ltd. said.
The previous record level of recession-linked insolvencies was 59% in 1983; last year, they numbered 6,833, or 48% of the total.
Meanwhile, the number of bankruptcies caused by falling prices of land, stocks and dsecurities last year fell 30% to 989.
Companies that failed last year had total liabilities of $60.51 billion, an 11% drop from a year earlier.
The 1993 bankruptcy cases included 2,868 construction companies, up 0.8% from 1992; 2,591 manufacturers, up 12%; 2,995 wholesalers, down 3.5%; 2,292 retailers, down 6.6%; 518 transportation and communication concerns, up 14%; and 866 real estate companies, down 26%.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Britain's Royal Mint will issue a 50-pence coin to commemorate Allied forces' D-Day landing in France on June 6, 1944, during World War II.
A silver version of the coin will be priced at $35.80 and a gold one at $560 . . . .
Since public-sector doctors in Bangladesh began a nationwide strike a week ago over pay and health-care spending, hospital sources said more than 100 patients have died for lack of treatment.
