Lillehammer -- With the 17th Winter Olympics entering their final weekend, it's time for some reader participation.
Stand up and bounce on your toes.
Shake your left leg, then your right.
Swivel your hips and thump your chest with one arm after another.
Feel warmer?
That's how the tirelessly hospitable Olympic organizers, with help from a perky song called "Ol-Floke," chase away frostbite from spectators at the outdoor events when the temperatures plunge below zero.
Ol-Floke translates loosely as "movement of the arms to keep warm at the Olympics."
It was the Olympics, not the Oppland County Fair.
But sometimes it was hard to be sure.
Propelled onto the world stage for a fortnight, tiny Lillehammer scored a triumph by turning the international extravaganza into a cozy folk jamboree.
The town cleared miles of trails into the woods for parades of cross-country buffs with Norwegian flags sticking out of their backpacks and painted on their faces.
Hook-nosed trolls on stilts greeted fans at the freestyle arena.
An encampment of Vikings in full dress sold jewelry and jousted on tree stumps.
Children in baggy elf garb and folk costumes danced on little blond-wood stages between races.
The ubiquitous tots even donned skates to retrieve the bouquets hurled at Nancy Kerrigan and Tonya Harding (who brushed them away with a frown).
Behind all the Norwegian flag-waving and bell-ringing was a conflict rending the Nordic soul: how to be patriotic and egalitarian at the same time, how to enthusiastically root for your countrymen while still acting like good hosts.
On a day when the Norwegian athletes added to their medal haul, placing them temporarily atop the medals standings, Lars Skjolas sheepishly welcomed a roomful of foreign guests on behalf of Oppland County.
"The way {the Olympics} has started," he said, "we are almost embarrassed by all the Norwegian medals.
As hosts we are not supposed to win it all.
We hope it evens out a bit as we go along."
But not too much in favor of the Swedes, mind you.
Stoking the rivalry between the Scandinavian neighbors, one Norwegian newspaper delightfully reminded the Swedes of their (at that time) miserable performance with this medals-count headline: "Sweden equals Fiji."
Watching EuroSport on TV in the athletes' village, American Picabo Street suddenly saw the screen fill with . . .
Picabo Street skiing toward the silver medal in the women's Alpine downhill that very morning.
She beams with delight as a British sportscaster announces her name.
"You'll never meet a more cocky young lady!" the sportscaster declares.
Ms. Street raises her eyebrows.
"Wow, that was rude," she murmurs.
On TV the young American skier flies into the air over a jump.
"Often lets her arrogance and confidence get the better of her ability!" opines the sportscaster.
"God, the guy doesn't like me very much," says Ms. Street, wrinkling her nose with a frown.
On TV, Picabo Street roars ahead to glory.
In the village, Picabo Street silences the sportscaster with her own play-by-play.
"Stay low!
Stay low!
She's fighting!"
The TV image whizzes across the finish line.
Both Picabos throw their arms into the air.
Lillehammer's Liu Lan restaurant doesn't serve lutefisk (fish soaked in lye), nor Gudbandsdalsost (brown caramel-flavored cheese) nor reindeer pate.
But it may still have the strangest menu in town.
Have some frityrstekt sur-sot svinefilet (sweet and sour pork)?
Or, better yet, biff m/bambusskudd?
What's he doing by the road?
He's hitchhiking.
With upward of 100,000 visitors steaming in this town of 23,600 every day, it was hard to find a place of solitude.
There was one, though, just half a block off Lillehammer's main street, just around the corner from pin traders, sweater shoppers and cowbell-ringing ski fans.
At the KIO art gallery, there are 63 works of local Oppland County artists and zero visitors.
Just 18-year-old Thor Solberg, leafing through a newspaper while minding the door.
Soothing scenes in icy blues and grays fill the hushed, wood-planked gallery.
Mr. Solberg points to his favorite work, a smooth tusk-like sculpture called "Ein still song til havet," "A silent song to the sea."
The most hazardous place at the Olympics isn't the curve where speed skater Dan Jansen slipped or the plunging "reindeer ride" on the Alpine course at Kvitfjell.
It is the pavement outside the "Jump in" bar across from the Hakon Hall hockey rink.
A horrendous slick of ice there toppled streams of hapless pedestrians every day.
Odd Edgar Larsen, a local Coca-Cola Co. manager whose wife works at the "Jump in," recalls seeing at least 20 people tumble on the same spot.
Parading back from a cross-country race, 15-year-old Kjersti Nilsen stepped onto the deadly patch, skidded out of control and narrowly avoided falling.
Right behind her, Christian Bokke came clattering onto the pavement, his cross-country skis and backpack flying into the air.
"I'm used to the ice, but not that much ice," he said, smoothing out the Norwegian flag clipped to his overalls.
He also attributed his fall to a Norwegian brew of moonshine and coffee called karsk.
Freezing weather turned much of Lillehammer into a giant icy rink.
As the Games drew to a close the official count of broken bones stood at 210.
The casualties included at least four corporate guests fighting their way out of the Opening Ceremonies and U.S. Nordic combined athlete Tim Tetreault, who slipped in downtown Lillehammer and broke his left leg.
Mona Ingela Stanley of Lahti, Finland, was cheering her husband, Jari Mantila, in the Nordic combined event when she lost her footing and smashed her wrist.
"There's more snow in Finland," she muttered glumly while waiting for an X-ray in the surgery clinic at Lillehammer State Hospital.
Then there's the disco in the athletes village.
"Kultur-og fritidsaktiviteter" (culture and leisure activities), proclaims a notice on the door.
"Welcome to DISCOTHEQUE."
Inside, reggae music booms from the speakers, and green and red spotlights sway on the dance floor.
Along the walls are a ring of wood tables, each neatly laid with a candle centerpiece.
Thirty minutes into the party, there are just three people in the big room, who seem to have wandered in by mistake.
At one table, Miklos Gyulai, a Hungarian bobsled brakeman, sits quietly with Hungarian skier Agnes Litter.
"I'll just listen to the music and at 10 o'clock I'll go to bed," he says.
Marco Felder of the Liechtenstein luge team slouches alone at the next table, blankly tapping his fingers to the beat.
"I heard the good music.
So I'm just hanging around to listen for a little," he says.
Watching sadly from the doorway is Brit Heksem of the official culture and leisure staff.
She says the athletes are far more interested in playing pool in the game room next door.
"It hasn't been very crowded -- but I can hope," she says.
And pray.
After the Games, Lillehammer plans to convert the disco into a church.
