The Tomb of the Patriarchs, where Dr. Baruch Goldstein massacred dozens of Arab worshippers Friday, is both a synagogue and a mosque.
In the small Jewish prayer rooms, the arks containing the Torahs are pushed up against walls engraved with Arabic verses.
Up until Friday, there were a series of elaborate rules governing the two religions' use of the shrine, the basic principle being that to keep order it was necessary to keep the two groups apart.
Jews were not permitted in the building on Fridays, and prayed there mainly in the mornings.
Jews were allowed to sweep the floor, but they could not mop, because such cleaning would imply ownership.
All the elaborate rules were shot to bits on Friday, a warning for any peace-process negotiators who think they can paper over antipathies with elaborate compromises.
Hebron was the first Jewish city.
Abraham, the founder of the Jewish religion, is buried a few yards from where Goldstein emptied his machine gun, as are Isaac, Sarah, Jacob, Rebecca and Leah.
It was the first town Jews resettled when they regained access to the West Bank in 1967.
Goldstein lived in Kiryat Arba, a big suburban-style community up on a hill.
Down in the center of the city is a smaller branch of the settlement, a fortress with about 200 people built around an ancient synagogue.
They live cheek by jowl with 50,000 Arabs who detest them.
When they leave their front door, Palestinian kids can pelt them with rocks and then dash into the dark alleys of the neighboring marketplace.
Knifings and shootings have become monthly events.
Terrorists pass the settlers' cars on the road and spray them with machine gun bullets.
Two Fridays before the massacre, a group of Israeli soldiers were at their posts outside the Hebron community while shirt-sleeved settlers unloaded a few dozen rifles from a jeep.
Nearby, a father was pushing his daughter in a stroller.
These settlers often have eight or nine kids.
The vans that take the kids to school are frequently stoned.
One father said that his three-year-old would wake up at night screaming about the stones and snakes in his bed.
"I don't know about bringing kids into all this," one of the soldiers mused as he watched the strollers, and the guns being unloaded.
The soldiers don't say it openly, but it's clear that they suspect the settlers in Hebron are nuts.
It's a common suspicion in Israel, and Baruch Goldstein's massacre clinched the issue.
Yesterday, the Israeli government disarmed the settlers living in this community, essentially making them prisoners in their homes.
The larger influence of this event will be the way it taints the settler movement as a whole.
If all the West Bank settlements were like Hebron -- with no strategic importance and filled with fanatics -- then Israelis would have few qualms about dismantling them.
But most settlements are not like that, so up until now it's always been a tougher call.
They should title trips through the West Bank communities "The From Here You Can See Tour," because at each spot somebody announces, "From here you can see the planes land at Tel Aviv airport," or "From here you can see the road the Iraqi tanks would take in an invasion."
Many settlements have strategic importance.
And it is hard not to admire many of the settlers.
They devote their lives to something outside themselves, and take responsibility for their beliefs.
A disproportionate number of them have moved from the U.S., not only the demented ones such as Goldstein, but the virtuous ones found in Eli, Shiloh and Efrat.
It's a life slightly apart from the media and commercialism, devoted to family.
People feel that by building new places on these barren hilltops they are serving Judaism and Israel.
"You wash off the cosmetics.
You've got no TV.
You're doing something.
You've got the roar of history around you," says a settler on a hilltop overlooking Jericho.
"You come here and there's such a clear desire to help one another that you don't feel you're imposing on people," says a Princeton grad in Eli.
"We were brought up on the stories of the pioneers who built Israel.
I don't think what we've done in the past 10 or 15 years here is going to pale in any way shape or form," says Scranton-born Yechiel Leiter, a leader of the movement.
But in the end you can't be a pioneer just for the sake of being a pioneer.
And just because you are heroic doesn't mean your cause is realistic.
Survey results over the past few months indicate that many mainstream Israelis are saying farewell to the West Bank, while trying to preserve Israeli security in other ways.
More are regarding the settler movement as a failure.
The rage, shame and revulsion over the massacre gives Israelis another reason to want to cut their ties to the West Bank mess and get out.
If the settler movement is indeed a failure, it is because the rulemakers at the Tomb of the Patriarchs had the right impulse: The only way to keep order in the West Bank is to keep the two peoples apart.
Communities of Jews amid an Arab population involve Israel in the sort of perpetual irritation that a modern democracy is not willing to tolerate.
If the peace process is to work it can't be about true peace.
There will be no millenial end-of-history moment after which Israel will live with its neighbors they way Luxembourg lives in Europe.
It's better to think of the current process as a divorce.
Successful talks will be about where to build walls between the Palestinians and Israelis, and how to divide or manage the assets they both claim.
Few Palestinians want to live side by side with Israelis.
Rampant anti-Semitism, cultural differences, fear of Israeli economic domination are among the factors that will prevent intimate contact, as they have between Israel and Egypt.
Nor is it realistic to expect a democracy like Israel to have normal relations with the chaotic revolutionary-style regime that Yasser Arafat is constructing.
If nothing else, the Hebron massacre should end the era of illusions that followed the handshake on the White House lawn.
Naive businessmen were talking about Mideast Common Market.
That's not going to happen.
But at the end of the talks, there could be a situation in which Arab nations recognize Israel's right to exist.
Then all sides could do business when they have to, and ignore each other when they don't.
It's not peace, but it's better than what's been going on in Hebron recently.
Mr. Brooks is deputy editorial page editor of The Wall Street Journal Europe.
