THE COMPUTER industry's marketing battalions have been in full cry about the virtues of multimedia software -- PC programs featuring combinations of animation, sound, video, text and graphics.
In fact, the advent of multimedia on the computer has been a key reason for the surge in home computer sales, especially of models with sound capability and CD-ROM disk drives, the equipment needed to play the high-capacity platters on which most multimedia software is distributed.
I've recommended some such programs myself, and will continue to do so.
But it's time to reveal the dirty little secret of the industry marketers, the dark side of multimedia: In many cases, getting multimedia hardware and, especially, software, to run on a typical IBM-compatible computer can be a frustrating -- even impossible -- task.
A case in point: When a much-publicized multimedia health-care simulation program, SimHealth, was issued to great publicity late last year, at least one computer-savvy White House staffer and other users (including yours truly) couldn't get it to work without help from its publisher, Maxis.
The software required users to answer detailed technical questions about components of the computer, and some obvious choices didn't seem to work.
The program was rushed out before testing was completed, has been improved and Maxis no longer owns it.
But the syndrome is widespread.
Neither the basic PC hardware nor the underlying operating system software, which controls IBM-compatibles, was designed to produce singing, dancing video on the screen.
Modifying these systems for multimedia can mean altering the computer's configuration in ways that mess up the more mundane components, such as modems and word-processing software.
Some products require you to know highly technical terms to even understand their explanations of how they are changing your machine's configuration.
WORSE, THERE ARE some products that reconfigure key aspects of your computer without informing you at all.
In all these categories, game software is the worst offender.
So here's a brief rundown of the kinds of problems you may face in getting multimedia products to run on your computer.
In future columns on multimedia, I plan to withhold a favorable recommendation from any program that's too hard to install or interferes with other software.
(This discussion is limited to IBM-compatibles.
In general, users of Apple's Macintosh computers face very few of these problems, because a single company -- Apple -- makes both the hardware and the operating system and has made sound, graphics and video a priority.)
The first multimedia problem many IBM-compatible users encounter comes when they try to add sound capability and/or CD-ROM drives to older machines.
This requires opening the computer and installing at least one, or maybe two, flat cards jammed with chips into special slots.
In too many cases, this requires hours of maddening adjustment of tiny switches, or software settings, to prevent the new equipment from disabling things like modems and mice.
It's much better, if buying a new computer, to get one with stereo sound and a CD-ROM drive built in.
Even if you clear this hurdle, however, hours of aggravation await you as you try to install and run multimedia software, especially games and other programs that don't take advantage of Microsoft Windows, but rely on the older MS-DOS operating system.
I estimate that a third of the multimedia programs I've tested lately have caused problems.
ONE PROBLEM IS what the White House and I faced: programs that expect you to know the make and model of your audio and video circuitry, and even complicated configuration information about them.
One such program is the game Mad Dog McCree by American Laser Games.
Worse is software that requires you to make big changes in the basic configuration of your computer.
Some of these programs tinker with special configuration files, called "autoexec.bat" and "config.sys," in ways most users don't (and shouldn't have to) understand and that can goof up Windows or other programs.
Still other software refuses to run or even to install unless you somehow find and run a "driver" for something called "VESA" video, a new standard that most software doesn't use.
Another group of programs tries to seize all your computer memory, or utilize an older type of memory management that most modern programs don't use.
Among the products I've found guilty of one or more of these traits lately are a game called The 7th Guest, by Virgin Games; a program called Sid & Al's Incredible Toons, by Dynamix and some games from Sierra On-Line.
In some cases, software makers suggest you create a floppy disk, configured only for their products, and start your computer using the floppy instead of your hard disk.
That's not only cumbersome, it's a throwback to 1981 computing that wouldn't be necessary if the software worked better with standard machines and with Windows.
Some companies do a great job of this, including Knowledge Adventure and Medio.
Infocom's fascinating new game, Return to Zork, gave me no trouble.
Nor have any of the Microsoft multimedia titles.
So it can be done.
It's time the rest of the computer industry gets the message that computer users shouldn't have to be techies to use multimedia.
