Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said it will ask shareholders to approve a 10-for-1 stock split, making shares of its common affordable to more buyers.
Shares of the broadcasting and publishing company closed yesterday at $708.75, up $11.75, or 1.7%, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The split will be declared at a May 19 board meeting, pending shareholder approval.
Before the split, common shares of Capital Cities were the second-most-expensive on the Big Board.
Only Berkshire Hathaway Inc., whose chairman is Warren Buffett and which owns 13% of the 15.3 million Capital Cities shares outstanding, is more expensive.
Berkshire Hathaway closed yesterday at $15,800 a share, up $150.
Many Wall Street investors and some executives inside Capital Cities have been pushing for the split for some time, as a way to make the stock available to more people, including company employees.
"If you want to have a wide shareholder base, that's also retail and not just institutional, you have to have a reasonably priced stock," said John Tinker, an analyst at Furman Selz Inc.
"A split is sometimes seen as gimmicky, as a way to get the stock up, but in this case, it's way long overdue."
The last time Capital Cities shares split was in 1978, before the company merged with ABC Inc. in 1986.
Analysts couldn't agree on the move's broader implications.
In a stock split, shares tend to rise, which would increase the company's value.
Some argued that would make a hostile takeover less likely by increasing the company's value, while others said it signaled it is looking to sell, and wants to get more for its shares.
Yet another theory circulating was that if the company was worth more, it could afford a larger acquisition.
Company management said in late 1992 that it would consider an acquisition of as much as $8 billion, but never completed such a transaction because it couldn't find anything with an acceptable price.
Instead, in a Dutch auction tender offer last December, the company spent about $690 million and bought back 1.1 million shares, at about $630 a share.
One million of those shares were from Berkshire Hathaway, which reduced its holdings to two million shares.
Capital Cities had hoped to repurchase as many as two million shares, but investors held back, betting that the stock would go higher, as indeed it did.
The company said it would continue to buy back shares on the open market.
In January, it repurchased 45,000 shares, at prices lower than $630 a share.
The split will make it easier for it to continue to buy back stock, with more shares outstanding.
