For many attorneys, it is the ultimate experience in legal advocacy: arguing a case before the U.S. Supreme Court.
"You walk into the building, and you see the courtroom is four miles high," says Philadelphia lawyer Stephen LaCheen.
"It's the bigs, it's the tops, and it takes your breath away."
But with nine justices in black robes looming down from a mahogany bench just a few feet from the lawyers' lectern, the encounters can also be bruising: Only a minute into his argument, Alfredo Parrish of Des Moines, Iowa, is abruptly told by the chief justice of the U.S. that he has flatly misinterpreted a major precedent.
It feels, Mr. Parrish says, "like someone punched me directly in the face."
The high court's oral arguments -- there will be about 100 of them this term -- are its only substantial public activity.
In a surprising number of cases, the arguments are a bust.
One explanation may be a change in who is doing the arguing.
In some periods in the past, small, elite groups of lawyers dominated Supreme Court advocacy.
But these days, if lawyers persuade the highest court in the land to hear their case, many can't resist the once-in-a-lifetime chance to argue before the justices themselves.
The result, says Harvard Law Professor Charles Fried, "is greater variability in the quality" of argument than is merited by the importance of the high court's business.
That's lawyer talk for: The arguments often aren't as good as they used to be.
Privately, Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas have told friends they noticed a drop in the quality of advocacy when they moved to the top court from the federal appeals court in Washington.
The most common reason attorneys run into trouble is that they arrive seemingly oblivious to what the justices expect from them.
Many newcomers "get here thinking the court worries only about fairness," says Supreme Court Clerk William Suter.
"But this isn't a big Judge Wapner's `People's Court'; you have to argue the specific jurisprudential question the justices agreed to decide."
Lawyer John Bisbee discovers this when he insists on complaining about how an Illinois hospital wrongly fired his client, a nurse, just because she complained to colleagues about management.
Unfortunately for Mr. Bisbee, the justices had asked him and opposing counsel to discuss the case's First Amendment implications, among other thorny legal questions.
"We didn't take this case to determine who said what to whom in the cafeteria," lectures Justice Anthony Kennedy.
Carl Lundberg, the chief counsel for South Carolina's parole board, gets even tougher treatment.
He has shown up for an oral argument with the sheepish admission that he had neglected until the day before to inform the justices of a legislative change that possibly made his appeal moot.
"You come in here with a four-and-a-half-month-old statute and present it to us the eve of argument," snaps Justice Harry Blackmun.
"You surely don't practice law that way in South Carolina, do you?"
"No, your honor," the lawyer replies, apologizing that he simply hadn't noticed the amendment earlier.
The justices go through the motions of hearing Mr. Lundberg's appeal, then dismiss it a few weeks later without even writing an opinion.
Some attorneys annoy members of the court by adopting too casual an attitude.
Attorney Martin Seneca, a Reston, Va., Indian-law expert, tells the justices that one way to reach their decision in a case about the boundary and jurisdiction of a Utah Indian reservation "is to look at the tremendous amount of work that has been done" by the lower courts and "say, `Hey, this thing has already been decided, it's already been worked.' "
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor isn't amused.
She notes tartly that since the Supreme Court itself might like to analyze the case, perhaps Mr. Seneca ought to offer some thoughts on the legal merits.
But despite further prodding from other justices, he resists.
The justices, he concedes afterward, weren't happy about his approach.
"They beat up on me."
Some justices hardly ever ask questions at oral hearings.
Justice Blackmun worried in a recent interview on ABC-TV's "Nightline" that people perceive him as "just sitting there like a bump on a log."
But he quickly added: "At least I'm a little more talkative than Justice Thomas," who almost never says a word.
But occasionally justices have so much to say that the attorneys can hardly get a word in edgewise.
Monica Foster, an Indianapolis attorney, has barely begun an argument on behalf of a convicted killer on Indiana's death row when Justices O'Connor and Ruth Bader Ginsburg raise questions about jury procedures.
Justice Scalia notes that if juries were required to return a verdict on every count, many trials would end in deadlock.
Before Ms. Foster can react, Justice John Paul Stevens observes that juries "are normally instructed to return a verdict on every count.
You don't say, `Just do one count and go home for the evening.' "
Back and forth goes the exchange on the bench until the red light on the lectern flashes on, signaling that an attorney's 30 minutes are up.
"Thank you, Ms. Foster," Chief Justice William Rehnquist intones.
Then he adds: "I think you did very well in the four minutes that the court allowed you."
Ms. Foster leaves a bit puzzled, since the court itself appointed her to argue the case.
"They wanted me to come to Washington," she says, "but then they didn't seem to listen very much."
Oral arguments don't necessarily determine results, of course.
Some lawyers even say that the arguments don't matter at all because the justices have already made up their minds based on written briefs.
That's wrong, according to private comments by several justices.
Chief Justice Rehnquist has written that "in a significant minority" of cases, he leaves oral arguments "feeling different about the case," if rarely changing his views completely.
Mr. Suter, the court clerk, a few years back began offering group tutorials on basic etiquette for the uninitiated.
Among his tips: "When the justices ask for a `yes' or `no' answer, give it to them."
Yet, many lawyers arrive unprepared even for predictable queries.
One of Chief Justice Rehnquist's favorites is: "What authority do you have for that proposition, counsel?"
Often, counsel has none.
One consolation for the harried advocate is that rough treatment at oral arguments doesn't always foreshadow defeat.
Mr. LaCheen, the lawyer from Philadelphia, takes a lot of flak when he passionately insists that even though his clients, an Oregon couple convicted of money-laundering, evaded federal currency-reporting requirements, they did so with "noncriminal motives."
Seemingly most skeptical is Justice Scalia, who notes that Congress can pass criminal laws without requiring a bad motive, especially "if in the vast majority of cases, it's going to be picking up people who do have some nefarious motive."
Thundering with indignation, Mr. LaCheen declares: "I don't think that we've gotten to the point where we don't mind convicting innocent people because we're going to get some guilty people with the same act!"
"What innocent?"
Justice Scalia fires back.
"They violated the law."
"They didn't knowingly violate the law," the attorney insists.
Last Monday, the court ruled 5-4 in favor of Mr. LaCheen's clients -- because they hadn't been found to have knowingly violated the law.
Justice Scalia joined the majority opinion written by Justice Ginsburg.
While most major-studio executives have avoided putting the subject of AIDS on the big screen, convinced it would amount to box-office poison, TriStar Pictures took the risk and stellar returns are pouring in.
"Philadelphia," a drama in which Tom Hanks plays a gay lawyer who is fired because he has AIDS, was the No. 1 movie at the nation's theaters over the weekend, charting an estimated three-day gross of $12.1 million.
"Everyone involved with `Philadelphia' wanted very much to make a film that would play in every city and every town across America," says Marc Platt, president of TriStar, a unit of Sony Corp.'s Sony Pictures Entertainment.
"It seems as though that goal has been achieved."
The movie received mixed critical reviews.
Even in the gay community, which has criticized Hollywood for failing to do a film on AIDS, some have attacked "Philadelphia" as too timid.
The film had been playing at just four theaters in New York, Los Angeles and Toronto since Dec. 22 in a distribution strategy called platforming.
Studios typically platform tough-sell films by opening them in a handful of big cities.
They hope the "buzz" created in the bigger markets then travels to the rest of the country and builds anticipation.
In this case it worked, and even frigid temperatures in much of the country didn't damp ticket sales.
"Philadelphia" jumped to 1,245 theaters on Friday and posted an impressive per-screen average of $9,735.
TriStar said the box-office take was the largest-ever January movie opening, topping "Born on the Fourth of July."
That film had opened in a few theaters at the end of 1988, before expanding screens early in 1989.
Another tough-sell movie, Steven Spielberg's Holocaust epic "Schindler's List," also is finding success with a platform release.
But Universal Pictures is taking a slower approach.
"Schindler's List" opened Dec. 13 in 25 theaters, expanded to 172 on Jan. 7 and on Friday widened to 253 theaters.
"Schindler's List" was the No. 10 movie at the box office this past weekend, selling about $3 million in tickets, or a per-screen average of $11,800.
That's a very healthy gross, considering the small number of theaters playing it.
The picture's length -- well over three hours -- also means that most theaters can schedule only three showings a day.
Fred Mound, president of distribution at Universal, says he doesn't know how many theaters will play "Schindler's List" at its widest release.
He says the plan is to add 75 theaters Friday, and perhaps be up to 500 or 600 theaters by Feb. 4.
The big day for "Schindler's List" will be Feb. 9, the day Academy Award nominations are announced.
The film is expected to garner many nominations, and the studio likely will widen its release soon after.
But Universal has a major technical constraint.
Where studios usually can get as many as 200 to 300 prints of a film made in a single day, Universal only has been able to get eight to 10 prints of "Schindler's List" a day.
The reason: The movie was shot in black and white, but there are brief scenes shot in color, which must be inserted by hand into each print.
Universal, a unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s MCA Inc., is taking another picture on a slow route: "In the Name of the Father," starring Daniel Day-Lewis and Emma Thompson.
The movie, about a father and son wrongly convicted of an Irish Republican Army bombing, is playing at 67 theaters and had the highest per-screen average of any current film this past weekend, at $12,500.
