The Joe Camel cigarette campaign is giving antismoking advocates a new target: "Josephine Camels."
For the first time since the campaign for Camel cigarettes was introduced in 1987, female characters are being used in an effort that some critics call a blatant attempt to broaden the traditionally male brand's appeal to more women smokers.
The new campaign is an audacious move by RJR Nabisco Holdings, parent of Camel's maker, R.J. Reynolds.
It comes as the Federal Trade Commission is considering a ban on the Joe Camel character.
The FTC staff recommended the ban in August, after criticism that the character attracted underage smokers.
The five commissioners haven't made a ruling, and an FTC spokeswoman yesterday declined to comment.
And the likelihood of action diminishes with each day.
The new four-page, full-color, fold-out ads feature Joe's Place, a happening duplex bar, crowded with male and female camels shooting pool, playing darts and cards, schmoozing and smoking or holding lit cigarettes.
The ads started appearing this week in magazines such as People, Us, Glamour, Redbook and Sports Illustrated.
The ads "are frightening," says Sidney Wolfe, director of Public Citizen's health research group in Washington, which first complained about the campaign five years ago.
"Now female camels are being used to lure more young women to `Light up the night' {Camel's slogan} and eventually die."
Joe Camel is expected to be discussed in a report on smoking and health that the U.S. Surgeon General's office is to release next Thursday.
According to the spokesman, Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders is expected to corroborate a 1991 American Medical Association finding that some cigarette ads appeal to youngsters.
"The surgeon general expresses concern on focusing tobacco advertising on the youth as a means of replacing its lost customers," says the spokesman.
The Joe Camel character, which wears shades, a blazer and a T-shirt, has been very popular with young males.
An official says the surgeon general's staff is considering drafting a letter to the FTC asking the agency to take action on Joe Camel.
Yesterday, former Surgeon General Antonia C. Novello said: "I wish the FTC had acted on the recommendation.
Then we wouldn't be seeing female camels, and old Joe Camel might have been gone as well.
Who knows?
It is my hope that the introduction of a female camel will be the straw that breaks the camel's back of public and policy opinion."
An R.J. Reynolds spokeswoman dismisses criticism that the character attracts underage smokers.
While the new ads refer to Camel catalog merchandise, they note purchase is restricted to smokers 21 and older, she says.
"Also, no one has put forth credible research to back up accusations about our ads attracting teenage smokers."
Reynolds has studies, she adds, that show that despite a high awareness of Joe Camel among children, "kids still don't like smoking.
And that should be their position.
We don't want them to want to smoke."
Reynolds says its responsibility is to its shareholders, and it would be "wrong to interrupt" an ad campaign solely because of criticism from antismokers.
While Camel's market share has fluctuated, the Joe Camel campaign has helped prevent a drastic slip.
Last year -- like many premium-priced cigarettes -- Camel lost share, dropping to 3.9% from 4.1% in 1992, according to Wheat First Securities.
But it still holds its No. 8 ranking in sales among U.S. brands.
Camel's advertising spending surged 75% to $37.5 million from January to November 1993, the most recent figures available from Competitive Media Reporting, which tracks ad spending.
A year earlier, Camel spent $21.4 million.
In comparison, Marlboro, the No. 1 brand, cut its ad spending 16% to $65.5 million from $77.6 million.
The introduction of female camels into the ad campaign seems "natural," says John Mezzina, chairman and executive creative director of Mezzina/Brown, the New York ad agency that created the controversial icon.
"They might take some people by surprise," he says.
"But some could think Joe is like Michael Jordan, in that he is too cool and unapproachable.
This ad is about inclusion."
The campaign is in conjunction with a Camel Cash program.
It encourages smokers to collect Camel packs and redeem them for merchandise with the Camel or Joe's Place logo, including baseball caps, cigarette cases and lighters.
Another major merchandising effort by Marlboro expires at the end of the month.
A spokeswoman for Philip Morris, which makes Marlboro, says the brand will gear up another campaign shortly.
Meanwhile, there are no plans for Joe Camel to slow down.
Reynolds recently published its fifth Camel catalog.
The Reynolds spokeswoman says the Camel Cash program "is very successful at attracting adult smokers of competitive brands and switching them to Camel."
And everyone at Joe's Place seems to be having a good time, including a hunky male camel with his leg in a cast, who is getting his back rubbed by a female camel in a T-shirt and miniskirt.
There is a crowd dancing to the blues quartet the Hard Pack, which has appeared in previous Camel ads.
There is one odd element, at least at first glance.
Anyone who is drinking is imbibing a clear liquid.
And H20 labels are on the taps behind the bar, instead of beer logos.
Is the message that smoking cigarettes at Joe's Place is acceptable, but drinking alcohol isn't?
Mr. Mezzina pauses.
"No," he says after a moment.
"They're camels.
What else would they be drinking?"
Seagram Co. assigned an estimated $10 million in advertising to Omnicom Group's TBWA Advertising, expanding the role of the Absolut-vodka agency less than a month after it landed on Seagram's roster.
TBWA will create ads for Godiva liqueur and new products, including Coyote tequila.
Godiva and Coyote previously were handled by Wells Rich Greene BDDP.
TBWA said combined billings were $10 million.
The new work comes less than a month after TBWA joined Seagram's stable of agencies, when Seagram acquired distribution rights to Absolut vodka from Grand Metropolitan's Carillon Importers.
Seagram's other agencies include Omnicom Group's DDB Needham and WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather.
Seagram is reviewing the Glenlivet Scotch whisky account, currently at WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather.
Ogilvy, DDB Needham and TBWA are pitching for it, industry executives said.
Glenlivet billed about $3.5 million in 1993, according to Competitive Media Reporting.
Seagram has been shuffling other assignments, too.
Late last year, it moved the $35 million Martell cognac account to Ogilvy from DDB Needham.
Gap Inc.'s Banana Republic tapped Arnell Group to handle its account, the agency said.
Estimated 1993 billings are $5 million.
The account was previously handled in house.
Peter Arnell said two Arnell Group employees would work from Banana Republic's San Francisco premises "to establish a relationship that is closer to that of a partnership than a traditional clientagency relationship."
Gap officials didn't return phone calls.
Ad Notes. . . .
KERRIGAN SPOT: Olympic figure skater Nancy Kerrigan starts appearing tomorrow in inspirational commercials from Reebok International and agency Leo Burnett.
Reebok has had bad luck airing ads starring Olympic athletes before.
Two years ago, it started hyping a pair of track stars months before the Games: One failed to make the team, the other won a bronze medal.
A company spokesman said Ms. Kerrigan didn't balk at appearing in the spot before the women's competition next week.
WHO'S NEWS: Paula Forman, executive vice president and head of the Procter & Gamble business at Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, was wooed away to another Procter shop, Wells Rich Greene BDDP.
Ms. Forman, age 45, was named executive vice president overseeing Wells Rich's consumer products accounts, including Procter, Reckitt & Coleman and Seagram Co. . . .
Sony Corp.'s Sony Electronics unit named Marina Hahn vice president of advertising.
She succeeds Jeffrey Brooks, who resigned as senior vice president of advertising on Monday, Sony said.
Ms. Hahn, who didn't want to disclose her age, was until recently director of advertising for PepsiCo's Pepsi-Cola Co.
BURNETT: Leo Burnett, Chicago, said it has formed a "nonequity affiliation" with Vietnam Advertising Co., a privately held agency based in Ho Chi Minh City.
Burnett said Vietnam Advertising will handle marketing and media in Vietnam for Burnett's multinational clients.
