The Securities and Exchange Commission, pursuing its new activist role in investor litigation, urged a federal judge to slash the fees sought by plaintiffs' lawyers in a big class-action settlement involving Prudential Securities Inc.
The SEC argued in a letter that plaintiffs' lawyers shouldn't receive the roughly $27 million they're seeking in the $90.7 million cash accord.
That's because class-action counsel earlier had advocated an "inadequate" settlement proposal that subsequently was yanked by Prudential amid heavy criticism by state regulators, the SEC said.
The unusual move by the SEC reflects the new tone set by SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt in a January speech to securities regulators.
Mr. Levitt said at the time that the agency would consider intervening in cases that it deemed frivolous, including advising courts on the appropriateness of proposed settlements.
The stance in the Prudential matter is a major test of the SEC's new resolve, and underscores its increased focus on issues involving individual investors.
Legal fees are criticial for small investors in such class-action cases: The less money lawyers receive in fees, the more cash the 115,000 Prudential investors will get.
While outside parties often attempt to intervene in class-action cases, objections by the SEC traditionally carry more weight, because the agency is the nation's top securities cop.
"This is one of the rare instances that I'm aware of where regulators actually stepped in and said: `Wait a second, this is not just a candy store for attorneys,'" said one lawyer familiar with the case.
At issue are 35 Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships, the largest series of partnerships offered in the 1980s by Prudential, a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
In January, a New Orleans federal judge approved the $90.7 million settlement in the case, which was brought by investors who say they were misled on the risks and returns of the partnerships, which have sunk to half their original $1.45 billion in value.
What led to the fracas over fees was Prudential's original settlement offer in the case.
In that proposal, Prudential offered $37 million in cash, plus interests in a reorganized partnership.
Class-action counsel sought $21 million in fees under that settlement proposal, which Prudential later withdrew amid heavy criticism by state regulators and investors.
"Support for that inadequate proposal would seem more properly to lead to a reduction, rather than an increase, in fee awards," wrote SEC General Counsel Simon M. Lorne in the letter.
Moreover, the SEC is questioning why class-action counsel now are seeking 30% of the $90.7 million cash settlement -- when they sought only 25% of the total estimated value of the earlier proposal.
"Although we understand that counsel may have spent more time and effort on the case in the intervening months between the withdrawal of the first settlement proposal and the submission of the second, it is not clear to what extent counsel's efforts, as opposed to those of the court and the state regulators, added value to the first settlement offer," the SEC letter said.
Not surprisingly, plaintiffs' lawyers bristled at the SEC objection.
They said the 30% fee request is justified because of the additional work that went into the later accord, among other things.
And they said that they added lawyers between settlement proposals, including those who had objected to the earlier offer.
"We have added another seven lawyers -- all of whom claim to have put in time and made a significant contribution," said Edward Grossmann, the lead plaintiffs' lawyer in the class-action case.
"When all is said and done, the previous objectors will wind up with more than 5% of the fees," Mr. Grossmann said.
It's unfair to label the initial settlement offer inadequate, Mr. Grossmann said.
"The SEC, in effect, is wrong by saying that one deal was so much more valuable than the other," he said.
"The first deal was a good settlement."
The SEC review was prompted by criticism of the Prudential settlement by California securities regulators.
In a letter last month to federal Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr., who is overseeing the case, California Securities Director Gary Mendoza said the class-action lawyers didn't deserve to base their fees on the $90.7 million settlement, because they didn't play a big role in crafting the accord.
Indeed, he said, the lawyers battled with state regulators about their objections to the earlier proposal.
Persecution for union-organizing activities can qualify an individual for political asylum, a federal appeals court ruled.
In a rebuke to immigration officials, the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New York said that a Guatemalan union official was improperly denied asylum because of a technical reading of the law that narrowed eligibility to those persecuted for exclusively political reasons.
Vincente Osorio, a member of the executive committee of a municipal workers' union in Guatemala City, had argued that he was persecuted for both political and economic reasons.
He had presented evidence that many of his close colleagues had been murdered by the Guatemalan government in connection with union-organizing efforts, and that the three-year-old son of another had been shot and paralyzed.
In reaching its decision, the threejudge panel found a pattern of persecution by the Guatemalan government and dubbed it "horrific" and "rivaled in this hemisphere" only by El Salvador.
To deny Mr. Osorio asylum because his activities were essentially "economic" would be like denying former dissident Alexander Solzhenitsyn political asylum because his "dispute" with the Soviet Union was essentially "literary," the appeals court concluded.
In Washington, Edmond Mulet, the Guatemalan ambassador to the U.S., said he hadn't seen the opinion.
But he said Guatemala has taken steps to eliminate political persecution since its civilian government was instituted in 1986.
Mr. Osorio contends that he was persecuted up until the time he left Guatemala for the U.S. in 1989.
"You can't overcome a tradition of violence and confrontation overnight," the ambassador said.
"Maybe he was right to come to the U.S. at that time . . . but now it doesn't apply."
Immigration experts said the decision reflected an increased willingness on the part of federal appeals courts to review and reverse narrow interpretations of eligibility for political asylum by the Bureau of Immigration Appeals, a part of the U.S. Justice Department.
Several circuits have indicated such a willingness, but only the Ninth Circuit, which covers California, had actually done so before.
A U.S. Supreme Court decision last year left several related questions unanswered.
Arthur Helton, a New York attorney with the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, which submitted a brief in support of Mr. Osorio, said his group has asked Attorney General Janet Reno to issue a broader definition of political asylum to avoid "piecemeal litigation" of the issue.
The group also urges the creation of a process to review asylum applications that is separate from the immigration process.
Canada, Germany and France, among other countries, already have separate immigration and asylum processes, Mr. Helton said.
The government said it hasn't decided whether to appeal the decision.
In the next few weeks, the Justice Department intends to issue proposed revisions to the asylum process.
(Osorio vs. Immigration and Naturalization Service, Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, New York, 934115)
Law Note . . .
NO-SHOW IN DELAWARE: Houston lawyer Joseph Jamail declined to respond to the Delaware high court's request that he explain why he shouldn't be banned from practicing in the state.
Last month, the court lambasted the successful plaintiffs' attorney for what it called his "extraordinarily rude, uncivil and vulgar" conduct toward a Delaware attorney.
The court had asked Mr. Jamail to respond by Monday, but didn't say what steps it would take next.
Mr. Jamail, who couldn't be reached for comment, previously defended his actions and said he had no interest in practicing in Delaware.
Mr. Jamail's alleged bad behavior occurred during a deposition for a lawsuit in connection with the Paramount Communications Inc. takeover battle.
Margaret A. Jacobs and Wade Lambert contributed to this article.
