The Group of Seven industrialized nations huddled to hash out employment issues, shifting their focus from the macroeconomic topics that have dominated past discussions.
President Clinton, the only head of state to attend the meeting here, urged foreign officials to "summon their collective energy and intellect" to focus on ways to create jobs.
After the first day of talks, U.S. officials were effusive.
"This will be looked back upon, I am convinced, as one of the most important turning points in the postwar dialogue," Vice President Al Gore said last night.
"We are now opening a brand-new chapter by focusing on the one issue of the most importance" to the G-7.
Labor, economic, commerce and finance ministers debated job flexibility, entrepreneurial opportunities, training and unemployment.
While there was much agreement on the causes of job problemsmost countries agreed they were primarily the result of slow economic growth -- there was little agreement on how to resolve those difficulties.
High unemployment rates in Europe and Canada -- in many cases over 10% -- worry government leaders throughout the industrialized nations.
Many came here looking for solutions.
The Group of Seven is made up of the U.S., Canada, Japan, Britain, France, Germany and Italy.
"There is a real connection between a highly skilled work force and creating jobs," said Lloyd Axworthy, the Canadian minister of human resources development.
"Change is there and we can either guide it, help it and shape it or we can be intimidated by it."
Even officials from Japan, where unemployment is a skimpy 2.5%, see lessons to be learned from dialogue with their counterparts from other countries.
The Japanese unemployment rate "is low, that's true," said Kenji Nakano, a spokesman for the Japanese embassy in the U.S.
"But Japan can learn from other countries' experience and insight," particularly as the Japanese system of "lifelong employment" is beginning to fade.
U.S. officials are proud that the unemployment rate here has dropped to 6.5%.
But they fret that high wages are increasingly the domain of the college-educated, and that inflation-adjusted wages for those without degrees have declined.
"There's lots of little suggestions that can help us," Labor Secretary Robert Reich said.
For example, he was impressed by a British program of "jobs clubs," in which the long-term unemployed form networks to help each other find jobs, often with great success.
The conference could change the tone of future G-7 dialogues, delegates said.
"My instinct is that the structural issues such as employment and job training will be very much on the agenda in Naples," the Italian city where the next G-7 summit meeting will be held, said Robert Rubin, President Clinton's economic adviser.
Still, macroeconomic policies weren't far out of mind.
The U.S. and Japan, fresh from their recently resolved dispute over cellular phones, traded barbs over Japan's burgeoning trade surplus, which was pegged at $131.4 billion world-wide last year.
The Japanese must stimulate their economy to increase consumption of imports, President Clinton said.
But the Japanese, who unveiled a $140.3-billion stimulus package in February, prefer to wait to see whether that has enough of an impact.
Mr. Clinton, clearly targeting Germany, also urged European nations to cut interest rates.
But German spokeswoman Helga Schmid praised the German central bank as "doing a pretty good job."
The conference was designed in part as a forum for Mr. Clinton to lay out his broad vision for economic growth.
In his speech delivered at the lavishly refurbished Fox Theatre in downtown Detroit, Mr. Clinton urged American workers to embrace productivity gains that often require job cuts.
"We cannot turn away from the notion that modernization is the key to employment," Mr. Clinton said.
The Clinton administration is pushing several legislative proposals that it sees as helping workers embrace technological and productivity gains: a re-employment plan that would help move people between jobs, a healthcare plan that wouldn't tie people's insurance to specific jobs and a streamlined job-training system that would enhance skills.
Few expect the conference here to produce tangible shifts in the world's economies.
There won't be any formal communique, but instead a general summary at the end of the meeting today.
But by putting the issue on the front burner, administration officials hope to show the American public that they still care about jobs, the cornerstone issue of the 1992 election.
And they hope to show the world that focusing on jobs can lead to broader economic changes.
That theory appears to be catching on.
The G-7 talks "may move from just talking about broad macroeconomic issues" to such topics as how to create jobs and train workers, Canada's Mr. Axworthy said.
