Congressional pressure on the Federal Reserve System to become more efficient is beginning to have effects: Some of the Fed banks, particularly the one in Cleveland, are starting to streamline themselves.
The 12 regional banks of the system are charged with clearing checks, moving money and helping the seven-member Federal Reserve Board in Washington determine monetary policy.
House Banking Committee Chairman Henry B. Gonzalez wants more of the Fed's chores to be turned over to commercial banks, which he considers more efficient.
Already, commercial institutions are performing part of the check-clearing function that was considered the sole domain of the Fed.
The Treasury Department, meanwhile, has proposed legislation that would strip the Fed of many of its bank regulatory duties and give the tasks to a new federal agency.
If Rep. Gonzalez and the Treasury Department have their way, the Fed banks would have a lot less to do.
"If we don't have a hand in bank operations and regulation," contends Jerry L. Jordan, president of the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank, "we can't do an effective job in monetary policy."
So it is that Mr. Jordan is pressing a counterattack -- and trying to make his bank operate more like a commercial institution.
The Cleveland bank has introduced incentive programs for employees and training programs to increase worker efficiency.
Where the bank now ships crates of paper in support of its check-clearing function, it hopes soon to be sending the information electronically.
Then there are the layoffs.
The bank has about 1,400 employees, and though Mr. Jordan won't say how much the payroll has been cut, he points to attrition and layoffs of administrative staff.
Management is leaner, too.
When Mr. Jordan took office 18 months ago, the Cleveland Fed had 62 officers.
Now there are 48.
(The Fed regional banks are technically owed by the banks in their districts, although, in effect, the profits go to the Treasury.)
Trying to increase efficiency to compete with commercial banks for dollars has meant drawing on the expertise of the business executives who serve as the bank's directors.
Directorships at some Fed banks had been seen as largely honorary positions -- so much so that the Federal Reserve Board staff in Washington felt it had to police the regional banks, taking on a role it felt the directors weren't handling properly.
Mr. Jordan boasts of involving directors more in Cleveland operations.
The efforts have paid off in Cleveland.
Seventeen years ago, the Federal Reserve System ranked the Cleveland bank dead last among the 12 regional banks in efficiency.
Last year, it ranked Cleveland first.
Other Fed banks are also beginning to respond to competitive pressures sweeping banking.
The Fed bank in Richmond, Va., is one.
Jimmie Monhollon, first vice president, says his bank will launch an early-retirement program later this year and, he says, "many of these people won't be replaced."
He adds: "We're automating everything that we can automate."
