At Blob's Park last November, amid servings of German bratwurst and beer, about 100 party guests cheered a man dancing with his wife to the music of a polka band.
It was Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackmun, looking dapper in an ascot and navy-blue ultrasuede blazer and celebrating his 85th birthday.
The oldest justice is doing some lively stepping at the Supreme Court these days as well.
Justice Blackmun, who in 1987 was rumored to be stepping down when a recurrence of prostate cancer sent him to the Mayo Clinic, has had a second wind -- and is clearly enjoying the limelight.
The most notable example came last month when he jolted the long-running debate over the death penalty with an emotional 22-page dissent stating that after decades of reflection he could no longer vote to uphold any executions.
Mr. Blackmun, who regularly receives and reads a jailhouse newspaper, declared: "From this day forward, I no longer shall tinker with the machinery of death."
Some court watchers see his lone, passionate dissent against capital punishment as a sign that he is finally preparing to retire after this term after 24 years on the court.
He playfully told one friend over breakfast last month that "it's about time I get my stamp collection in order."
But Mr. Blackmun, who still works 12-hour days, in fact is now contemplating whether to stay another term or two to complete his journey from a seemingly conservative Nixon appointee to the court's most outspoken liberal.
Whatever he decides, it's clear he is out to make sure that people don't forget "Old No. 3" -- his self-deprecating reference to his having been President Nixon's third choice to fill a court vacancy in 1970 after the Senate rejected two other nominees.
Mr. Blackmun's burst of energy in his golden years contrasts sharply with some of his former colleagues.
Thurgood Marshall could barely walk in his latter years of service and watched television soap operas in his chambers.
An ailing William Douglas resisted pleas that he resign, and for a time shuttled between the court and his hospital bed.
Justice Blackmun declined to be interviewed for this article, but friends portray him as remarkably vigorous and upbeat.
When a recent conversation turned to an 1819 Supreme Court case involving Dartmouth College, the justice spontaneously broke into the Dartmouth football fight song, which he learned, along with other Ivy League favorites, as a member of the Harvard College Glee Club 65 years ago.
About his only concession to age is pushing the starting time of his mandatory law-clerk breakfast from 7:30 a.m. to 8:15.
He and his four young assistants dine every weekday morning at the same table in the court's public cafeteria, largely ignored by the early-bird tourists and court policemen sipping coffee.
The elderly justice still takes breaks in late afternoon to pedal an exercise bike in the court's basement gym.
He startles court staffers a fourth his age by striding quickly up and down the internal marble staircases of the classic Corinthian-style building.
"I've never seen him on an elevator," says Geoffrey Klineberg, a Blackmun law clerk last term.
On the court, associates trace his renewed vigor to a variety of causes.
One is the election of President Clinton and the turning of the legal tide in the abortion debate.
During the Bush administration, Mr. Blackmun, like many others, anticipated that Roe vs. Wade, the landmark abortion-rights ruling that he wrote in 1973, would inevitably be overturned.
"He was going to resign with his most important legacy on the Supreme Court shattered; it was depressing for him," says Pamela Karlan, a former Blackmun clerk who is now a law professor at the University of Virginia.
But in June, 1992, Roe survived a 5-4 court vote.
"It had a big effect on him when he saw the center of the court would hold," says Norval Morris, a University of Chicago criminologist and a friend of the justice's.
Five months later, Mr. Clinton won the White House and pledged to appoint only abortion-rights supporters to the high court.
Suddenly, Justice Blackmun's central worry had evaporated.
The Republican octogenarian and Mr. Clinton have been cordial acquaintances since the mid-1980s as a result of shared friends in Arkansas legal circles.
A longtime participant in Renaissance Weekend, the elite New Year's gathering at Hilton Head, S.C., Justice Blackmun received star treatment when the event became a Clintonite celebration in 1992.
The young president emotionally introduced the old jurist when they were co-chairmen of a wide-ranging discussion at the retreat that year entitled "Changing of the Guard."
Another factor that has energized Justice Blackmun is his authority as the most-senior justice to assign opinion-writing duties when he and Chief Justice William Rehnquist are on opposite sides of a case.
With liberal giants like William Brennan and Justice Marshall gone, he has taken it on himself in opinions to remind the court of the human consequences of its actions, a habit that enrages conservative critics.
Roger Clegg of the National Legal Center for the Public Interest, a conservative legal group, accuses Justice Blackmun of embodying "an arrogant belief that judicial power can and should be used to right all wrongs, whether or not the judiciary actually holds the power it is exercising."
The critics sometimes include Justice Antonin Scalia, who believes that his colleague substitutes sentiment for legal reasoning and acts more like a politician than a jurist.
In a biting response to the death-penalty dissent, Justice Scalia said that no matter how "passionate or deeply held," opposition to capital punishment lacks "any textual or historical support" from the Constitution.
Nonetheless, the members of the court seem to view their elder statesman with affection.
He has developed a particularly warm relationship with Justice David Souter, who shares with him a close bond with retired Justice Brennan, whom Mr. Souter replaced.
Justices Blackmun and Souter were the only members of the court who paid condolence calls on the frail, retired justice on the day that his liberal comrade-in-arms, Justice Marshall, died last year.
Having long been impressed by federal judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg's sharp mind, Justice Blackmun was pleased when President Clinton chose her last year to replace the retiring Byron White.
But Justice Blackmun now worries that the court's newest member, together with Justices Scalia and Souter, have gotten too loquacious during oral arguments of cases, stifling the lawyers.
Justice Blackmun, who doesn't say much during arguments, has taken to keeping a tongue-in-cheek scorecard of who asks how many questions in each case.
He also shared with Justice Ginsburg advice given to him early in his high court career by the late Justice Hugo Black: "If you don't ask many questions, you won't ask many foolish questions."
But if she got the hint, a smiling Justice Blackmun later reported to friends, she ignored it.
