With his two new Hollywood studios in the bag, Ted Turner is on the prowl again.
He wants a network more than ever.
He says he is interested in new business alliances.
And for the first time ever, the restless chairman, chief executive and founder of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. says he is prepared to give up his 51% voting control of the company to accomplish those goals.
He would now part with a sizable chunk of his stock "in a blue minute," he says.
"The next move I make I'll be below 51%."
Indeed, the man who was considering breaking up his company a year ago now appears back in it for the long term, even if it means he has a smaller stake.
Now 55 years old and married to actress Jane Fonda, Mr. Turner's distinctions are many and varied.
A winner of the America's Cup in his yacht Courageous in 1977, and the owner of the Atlanta Braves, he started his business career with a billboard company at age 24 and built it into a broacasting empire that grew to include Cable News Network.
As he discusses the future, 11 TV screens in his spacious office beam out programming from his own cable networks as well as the competition.
His calendar is jammed with meetings with media and entertainment companies as he ponders his next move after last summer's purchase of Castle Rock Entertainment and New Line Cinema Corp.
"I don't like being the ninth- or 10th-largest player in the game," he says.
"Now Viacom, which was my size, is twice as big.
Sony, which owns Columbia, is 10 times as big . . .
Murdoch is a lot bigger."
Mr. Turner lets it drop that he has met with executives at Columbia but won't discuss those talks further.
Nor will he comment on deals he may be working on.
But people close to the company say Mr. Turner has recently talked with both NBC, a division of General Electric Co., and ABC, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
One person close to the company says Mr. Turner might be willing to drop his voting shares in Turner Broadcasting as low as 25% to do some kind of network deal and forge other alliances.
Such a diminished stake would underscore the daunting task Mr. Turner has set for himself.
Already, any major corporate move is subject to veto by a board dominated by cable-TV operators, including Tele-Communications Inc. and Time Warner Inc., the company's next two biggest shareholders.
They have, in the past, blocked moves where his interests conflicted with theirs.
And even in cases where Mr. Turner has prevailed -- like the purchase of the Castle Rock and New Line movie studios last year -- he has given up some maneuvering room.
In addition to the nearly $800 million Turner Broadcasting paid for the two studios, it granted their executives considerable autonomy.
Mr. Turner, nonetheless, feels his company must grow even if, in the process, his own once-absolute control declines.
As he explains it: "Just take a look at the soft-drink business; how many viable competitors are there?
Only two.
How about the airline business?
There are four or five.
How many really viable fast-food chains are there?
"So 10th is not so hot."
Mr. Turner needs a new network, he says, partly because he is hobbled by his cable-programmer status.
"We can't bid for the Olympics; we can't be a primary bidder for the NFL.
We're always bidding on secondary packages."
He could also save money by combining various network-news functions with CNN, he says.
His two new studios will be a big help in supplying fresh sources of programming, but not right away.
The company plans a gradual increase in the number of movies its studios make each year, company officials say.
Turner Pictures, the company's internally developed studio, will go from making one movie in 1993 -- the Civil War epic, "Gettysburg" -- to as many as eight in five years, says Turner Entertainment President Scott Sassa, who will oversee that venture along with the company's cable networks, TBS, TNT, the Cartoon Network and the upcoming Turner Classic Movies.
Castle Rock and New Line, which report directly to Mr. Turner, will also add only a couple of films a year to their respective production schedules.
Even then, Mr. Turner still faces considerable hurdles in the movie business.
Chief among those is cost: Hollywood executives say a major studio can spend $1 million a day in administrative costs and another $800 million or so each year producing movies.
By starting out slowly, Turner Broadcasting says it can fund big-budget movies like Castle Rock's "In the Line of Fire."
It has pledged to make movies like that for both Castle Rock and New Line.
Such films typically average around $40 million per picture after advertising costs are figured in, but Turner officials say most of the costs can be financed through the cash flow of the studios and Turner itself.
"Our incremental borrowing is expected to be modest," says Wayne Pace, Turner's chief financial officer.
Initially, Castle Rock and New Line combined should contribute small operating profits to Turner Broadcasting this year, Mr. Pace says.
Although Castle Rock had been plagued by cash-flow problems, New Line has been profitable for years and its 1994 profits should jump to $23 million from $13 million last year, according to a Security and Exchange Commission filing.
Managing the new studios could also prove tricky.
All three will operate independently.
While Mr. Sassa will oversee Turner Pictures, Mr. Turner himself will oversee Castle Rock and New Line.
He has bent over backward to make sure that he keeps their creative talent, so critical to successful movie making, intact.
He signed both Rob Reiner, perhaps Castle Rock's most respected producer and director, and Alan Horn, the company's chairman and chief executive, to seven-year contracts.
Similarly, New Line chief executive officer and founder Robert Shaye and president Michael Lynne, who built a successful 200-film library of mostly low-budget B-movies, have signed employment agreements through 1998.
To seal that deal, Mr. Turner agreed to pay both men more than $1 million a year, or substantially more than his own 1992 base salary of $765,554.
He has assured his new movie executives that they will get complete creative control.
"There's nothing worse than buying a business built on creativity and taking that creativity away from them.
That would be dumb," Mr. Turner says.
That arrangement could prove nettlesome down the road.
Mr. Turner's movie budget will be subject to board approval, and he will divvy it up among the three studios, who will have ultimate say in how to spend it.
The Turner board, which keeps a close eye on costs, isn't likely to tolerate big overruns, and that could limit the studios' freedom to take risks.
And some industry experts wonder just how far board member Time Warner is willing to go in letting Mr. Turner create a motion-picture competitor.
Time Warner, parent of Warner Bros. studio, will vote along with the other directors on Turner Broadcasting's annual filmmaking budgets and could effectively keep Mr. Turner's movie ambitions in check.
Mr. Turner insists that won't be a problem.
"As directors of Turner Broadcasting," he says, Time Warner can't "do things that are not in the best interests of this corporation."
Moreover, Mr. Turner, who was so frustrated by his board alliances a year ago, now seems quite resigned to them.
"I really do like the collaborative model rather than the dominator model," he says.
"You are never going to conquer the world.
Conquest is out.
People don't want to be dominated."
