Cigarette smoking significantly increases a woman's risk of developing the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis, according to a study by doctors in Australia.
The research confirms the findings of several previous studies that, over the years, have linked smoking and a potentially dangerous reduction in bone density.
The report, published in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, also provides further evidence that smoking interferes with the hormone estrogen, which is vital to bone formation.
Osteoporosis affects about 25 million aging women in the United States and causes about 1.3 million fractures every year, mostly of the hips, wrists and spine.
Public-health officials put costs of treating the disease at about $10 billion annually.
Women are being encouraged to prevent the disease by increasing their consumption of the bone-building mineral calcium, by taking estrogen supplements after menopause when natural estrogen levels decline, and by not smoking.
The latest study by Ego Seeman and John Llewelyn Hooper at the University of Melbourne studied bone density among 41 pairs of mostly middle-aged and elderly female twins, in which one sister smoked and the other didn't, or in which one sibling smoked much more than the other.
The Australian researchers found that women who smoked the equivalent of one pack a day for 10 years on average had a 1% or 2% decrease in bone density as compared to women who never smoked or smoked little.
Over four or five decades, this difference can put a woman at sharply higher risk of osteoporosis, the researchers said.
In fact, where one twin smoked significantly more over time than the other twin, the researchers found a 5% to 10% reduction in bone density, enough bone loss to sharply raise the risk of a fracture.
The researchers said this difference remained the same even when they accounted for differences in a wide range of lifestyles and estrogen use.
The researchers said the findings are especially troubling because of a rise in smoking among young women.
Recent surveys have found that 25% of American women smoke.
"This study suggests that by the early 21st century there will be an increase in fractures attributable to smoking," the researchers said.
"Recognition of these consequences for osteoporosis may help dissuade women from taking up, or continuing to use, tobacco."
In an editorial accompanying the study, Charles W. Slemenda of the University of Indiana School of Medicine in Indianapolis said that "physicians should mention the decreased bone density and increased risk of fractures when they counsel patients about smoking cessation."
