Turmoil in the medical industry is producing some big new winners: health-care consultants.
Hospitals and health-maintenance organizations are rushing to hire strategy advisers -- sometimes at fees topping $1 million.
The consultants are finding ample work putting mergers together, and some may even be fueling the consolidation trend by the advice they whisper into chief executives' ears.
"A lot of people see change happening rapidly, and they're frightened," says Eran Broshy, head of the health-care practice at Boston Consulting Group.
"They wonder: `How do I protect what I've got?'"
The best answer, Mr. Broshy says, is to become a "more integrated delivery system," either through acquisitions, mergers or joint ventures.
There isn't any comprehensive data on how many health-care consultants are roaming through U.S. hospitals and other medical sites.
But all six of the leading U.S. accounting firms have set up health-care consulting units of 100 people or more.
General corporate strategy consultants say health care is one of their fastest growing fields.
And hospital executives figure at least two dozen health-care consulting boutiques have established a national presence within the past five years.
Advising on health-care mergers is "a huge opportunity," says David Knott, a consultant at Booz-Allen Hamilton Inc. in New York.
"It's growing like gangbusters."
Booz-Allen is urging clients to combine doctors, hospitals and insurance under one roof, a concept that it has labeled "the Medical Service Company."
Similar messages are coming from swarms of other consultants at accounting firms and health-care boutiques.
"The only way for hospitals to be successful going forward is to participate in the shift toward ambulatory care," says John Gannon, a Short Hills, N.J., consultant at KPMG Peat Marwick.
"That means spreading geographical reach to broader markets, and developing referral links that can hook back to the hub institution."
While consultants beat the drums for more deals, though, some industry watchers worry that nonstop recommendations for mergers could prove excessive, much like Wall Street's overleveraging of industrial companies in the 1980s.
"People are caught up by the need to pick a partner," says Casey Nolan, a Washington-based health-care consultant at Ernst & Young.
"There's almost a palpable panic.
It's kind of reminiscent of leveraged buyouts.
People see something on the cover of Modern Healthcare magazine, and they've got to try it."
For now, such cautionary voices are rare.
"In the past week," says Boston Consulting's Mr. Broshy, "three major teaching hospitals have called us out of the blue to talk about rethinking their function."
He says his firm's health-care practice is growing about 30% a year, and already accounts for nearly one-fifth of the consulting firm's overall work.
If health-care providers take the consultants' advice to consolidate, they can help cut costs as much as 20%, Booz-Allen contends.
Some gains will come from economies of scale in administrative areas such as record-keeping, billing and computer services, it says.
Other savings will come from a greater ability to change doctors' practice patterns and reward frugal care.
Another argument often cited by consultants is a belief that hospitals and other health-care providers must build up critical mass to better negotiate with large insurers and health-maintenance organizations.
Big buyers of health care want to steer patients to the medical centers that provide the most cost-effective care, says Robert Rubin, president of Lewin-VHI Inc.
But some consultants say they are starting to worry that not all mergers will necessarily work out.
"It's very tempting to put a medical-services company model on the table, but you really have to go client by client," says Robert Go, a Detroit-based consultant for Deloitte & Touche.
"In some cases, it isn't clear what you get out of a full merger versus setting up a significant business relationship."
Mr. Go says he has seen cases where mergers don't help hospitals lower costs and end up creating bureaucratic gridlock.
As a result, his firm sometimes counsels clients to stop short of a merger.
Mr. Go says Deloitte recently helped Henry Ford Health System negotiate a closer affiliation with Blue Cross of Michigan, and helped Blue Shield of California negotiate an affiliation with UniHealth America Inc. after merger talks broke down.
Consultants don't disclose fees publicly, but some say privately that they can earn $500,000 or more for advising a midsized hospital on a strategic overhaul that culminates in a merger.
Working with the nation's biggest hospitals can sometimes bring in fees that top $1 million.
While those amounts don't match what investment bankers collect for corporate takeovers, they are hefty enough to keep consultants seeking opportunities.
In one notable case, the University of Pennsylvania Health System used three different consultants in the past two years to help on acquisitions.
The Philadelphia-based health system hired APM Inc. to develop a general strategy, KPMG to pick out groups of primary-care doctors to buy and another top accounting firm to value physicians' practices.
The health system's chief executive, William Kelley, won't say how much the consultants' advice cost, but he says it was worth it.
The consultants had nationwide experience in lining up such acquisitions, Dr. Kelley observes.
In Florida, the Hunter Group used to specialize in turning around troubled hospitals, says the consulting firm's president, David Hunter.
But in the past year, he and his 20 employees have broadened their services, advising on three hospital mergers.
"We're getting called by hospitals asking: `What should we do?'" he says.
"And we're testing the market to see what sorts of alliances make sense."
Over time, some of the new mergers may prove to be mistakes, says Bernard Ferrari, a partner at McKinsey & Co.
He says he's especially concerned that high-cost teaching hospitals will find that joining forces only makes their budgeting problems more severe.
In fact, he says, some parties to early mergers may already be looking for ways to separate.
But consultants needn't worry; fixing up troubled mergers may mean even more work.
As Dr. Ferrari says: "McKinsey has done an enormous amount of work on postmerger integration in all industries."
