Michael Walsh stepped down as chief executive officer of Tenneco Inc. after telling directors that treatment he's receiving for a brain tumor is impairing his ability to run the company.
The company's board, meeting by telephone conference call yesterday until after the close of New York Stock Exchange trading, elected Dana Mead, 58-year-old president and chief operating officer, to the additional post of chief executive.
Mr. Walsh had recruited Mr. Mead in 1992 to join Tenneco.
Mr. Walsh, 51, who remains chairman, will be on indefinite medical leave.
"We all hope he will recuperate and return, but we don't know," said Arthur House, vice president, corporate affairs.
Mr. Mead's succession was expected, the timing wasn't and Mr. Walsh's decision came as a surprise to some of his closest associates.
Last month, Mr. Walsh underwent surgery to remove dead tissue remaining from his brain tumor, discovered last year, and at the time the company said his prognosis was favorable.
"I think we were all encouraged, and we're saddened," said Mr. House.
Mr. Walsh's doctors tell him the cancer isn't back, but he told directors that the cumulative effects of surgery, chemotherapy and other treatments have been more demanding than expected.
Mr. Mead said that Mr. Walsh, who he hasn't seen since late January, has sounded "fatigued" in recent telephone conversations, and has described continuing weakness on his left side.
"The most recent operation was to take care of that by relieving pressure from the nerves.
But those symptoms are persisting."
The suddenness of Mr. Walsh's announcement left Tenneco uncertain as to whether it will name a new president and chief operating officer, or whether Mr. Mead will retain those titles.
It's uncertain how Wall Street will react to Mr. Walsh's leave.
The day Tenneco announced in the summer of 1991 that he was to join the company, the stock price surged $3.25 a share.
In composite trading yesterday on the Big Board, Tenneco fell $1.375, or 2.4%, to close at $56.625.
At Tenneco, Mr. Mead's responsibilities grew quickly, including heading up the company's largest subsidiary, Case, a long-troubled farm and construction-equipment maker.
Mr. Mead was credited with returning Case to profitability, posting a 1993 operating profit of $82 million, vs. a loss of $260 million a year earlier.
Tenneco is a diverse company with interests that include natural-gas pipelines, automotive parts, packaging, chemicals and shipbuilding.
In 1993, the company reported net income of $426 million, or $2.44 a share, on revenue of $13.26 billion.
Mr. Walsh was diagnosed as having a midgrade brain tumor in January 1993 and he underwent a treatment of radiation and chemotherapy.
Mr. Mead has frequently functioned as chief executive officer since Mr. Walsh's illness was diagnosed.
He presented the company's year-end 1993 financial results to Wall Street analysts earlier this month and he has been in charge since Mr. Walsh's follow-up surgery.
The new chief executive is a self-described compulsive organizer who always carries three briefcases on business trips.
"One is for Case, another is Tenneco `have-to-do' stuff, and the third is reading material" such as a biography of Theodore Roosevelt and David Halberstam's book on the culture of the 1950s, he said.
Mr. Mead said he doesn't plan major changes, at least not immediately.
"We have Tenneco on a terrific trajectory.
Our cost structure is improved, our business positions are better and we have cleaned up our balance sheet.
We have financial flexibility that we didn't have before.
We're ready to enter a new phase-sustained growth."
