When Kathy Coffman heard of plans to redevelop the site of a long-abandoned Kmart in her neighborhood, the housewife and mother of four teenagers hit the warpath.
Joining several hundred other residents of the neat, well-to-do section of north Dallas, Mrs. Coffman helped organize pickets, distribute leaflets and post signs to protest the project.
The group collected $26,000 to hire attorneys for the cause and launched an intense lobbying campaign at City Hall.
"They want to sacrifice the neighborhood," Mrs. Coffman says.
Sacrifice it for what?
Movie theaters.
"Movies," Mrs. Coffman argues, "are not family entertainment.
Movies depend on teenagers for revenue."
Adds comrade Susan Pardo, mother of two: "We're afraid of gangs."
The reaction surprised city officials and Cinemark U.S.A. Inc., the Dallas-based national theater chain that wants to build a $30 million, 18-screen "Tinseltown" complex on the site.
But zoning experts say this is part of a pattern.
Across the nation, they say, a new isolationism is emerging as seemingly innocuous developments like parks and footpaths -- and theaters -- prompt angry not-in-my-back-yard, or "nimby," responses.
Of course, neighborhood activism isn't new, and as has long been the case, plans for a prison or a trash incinerator still can rouse communities to arms.
But now, driven by perceptions of a rising tide of crime and gang violence, some neighborhoods are resisting any change that they think might expose them to feared outsiders.
And that often puts them in direct conflict with city planners, sparking zoning debates that resemble pitched battles.
"It used to be people just protested against noxious-type things," says Jon Perica, a city planner in Los Angeles for 25 years.
"But we're seeing socially positive things now targeted by neighborhood opposition."
In Durham, N.C., neighborhood opposition last year forced the rerouting of a greenbelt with a jogging path and nature trail.
"I've got nothing against nature," says one homeowner, Guy Gentry.
"I just don't want these two-legged nature folks wanting to come through."
In Overland Park, Kan., protests led to the removal of basketball and volleyball courts from a park under development in 1992.
Residents of the Kansas City suburb argued that such facilities would attract unwanted youths.
In the Queens borough of New York City, residents of one neighborhood defeated a plan in January to convert an abandoned cinema into a laser-gun games center.
"That's what we're afraid of-trigger-happy kids," says Wendy Marsh, owner of an optical shop and president of the Union Turnpike Merchants Association, which was instrumental in killing the plan.
"We didn't know if they would take it outside after the game."
Police generally discount such effects.
They and urban planners even argue that parks, greenbelts and mixed-use developments -- the combined office-retail-residential properties now popular in many cities -- may help deter crime by getting people out and about in a neighborhood.
"If you're trying to create more livable, cohesive cities, you want to connect complementary uses," says Paul Norvy, Durham's planning director.
"We're trying to get back to what made cities more livable.
Creating communities where people interact will also be safer."
Try telling that to North Miami Beach, Fla.
The Miami suburb last month asked the Chicago-based American Planning Association, a subscription research service for community planners, to send it examples of especially restrictive zoning ordinances from other cities.
The reason, it said, was to help it find ways to ban laundromats, telegram offices, car washes, pawn shops and other businesses that might draw outsiders to the area.
Planning association staffers, however, soon found that most of the examples they came up with were from North Miami Beach.
"We called back and said, `You already have some of the most restrictive zoning in the country,'" says Marya Morris, senior research associate.
She says the association doesn't encourage such zoning, adding that "most cities don't have the luxury of turning everything down."
That is because new businesses mean more tax revenue.
Ironically, city officials say, nimby-movement leaders often also complain about higher taxes and lack of police protection -- both of which can be linked to insufficient growth in the local tax base.
"People right now are opposed to any change, and that creates absolute instability as we go out and try to promote economic development in the city," says Dallas City Councilor Chris Luna.
In many cities, the new isolationists have recourse to laws and regulations born of past nimby successes.
In Los Angeles, an ordinance permits the city to act on zoning complaints by shutting down targeted businesses even if they are in compliance with existing codes.
Zoning experts say opposition to a community project often is fueled by a recent, highly publicized crime.
In Queens, the plan for a laser-gun games center came just after a gunman killed six people and wounded 19 on the Long Island Railroad commuter train.
"People are afraid, and they are getting paranoid," says Alvin Lubov, landlord of the property that was to house the Q-Zar laser center.
"It was not the right time for this" development.
In Dallas, proponents of Tinseltown thought their timing was perfect.
The derelict site, positioned amid the area's commercial district, is indeed ripe for redevelopment.
Just a quarter of a mile away sits the giant Galleria mall and office tower.
Also close by is a strip mall, a major tollway, gasoline stations, more shops and an indoor amusement park.
In 1985, the surrounding neighborhood agreed to plans to build three 18-story office towers on the site, but the crash of the Texas economy sank that project.
Eight years later, Cinemark came along.
The nation's sixth-largest theater chain, with 157 theaters in 27 states, still had only suburban outlets in its hometown.
While traveling to Mexico with a group of businesspeople last July, Mayor Steve Bartlett heard of Cinemark's search for a city site and offered his help.
Cinemark told the mayor a few weeks later that it wanted to use the Kmart site, just blocks from the mayor's house and roundly scorned as an eyesore.
The mayor, says Randy Hester, Cinemark's head of corporate development, was "thrilled" with the company's interest.
But as word spread, Mrs. Coffman and her neighbors began to worry that Tinseltown would become a regional draw, particularly for teenagers up to no good.
"Gangs come to movies together and run into another gang.
Then do they shoot up the neighborhood?" asks D.M. Bland, a retired aircraft engineer who lives 12 blocks from the Kmart site.
The community is one of the safest in a city where statistics show that violent crime has declined for five consecutive years.
City officials have insisted that the predominantly white neighborhood's fear of teen gangs is illogical, and local talk-radio hosts have suggested that their resistance is rooted in racism.
Residents scoff at such criticism.
When explaining their stance, they readily tick off examples of violence in other parts of the city that they think the Cinemark complex would expose them to: a man shot in the neck at an automatic teller machine; a young girl abducted from a soccer field in suburban Plano and then murdered; patrons of a grocery store robbed in the parking lot; a bystander killed in a gang shooting at a suburban mall.
"I could see a young girl or boy disappearing just as easily there as at that Plano soccer field," says Mrs. Coffman, who now watches from her door when her teenage children play outside.
"If I can't see my daughter, I get nervous."
In November, residents of the conservative neighborhood, which is dominated by rambling $200,000 and $250,000 homes built in the 1960s and 1970s, formed a group called "Citizens Against Tinseltown" and began marshaling their resources to fight the project.
They said the complex would create lots of noise and traffic at night.
They offered data from marketing studies showing that the average moviegoer spends 90 minutes near a theater in addition to the time spent in the theater, time enough for youths to make trouble in adjacent residential areas.
They enlisted real-estate experts to predict a decline in property values.
Mrs. Coffman claimed that based on her own survey of movie listings, Cinemark theaters were more likely than others to run R-rated films.
Cinemark, which says it had never before been the focus of fears over plans for a theater, denies that.
Cinemark says the city attorney's office assured it that the theater complex and four restaurants met the criteria of a planned-development ordinance approved for the 1985 project and that the City Council's approval was only a formality.
Soon, the battle was engaged.
Residents shouted down Cinemark officials during a company news conference at the Kmart site.
Playing tit for tat, Cinemark then filled City Council chambers with its supporters before the start of a Jan. 12 meeting called to hear both sides of the conflict.
Foes of the theater were able to take their seats only after a truce was negotiated by the mayor, who by this time had switched to support his neighbors.
"The {neighborhood's} fears are probably somewhat overblown," Mayor Bartlett says, "but there are legitimate questions."
Cinemark presented a letter in which police officials testified that its existing theaters weren't crime centers.
The company also got a former mayor of nearby Garland to stump for its cause, praising a Cinemark megatheater in his town.
Beyond City Hall, the neighborhood group continued picketing and posting signs, including a "STOP CINEMARK" Christmas-light display on the roof of one home.
Cinemark mailed slick promotional fliers to the neighborhood to announce: "We're Coming!"
It said it had conducted a mail-in poll in which area residents approved of its plan, 406-71.
The company, saying it had all the needed administrative approvals, issued a veiled threat that if the City Council didn't sign off on the project, members could be held personally liable.
And in an 11th-hour attempt to woo councilors before a vote, Cinemark said it would build a theater in economically depressed south Dallas if its north Dallas plan was approved.
The neighborhood group, counting only seven votes on its side among the 15 council members, went to the meeting prepared for defeat.
It brought along an attorney who carried a lawsuit to be filed immediately after the vote.
But at the last minute, a councilor switched sides, giving Mrs. Coffman and her cohorts an 8-7 victory.
"I don't think the neighborhood should only be allowed to speak out if it's a prison or a lead smelter coming in," an exuberant Mrs. Coffman said soon after the vote.
Since the late-January vote, Cinemark has taken its case to court.
It is asking a Texas court to order the city to approve the Tinseltown plan.
And it has filed suit in federal court in Dallas against the city, the mayor and the seven city councilors who voted against it, asking millions in damages.
City attorney Sam Lindsay says the city will be "vigorously defending both lawsuits."
Cinemark's supporters, including a few local merchants and even some of Mrs. Coffman's neighbors, worry that the council's decision bodes ill for Dallas's future.
"If we are at the point where we are afraid of a family entertainment center, then we all better live in a steel box," says Richard Jaffe, owner and manager of the strip mall near the site.
Complains Councilor Luna, chairman of the council's economic-development committee and a Cinemark supporter: "The public is saying, `Do something about the city,' and when you do, they say, `Don't do it here.'
This is classic nimby taken to an extreme."
