Cable company Jones Intercable Inc. and Canadian telecommunications giant BCE Inc. have renegotiated terms of their alliance, cutting the price BCE will pay for a 30% stake in Jones, a person close to the deal said.
The two companies are expected to announce today changes in the contract that reduce by 5% the lion's share of a planned $400 million investment.
The changes reflect a new round of federal cable-rate cuts that Denver-based Jones Intercable says will crimp its cash flow.
Jones Intercable, run by cable pioneer Glenn Jones, declined to comment on the announcement.
Officials at the BCE unit involved in the deal couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.
Jones Intercable, which serves 1.6 million U.S. cable subscribers, and BCE's international investment unit are the latest cable-telephone partners to renegotiate the value of an agreement in the face of additional cable-rate cuts.
The Federal Communications Commission expects to release further details of new rate restrictions this week.
Cable operators say the rules put pressure on cash flow, a key indicator of how cable systems are priced.
Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. cited the FCC rules in the collapse of Bell Atlantic's recent multibillion-dollar proposed TCI acquisition.
And Southwestern Bell Corp. is renegotiating the financial terms of its $4.9 billion cable venture with Cox Enterprises Inc.
Under the new terms of the Jones-BCE deal, instead of paying an initial $275 million for 10 million Class A shares, or $27.50 apiece, BCE will now pay $261 million in two stages.
The first will be to buy a 13% interest, or 2.5 million newly issued shares, at $22 a share -- still a premium over the current price of about $15 a share.
The second step will be to buy the remaining shares needed to reach a 30% stake at $27.50 apiece.
BCE will still invest $400 million over time.
But instead of committing to pay an additional $125 million in the future for newly issued shares to finance the company and maintain a 30% interest, BCE is expected to commit to $139 million.
No dates have been set for future investments.
The new terms also reduce the price of BCE's option to buy control of the company from Jones International Inc. to $52 million from $55 million.
Jones Intercable is a subsidiary of Jones International, which is wholly owned by Mr. Jones.
The deal, which is subject to other conditions, is expected to close by midsummer.
