In this small city in southwestern Japan, Goro Aoyama sits at the center of a retailing empire built on cheap suits.
Suits aren't a fashion statement; they're simply a businessman's uniform, says Mr. Aoyama, head of the 514-store Aoyama Trading Co. discount-suit chain.
Why should legions of salarymen spend hard-earned cash on $700 suits sold by department stores, he argues, when Aoyama's mass-produced, $275 suits are decent enough, even in label-conscious Japan?
Many of his compatriots are asking the same question.
At a time when department-store sales are plunging, Aoyama stands apart, posting steady increases.
Analysts support the company's assertions that it accounts for about one of every four suits sold in Japan.
In the fiscal year ended March 31, 1993, sales rose 30% to 150.9 billion yen ($1.39 billion), while pretax profit was up 12% at 30.2 billion yen.
Last week, the Japanese business daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun said Aoyama is likely to report an 11% increase in pretax profit for fiscal 1994 to a record 33.5 billion yen.
Its sales are projected to grow 26% to 190 billion yen.
However, those numbers aren't as great as the estimates Aoyama itself is projecting.
Indeed, some of the company's critics say that Aoyama tends to overestimate other aspects of its business.
In particular, regulators are looking into whether the company's ads overstate the savings on its suits.
Mr. Aoyama says he hasn't violated any rules and refuses to halt the ads.
Criticism notwithstanding, the 63-year-old Mr. Aoyama, whose private company owns 8.5% of Aoyama Trading, is reaching the peak of his career at an age when many businessmen begin to slow down.
Moreover, he has become a fitting symbol of the new thinking challenging Japan's business establishment as it confronts economic deregulation and economic downturn.
After starting out with a single small suit outlet in rural Japan 30 years ago, Mr. Aoyama now has become a source of retailing savvy, inspiring would-be entrepreneurs and providing lessons for ailing corporate giants.
He is the subject of several how-to books on business, and has written a hot-selling autobiography.
He appears often in magazines, offering a message of take-charge gumption that is unusual for Japan.
The fifth son of a carpenter who built shrines, Mr. Aoyama says he always had a burning desire to be No. 1.
When illness prevented him from attending university, he vowed to succeed in business.
His dedication shows in his hands-on management style.
Until recently, he personally selected the sites of new stores.
He gets up at 4 a.m. to pore through a thick book that compares sales at his stores against those of competitors.
Weekends are reserved for store openings, sometimes four a day.
Holidays are for other people to enjoy.
His individualism has kept him outside Japan's mainstream business community.
Aoyama's head office is perched atop one of its discount stores, next to a McDonald's restaurant, in a Fukuyama suburb.
For an interview, Mr. Aoyama himself wears a $325 Aoyama suit, and appears unaware of a hole in his shoe.
He doesn't participate in national retail associations: "I'm not going to associate myself with the kind of people who always act together and try to avoid getting hurt," he says.
Mr. Aoyama buys his merchandise in bulk, directly from manufacturers.
Most of the suits are of simple, similar designs, and some are stitched in China and North Korea, where labor is relatively cheap.
He also imports some foreign business strategies.
For instance, after seeing roadside shopping centers in California, Mr. Aoyama realized that many of his customers belong to the growing ranks of car-driving Japanese suburbanites.
So while many Japanese retailers were busy opening stores in urban centers, Aoyama quickly built many outlets with parking in rural areas, where rents are lower.
He was, however, also brazen enough to open a store in Tokyo's tony Ginza district, right next to the nation's classiest department stores.
The Ginza gambit grabbed headlines.
Mr. Aoyama made the most of the attention: He opened the store at 7 a.m., and offered $25 suits on the first day.
The cameras whirred as bargain hunters clawed at the racks.
Department stores, once dismissive, are now shocked to find this no-frills intruder siphoning away business and criticizing their style.
What's more, his success has sparked intense competition as copycat suit chains have sprouted up around the country.
One after another, department stores are slashing suit prices.
Many consumers once dismissed Aoyama, too, assuming that its low prices meant shoddy quality.
But no-frills stores and low prices fit perfectly the current mood in Japan, where tough times are making consumers more price conscious.
Mr. Aoyama says he plans to open as many as 110 stores in Japan alone this year.
He also hopes to transplant his success abroad, planning to open a store in Shanghai in the coming months, and, in time, 15 to 20 stores in Taiwan.
All in all, he vows to increase sales sixfold to one trillion yen in the next decade.
Still, Mr. Aoyama says he realizes that eventually, he must spread his business to other areas, such as men's casual clothes.
He recently linked up with Giordano Ltd., a Hong Kong clothing retailer, and J.C. Penney Co. of the U.S. to sell their casual clothes in Japan.
