Federal Judge William Dwyer is best known for banning the sale of Pacific Northwest timber to protect the spotted owl.
Now he has become the judicial protector of another controversial endangered species: incumbent Members of Congress.
He has declared that their chief habitat -- Capitol Hill -- can't be disturbed by a majority of voters who want more thinning of the deadwood they see there.
Last week, Judge Dwyer issued a sweeping ruling that the term limit law passed by Washington state in 1992 violated not only the Constitution, but the First and 14th Amendments as well.
An appeal will be filed, and is likely to reach the U.S. Supreme Court next year.
House Speaker Tom Foley has been the prime mover behind the litigation to block term limits in his home state.
There are many arguments against term limits, but the one that holds they violate the First and 14th Amendments is, frankly, a stretch.
Using that logic, term limit laws that have restricted more than half the nation's governors for decades would have to be found unconstitutional.
Still, such arguments were used in 1991 when California Assembly Speaker Willie Brown claimed his state's term limit law discriminated against incumbents and thereby violated their right to equal protection of the laws under the 14th Amendment.
Speaker Brown further claimed that term limits violated the "associational rights" guaranteed by the First Amendment.
California's Supreme Court rejected all of Mr. Brown's arguments.
In a 6-to-1 decision upholding term limits, it said that there was no reason why governors should have a limit imposed on them, while state legislators were allowed permanent tenure.
It noted that current incumbent protections mean term limits may give voters a greater choice than they have now.
It also found that term limits allow voters to freely associate with others to advance their beliefs or support a term-limited incumbent for another office.
Judge Dwyer's decision completely contradicts the California court, and will be hotly argued on appeal.
He flatly declares that state term limits unconstitutionally add to the age, residency and citizenship qualifications in the Constitution.
But Powell v.
McCormack, the 1969 Supreme Court decision he relies on, held only that Congress couldn't add to the qualifications.
Since then, the Supreme Court has frequently upheld many state laws restricting who can run for office.
Griffin Bell, who was Jimmy Carter's attorney general and was lead counsel for the term limits forces, isn't surprised by Judge Dwyer's ruling.
"The same high court that's allowed states in the past to control their own elections will act likewise when this case reaches them," he says.
Meanwhile, there's a chance that Speaker Foley may not even be representing his district when his 1998 term limit kicks in.
In 1992, Mr. Foley won with only 55% of the vote, and a new Fabrizio/McLaughlin poll of his district finds only 43% of respondents believe he deserves re-election.
A stunning 74% believe Speaker Foley should drop his suit to overturn the voters' preference for term limits.
Incumbents who view Judge Dwyer's ruling as an all-clear signal should think again.
Most career politicians aren't cute like spotted owls, and most judges and voters aren't bothered by the thought of endangering these pols.
Few tears will be shed when they're forced out from their sanctuary and returned to the wilds of real life.
