A one-two punch combination sent the U.S. Treasury market reeling yesterday.
First, there were hints of a stronger economy and rising inflation in the latest monthly survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management.
Then came the surprise resignation of a top Federal Reserve official.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped more than a point, or more than $10 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 99 1/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, rose to 6.31% from 6.23% Monday.
Before any major news items reached the market, prices of short-term Treasury securities came under pressure as dealers considered comments made by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan on Monday.
Mr. Greenspan, speaking before a congressional panel, had warned that at some point, the Fed must raise short-term interest rates.
Then, at mid-morning, the association reported that its January index of manufacturing conditions rose to 57.7 from 57.1 in December.
The slight rise contrasted with expectations that the index would slip because of the cold weather that gripped much of the eastern U.S. last month.
Even more troubling to the bond market, the association's price index raised concerns that the torrid pace of growth in late 1993 might finally be creating production bottlenecks that in turn are forcing business to raise prices.
The price index rose to 59.8 from 51.3 in December.
Shortly after, the Federal Reserve announced that Vice Chairman David Mullins had resigned to take a private-sector job.
His resignation means there are now two Fed vacancies for President Clinton to fill as Fed Gov. Wayne Angell's term also expires this month.
The resignation of Mr. Mullins "caught the market offside," said Ron Connors, manager of government securities trading at Bear Stearns.
"And what it did was to add a degree of political uncertainty about the Fed's commitment . . . to strike pre-emptively at inflation."
That uncertainty was especially punishing for longer-term securities.
After holding up relatively well through early trading, the 10-year note and 30-year bond ended up suffering the worst declines.
The 10-year note dropped more than 5/8 point yesterday to 100 1/32 to yield 5.73%, compared with 5.64% on Monday.
But analysts said traders and investors need not worry that the vacancies created by Mr. Mullins and Mr. Angell would cast doubt about the Fed's inflation-fighting credentials.
"They overreacted to Mullins leaving," said Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Securities.
"A lot of people feel that if Clinton nominates somebody, by definition they are not going to fight inflation.
But when the economy is moving ahead and is growing at a fairly steady rate, virtually all economists would agree to raise rates," he said.
Instead, analysts said the market should focus more on the economic news.
Many traders and investors have been betting that the cold weather, coupled with the earthquake in Southern California, would temporarily affect economic data, creating the appearance that the economy had slowed and delaying any Fed tightening.
But yesterday's report indicates that such a delay mightn't be as long as some had thought.
"People had been saying the Fed is going to tighten, but that it's going to come later," said Lawrence Leuzzi, head of fixed income at S.G. Warburg.
"But that complacent view on the Fed has been called into question," he said.
Along with the National Association of Purchasing Management report, there were also signs that consumer spending held up better than expected.
The Johnson Redbook Service, an affiliate of Lynch, Jones & Ryan Inc., reported chain and department store sales rose 1% in January from December.
"From what we've seen so far, it looks like activity was better sustained than we'd thought," said Alan Levenson, a money market economist at UBS Securities.
Traders have several more significant events to contend with this week.
Today, the Treasury Department is scheduled to announce the terms of next week's quarterly refunding auctions.
Economists expect the Treasury to sell $40 billion worth of securities, including $17 billion of three-year notes, $12 billion of 10-year notes and $11 billion of 30-year bonds.
That would be the same amount of three- and 10-year notes as in November, while the bond offering would be unchanged from last August.
Traders are also looking ahead to Friday's January employment report.
Wall Street is looking for a rise in nonfarm payroll employment of about 200,000, which would follow the 183,000 gain chalked up in December.
The Republic of Iceland made its debut in the U.S. corporate-bond market yesterday with a $200 million Yankee-bond offering, and it received a warm reception.
The Republic of Portugal, GTE Corp., Property Trust of America, Aluminum Co. of America and Unocal Corp. also came to market with more than $1.5 billion of debt.
Trading in the investment-grade and junk-bond markets was light with prices changing little.
Investment-grade traders speculated that uncertainty about the future of short-term interest rates may be curbing trading in the corporate-bond market.
"A lot of accounts are unsure about the Treasury market," one trader said.
However, one syndicate official said the lack of activity is temporary and stems from the recent focus on new issues.
Yankee bonds sold Monday by the Province of Quebec traded down during the session.
The price of the 7.125% coupon bonds maturing in 2024 dropped by 1.235 points, or $12.35 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 98.25.
As a result, the yield rose to 7.269% from 7.167%.
Junk-bond offerings from ACF Industries Inc. and ACF Industries Holding Corp. continue to struggle in the junk-bond market.
Merrill Lynch is lead-managing the deal that was expected to price late last week.
Investors are reportedly haggling over covenant changes for the bond offerings from the two companies controlled by financier Carl Icahn.
Meanwhile, investors flocked to Iceland's Yankee offering of 6.125% coupon 10-year notes, which were priced at 98.81 to yield 6.287% through lead manager J.P. Morgan Securities.
Iceland, with a population of 270,000, may be tiny, but the country has a strong economy "that is very much on the upswing," said Bob Hugin, head of J.P. Morgan's fixed-income syndicate.
Yankee bonds are securities sold by foreign issuers in the U.S.
Municipal issuers brought more than $1 billion of debt to the market despite a price slip that boosted yields.
The day's largest issue -- the New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's $660.1 million general-purpose revenue bonds -- came to the market via a Bear, Stearns group.
Following a repricing, at which a few yields were raised 1.0 to 3.0 basis points to attract buyers, yields range from 2.5% in 1995 to 5.28% in 2024.
The initial yield scale was 2.5% in 1995 to 5.25% in 2024.
In secondary dealings, munis slumped with Treasurys on concerns about the strengthening economy and closed as much as 3/4 point lower.
Salem County, N.J, 5.45% bonds due 2032 closed 3/4 weaker at 99 1/2 , yielding 5.45%.
Late Monday, those bonds were priced to yield 5.42%.
This week's pricing calendar includes at least two more big issues.
San Diego's $430 million pension-obligation bonds are to be priced by a Merrill Lynch group, and the New York State Dormitory Authority's $230 million revenue bonds are to be priced by a Goldman, Sachs group.
Meanwhile yesterday, New York City Comptroller Alan Hevesi said he expects Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's budget to be "extraordinarily painful" as it attempts to attack an estimated $2.3 billion deficit.
The budget is slated to be unveiled today.
New York is one of the nation's largest issuers of municipal debt.
Mr. Hevesi said he wants to reduce the city's debt-service costs, which he says is excessive.
"New York City's debt service is approaching 20% of the budget," he said.
"It should be 12% or 13%."
Prices of mortgage-backed securities slipped, but not as much as Treasurys, allowing yields on current coupon securities to narrow to the Treasury's 10-year note.
Good buying has been seen for several sectors of the mortgage market, although flows this session were said to be light.
Rising interest rates are often viewed as bullish for the market because of the effect they have on slowing prepayments.
Freddie Mac Gold 6.5s are yielding 6.53%, only 79 basis points more than the Treasury's 10-year note.
The 10-year note is a pricing benchmark for current coupons, which have a similar average life.
At the close of trading Monday, the yield spread between Freddie 6.5s and the 10-year note was 83 basis points.
Ginnie Mae 6.5s for February delivery were ending down 14/32 at 99 28/32, Freddie Mac Gold 6.5s were down 13/32 at 99 31/32 and Fannie Mae 6.5s were down 13/32 at 99 25/32.
In the primary market, Fannie Mae announced two real estate mortgage investment conduits totaling $1.625 billion backed by 15-year 6.5% securities and a $2.275 billion trust of stripped mortgage-backed securities backed by 7% collateral.
Also, the agency announced a $100 million increase of a 30-year 7.5% Remic and a $25 million increase to a stripped mortgage-backed trust backed by 15-year 6.5% mortgage securities.
Freddie Mac announced a $1 billion increase to an issue of Gold modifiable and combinable securities.
The size of the issue, which was backed by 30-year 7.5% securities, was raised to $2.25 billion from $1.245 billion.
