Already, companies issuing performance-based stock must charge the cost against earnings.
The new rule would require similar charges for options tied solely to the stock price.
Companies aren't waiting until they would have to adhere to the proposed rule, which would take effect with 1997 financial statements.
Some have already switched to performance-based stock programs or are considering such a change.
The programs are popular with shareholders because they reward executives only if the company turns in a stronger performance, based on reaching specified returns on investment, equity or assets and sometimes on the stock price as well.
"Performance-based compensation is the most attractive option available to business with FASB moving ahead on its proposal," says Peter Chingos, a KPMG Peat Marwick partner specializing in executive pay.
If the board adopts the rule, he expects a revival of many types of performance-based stock compensation that fell out of favor in the early 1970s, when an accounting rule change began penalizing such programs.
First American Corp., a bank holding company in Nashville, Tenn., is considering a change in its stock-compensation program.
The company says it may drop its current system of restricted stock grants.
These shares can be sold during a certain period if certain goals are met, and they may be sold after that with the sole proviso that the recipient remain with the company.
The executives get them, at no cost to themselves, after 15 years of service.
Instead, First American says it may substitute only performance-based grants of restricted stock if the FASB proposal takes effect.
"It's a better ballgame for performance-based stock grants under the FASB proposal," says John W. Smithwick, an executive vice president.
Ira Kay, head of Wyatt Co.'s executive-compensation practice in New York, says two big retailers he advises are about to shift to performance-based packages.
"One would give employees stock free if, over a seven-year period, the company achieves a certain return on investment," he says.
"The other plans to award options that only could be exercised if the company's stock reaches a certain set price."
Edward Graskamp, a principal in Chicago for pay consultants William M. Mercer Inc., says four corporate clients are considering replacing regular stock options with ones tied to performance.
The companies, involved in telecommunications, financial services, food distribution and manufacturing, are reacting to shareholder criticism that regular options are too much of a giveaway, he says.
He adds that the FASB proposal makes performance-based stock plans more attractive.
