Perhaps the long weekend will have a calming effect on the financial markets, which ended the week nervous.
Bonds staged a two-day plunge, while stocks fell 14 points on Thursday and 35 on Friday.
U.S. Treasury bonds sank some more in overseas trading Monday.
Most stock markets were sharply off, dropping a percent or more in Toronto, London, Paris and Frankfurt.
The big exception was Tokyo, where the Nikkei index gained over two percent as the Bank of Japan repeatedly intervened to support the falling dollar.
Most of the chitchat in the market concerns the Federal Reserve, and its decision to push up short-term interest rates.
All eyes are supposed to be on Chairman Greenspan's impending testimony.
We hope and trust he'll make clear that the big problem is with long-term rates, which march to a tune played by broad markets, not the Fed.
Our own fear is that the Fed should have boosted short rates at the Dec. 21 meeting, as Governors Wayne Angell and Larry Lindsey urged.
History suggests that when the Fed moves too late and too little, it may find itself in a series of boosts without ever quite catching up with market pressures.
In any event, what about that elephant over in the corner?
Everyone fretting about a quarter-point boost in the Fed Funds rate ought to stop for a moment to notice that the Clinton administration is threatening to start a trade war.
The 1987 market crash came, remember, when the Bush administration declared war on the Bundesbank.
For that matter, the 1929 crash came as the Smoot-Hawley tariff was debated.
Both tariff wars and competitive devaluations were hallmarks of the Great Depression.
So now comes the administration war on Japan, over the refusal by its new reformist government to practice managed trade to the benefit of industries represented by the biggest Beltway lobbyists.
We're glad it's denying an attempt to trash the dollar, but the trashing somehow seems to be happening anyway.
We hope that the likes of Lloyd Bentsen and Robert Rubin understand the need for some reassurance.
Markets are entitled to be nervous when an American administration is running around shouting "Banzai."
