Looking for a stock to give a child or grandchild?
Consider Newhall Land & Farming, a big California real estate developer.
Its near-term prospects are cloudy, but knowledgeable money managers say it has a reasonable chance to triple by the end of the decade.
California has suffered from a stubborn recession.
And real estate has slumped nationwide until recently.
So Newhall has labored under a double whammy.
But neither California nor real estate will stay depressed forever.
"If you believe California is going to recover . . . this is the consummate California play," says Martin Cohen, a money manager with Cohen & Steers in New York.
The stock closed Friday at 14, down 1/4.
Traded on the New York Stock Exchange, it has sunk more than 60% from its 1989 high of 35 3/4.
Newhall owns more than 100,000 acres of land in various parts of California, which it is gradually turning into housing developments, shopping malls and office buildings.
Meanwhile, it continues to operate ranches on much of the land.
Its most important location is Valencia, 35 miles north of downtown Los Angeles, where it has a planned community, a regional shopping mall and its corporate headquarters.
The earthquake that recently rocked the Los Angeles area could hurt sales of houses at Valencia this year, since it damaged major roads connecting Valencia to Los Angeles.
But Newhall Chairman Thomas L. Lee says that so far no prospective home buyers have canceled purchase plans.
The company's properties weren't damaged severely.
The mall reopened within three days, and is seeing light but improving traffic.
At this point, he says, it looks as if Newhall will still be able to meet its goal to "get five or six new housing projects introduced" this year.
Few brokerage analysts follow Newhall, which is structured as a master limited partnership.
Among the few with estimates, the consensus calls for Newhall to earn 50 cents a unit in 1994.
(Such partnerships have units rather than shares.)
Some highly regarded money mangers have invested in the stock.
John Templeton's family of mutual funds owns more than a million shares.
The Stein Roe Special Fund owns more than 750,000.
Charles Royce's Pennsylvania Mutual Fund is also a big holder.
These investors are known for their bargain-hunting skill.
At first glance, their presence in Newhall seems incongruous because Newhall stock looks expensive by standard measures.
For example, it sells for 40 times the company's per-share earnings for the past four quarters.
But the fact Newhall has any earnings at all, given the recent economy of California, is "heroic," says one broker who follows the stock.
Newhall's appeal lies in its assets.
By the company's most recent appraisal, its properties are worth a bit more than $21 a share, or 50% more than the current stock price.
And even Newhall's detractors agree that the company's appraisals over the years have been conservative.
Dick Peterson, co-manager of Stein Roe Special Fund, says there is an element of judgment in valuing real estate, "sort of like valuing a Rembrandt."
His guess: The company's properties are worth about $25 to $30 a share in the current climate.
And Mr. Peterson thinks Valencia looks like a "crown jewel" for the long term.
"When you don't have to drive around earthquake damage," the site is convenient to Los Angeles, he says.
Given the "rising crime and civil disturbance" in the city, he thinks quite a few Los Angeles residents may want to move north.
In the short run, unfortunately, there's no special reason to expect the shares to outperform the overall market.
James Schmitt, an analyst at West Country Financial in Somis, Calif., says he would avoid the stock "until such time as the California real estate market looks a lot better."
Mr. Schmitt concedes that California's economy showed some movement late last year, but he regards that as a "hiccup," not the start of a solid recovery.
Jeff Everett, an analyst and money manager with the Templeton organization, says, "We see a lot of value in their land.
And they have made good progress in developing Valencia."
But he adds: "We're very disappointed with management" for not getting profits and the stock price moving more briskly.
Meanwhile, Newhall has another illustrious fan.
Peter Lynch, the investment legend who used to run the Fidelity Magellan fund, had a kind word for Newhall in a recent article he wrote for Worth magazine.
Newhall "was a spectacular stock for two decades," Mr. Lynch wrote, "and now it can be bought for half its 1989 high price."
Year ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Revenue: $105.5 million
Net income: $12.8 million; 35 cents a unit
Fourth quarter, Dec. 31, 1993:
Net income per unit: 26 cents vs. 12 cents
