U.S. FIGHTER JETS SHOT DOWN four Serb attack planes over central Bosnia.
NATO said the planes were shot down after they blatantly violated the Western alliance's "no-fly zone."
The action marked NATO's first military engagement in Bosnia and the alliance's first offensive action in its 44-year history.
U.S. Adm. Boorda, NATO commander for southern Europe, said the encounter 50 miles west of Sarajevo, should underscore the West's resolve.
Clinton played down any suggestion that the attack was a prelude to deeper military action.
Since the no-fly zone took effect last April in Bosnia, over 1,000 violations have been reported to the U.N., though almost all have been by helicopters.
CIA AGENT AMES RECEIVED well over $2.5 million from Moscow, the U.S. said.
The amount that Aldrich Ames allegedly received for spying was significantly more than the original estimate of $1.5 million, federal prosecutors said.
Furthermore, according to a prosecution document, Ames's wife has admitted the couple's involvement in espionage.
People familiar with the CIA officer's career say he worked with several major Soviet defectors during the 1980s, and more recently traveled in former East bloc countries.
Amid the fallout from the Ames case, the Russian government expelled a U.S. diplomat and fired the head of its counterintelligence service.
THE PLO REJECTED an Israeli offer to allow foreign observers in occupied lands.
The PLO's executive committee turned down Israeli concessions aimed at coaxing Palestinians back to the peace table in the wake of a mosque massacre, saying the proposals didn't go far enough in protecting Palestinians.
Israel reportedly had offered to disarm settlers and expand a proposed Palestinian police force.
But the main stumbling block was an offer made by Israel's Rabin to allow unarmed international observers in the occupied territories.
"We still insist on military and armed peacekeeping force to protect our people," a top PLO official said after the committee rejected the reported offer.
New York University was bequeathed Sir Harold Acton's estate in Tuscany, as well as art and cash.
NYU said the British historian's gift is probably the biggest ever given to an American university, but the school's president said he couldn't place a precise dollar value on the land, villas and art.
The Supreme Court will decide whether a statute barring child pornography violates the First Amendment.
The Justice Department is appealing a lower court's ruling that the law is unconstitutional because it doesn't clearly require that prosecutors prove that distributors or buyers knew the material depicted minors.
Clinton traveled to Chicago in a bid to boost Rostenkowski's re-election prospects, declaring that the White House needed the congressman to get its health-care and welfare initiatives passed.
The Illinois Democrat, under investigation for possible misuse of funds, faces a primary election on March 15.
The U.S. plans to announce today a late March date for the resumption of high-level talks with North Korea and cancellation of military exercises with South Korea, a State Department official said.
But the resumption would be reconsidered if U.N. experts find Pyongyang pursued a nuclear program in violation of international commitments.
Sen. Packwood shouldn't be allowed to withhold his diaries from the Senate Ethics Committee while he appeals its subpoena, the panel's lawyers told Chief Justice Rehnquist.
On Friday, the Oregon Republican asked Rehnquist to block a federal judge's ruling that ordered the diaries to be turned over to the committee.
Mexican rebel leaders stepped up their rhetoric about the need for reform despite reports that they may reach a tentative peace pact with the government as early as today.
The chief rebel spokesman insisted that the current government must resign.
The federal Brady law took effect, requiring firearms dealers in 32 states to take new steps to keep felons from buying handguns.
Many dealers criticized the complexity of the new rules for background checks needed for gun buyers.
The government said 18 states are exempt because they already have acceptable requirements.
