Word that the budget deficit is actually declining has unleashed a wave of unjustified euphoria in some quarters about the state of federal finances.
Now that last year's tax increases and spending restraints are firmly in place, and a plan promising much slower growth in health-care costs is in the pipeline, some argue that the messy job of reducing the deficit is pretty much done.
"If we continue to stick to the deficit-reduction plan, then we clearly have set the deficit on a downward track," Budget Director Leon Panetta said the other day.
"If we can enact health-care reform, we can continue that track into the next century."
Don't bet on it.
Even if Congress passes health reform in some fashion, another round of broad-based tax increases and benefit cuts probably will be needed before the decade ends.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, for one, says so publicly.
After listening to Mr. Panetta's comment, Mr. Bentsen stepped to the microphone and said, "Let me add to that that I think over the years to come we'll be looking for additional cuts in that deficit."
Yes, last year's law took a substantial bite out of the deficit -- $433 billion over five years -- improving the long-term outlook.
In marked contrast to the months following the 1990 deficit-reduction effort, there have been no unpleasant surprises so far, except for the Los Angeles earthquake, which will cost the federal government about $8 billion.
Mr. Panetta is also right that the soaring cost of federal spending on health programs for the poor and the old, Medicaid and Medicare, is the reason the deficit will rise again under current policies.
The top line on the accompanying chart shows what the Congressional Budget Office predicts if the federal government fails to restrain its health-care spending.
The bottom line shows what would happen if the growth rate of Medicare and Medicare spending were halved and spending on these programs grew at the same pace as everything else in the federal budget.
But only a few people -- President Clinton's health adviser Ira Magaziner is one -- believe the government can simultaneously guarantee health insurance to all and save the government substantial sums over the next five or six years.
The top line on the chart may be too pessimistic, but the bottom line is probably too optimistic; ending up somewhere between the two leaves a deficit still too large to ignore.
"Is health care the solution?
Part of it, but not all of it," says Robert Shapiro of the Progressive Policy Institute, a centrist Democratic think tank.
"My judgment," says economist Charles Schultze of the Brookings Institution, "is that nothing that can reasonably be done in the way of health-care reform, even if successful in the long run, is going to control the growing cost of medical care sufficiently to give us a desirable budgetary picture around the turn of the century."
Mr. Magaziner is impatient with this view, arguing that there is so much waste in the U.S. health-care system that there must be room to save big bucks.
But even if Congress tackles the health-care issue this year, it could take a decade before anyone knows whether Congress is successfully controlling federal health spending.
Meanwhile, the deficit could start to widen again.
It won't provoke a catastrophic stock-market crash or a sudden recession, but it will continue to erode the prospects for the future.
A big -- and it's still big -- government deficit shows that the nation continues to spend too much for today and to set aside too little for tomorrow.
There is another reason to act soon.
Making economic predictions beyond 2004 is generally foolish, but one sure fact is that the baby boomers, the oldest of whom turn 48 this year, will be closer to retirement at that time.
And the closer the baby boomers are to retiring, the harder it will be for politicians to make the changes in Social Security and Medicare that most economists think are needed to prevent enormous deficits or huge tax increases in the future.
The baby boomers will get whatever retirement benefits have been promised.
"We will be politically powerful enough to ensure that," says Deborah Steelman, a Republican baby boomer who headed a commission that examined all this in 1991.
"We will hurt the generations behind us."
The law already provides that the Social Security retirement age is to climb gradually from 65 to 66 in 2009 and 67 in 2027.
With people living longer and longer, Mr. Bentsen has said it is time to think about accelerating that timetable or raising the age further.
Others suggest making the elderly pay more of the Medicare tab or trimming or taxing benefits paid to the relatively well-off or imposing new broad-based taxes now.
None of this will be mentioned in the budget Mr. Clinton unveils today.
Enact my health-care plan, he will say, and we can slay the deficit dragon.
But a hard look at the underlying trends suggests otherwise.
