The Clinton administration is developing a "concerted and coordinated program" to fight white collar and violent crime in public housing.
According to an outline of the program, called "operation safe home," it would target fraud in public housing administration, equity skimming in multifamily insured housing, and violent crime in public housing.
Vice President Gore plans to announce the program this week along with the heads of the departments of Justice, Treasury and Housing and Urban Development.
It would be another in a series of high-profile moves emphasizing the administration's commitment to combatting crime.
"This effort is entirely consistent with the president's crime initiative," says the description of the program.
"HUD housing is a major locus of violent crime.
We must not allow poor people who need HUD assistance to be continually victimized."
Federal Bureau of Investigation officials and investigators in HUD's inspector general's office probing housing fraud expect "a series of simultaneous arrests, searches and indictments within six to nine months," it says.
Justice and HUD officials would develop a strategy for cases where private owners illegally divert project funding, "resulting in huge losses in taxpayer money and substandard living conditions," according to the outline.
One official said such schemes could include the over-valuation of a property in order to obtain excessive government-backed financing for its remodeling.
Officials believe about 25% of HUD's $50 billion fund for multifamily housing projects is at risk of being hit by fraudulent operators.
Law enforcement officials plan to establish federal, state and local task forces to attack crime in public and assisted housing.
The Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the Secret Service, along with the Drug Enforcement Administration, the FBI, U.S. attorneys and HUD's inspector general's office would work with local police departments, housing management and resident groups under the plan.
Officials in the inspector general's office, according to the outline, will focus "on major integrity and abuse issues, rather than on strict bureaucratic compliance with rules and regulations."
Separately, Attorney General Janet Reno continued her search for someone to succeed Deputy Attorney General Philip Heymann, who announced his resignation Thursday.
Among those mentioned as possible candidates are Jo Ann Harris, assistant attorney general for the criminal division; Jamie Goerlick, general counsel at the Pentagon; Charles Ruff, a Washington lawyer who previously served in several Justice Department positions; and Irvin Nathan, Mr. Heymann's principal deputy.
