This is a story about bikers, coleslaw wrestling and a man who wants to be the bikers' lawyer, John Rue.
Mr. Rue, who lives near Daytona Beach, Fla., had a brainstorm years ago: While the world was full of motorcycle riders, none of them seemed to realize they might deserve compensation for personal injuries suffered while riding.
But how could Rue, Bush & Ziffra go after these underserved clients?
"It's hard to get their names," Mr. Rue says.
"Some of them are crazy."
That's where the coleslaw wrestling came in.
Bike Week is held annually in Daytona Beach, and last week was the 53rd.
Cruising among bikers from all over the U.S. -- as he has for the past several years -- was Mr. Rue, riding on his own hog (a 91FXR Harley Sportster), passing out brochures stamped "All Injuries Are Personal" and wearing a black T-shirt with his firm's name on the back.
"I don't put on office clothes," he says.
"The bikers that don't know me would probably think I was a cop."
Mr. Rue also oversaw Bike Week events co-sponsored by his firm, including a coleslaw-wrestling contest involving scantily clad women, a wet T-shirt contest and a Japanese "motorcycle drop" at a popular biker bar.
At the drop, Japanese-made bikes that had been drained of oil were hoisted up and allowed to run until the engines seized up and exploded.
Then the bikes were dropped to the ground.
The annual get-together has been lucrative for Mr. Rue.
With bikers "in a partying mood, the police are going to stop people for various violations," he says.
"They're going to drink too much and get into altercations."
After last year's Bike Week, Mr. Rue says, he ended up with 35 new clients.
In general, about 20% of his cases now involve bikers.
Mr. Rue says his friendship with biker-bar owners has also helped business.
And he credits changing demographics.
"The people coming to Bike Week now are more affluent members of society," he says.
As a result, they are less wary of lawyers.
According to Stephen Gillers, a professor of legal ethics at New York University, as long as Mr. Rue "doesn't say anything false or misleading or make personal approaches" to potential clients, the ethics rules for lawyers won't get in the way.
Mr. Rue's Bike Week promotion is "the equivalent of the white-shoe law firm supporting National Public Radio," Mr. Gillers adds.
