President Clinton hailed Richard Nixon as his health care ally Tuesday night, but the next day the former president stopped by Capitol Hill for a lunch in his honor sponsored by Sen. Bob Dole.
"I'm for the Dole bill," the old GOP prince said later to a wandering TV camera.
"Whatever it is, I'm for it."
Bob Dole relates that story with just a hint of glee, as if he's relishing even that small victory over a newly confident, revived Bill Clinton.
The Senate minority leader doesn't yet have his own health bill, but he does have a strategy for beating Mr. Clinton's.
To make it work, he needs at least 41 Senate Republicans united against the Clinton plan, enough to imply a filibuster.
"If we're going to be players, we have to stay on the same ship," he says.
"We're not there yet."
Mr. Nixon's reappearance is especially apt, because Bill Clinton wants to do again to Republicans what Democrats did to them back in the Nixonian 1960s and 1970s.
The model is the politics of the Great Society.
Democrats proposed bills, and Republicans replied not with principled opposition but with what they called Constructive Republican Alternative Proposals.
Democrats quickly turned that into a pungent acronym.
LBJ triumphed by peeling off enough fearful Republicans, who got no political credit in any event.
Last fall Republicans seemed poised for another such ritual suicide.
Their "constructive alternatives" sprouted.
Hillary was hailed.
Even Mr. Dole treaded lightly on a Clinton plan that would be the largest government intrusion into private life since Mr. Nixon imposed wage and price controls.
But slowly the GOP has begun to understand the stakes.
Mr. Dole says he saw growing opposition back home in Kansas, but he can also read polls.
Approval for Clintoncare has fallen to 42%-39% in January from 51%-18% in September, according to the latest Wall Street Journal/NBC survey.
More revealing yet: Those who have health insurance now oppose the Clinton plan, 42% to 39%.
And the insured tend to vote.
With an eye on 1996, Mr. Dole has also watched his potential adversaries outflank him on the right.
First Texas Sen. Phil Gramm assailed Clintoncare as the social engineering it is.
Then Dick Cheney endorsed the analysis by strategist Bill Kristol that there really is no "health care crisis," so Clinton radicalism is unneeded and dangerous.
Mr. Dole has now decided to lead this line of attack.
Mr. Dole assumes the State of the Union afterglow will buoy the Clinton plan for a while.
Then Democrats will "ramrod something through the House" on a partisan vote.
But as the facts become better known, the plan's popularity will fade.
About that time the bill will hit the Senate Finance Committee, where Mr. Dole and only an 11-9 Democratic advantage await.
Also waiting is Democratic Chairman Pat Moynihan, who has said that no health reform will pass that Bob Dole hasn't approved.
But only if 41 Republicans are united will they have the leverage to work with moderate Democrats and purge Clintoncare's price controls, business mandates and vast bureaucracies.
"I think we can do it," Mr. Dole says, adding that "it may be a little brass knuckles."
By that he means he may have to persuade some of his less principled colleagues.
John Chafee, the Rhode Island liberal, is already nervous about the new Dole strategy.
He's on Bill and Hillary's schmooze list.
With only 44 Senate seats, and Vermont's James Jeffords already a sellout, Mr. Dole may have to strangle the drifters.
To peel off Mr. Chafee and others, the White House will try to frame the choice as its reform ("for health care") or nothing.
Mr. Dole's sensible reply is to ask Republicans to rally around a single bill, similar to the one introduced in 1991 by Mr. Clinton's own treasury secretary, Lloyd Bentsen.
This would reform the health insurance market, allaying the middle-class anxieties (such as portability) that Mr. Clinton likes to exploit, but without endorsing a vast liberal experiment.
Mr. Dole isn't impressed with the president's threat to veto such a nonradical reform.
"Do you really think he's going to veto a bill passed by a Democrat Congress?" he asks.
"It may be an empty threat."
Drawing bright lines on health care is especially valuable to Republicans now that Mr. Clinton is erasing them on crime and welfare.
The parody of liberal activism that is the Clinton plan is one of the few openings Democrats are giving Republicans for November's elections.
Even Mr. Clinton seems to understand this weakness because on Tuesday he was at pains to say we need "guaranteed private insurance" even as he trashed private insurers.
Bill McInturff, a GOP pollster, says that when he explains Clintoncare details to focus groups, some people simply don't believe them: "They say, `You can't do that in America.'"
This suggests an opening for Republicans to lift their arguments beyond health care details to a broader vision of individual liberty.
Bob Dole has excelled as a strategist, but he has yet to provide such a vision to compete with Mr. Clinton's security state.
This year, he'll have to do both -- to keep his 41 votes, and to stay in the running for the presidency.
