I am disappointed in the tone and context of your Jan. 17 article on Alaska Pulp Co.
I've spent my adult life in business, and I am knowledgeable about the timber industry in southeastern Alaska.
I'm CEO of a company that owns and develops timberlands, and am a board member of the Alaska Forest Association, which represents the timber owners, loggers, road builders and mills in the state.
I live and make my living in the Tongass National Forest.
Your article assigns a motive to the U.S. Forest Service without any supporting evidence.
The fact is that the service issued a notice of contract cancellation.
The motive of the service is not evident in this notice.
You offer the opinion of some that there has been overcutting in the Tongass.
You do not offer the opinion of those who are actually in charge of the program there.
The facts are that, of the 17 million acres in the Tongass National Forest, only one-tenth of 1% will be harvested each year.
Over the 100-year rotation cycle, 10% will be harvested.
Forty percent of the Tongass is in land-use designations that are either wilderness, or limited access.
Twenty-three percent of the Tongass is designated for intensive uses (which include logging), but less than half of that area will be used for logging.
You provide opinions of "environmental attorneys."
By whose standards do you measure whether an individual is "environmental"?
Those of us who live and work here were conservationists long before the new terms were coined.
We care more than any political advocacy group that our harvest practices leave the land fertile and able to support a new crop.
We obey the law, monitor the health of fish streams, build roads to specifications that control runoff, leave buffers around water bodies, avoid steep slopes, elevate logs over stream beds and generally take good care of the land.
The difference between those in the timber industry and those referred to as "environmentalists" is a matter of politics and values, not husbandry.
You refer to a timber sale on Prince of Wales Island, incorrectly placing it on "Crown Prince William" Island.
The error suggests indifference to the facts of the present debate on the Tongass.
In my youth I learned to know a "good drying day."
Breezy and sunny conditions offered the opportunity, and initiative and effort produced the result.
So it is in the Tongass.
This is good timber-growing country.
Rain and moderate temperature offer the opportunity.
We do the rest.
We have not wreaked environmental havoc.
The salmon streams are productive.
The areas cut are in sustainable proportion to the forecast demand.
The other species here have viable habitat.
The world demand for fiber will be supplied from some source.
Far better the supply come from the Tongass where state and federal law and common sense achieve these results, than from another country with less regulatory and self-control.
