At last count, rubles were trading at 10,000 to the dollar on Moscow's black market.
Here, in this frozen outpost, you can't give them away.
At the Board of Trade bar, rubles serve as beer coasters.
Down the street at Maruskiya's store, owner Marty James points to shoe boxes of rubles and mutters about "the pounding I took on that stuff."
A sign outside the Music Mart hawks "Turbo, GrafX and Kopecks"; the computer games sell, the Russian coins don't.
Laments the store's Erna Rasmussen: "I don't know how we'll ever get rid of them."
Folks in Nome, indeed, throughout Alaska, are starting to voice similar concerns about the Russians themselves.
In an experiment that will go down -- way down -- in the history of economic blunders, Nome merchants decided a few years back to recast this old gold-rush town as the hub of Russo-Alaskan trade.
The Siberian border, a westward seagull's flap across the Bering Strait, had just been opened after four decades of truly cold war.
Russians were streaming into Alaska through the so-called Ice Curtain to taste the long-forbidden fruits of American life -- mainly shopping.
For many, Nome was their first stop; Nome merchants wanted to make sure the Russian buck stopped here.
So, no matter that, at the time, rubles weren't convertible into hard currency.
Nome started accepting rubles -- at the charitable rate of one ruble to the dollar.
The Cold War might have left the Russians numb, but not dumb.
They came in hordes, rubles flying out of their pockets.
Reality came, too.
Rubles joined the world-currency market.
Now Nome is up to its civic eyeballs in rubles -- worthless rubles -- and a big chill has settled over Russo-Alaskan relations.
For the Russian invasion hasn't just included Kmart-bound Ivans and entrepreneurial Igors.
It has also brought legions of freeloaders, sad sacks, mobsters, and -- if the rumors are to be believed -- former agents of the KGB as well.
They stay, they mooch; some of them steal and scam.
They also are wearing out the welcome for the majority of law-abiding Russians who come on legitimate business.
"The bloom is off the Russian rose," observes Jim Stimpfle, Nome's only real-estate agent.
This is a startling comment from Mr. Stimpfle, who dreamed up the ruble exchange and is perhaps the most vocal booster of Russo-Alaskan relations (among other things, he is promoting an Alaska-Siberia tunnel).
He has put up more than 30 Russian visitors at his house in the past two years, but he can't put up with more.
"I had to stop bringing them home," he says.
"My wife was going to strangle me."
Dave Olson, a Nome-based pilot, recalls how a Russian he had barely met showed up at his house, along with wife and toddler, for a proposed two-week visit.
"Then, he dumped the wife and kid with me and took off for Anchorage," Mr. Olson recounts.
Six weeks later, Mr. Olson finally got a message to the Russian: Get back here, get your family and get going.
"You want to extend hospitality, but you wind up feeling taken advantage of," he says.
The sheer haplessness of some Russian visitors is beginning to wear on many Alaskans.
"Somehow, Russians always seem to end up broke and in need of rescue," says Jon Girard, an electrician who has housed many Russians.
He cites the Russian sailors whose leaky mock-up viking ships almost sank during a joint commemoration of the 200th anniversary of explorer Vitus Bering's wanderings.
The Russians listed into Anchorage penniless; Alaskans had to bail them out.
Last year, a folk-dance troupe ran out of money and had to be rescued by Anchorage church groups.
Some of these problems reflect cultural differences.
For one thing, the Russian view of hospitality is more expansive than the Alaskan view.
If you tell a Russian "he ought to drop in and visit if he's in the neighborhood, you better mean it," advises Kent Lee Woodman.
"He'll soon be on your doorstep -- with family in tow."
And such differences aside, some Alaskans also take pains to note that the Russo-Alaskan experience hasn't been all bad.
When, for example, the civic choir from Magadan, a major Siberian town, sang "God Bless America" at the Anchorage Convention Center a few years back, many Alaskans in the audience were so touched that they wept.
Alaskan-Russian marriages are proliferating: 50 so far.
Mr. Woodman, president of the Russian-Alaskan Friendship and Trade Center, says the Russians are "wonderful people."
He should know: He has had more than 60 Russian house guests.
Still, no one maintains there aren't troubling elements, especially the crooks.
"When the border opened up, it opened up for the bad guys as well as the good guys," says Burdena Pasenelli, until recently the head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Alaska office.
She says detectives are on the trail of various Russian mafia and rumored ex-KGB operatives, including a walrus-tusk smuggling ring that they suspect is controlled by ex-KGB men.
(The walrus is federally protected and its tusks can't be sold or imported.)
Then there are the petty, but annoying, criminals.
For the third consecutive year, several teenage Russian hockey players were nabbed for shoplifting during Anchorage's World Junior Hockey League tournament.
(In a postscript that galls many Alaskans, the players were bailed out by team officials, permitted to play and hustled home before their court dates.)
Atop that are the black marketeers, who swing into action every Wednesday night when the weekly Aeroflot flight arrives from Magadan.
They pack the terminal bearing huge packages, hoping to bribe the flight crew to take stuff back to Magadan, where it will be sold on the black market at huge markups.
(Aeroflot crewmembers are said to get minimal static from border guards.)
But on a recent Wednesday night, the Aeroflot pilot races to a waiting cab, fending off the throng.
"Costco!" he shouts to the driver, Costco being a big discount department store that has become a sort of mecca for Russian visitors.
Suddenly, the cab is surrounded by screaming Russians.
The driver looks stricken.
The mob eventually lets the cab pass -- after the pilot agrees to stow away much of the hustlers' cargo.
"It's like this every Wednesday," observes an airport security guard.
"Somebody's going to get trampled one of these days."
Jim Rowe, owner of Bering Air, a commuter airline, feels like he has already been trampled.
He may have been the biggest loser in Nome's ruble fiasco, accumulating nearly 200,000 rubles ferrying Russians to Nome.
Now, rubles are worthless here and Russian authorities, for reasons that aren't entirely clear, won't let him spend them there.
Mr. Rowe figures he is out thousands of more dollars on the many free passages to Siberia he has given to penniless, ticketless Russians who show up at the Nome airport.
"I know I shouldn't just give service away, but what else can I do?" he asks.
Chimes his wife, Chris: "If we didn't fly them back, we'd have to put them up."
She rolls her eyes.
