Surging freight shipments aggravated by this winter's cold and ice are straining the capacity of Conrail Inc., leading to delays, disruptions and higher costs for rail shippers.
The severe winter weather that battered the Midwest and Northeast has been largely responsible for the slowed trains, clogged freight yards and snarled shipments at Conrail.
But shippers complain that the railroad was caught short, lacking enough locomotives and train crews to handle a pickup in shipments and affected by the closing of part of a big Conrail freight yard near Harrisburg, Pa., last autumn.
Other railroads with operations in the East, such as Norfolk Southern Corp. and CSX Corp., were also hurt by weather-related problems, but none as much as Conrail, which has many of its key lines and yards in areas hit hardest by the storms.
Conrail, which operates about 11,400 miles of rail routes in 13 states in the Northeast and Midwest, accounts for about 12% of total rail revenue among the nation's major railroads.
Despite the approaching spring, officials at Philadelphia-based Conrail say they don't expect a full recovery of service to shippers for as long as 60 days.
"We have seen the poorest service from Conrail in our 12-year history," said Marc Levine, general manager of the Pioneer Valley Railroad, a short-line carrier in Westfield, Mass., that relies on Conrail for the long-haul movement of rail cars.
"Deliveries to our railroad have been delayed, outbound shipments haven't been picked up for days and our customers' satisfaction with rail service in general has been diminished."
The disruption to rail transportation in the East and Midwest has worsened a shortage of certain types of freight cars throughout the country.
As a result, Chrysler Corp. is having trouble getting its hottest-selling cars and trucks to dealers on the West Coast.
Some shippers have turned to long-haul trucks to move time-sensitive freight, incurring higher shipping costs.
Others are boosting in-transit inventories to accomodate longer shipping schedules.
"There hasn't been an area on the Conrail system where we haven't experienced slowdowns and delays," said Ron Weber, director of marketing services at Air Products & Chemicals Inc. in Allentown, Pa.
The company has secured additional tank cars to keep chemicals moving to customers.
"It is starting to come around, but there are still delays."
For its part, Conrail says it experienced its worst winter in 15 years.
"We got hit hard in January, hit hard again in February and hit hard in early March," said James Hagen, Conrail's chairman, president and chief executive officer.
"It really never let up."
The railroad couldn't run long freight trains because air brakes don't work properly in extreme cold, forcing Conrail to use shorter trains and thus using up more locomotives and train crews.
Frozen switch tracks prevented deliveries to customers.
The winter weather increased locomotive and signal system failures.
Earlier this month, an avalanche buried portions of Conrail's Harrisburg-Buffalo rail line under as much as 40 feet of snow.
But Conrail also was caught off guard by a sudden boost in shipments, reflecting a pickup in the economy and more shippers attracted by improvements in rail service.
Conrail's freight traffic is running about 11% ahead of a year ago.
"Even if we hadn't had this horrible winter, we would have had some service disruptions," said Gordon Kuhn, a Conrail senior vice president.
"We didn't adequately plan locomotive power and manpower for the business.
But this whole industry for a long time has done nothing but downsize.
We haven't had a lot of experience planning for growth."
Conrail officials say they are gradually working their way out of the mess, helped by two weeks of favorable weather that has allowed the railroad to run longer trains.
Conrail recently took back 90 locomotives it had leased to a Western railroad.
And it is hiring 85 new train crew members, and may hire more in the next few months.
A Conrail official said the severe winter will have a "significant adverse effect on earnings" in the first quarter, but "I don't think it will throw us into the red on operations" before a pretax charge of $75 million to $85 million associated with an early retirement program.
In the year-earlier quarter, Conrail had earnings of $46 million, or 52 cents a share, excluding extraordinary charges for accounting changes.
Some shippers sympathize with Conrail, because their own operations were hurt by the severe winter.
"We all seemed to experience the same storms to the same level," said Kathy Wright, director of global distribution at DuPont Co.
But other shippers and short-line railroads complain that Conrail's intense focus on squeezing productivity from fewer assets left it with little flexibility when faced with traffic growth and difficult weather.
"They downsized, and maybe they downsized too much," said Clifford Hopler, transportation manager of Suburban Propane, which is owned by Hanson PLC.
Faced with delayed shipments on Conrail this winter, Suburban Propane turned to trucks for certain shipments.
Philip Light, president of the Winchester & Western Railroad, faults Conrail for shutting down much of its big Enola switching yard near Harrisburg in October.
Freight cars that were sorted by the yard were rerouted to other Conrail yards, adding several days to the transit time of some freight handled jointly by the two railroads, he said.
"They are saving some money, but it is hurting some other people," said Mr. Light.
Conrail officials defend the move.
David LeVan, Conrail's executive vice president, said the company sought to avoid the large capital expenditure to bring the outmoded yard in line with its more modern facilities.
But Mr. LeVan said Conrail will increase its spending on locomotives and train crews to avoid a repeat of this winter's rail disruptions.
