Chinese mainland authorities are offering to repatriate some of the $35 million worth of yachts stolen in a recent wave of thefts at Hong Kong marinas.
But Guangdong Province police chief Chen Shaoji was reported by the South China Morning Post to be suggesting that the owners should compensate the innocent mainlanders who bought the boats.
"These buyers did not know these yachts were stolen from Hong Kong," he was quoted as saying.
"Moreover, they did not break the law when they made the purchase."
How could they?
China has no law governing the sale of luxury yachts.
People here with a knowledge of mainland ways -- meaning just about everybody -- know that out of 1.2 billion Chinese there couldn't be more than two with the means to afford a yacht who wouldn't be shrewd enough to learn its origin, even without a brass plate on the flying bridge saying "Stolen in Hong Kong."
Mainland Chinese may have faults, but innocence is not one of them.
What began as mere yacht theft now looks more like boatnapping for ransom, with Chinese cops trying to collect the swag.
People here also have little trouble imagining involvement of various mainland authorities in other crimes committed in Hong Kong.
Some stories of the traffic in stolen goods from Hong Kong to the mainland may be apocryphal but most are probably true.
There is, for example, the tale of a Hong Kong man who while being chauffeured in an official Mercedes in Quangdong Province looked at the floor mat, recognized a familiar coffee stain and realized that this car had been his before it joined the parade of stolen Mercs that cross the border to the mainland every year.
Sometimes the prey is larger.
The Alicia Star, a cargo ship bound from Singapore to Korea, went missing early this year and after three weeks was found to be in the custody of authorities in the Chinese port of Shanwei.
Just before it disappeared on the high seas between the Philippines and Taiwan, the Alicia Star was able to report by secret transmitter that it was being boarded by men in green uniforms bearing automatic weapons.
The Shanwei authorities released it but not before liberating its cargo of $5 million of Marlboro cigarets.
These examples are but a sampling of activities engaging the energies of mainland Chinese police, military and political authorities, activities that the western world more normally associates with criminal gangs.
Angelina Malhotra wrote in last month's edition of the magazine Asia, Inc. about the revival of sin in Shanghai, a city notorious for debauchery in the 1920s and 1930s.
"Police, PLA {People's Liberation Army} and party members are opening their own nightclubs and brothels and signing joint-venture agreements, often with criminal organizations from overseas," she reported.
It is of course well known that the PLA, aside from serving as China's army, also is a vast business organization, trading in arms and a wide variety of other products and services.
Ms. Malhotra quotes a Hong Kong analyst as estimating that the PLA's business ventures added some $27 billion to its $57 billion 1993 budget.
It is this China that U.S. Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher will visit Friday, assuming that China's behavior in the meantime doesn't force him to cancel.
That behavior, renewed harassing of leading political dissidents, may be associated with the Christopher visit.
But probably it is more related to the beginning Thursday of the Communist Party's National People's Congress, an event that normally is preceded by efforts to intimidate anti-party forces.
This doesn't augur well for the Christopher visit, of course.
He has said that human rights will be at the top of his agenda for discussions with China's leaders.
The U.S. says improvements in human rights are a condition for continuing Most Favored Nation trading status for China.
It might seem at first glance that there is little connection between China's human rights abuses and the extent of official corruption or involvement by Chinese officials in immoral activities.
But in fact there is a very close connection.
It is to be found in the mores that develop among wielders of power in any totalitarian system, which Communist China has of course been throughout its 45-year history.
"It has to do with the absence of a rule of law," says a young American diplomat over drinks at the Oriental Hotel in Bangkok.
"The authorities come to feel that they are answerable to nobody but themselves."
When the lines of authority in such a system break down, the use of power by local cadres, most often for self-enrichment, know few bounds.
Self-enrichment, of course, is preferable to the abuses of power that were commonplace when lines of authority were strong.
Theft and graft are far more tolerable than the murders committed by the Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution.
Reality sharply contrasts with the purification myths Communist and other totalitarian regimes have used to justify their repressions.
Mao Tse-tung professed a desire to create a "new man" in China but behind the scenes he himself, with his appetites for young women, was hardly a role model for this imagined paragon.
China's move from totalitarian corruption toward a more open system still bereft of a functioning rule of law presents problems for the western world.
They go beyond the issue of human rights.
According to Bertil Lintner, writing in the Far Eastern Economic Review, China's improvements in its relations with the military government of Burma has led to an expansion of opium production along Burma's border with China.
To help Burma ply tribal insurgents with a cash income, China has become an outlet for shipping opium from border distilleries to the outside world.
According to Mr. Lintner, Burma now accounts for some 60% of opium production world-wide.
It is the major source of heroin sold on the streets of American cities.
China has paid its own price.
Opium addiction, along with disease, crime and other side effects of drug use, are rising in China's Yunnan Province, which borders Burma.
How hard will it be for ex-Communist countries to achieve a rule of law?
First they will have to achieve constitutional democracy.
Russia, to its credit, is at least ahead of China on that front, but of course still is troubled with its own lawlessness.
The answer would seem to be that it takes a long time to overwhelm the vested interests of totalitarianism.
A man who can hold the yachts of millionaires for ransom with impunity is not likely to give up that power very willingly.
