Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. launched a full-scale counterattack yesterday aimed at discrediting John Sculley's contention that he quit because he had been misled about the company's deepening problems.
The new effort by the company, whose stock price fell about 65% in the wake of Mr. Sculley's sudden resignation this week, draws hard battle lines between the two sides: Mr. Sculley, the former chairman of Apple Computer Inc., claims he was duped by the company, and the company claims Mr. Sculley is lying.
Spectrum general counsel Christopher Franco, in making the company's most detailed response yet to Mr. Sculley's charges, provided company documents and described meetings in which Mr. Sculley supposedly learned of Spectrum's problems.
The issues include stock options exercised by top insiders and a probe by the Securities and Exchange Commission into the company's licensing agreements and alleged stock manipulation.
Meanwhile, the company said it learned late yesterday that its new auditor, KMPG Peat Marwick, had resigned.
Mr. Sculley had hired the firm to perform an audit of the company, which led Spectrum to restate its earnings Monday, turning purported profits into outright losses.
Mr. Sculley quit the tiny wireless communications company on Monday, simultaneously filing a lawsuit in federal district court in New York City against Spectrum's president, Peter Caserta.
The $10 million suit charges Mr. Caserta with withholding information about the federal probe and the accounting problem that forced Spectrum to restate its numbers for the past two quarters.
According to the suit, Mr. Sculley also was surprised to learn that Mr. Caserta and two insiders exercised options at a combined profit of more than $13 million a month after Mr. Sculley joined the company.
But Spectrum's Mr. Franco paints a far different picture of what Mr. Sculley knew and when he learned of it.
The company said it will disclose more details today in a lawsuit it plans to file against Mr. Sculley in federal court in New York or Connecticut.
Mr. Franco said, for example, that Mr. Sculley was fully informed about Spectrum's problems, including the federal probe, before he joined the company.
Mr. Franco said Mr. Sculley discussed the SEC probe with Mr. Caserta and other Spectrum executives at a dinner at Campagnola, a restaurant in New York City on Oct. 15 -- three days before Mr. Sculley joined the company.
In addition, while Mr. Sculley expressed surprise at the insider trades, Mr. Franco provided a company document signed by Mr. Sculley that explicitly states that Mr. Caserta would exercise options for at least one million shares after Nov. 15 and that other company insiders had the right to do so, as well.
Then again, the document also assured Mr. Sculley that "Spectrum executives don't wish to take any actions which might be interpreted as showing a lack of commitment to Spectrum."
Yet Mr. Caserta and the two other insiders who exercised a large chunk of their options didn't hold on to any of the shares, dumping them all into the market in late November and early December.
Mr. Sculley wouldn't comment on Spectrum's salvo, preferring to let a spokeswoman handle his rebuttal.
She said Mr. Sculley thought the SEC probe had been concluded before he arrived at Spectrum and that he had expected the insiders would sell their stock "in an orderly fashion, and that they wouldn't do it with inside knowledge, such as the SEC investigation."
On another matter, Spectrum's general counsel, Mr. Franco, said Mr. Sculley could have learned of the company's accounting problems simply by reading the company's quarterly statements filed with the SEC.
Instead, Mr. Franco contended, Mr. Sculley disengaged himself from Spectrum's daily operations and went on a hunt for acquisitions with a consultant, Arjun Gupta.
Mr. Sculley had even hoped to have Mr. Gupta, who couldn't be located for comment, named Spectrum's chief operating officer -- which would mean diluting Mr. Caserta's influence.
"There was a clash throughout John's tenure between John and Peter and Spectrum management," Mr. Franco said.
"There was a lot of disruption, with people not knowing who's on first."
In fact, Mr. Sculley kept Spectrum's executives in the dark about his plans to leave the company until only five minutes before the stock market opened on Monday morning.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Sculley said he held his fire because he wanted to complete his duties as chief executive before making his announcement.
Mr. Franco noted that he and Mr. Sculley had met just a week ago with a tenant in New York's Seagram's building about leasing space for Spectrum's new corporate headquarters.
Mr. Sculley asked the tenant to draw up a sublease agreement for 5,000 square feet of space.
Then over the past weekend Mr. Sculley spoke with Spectrum's attorneys about changing the Manhasset, N.Y., company's name to Global Wave Communications Corp., Mr. Franco said.
But Mr. Franco didn't notice anything unusual about Mr. Sculley's routine until Monday morning -- five minutes before the market opened.
Earlier that morning at about 6:30 a.m., he said, Mr. Sculley and he had agreed to publicly disclose the earnings restatement at 9:20 a.m., about 10 minutes before the market opened.
Later on, about 9:25 a.m., Mr. Sculley called Mr. Franco back and demanded proof that the announcement had been made.
"When I gave it to him, he said that he planned to announce that he was resigning from Spectrum," Mr. Franco said.
"I said `John, the market opens in five minutes.'"
Spectrum's counsel frantically called the NASD to halt trading in the company's stock, but the exchange wasn't able to call a halt until 9:34 a.m.
By that time more than a million shares had already traded, the first in a run that by the end of the day would amount to 35 million shares, the largest volume in NASD history.
