There comes a moment in any major Washington scandal when the ordinary rules of the game are suspended, and new "scandal rules" begin to apply.
This week that moment was reached in the Whitewater affair.
The ordinary rules of Washington political life are somewhat lax.
Officials can give heads-ups briefings to the White House about matters of political interest and are thought of as "team players."
In congressional testimony officials can bob and weave, and this is considered to be normal partisan or inter-branch combat.
Information is shared with political allies and withheld from enemies.
Such behavior is viewed as normal, even laudable.
Officials act this way not only because they seek recognition and reward from the president and his team but because they believe in what they're doing.
They seek to help and protect the president, to advance his agenda, and to benefit their own careers -- all at once.
This pattern of conduct is simply stopped when "scandal rules" come into effect.
All of a sudden, every action is subject to potential review not under political, but under judicial, standards.
The normal briefings given to White House lawyers or political operators are now dissected on page one of the newspapers.
Political opponents talk of conspiracy and demand resignations.
Testimony, speeches and press conferences are judged not by the broad and familiar standards of political exchange, but by whether the official told the "truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth."
Officials who delighted at seeing their names in the newspaper, who indeed schemed to reach that goal, now wince as they unwrap the paper or turn on CNN.
Charges of coverup are heard and are often unfair.
The problem, all too often, is time lag: Officials who do not realize that scandal rules are in effect continue to act under the old rules, which allow a certain amount of concealment of mistakes.
Some will pay with their jobs; others may pay an even higher price.
For an official even remotely connected to the events or the people under investigation, the moment of recognition -- when it becomes clear that a major scandal has been declared by the press -- is a sad one.
Henceforth, the official must reconsider every action he or she takes in the context of the courtroom.
The imaginary interlocutor is no longer the White House political aide demanding to know why some action was not taken, but the independent prosecutor demanding to know why it was.
Now the demands of political and personal loyalty must be given lower priority, those of self-preservation a higher one.
The official must contemplate hiring a lawyer, and paying for one out of a family budget that all of a sudden seems to be falling apart.
He or she must consider trying to avoid people who were being cultivated just a few days ago, and must wonder how this government service -- once seen as a ticket to the stars -- will affect future employment possibilities.
The effect on morale is obvious.
This is how the "scandal rules" affect the individual official.
For the administration as a whole, the consequences are equally grave.
When this conglomeration of officials begins to see some among its small and cohesive group as doomed, and some as dangerous, cohesion frays.
The ability to take risks to advance the president's agenda declines precipitously.
The assumption of future cooperation and success disappears.
This turns a president into a lame duck overnight.
The time available to plan and implement effective administration action, always in short supply, is cut back because so much effort is diverted to handling the scandal.
And above all, it's impossible for the administration to recover a sense of sure-footedness and confidence in its overall conduct.
The application of new "scandal rules" that are both unfamiliar and somewhat indeterminate makes the administration tentative where it once would have been decisive, and present-oriented where it once would have been planning for future battles -- and triumphs.
Thus the invocation of "scandal rules" this week permanently marks the Clinton administration, and not until Independent Counsel Robert Fiske closes his doors, years hence, will things ever return to normal.
When cocktail party conversations turn to which famous criminal lawyer is representing whom, and who has been before the grand jury, the spirit of politics with which the new team came to Washington -- of fun and excitement, of doing good and doing well -- is gone forever.
Mr. Abrams, assistant secretary of state for Inter-American affairs in the Reagan administration, was convicted of withholding information from Congress in the Iran-Contra affair.
President Bush subsequently pardoned him.
