Japanese stocks were sharply lower early Monday, in the wake of the failed trade talks between the U.S. and Japan.
The Nikkei Stock Average ended the morning session at 19475.65, down 515.05 points, or 2.6%.
Trading volume was relatively thin, with most investors waiting to see if the recent market rally had indeed been broken.
The market was falling in response to the stronger yen, which made strong gains after the U.S.-Japan trade talks collapsed Friday.
A stronger yen makes Japanese goods more expensive overseas, and could batter Japan's export-dependent economy.
The stock market has gained 15% this year on expectations of a Japanese business recovery, but a sharply stronger yen could change that forecast.
The currency was trading at 106.17 yen to the dollar Monday, compared with 108.25 yen before the trade talks collapsed.
"The yen's appreciation as a result of the trade talks has really changed the situation" in the market, said Shigeru Akiba, head of yen equity trading at UBS Securities Ltd.
The market could go initially as low as 19200 in response to the stronger yen, he added.
Export-dependent companies, such as electronics manufacturers and automobile makers, were among Monday morning's biggest casualties.
London shares lost ground Friday, partly on jitters about U.S. economic data, but ended up from lows, a pattern for many other European bourses.
Frankfurt stocks tumbled 1.3% because of falling German bond prices.
The Tokyo market was closed Friday for a Japanese holiday.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.02, up 0.22, reflecting increases in American and Asia/Pacific markets and a drop in markets in Europe.
Fishing stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 78.40, up 1.20, or 1.55%, with Unicord of Thailand posting a 5% gain in its local currency.
Health-care stocks trailed, at 157.81, down 2.83, or 1.76%, with Columbia/HCA Healthcare of the U.S. sliding 4.63% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index dropped 28.1 points to 3378.9, making last week's slide total 96.5 points.
The FT 30-stock index declined 24.1 points to 2595.3.
Volume was 988.2 million shares, compared with 995 million shares a day earlier.
The benchmark 100 index fell in morning dealings on nervousness about U.S. data on retail sales and producer prices, and the general uneasiness kept prices weak.
The FT 100's intraday low was 3349.3.
Once the U.S. issued the economic reports, showing producer prices rose less than expected last month and retail sales fell a bit more than anticipated, shares in London rose a little.
Though Wall Street opened slightly weaker, London investors were relieved that the data didn't produce a U.S. sell-off and prices on the British bourse moved up from lows.
Still, prices were in negative territory most of the day, with the main index marking a trading high of 3388.3.
Last week's drop was viewed as a healthy correction to help ensure a more sustainable rise in the long term.
This week, the market expects British data on inflation, retail sales and employment, and company financial results will play a bigger role in the direction of the market, which expects strong profit improvements.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index lost 28.35 points to 2090.61, marking the fifth session of sharp swings and a drop of 47.64 points last week.
Dealings have been technically focused, with a strong link between movements in German bond futures and stock prices.
Investors, uncertain about further German interest-rate cuts, have been cautious, leaving the market dominated by traders taking short-term positions, which also increases volatility.
Thursday's sharp drop on Wall Street also pressured Frankfurt stocks Friday, when issues sensitive to interest rates, such as banks and insurers, were hit hardest.
As in London, Paris stocks slid but ended up from lows, when the main index had sunk 2%, after the release of the U.S. price data, whch were considered encouraging, especially the producer price report.
And in Amsterdam, shares fell but finished above their lowest levels, as a firmer start on Wall Street improved sentiment following a London-led sell-off also influenced by pre-weekend positioning and the U.S. dollar's weakness.
In Madrid, equities fell, dragged down by a larger-than-expected rise in Spain's consumer price index for January, though prices came up from troughs after the U.S. producer-price report and Wall Street's early rise.
In Stockholm, prices dropped sharply and broadly, led down by overblown expectations about the telecommunications sector, a tendency toward higher Swedish lending rates, and poor performances on other stock exchanges.
In Zurich, shares recouped some of the steep early losses that had pushed the market down 2%, but still finished lower; rebounds occurred after the release of the U.S. data, luring bargain hunters into the market, which last week dropped a total of about 5%.
In Brussels, the market ended mainly lower, though a late surge left some stocks higher.
In Sydney, stocks rose despite some profit-taking, and the market ended the week with small gains, though investors were nervous because of a decline of foreign investors buying positions and speculation that U.S. stocks may fall this week.
In Manila, prices edged higher in light volume, boosted by local retail buying amid a continuing technical rebound following last Monday's plunge.
In Wellington, shares finished lower in quiet trading, reflecting weakness in some overseas markets.
In Bangkok, equities rose slightly in the lowest volume this year owing to bearish sentiment, with most players on the sidelines because of the Chinese New Year holiday, which closed bourses in Hong Kong, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Seoul and Taipei.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
