We know, we know: You want to be a wireless warrior, you want to be part of this great new world.
But you have no idea what anybody is talking about.
So, here's a glossary of terms to help you get started.
Advanced Mobile Phone Service (AMPS): The standard transmission scheme for analog cellular phones, based on technology developed by American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s Bell Laboratories.
Cellular providers are trying to move to an all-digital approach for cleaner calls, but AMPS will probably remain the most-used method for the next few years.
(See analog.)
Airtime: The time a user spends gabbing on a cellular phone.
Most carriers bill customers based on the total minutes they are on the air each month, and charges run 25 to 45 cents per minute, depending on the service.
(See peak, offpeak.)
Alphanumeric: A message that appears on the data screen of a pager or cellular phone.
It contains letters ("alphas") and numbers ("numerics").
Analog: The standard method of transmitting a radio phone call.
The call is converted into electrical impulses that travel in the form of radio waves, which are "analogs" -- or analogous -- to the sound waves of the original voice.
Cell: The basic geographic unit that gave cellular its name.
A cellular network in a city or county is carved into "cells," each of which is equipped with a radio transmitter/receiver.
These cells vary in size, depending upon terrain and capacity demands.
A computer at the network's switching office monitors each call, handing it off to another cell and at another frequency as needed.
(See handoff, microcells.)
Cellular Digital Packet Data (CDPD): A new method of transmitting data over the cellular network.
It places the message in digital electronic "envelopes," and sends it at high speed through underused radio channels or between pauses in cellular-phone conversations.
CDPD, which will send data as much as eight times faster than regular cellular delivery, is being introduced in some major markets this year.
Channel: The width of a spectrum band, measured in kilohertz, taken up by a radio signal.
Most phones use 30-kilohertz channels.
(See hertz and spectrum.)
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA): A type of digital-transmission system said to offer up to 20 times more capacity than conventional analog and digital cellular systems.
CDMA systems use a low-power signal spread across a wide-frequency band.
The systems assign a special electronic code (instead of a frequency) to each call signal.
This allows more calls to occupy the same space in a communications channel, and to be spread over an entire frequency band.
(See time division multiple access.)
Digital: The transmission method for sending voice or information using the binary code (ones and zeros) of computer language.
This is accomplished by transmitting on-off electrical pulses.
Dual-Mode Phones: Cellular phones that can operate in either an analog or digital mode.
Electronic Serial Number (ESN): Each cellular phone has a unique ESN programmed into it, facilitating billing.
The ESN is automatically transmitted ahead of a call to the cellular tower station.
The mobile telephone switching office then validates the ESN and puts through the call.
(See mobile telephone switching office.)
Frequency Reuse: The ability to use the same frequencies repeatedly across the different cells of a cellular system, thereby increasing call-handling capacity, despite a limited number of channels.
This is made possible by the basic cellular setup in which each cell uses the radio frequencies within its boundaries, allowing the same frequencies to be reused with little or no interference from other nearby cells.
Handoff: The process by which a switching office passes a cellular conversation from one radio frequency in one cell to another frequency in another cell.
This happens so quickly the roving user doesn't notice it-at least, when it works.
Hands-Free: A safety feature now included with most mobile phones.
By using a microphone in the car visor, drivers turn their cellular phones into speakerphones, and don't have to lift or hold the handset to their ear.
(See voice-activated.)
Hertz: Cycles per second, the international measure of frequency.
When used in relation to the radio spectrum, hertz is generally preceded by prefixes, as in kilohertz (thousands of cycles per second) and megahertz (millions of cycles).
(See spectrum.)
Horn Alert: An optional feature that automatically blows the car's horn as a substitute for the phone's regular ringer, if a call comes in.
It lets the recipient of a phone call be alerted when standing outside the car.
Message Alert: This feature, also known as the "call-in-absence" indicator, signals (usually with a light) when a call has come in.
This is particularly important if the cellular subscriber has voice mail.
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs): The 306 largest urban population markets as defined by the U.S. government; each has two licensed cellular-service operators.
Microcells: Units, smaller than cells, by which future personal communications services networks will be divided.
PCS microcellular networks will employ thousands of tiny radio transceivers in myriad microcells.
(See personal communications services.)
Mobile Phone: A cellular phone that is based in a car, truck or van.
Three types are sold-mobile, transportable and portable.
A mobile unit is attached to the vehicle, draws its power from the vehicle's battery and has an external antenna.
A portable is a one-piece, self-contained cellular telephone with the transceiver inside.
The latest phones weigh as little as six ounces and can be folded up and carried in a suit pocket or purse.
A transportable is a cellular phone that can be detached and carried outside the vehicle and has its own battery pack.
While the entire unit carries the same high-powered transmitter as car-mounted cellular units, its special carrying case isn't as small or as portable as pocket-size phones.
Mobile Telephone Switching Office (MTSO): The central computerized switch that controls the entire operations of a cellular system, monitoring all cellular calls, tracking the location of all cellular-equipped vehicles traveling in the system, arranging handoffs and billing.
No-Answer Transfer: A service that automatically transfers an incoming cellular call to another phone number if the cellular subscriber is unable to answer.
Nonwireline: A cellular-phone carrier that's one of two in any market and independent of the regular local phone service.
Customers who use the nonwireline cellular carrier operate on the cellular network's A-band.
(See wireline.)
Number Assignment Module (NAM): The cellular phone's electronic memory, and where it stores its telephone number.
Phones that have dual- or multi-NAM features offer users the option of using their phone in several different markets by registering with a local number in each location.
Off-Peak: The period during which carriers offer reduced airtime fees, usually after the close of a business day.
(See peak.)
Peak: Highest-usage period of the business day, when a cellular system carries the most calling traffic -- and when users pay through the nose for it.
Personal Communications Services (PCS): Digital wireless services that will let users make calls from lightweight pocket phones, or send data messages from the tiny communicators called personal digital assistants.
Expected to become widely available in three to five years, PCS systems will use microcells and operate at higher frequencies, and in a broader slice of the spectrum, than cellular systems.
Personal Digital Assistant (PDA): Touted often by former Apple Computer Inc.
Chairman John Sculley, the term refers to small, handy data communicators that can send their messages over wireless networks.
There's just one catch: Most of the PDAs introduced last year had little, if any, wireless capability when they were first delivered.
POP: A term for the population in the area served by a carrier.
An area with a million people is said to have one million POPs -- a million potential customers.
Repertory Dialing: Also known as "memory dialing" and "speed calling," this allows a cellular-phone user to recall one to 99 (or even more) phone numbers from a phone's memory with the touch of a button or two.
Reseller: A cellular-service distributor that reserves cellular transmission space at a discounted wholesale price from a regular carrier in its territory and then sells the service at retail prices.
Roaming: Refers to a cellular-phone subscriber's using a phone beyond his or her usual service area, such as when driving from one state to another.
Service Plan: A rate plan that a subscriber chooses when requesting cellular service.
This usually consists of a base rate for connecting to the system and a per-minute charge for usage.
Specialized Mobile Radio (SMR): A two-way radio dispatch service operating in the 800-900-megahertz frequency band.
Following the recent relaxation of federal restrictions, SMR operators who had previously handled taxi dispatches and the like have taken aim at expanding into cellular-like phone services, putting them in direct competition with cellular-phone companies.
Spectrum: The range of electromagnetic waves, which vary in length (or frequency) and intensity, and encompass sound near the low end and light toward the high end.
In between is the radio spectrum, used in wireless communications.
Spectrum is also used to refer simply to radio wavelengths.
Standby Time: The amount of time a fully charged cellular portable or transportable phone can be left turned on before the phone's batteries will lose power.
The phones must be turned on to receive a call.
Talk Time: The length of time a portable or transportable phone can be used before its battery must be recharged.
Battery capacity is usually measured by so many minutes of talk time and hours of standby time.
Talking draws additional power from the battery because the phone is transmitting and receiving during the conversation.
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA): A digital-transmission scheme for expanding the capacity of cellular systems.
TDMA can increase capacity less than the CDMA approach, but the technology is further along.
Now being installed by many carriers, TDMA transmission equipment offers three to seven times the capacity of existing cellular analog systems.
Current TDMA systems divide a channel into three time slots, each a fraction of a second.
This allows one channel to handle three calls simultaneously.
Future systems will go to seven calls at once.
Tumbling: The term for the use of a phone that has been electronically altered to steal service by constantly generating new electronic serial numbers with each call.
Each ESN is transmitted before a call, causing the cellular carrier to let the call pass, even though the call can't be traced to a billable account.
Voice-Activated: A feature of some cellular phones that lets a user dial by calling out names ("Mom") or numbers to the cellular phone, instead of having to dial manually.
Voice Mail: A computerized answering service like those in offices that automatically answers a cellular call.
It will play a greeting in the user's voice and record a message.
After the message is retrieved it can be deleted, saved or forwarded to someone else's voice-mail system.
Wireline: A cellular-phone carrier owned by the company that also operates the regular local phone service in a given market.
Customers who use the wireline cellular carrier operate on the cellular network's B-band.
Mr. Keller is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
