When President Clinton claimed he could finance his massive health reform plan without broad-based new taxes, few agreed.
Now Robert Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office, officially disagrees with the administration as well.
Mr. Reischauer and his CBO staff have imposed some needed truth-in-labeling on Mr. Clinton's plan.
Their first move was to "score" -- or categorize -- the president's mandatory insurance "premiums" as revenues to be recorded on the federal budget books.
This represents a move toward budgetary honesty, since the president had relegated those relevant numbers to the off-budget shadows.
The CBO also confirmed through its math that Mr. Clinton's proposed health plan is the largest entitlement program ever -- 25% larger than the current Social Security system.
By the year 2004, the president's health reform will cost $100 billion more than Social Security will cost in that year.
By correctly labeling some $320 billion in employer/employee mandates as new revenues, and by keeping them in the federal budget, Mr. Reischauer exposes the real cost to the taxpaying public of Mr. Clinton's plan.
It is these costly new mandates -- as well as the additional $90 billion in tobacco, corporate and other tax increases -- that constitute the bulk of the new burden facing taxpayers.
In other words, what Mr. Reischauer has done is to quantify for the first time the size of the tax bill that big sections of the health reform represent.
Mr. Reischauer revealed other areas where the Clinton plan doesn't compute.
For example, the president's Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala testified in October that the administration was allowing a $45 billion cushion in case its numbers for health care reform did not add up.
Yesterday, though, Mr. Reischauer stated that his office's math showed that there was absolutely no such cushion available in the budget.
(Indeed, he noted that America was on the "floor" on health care funding.
What this means is that, if the administration spends one penny beyond its budget on health care, the deficit will widen.)
In fact, CBO shows the Clinton plan increasing the deficit by $70 billion rather than decreasing it by $58 billion, as the administration has claimed.
It is of course no mystery why, after squeaking by the largest tax increase in history, the administration had been pressuring CBO not to count the employer/employee mandates as taxes.
The tax increases and tax mandates proposed would easily eclipse the burden imposed under last year's record $248 billion tax increase.
Fortunately, the CBO's honest labeling of Mr. Clinton's proposed mandates allows taxpayers to better understand the medicine they are being prescribed in an attempt to improve our health care system.
It's medicine that shouldn't be taken on an empty stomach.
The side effects of a significant tax increase include: lost jobs, lower wage growth and health care rationing.
Despite the president's offer to subsidize small businesses to help them pay for his mandate, even the smallest business, regardless of its income, would be forced to pay at least 3.5% of its payroll to health alliances under the Clinton plan.
And that amount is set to be increased over time.
Worse yet, the new mandate would only compound the financial burden for many small businesses that are currently absorbing last year's income-tax increases.
According to a new DRI/McGraw Hill econometric study to be released today, the combined impact of Mr. Clinton's demand for universal coverage and the employer mandate would result in hundreds of thousands of lost jobs, a wider deficit and lower GDP growth.
The additional taxes proposed to pay for universal coverage (a tobacco tax, corporate assessments, adjustments to flexible spending accounts, and changes in medical-expense deductions) would strengthen unemployment and hurt the income of individuals.
They would exacerbate the negative effects of forcing employers to insure their employees (the employer mandate).
The CBO's honest calculations of Mr. Clinton's financing problems confirm the suspicions that most Americans had about the Clinton health reform plan: There is no free lunch.
If Americans are legally required by government to pay a set amount of money for a government-defined purpose and they don't have any choice about paying that money, it's a tax.
Under the president's mandate-financing scheme, government controls more money largely by requiring employers to be the collection agency for Uncle Sam.
Taxes act as the most important price mechanism for people to decide how much or how little government involvement they desire and are willing to pay for.
The point did draw serious attention when administration officials testified that the Clinton plan may force 40% of Americans to pay higher out-of-pocket "premiums" than they pay currently.
The CBO is merely an advisory panel.
Its job is to advise Congress, in this instance on the financing and budgetary aspects of health care.
The Clinton administration and the president's Office of Management and Budget still have the last word on how the financing is presented in the federal budget.
But now the Congressional Budget Office's more accurate math and budget recording of the major financing for the president's health care overhaul will make it easier for Americans to decide if they want to take the presidential medicine.
Mr. Merski, an economist, is director of fiscal policy for Citizens for a Sound Economy in Washington.
