All of a sudden, the mutual-fund industry is reeling over personal stock trading by fund managers.
What's allowed, and what's not?
Here are answers to some questions on investors' minds.
Is it legal for fund managers to trade stocks for their own account?
Yes, as long as they don't violate federal rules against insider trading or enrich themselves at fund holders' expense.
How long has such trading gone on?
For years.
But the issue exploded into public consciousness only after Invesco Funds Group fired successful mutual-fund manager John Kaweske Jan. 4 for allegedly failing to report 10 to 20 personal trades.
The firing drew more scrutiny than it might have at a pension fund because mutual funds are the small investor's domain.
Why do managers trade stocks at all when they could just buy mutual funds?
"You could work for a fund group that didn't have a fund that met your investment objectives," says Jon Fossel, president of Oppenheimer Management Corp.
Others say ego plays a role; some managers brag about their trading prowess.
Why don't fund companies just ban personal trading?
"You're usually dealing with very talented money managers," says Roy Adams, a lawyer at Heller, Ehrman, White & McAuliffe in San Francisco.
"You may have trouble holding on to them if you restrict them unduly."
Are there any benefits for fund shareholders?
Tracy Gordon, a spokeswoman for Fidelity Investments, Boston, says, "We strongly believe that allowing our managers to trade individual stocks sharpens their skills, educates them about the markets, and ultimately produces even better performance for our shareholders."
Why has Fidelity caught the Securities and Exchange Commission's eye?
Fidelity managers' trades are being examined by the SEC because Fidelity is the biggest fund company and because of its unusual corporate culture.
Fidelity cultivates a climate of near-obsession with stock markets, stock-picking and performance, and it encourages stock trading by its analysts and fund managers.
What steps is Fidelity taking?
Fidelity tightened its rules on personal trades in November, a move that the firm said wasn't related to any improper or suspect trading.
Most managers seem to accept the new rules, albeit with some beefing.
Lawrence D. Greenberg, manager of Fidelity Emerging Growth Fund, is said by Fidelity insiders to have publicly objected in a meeting at the time that the rule changes infringed on individual rights.
Fidelity won't comment on that and Mr. Greenberg didn't return calls.
How is morale at Fidelity?
Some managers, who don't want to be identified, are upset that actions by anyone at the firm might threaten Fidelity's reputation.
Some fear the free flow of information at Fidelity may be hindered.
A few wonder if some Fidelity managers, especially younger ones, may have benefited by buying stocks for themselves, talking up the stocks around the office water cooler and then selling personal holdings after other Fidelity funds had bought the stocks, which can push up prices.
People who have heard such talk within Fidelity say these fund managers may have erred unwittingly.
How might fund managers take unfair advantage of their status?
One way would be to buy a stock for a personal account shortly before a fund directs a torrent of "buy" orders at the stock and drives up its price.
The manager could sell at a quick profit, an illegal practice called front-running.
Another illegality is accepting compensation in return for buying a particular stock for a fund.
How is trading monitored?
Fund companies are required to have a system.
At some, codes of ethics require more-frequent confirmations of manager trades than the quarterly reporting the SEC mandates.
Some require portfolio managers to get prior approval for trades.
Others print "restricted lists" of stocks that can't be bought or sold because funds are trading in them -- or insist that a personal trade can't occur within a certain number of days of a fund's trade.
What's at stake for the fund industry here?
Its sterling reputation.
SEC Commissioner J. Carter Beese Jr. points out that, unlike banks, which have deposit insurance, mutual funds have "no federal safety net. . . .
The entire mutual-fund industry depends on the trust and confidence of the investing public."
