Even among Japanese businessmen, Japanese bankers are a conservative bunch, and the bankers of Mitsubishi are the most reserved of all.
So Mitsubishi General Manager Akira Watanabe comes as a shock.
His opinion of such hallowed traditions as consensus management and lifetime employment?
A waste, says the head of Mitsubishi Bank Ltd.'s fast-growing derivatives unit.
"Instead of harmony, challenge people," he says.
"Tradition is kind of boring."
Mr. Watanabe, who's snapped up so many deals that he's called "the crocodile," claims his 140-person world-wide team is the most profitable section of the 15,500-strong Mitsubishi Bank.
The team made Mitsubishi $300 million last year, he says, or double year-earlier levels -- and contributed a significant part of the $3.2 billion in Mitsubishi's operating profit in the year ended March 31, 1993.
(The bank won't disclose earnings on derivatives, but doesn't dispute his claim.)
Mitsubishi's derivatives leadership is certainly drawing notice.
"Mitsubishi hasn't been this profitable in other areas," says Yoh Kurosawa, president of archrival Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd.
"I don't know how they managed it."
The answer lies with Mr. Watanabe, and it says a lot about what's happening, and what needs to happen, to revive Japan's banks -- the world's biggest, in terms of assets.
In Mr. Watanabe, Mitsubishi has a man who's found the mission, resources and freedom to do his job.
That's not always easy inside a Japanese bank, where competent managers transfer among departments without gaining specialized expertise.
Mr. Watanabe, who started small and built a reputation inside Mitsubishi through steady profitability, has persuaded Mitsubishi to keep him in the same section for 10 years.
"If they want to transfer me out," the trader says over a sashimi lunch in the company dining room, "they'll have to fire me."
Mr. Watanabe is one of the few Japanese at the center of the financial world's hottest market.
Derivatives are financial instruments like futures and options that fluctuate according to the price movements of other goods, such as corn or interest rates.
They can be used for speculation, or to insure against commodity price swings.
While products like futures have been around a long time, recent advances in computer power and theoretical mathematics have sharply increased futures applications.
They have also made the products seem volcanic-derivatives traders, an independent lot, have been known to make or lose millions a year.
The derivatives operations are a sharp contrast with the usual Japanese banking tradition.
Until now, these behemoths of world banking have been averse to using volatile products, a decision that has placed them at a competitive disadvantage to foreign challengers.
But with bad debts mounting, and loan growth stalled, Japanese banks are looking for profitable new niches -- no matter how untraditional.
Mr. Watanabe and his team -- including several highly paid foreigners he has poached to educate his young Japanese bankers -- are particularly unusual at Mitsubishi, where the right school and a conservative attitude mean everything.
The idea is to get the foreigners to tutor the young staff before they're too tied up in the bank's traditional roles.
"The only way to move quickly in this business in Japan is to hire brilliant young guys and lure in foreigners," he says.
He's also beefed up his sector's technology, spending about $15 million annually in recent years on computers.
That's a far cry from 1983, when Mr. Watanabe came back from an American assignment praising the new financial technology.
After a year of badgering, Mitsubishi made him the head of its new derivatives department.
Staff size: one.
"Young people understand the technology, but in Japan older people control the resources," says Masamichi Yamada, general manager of corporate planning at Mitsubishi and a Watanabe patron.
"It took a long time to understand the risk and potential."
After a year of 16-hour days, including midnight trades from his living room, Mr. Watanabe got the bank to agree to give him three assistants; his department was off and running.
The battle for acceptance is still quietly going on inside Mitsubishi.
Late last year Mr. Watanabe paid U.S. accounting firm Arthur Andersen $300,000 "to convince other people in the bank who don't understand us" that he's not reckless.
But Mr. Watanabe is turning heads -- inside the bank and beyond.
In another slap to tradition, he has won such clients as Mitsui & Co., which belongs to an archrival keiretsu, or business network.
That used to be unthinkable, but in economically stressed Japan, price and service are starting to matter as much as tradition.
There's something different in the air, too: oxygen.
Some staff complained about heavy tobacco use, so now there's no smoking during regular business hours, even for the boss -- a miracle here.
In this unclouded light, Mr. Watanabe and his crew believe they are helping to find a way out from the problems plaguing Japanese banks.
The biggest commercial banks have close to $4 trillion in assets, but an estimated $140 billion in bad loans, and new debts outpace write-offs.
Their core lending business is growing at an annual rate of just 0.5%, too, as customers turn to market-based financing.
There's also a new urgency for derivatives from Japanese businesses, because interest rate swings are challenging the economy, and companies are strapped for cash.
Japanese companies that took five-year loans in 1990 at 9% interest now see the competition borrowing from commercial banks at 3%.
That kind of advantage can be devastating in Japan, home of the thin profit margin.
For all of his untraditional ways, Mr. Watanabe still cozies up to some Japanese traditions, among them regimented executive pay.
His American derivatives traders are paid millions of dollars, but Mr. Watanabe takes home 18 million yen ($170,000) a year, just like the other 45-year-old career managers at Mitsubishi.
Contrary to popular belief, not everybody in Texas is thrilled with the North American Free Trade Agreement, which went into effect Jan. 1.
In fact, with all the advance hype, some people were bound to be disappointed.
Take Edward Loke, owner of Trelltex Inc., a Houston wholesaler of industrial rubber products.
As recently as last year, Mr. Loke couldn't have been more excited about Nafta, which aims to create a gigantic free-trade zone out of Mexico, the U.S. and Canada.
Mr. Loke had already started prospecting in Mexico for customers, and had lined up several buyers for products, including rubber hoses that are used to unload chemicals from barges and trucks.
Last year, sales to Mexico accounted for about $150,000 of Trelltex's $5.3 million in revenue.
"When anybody asked me what I thought about Nafta, I said, `Golly, it's the greatest thing since sliced bread, because we're ideally situated geographically to serve clients in Mexico,'" Mr. Loke recalls.
But now, he's deeply disappointed, and fears that his Mexican business will all but dry up.
The reason: Nafta's goal is to lower trade barriers for products that are manufactured in the signatory countries.
Distributors and other middlemen don't get a tariff break on products made outside the three countries.
That's a problem for Mr. Loke's 13-year-old operation -- and the 10 people it employs.
To be able to compete for sales with big manufacturers such as Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., he buys his goods from Korean, Malaysian and Italian manufacturers, as well as U.S. and Mexican producers.
Buying strictly from the U.S. and Mexico would cost too much and would cause him supply problems.
Thus, even though Nafta on Jan. 1 cut tariffs on the goods he sells to Mexico to 7.5% from 15%, and will eventually phase them out, the benefit only applies to the products that originate in Mexico, the U.S. or Canada.
And that means Mr. Loke's Mexican customers now are forced to pay 15% duties for most of his products, while his U.S. competitors can sell them with 7.5% duties.
"We have continued to process a few orders, but each time we do our customers in Mexico are saying we're not going to be able to continue this," says Mr. Loke.
"While Nafta might be a wonderful boon to U.S. manufacturers, it represents a major challenge to many Texas dealers and distributors and wholesalers like myself."
Hurting the Highways: Another casualty of Nafta could well be Texas' highways.
According to a new study by the University of Texas Center for Transportation Research, Mexican 18-wheel trucks "consume" pavement at roughly twice the rate of U.S. trucks, when each carry the legal maximum weight.
That's because the maximum in Mexico is 91,300 pounds, compared with 80,000 pounds in Texas without a special permit.
But in real life, the difference is even more profound, because weight restrictions generally aren't enforced south of the border.
According to a recent study by the Mexican Transport Institute, which weighed more than 117,000 trucks traveling Mexican highways, the average 18-wheeler actually was 40% overloaded, carrying a gross vehicle weight of more than 120,000 pounds.
The University of Texas report notes that, if U.S. truckers operated at similar overcapacity, interstate highways would have a life span of just 14 years, instead of the current 40-year design life.
So, what does all this have to do with Nafta?
Under terms of the agreement, motor carriers of both the U.S. and Mexico will be allowed to make international shipments to contiguous border states by December of next year.
And by December 1999, they will be able travel beyond the border states.
But won't Mexican drivers be subject to weight restrictions in the U.S.?
Robert Harrison, associate director of the Center for Transportation Research, says that's an open question.
"The problem is, they ignore their own laws in their own country," he says.
"The question is whether they'll voluntarily follow U.S. laws."
San Antonio Beckons: In a series of national advertisements in this newspaper in December, the San Antonio Convention and Visitors Bureau issued an invitation to corporations that wanted to learn more about Nafta: Why not have a meeting in the Alamo City?
After all, the ads noted, "San Antonio speaks trade with Mexico so fluently there are people who are calling us `the Hong Kong of North America.'"
As part of the promotion, the city's hotels offered "stellar values" to anyone holding a meeting.
So, have any meetings been booked?
"Not yet," says Alicia Vargas, director of marketing convention sales for the bureau.
She adds, however, that "we've gotten a good number of inquiries."
Nothing to Read: One of the biggest hurdles for anyone who wants to understand the new trade agreement is . . . finding a copy of the new trade agreement.
The government bookstore in Dallas, for instance, sold out its total supply -- 81 copies, at $40 each -- during a 10-day period in December.
Since early January, it has had 100 more of the two-volume monsters on back order from the Government Printing Office.
"I think they underestimated drastically how interested people would be," says Tom Faulkenbury, the bookstore's manager, who adds that Ross Perot's United We Stand organization, which lobbied against the accord, snapped up many of the initial copies.
Another problem: Getting a copy of the official schedule of Mexican tariffs.
The Dallas bookstore sold out all four of its copies the first day, and is waiting for a new order to come in.
Texas vs. Clinton: Texas bankers are bullish on Texas and bearish on Bill Clinton, a new survey by Grant Thornton shows.
The January survey of 130 bankers at small and midsize Texas banks by the accounting and consulting firm shows that three-quarters believe that the regional economy is either entering or well into a recovery.
Nearly two-thirds expect inflation to increase only somewhat this year, and 82% expect just a modest rise in interest rates.
But the respondents don't give much credit to the president: More than four bankers in five describe Mr. Clinton's performance as either "only fair" or "poor" so far.
