Some of the nation's biggest companies are quietly joining forces in a fresh, well-financed push for new laws to curb jury awards and discourage frivolous lawsuits.
In periodic meetings over the past six months, top lawyers at Fortune 500 companies have formed an alliance whose goal is to clip plaintiffs' lawyers' wings.
The companies, many of whom have been recent targets of product-liability and environmental lawsuits, are hoping their financial and organizational muscle will energize the flagging legal-reform movement.
The new coalition, called the Civil Justice Reform Group, has 17 members so far, and includes rivals Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp., as well as Exxon Corp., Texaco Inc., American Telephone & Telegraph Co., Pfizer Inc. and International Paper Co.
Jack Martin, the general counsel of Ford, heads its steering committee.
Other committee members include Judyth Pendell, vice president, law and regulatory affairs at Aetna Life & Casualty, and George Frazza, general counsel of Johnson & Johnson.
The group's leaders hope to add many more members in coming months.
Companies are being asked to make initial contributions of as much as $100,000, according to people familiar with the group, which is also soliciting contributions and support from trade groups and municipalities.
The nation's leading plaintiffs' lawyers' group derides the new venture.
"This is how corporations are trying to subvert the only means that the consumer has of getting any kind of justice," says Barry J. Nace, president of the Association of Trial Lawyers of America, a Washington-based lobbying group for 60,000 trial lawyers.
"This is nothing new.
They are just furthering the interests of the multibillion-dollar corporations."
Big business, of course, has for more than a decade poured millions of dollars into lobbying efforts aimed at reducing their vulnerability to huge damage awards.
But those efforts have suffered from a lack of focus and coordination, resulting in an alphabet soup of so-called tort-reform groups in Washington and elsewhere.
In the face of strong opposition from consumer groups and trial lawyers, the results have been disappointing.
"There are a lot of people going off on different agendas," explains Bill Shannon, assistant general counsel of Caterpillar Inc., a member of the new coalition.
"I think this group is trying to act as a catalyst on the national scene and to provide some kind of assistance in the various states."
While individual members of the alliance declined to discuss the venture, the group apparently plans to channel cash and other support, such as research and lobbying assistance, to a select number of existing civil-justice reform groups around the country.
The Texas Civil Justice League, one of the nation's largest legal-reform lobbying groups, for instance, has already been approached with the offer of a substantial grant, says Ralph Wayne, the league's president.
Insiders say the corporate alliance is considering pursuing state-level legislation in such lawsuit-rich places as New York, Florida, New Jersey, Illinois and California.
Mr. Wayne says his league will make use of the corporations' financial support in its upcoming effort to limit punitive damages in Texas courts.
In addition to building a warchest, the corporate alliance hopes to draw on other strengths.
"Companies of this size have enormous grassroots resources," says Martin Connor, the president of the American Tort Reform Association, an umbrella group for more than 40 state interest groups who promote state legislation on liability issues.
He says employees of major corporations can be some of the most effective representatives for such proposals.
Other people familiar with the new group say they view a report that Texaco prepared some years ago illustrating problems with punitive damage awards -- which may be awarded in addition to compensatory damages and are designed to punish serious wrongdoing -- as the kind of helpful corporate-sponsored research that the alliance could provide.
"This is going to bring new players and new resources into state tort reform in a major new way," says Mr. Conner.
Many people believe that oil companies and auto makers, despite their size and clout, generally haven't made the pursuit of state-level reforms a priority until now.
The new group reflects the apparently growing frustration some companies feel with the repeated failure of significant liability-related legislation in Congress.
Since 1982, for example, business has heavily supported a federal bill aimed at limiting the liability of manufacturers of defective products.
But every year, the bill, despite being significantly watered down over time, has been shot down by the powerful trial-lawyer lobby.
Proponents of the federal legislation are hoping to get their first vote on the issue on the Senate floor this spring, but they recognize that it has been a struggle.
"There is obviously frustration out there," says William Fay, executive director of the Product Liability Coordinating Committee, a Washington-area group that has been the driving force behind the federal bill.
At the same time, Mr. Fay says he believes that companies involved in the new alliance will continue to support his effort.
"I don't sense any erosion in the support," he says.
A federal appeals court in New York has upheld attorney Harvey D. Myerson's 1992 fraud convictions.
Once considered among the nation's top trial lawyers, Mr. Myerson was sentenced to five years and 10 months in prison for overbilling clients more than $2 million and fraudulently claiming personal charges as legitimate business expenses.
Under federal sentencing guidelines, the former Myerson & Kuhn partner is expected to serve most of that time without opportunity for parole.
He currently is at the low-security federal correctional institution in Milan, Mich., according to federal prison officials.
Jeremy Gutman, his attorney on the appeal, says that Mr. Myerson has served about a year of the sentence.
Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
