Despite worries about political instability in other developing nations, investors snapped up a Yankee-bond offering from Argentina's Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales SA.
In fact, investors had a number of offerings from foreign issuers to choose from yesterday.
Including a 1.5 billion Swedish krona ($186 million) global-bond offering from Sweden's Nordic Investment Bank and a 150 million Australian dollar (US$104.7 million) Yankee bond offering from News America Holdings, a unit of News Corp.
Global bonds are designed to be sold and traded in all the world's major markets.
Yankee bonds are securities sold by foreign issuers in the U.S.
Meanwhile the price of the benchmark 30-year U.S. Treasury bond dropped more than 1/2 point to 98 22/32, yielding 6.34%, compared with 6.30% on Monday.
YPF, as the Argentine oil company is known, sold $350 million of 10-year notes with an 8% coupon at a price of 99.77 to yield 8.033%.
The notes were sold through lead manager CS First Boston Inc.
The notes were priced with an extremely narrow yield spread over comparable U.S. Treasurys, considering their rating.
YPF's debt is rated single-B-1 by Moody's Investors Service and double-B-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp., the same as the Republic of Argentina.
However, YPF's offering was priced at a narrower yield than a recent Argentinian government note offering, because many investors believe the company deserves a higher rating than the country, syndicate officials said.
Moody's and S&P policies state that a company cannot be rated higher than the country where it is based, precluding a higher rating for YPF.
"It's a stellar company.
It would probably be a strong double-A credit if it were rated in the U.S.," said Anthony van Daalen, co-portfolio manager at Warburg Pincus Fixed Income Fund, who bought into the deal.
The YPF bonds were priced at a spread of 2.32 percentage points above 10-year Treasurys notes.
Argentina's 8 3/8% coupon global notes maturing in 2003 were yielding 2.42 percentage points above than 10-year Treasury notes yesterday.
More than 90 accounts bought into YPF's bond offering, a syndicate official said.
Even Asian and European investors, who typically prefer shorter-term securities, bought into the deal, another syndicate official said.
"More than half of the demand was from what we call investment-grade buyers, even though this was not investment-grade deal," said Richard duBusc, managing director of CS First Boston's corporate syndicate.
The offering also benefited from YPF's well-known name and investor following.
"There is clearly cash in this name," one developing-nation debt trader said.
With a slim new-issue calendar, investors quickly snapped up the bonds, and the offering was reportedly more than two-times oversubcribed.
Yesterday morning, Nordic Investment Bank's five-year bonds were priced with a 6.25% coupon at 99.416 to yield 6.39%.
Rated triple-A by Moody's and S&P, the bonds were sold through lead manager Merrill Lynch & Co.
Late yesterday, News America Holdings' A$150 million of 20-year bonds was sold at par to yield 8.625%, according to MCM CorporateWatch.
The offering is the longest-term Australian-dollar issue ever sold.
The noncallable issue is rated Ba-1 by Moody's and triple-b-Minus by S&P, and will be sold through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch & Co.
Although the government's auction of new two-year notes drew healthy bidding yesterday, it was not enough to spark continued buying, and disappointed traders sent prices of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds lower as a result.
Helping to depress prices were concerns over the prospects for today's five-year note auction and data suggesting that the cold weather and the Southern California earthquake may not have slowed retail sales as much as expected.
Bond investors welcome news of sluggish economy because it means less inflation.
Inflation reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond dropped more than 1/2 point, or more than $5 for a bond with a $1,000 face value.
Other Treasury securities posted smaller losses.
The 10-year note dropped 1/4 point to 100 to yield 5.73%, compared with 5.70% on Monday.
Most of yesterday's activity centered on the Treasury's auction of $17 billion in new two-year notes.
The Treasury awarded the notes at a yield of 4.11%, a touch higher than some had predicted, but still within the range of expectations.
The details of the auction results showed fairly good interest, marketwatchers said.
For the two-year notes, the bid-to-cover ratio -- a measure of demand comparing the number of bids tendered to those received -- was described as solid, at 2.85 to 1.
Noncompetitive bids, which typically reflect interest from outside the Wall Street dealer community, were $822 million.
Late yesterday, reflecting the lack of strong demand after the auction, the when-issued two-year note yielded 4.12%, compared with 4.09% before the results were released.
Investors sold notes and bonds in response to data showing the economy may have held up better than expected following the cold spell and the earthquake.
The Johnson Redbook Service, an affiliate of Lynch, Jones & Ryan Inc., reported that chain and department store sales for the three weeks ended Jan. 22 were up 1.3% from December's pace.
That compared with a 3.5% rise for the first two weeks.
And as prices eroded in late afternoon trading, dealers began to sell ahead of today's scheduled $12 billion five-year note auction.
After the market's dissapointing performance yesterday, traders said they were nervous about the prospects for the five-year note auction.
In when-issued trading late yesterday, the five-year yielded 5.09%, up from 5.07% Monday.
All bids are awarded at a single price at the market-clearing yield.
Rates are determined by the difference between that price and the face value.
The notes are dated Jan. 31, 1994, and mature Jan. 31, 1996.
Municipal-bond buyers feasted on the big issues from San Antonio and the Washington Public Power Supply System.
There wasn't much buying in secondary dealings, however, and prices ended unchanged to 1/4 point lower.
The Goldman Sachs & Co. group that priced San Antonio's $781.1 million electric and gas system refunding bonds was able to reprice the offering and lower some yields 0.02 to 0.05 point.
Following the repricing, yields ranged from 3.50% in 1997 to 5.28% in 2014.
The San Antonio issue includes $92 million of derivatives.
There is $35.9 million of floating-rate bonds based on the London interbank offered rate.
The remaining $56.1 million comprises standard floating-rate and inverse-floater securities.
Washington Public Power Supply System's $674.3 million of refunding bonds for Nuclear Project No. 2 also attracted much interest.
Following a repricing -- at which some yields were lowered 0.05 point -- yields range from 3.00% in 1995 to 5.50% in 2009 and 2011.
The WPPSS offering includes $100 million of floating-rate and inverse-floater derivatives due in 2012.
San Antonio's refunding bonds have a double-A-1 rating from Moody's Investors Service Inc., a double-A from Standard & Poor's Corp., and a double-A-Plus from Fitch Investors Service Inc.
Uninsured refunding bonds sold by WPPSS this session have double-A ratings from Moody's, S&P and Fitch.
Some market participants observed that San Antonio's latest bonds have yields that are as much as 0.35 point lower than WPPSS bonds with the same maturities, even though ratings for the securities are quite close.
Both issues fared well, however.
Mortgage securities ended with slim price declines, but purchases of securities as collateral for new real estate mortgage investment conduits and other buying lent support to the market.
The 6 1/2% securities for February delivery fell 5/32 in secondary dealings.
Ginnie Maes ended at 99 30/32, Freddie Mac Golds at 100 1/32 and Fannie Maes at 99 27/32.
Meanwhile, dealers were collecting collateral for new Remics in the 15- and 30-year sectors, keeping a floor under prices.
Banks were big buyers of three- to five-year planned amortization Remics.
More than $2.5 billion of Remics were announced, with five new deals and the increase of an offer outstanding.
The largest was a $1 billion Federal National Mortgage Association series 1995-G2 deal, backed by Government National Mortgage Association 30-year 7% securities and underwritten by Kidder Peabody & Co.
The market for Ginnie Mae 6% adjustable-rate mortgage securities, meanwhile, has been roiled in the past few weeks by one or two firms that reportedly bought most of the bonds and bid up the price.
Traders declined to name the buyers.
The practice of buying and holding the bulk of a mortgage security causes dealers to scramble for bonds before the price escalates.
The securities most recently affected were for January delivery.
