Members of Congress won't have long to savor their fleeting victory in a federal courtroom last week against the term-limits tide.
Given the strong likelihood that the Supreme Court ultimately will reverse Judge William Dwyer's ruling in a Washington State case, term-limit activists plan to sponsor initiatives in more than 600 jurisdictions across the nation next year.
They are all likely to pass since Americans support term limits virtually any time they are given an opportunity to vote on the issue.
The odds are that when the 105th Congress convenes in 1995, more than 40% of the House and Senate will be term-limited.
This will increase the pressure for a constitutional amendment to extend term limits to the entire Congress.
As the scary inevitability of term limits sinks in, careerists in Congress are turning to damage control.
If there are going to be limits, most incumbents reason, let them be as long as possible.
And therein lies the real drama in the term-limit debate.
For what virtually everyone in Congress considers to be term limits is 12-year caps for both the House and Senate.
What the rest of the country overwhelmingly takes to be term limits is six years (three terms) in the House and 12 years (two terms) in the Senate.
While there is a clear consensus on the limit for senators, the difference over how long representatives should be allowed to serve is a fundamental chasm.
Evidence that most people strongly prefer the shorter limit for the House is abundant.
National polls show a plurality of Americans favor just four years and a large majority six years or less; 12 years almost always scores in single digits.
A majority of the 15 states that already have limited the terms of their congressional delegations have opted for six-year caps.
The significance of the six-year vs. 12-year debate lies in the Founders' belief in a citizen legislature.
If democracy is to work, the Founders believed, legislators have to be of the people, representing the interests of what we now refer to as the private sector.
To turn the House into a citizen legislature -- to make it a true House of Representatives -- we must attract people who prefer to spend their productive lives in the private sector and who view their time in Washington as a leave of absence from their real careers.
As it is now, these people look at the prospect of running and recognize, first, that the odds of beating an incumbent are small, and second, that even if you do win, it will be a very, very long time before your opinion counts for anything under the seniority system.
Since most people aren't willing to buck those odds, our ballots are clogged with career politicians and would-be careerists.
Serious term limits -- six-year limits -- would solve that problem.
With six-year caps in the House, a "citizen-legislature" culture would develop in short order.
In such an environment conflicts caused by political ambition would be minimized and a more cooperative spirit of reasoned discourse would be possible.
Catering to special interests would become less essential to the legislative process.
Already in California, where a six-year limit in the state Assembly took hold in 1992, there is evidence of this change taking place.
Of the 27 freshmen in the Assembly, only one is a former legislative aide, the major stepping stone to the Assembly in prior years.
"Almost to a person," the Los Angeles Times reports, "the newcomers talk of changing the status quo, of cooperation, of sidestepping old political minefields, . . . of idealism."
Some will object that such a culture in the House would cost us our most experienced legislators.
But it is, after all, the experienced legislators whose handiwork has given us the budget deficit, the savings-and-loan debacle and an endless procession of tax hikes.
So, while there is much puffing of chests by the hundred or so House members who have signed onto GOP Rep. Bill McCollum's discharge petition for his "12 and 12" term-limits bill, there is deafening silence among the millions of Americans who desire real term limits.
Not unexpectedly, House hearings on term limits last November -- the first ever allowed by the Democratic leadership -- didn't deal with this debate between the people and the Congress, between six years and 12 years.
But that is the real issue.
Twelve years means continued seniority in committee chairmanships and a continuation of incumbents' insurmountable advantage in elections.
Six years means a citizen legislature and the people regaining control of Congress.
The good news is that a six-year limit has a serious proponent in the House.
Rep. Jim Inhofe (R., Okla.) will soon introduce a bill calling for six-year limits in the House.
Many populist groups are rallying around Mr. Inhofe's initiative.
A few months ago, Rep. Ernest Istook (R., Okla.) gave us a preview of what form opposition to six-year limits might take.
Appealing for symmetry in Congress, he said that the six and 12 proposal is "lopsided."
Until such time as the 12-year limit can muster more than single-digit support from the American people, however, supporters of a citizen legislature (lopsided or not) will be looking to see who signs the Inhofe petition to limit House members to six years.
Mr. Crane is president of the Cato Institute in Washington.
