Brooke Group Ltd. said it reached an agreement to settle a shareholder suit challenging pay arrangements and millions of dollars of personal loans to company chairman Bennett S. LeBow.
The settlement includes "arrangements limiting his future compensation," Brooke Group said, and Mr. LeBow will relinquish about $6.25 million he had been owed by the company.
Mr. LeBow, who controls about 61% of Brooke Group's voting stock, has profited handsomely from the tobacco, real estate and investments company, even though it had been reporting huge losses.
Last year, he owed the company more than $20 million in personal debt that, the lawsuit alleged, he had failed to repay on a timely basis, or had repaid with other borrowings.
The suit had been filed last May in Delaware Chancery Court as a derivative action against officers and directors on behalf of the company itself.
Brooke Group said Mr. LeBow had repaid more than $16 million in principal and interest owed the company or a subsidiary.
A spokesman said Mr. LeBow has committed to repay all but $1 million of the remaining debt.
Mr. LeBow was able to repay his obligations to the company mainly due to an agreement last fall involving Brooke Group's spinoff of its SkyBox International Inc. sports and entertainment-trading card unit.
While other Brooke Group shareholders received SkyBox shares, Mr. LeBow received Brooke Group preferred shares carrying a $30 million one-time cash dividend.
Mr. LeBow has used $16 million of that payment to cancel debt owed the company, and will "relinquish" another $6.25 million of the payment.
Another $4 million or so will retire liens and other obligations, leaving Mr. LeBow with $3.75 million from the special dividend payment.
SkyBox shares, which initially traded at about $7, closed yesterday at $10.25, up 37.5 cents, in the over-the-counter market.
Even though Brooke Group holders received SkyBox stock while Mr. LeBow received cash, a Brooke Group spokesman says shareholders benefited because Mr. LeBow received payments based on only 20% of his company holdings.
Under the settlement, Mr. LeBow's future compensation will be tied to corporate performance.
Unless Brooke Group shares gain more than 10% annually, he would be limited to a 10% annual raise.
(He was paid $1.5 million in 1992, the most recent figure available, when the company had a net loss of $75.8 million.)
His compensation can increase at the rate of the stock's price increase, up to 25% annually.
Yesterday, in New York Stock Exchange trading, Brooke Group gained 25 cents, or more than 14%, to $2.
The settlement requires that outside directors approve any transaction of more than $100,000 between Brooke Group and Mr. LeBow or any associated group.
The company has three directors including Mr. LeBow.
In a statement, Mr. LeBow said the settlement is in the "best interests of the company" because it eliminates the "distraction and expense which litigation brings."
A company spokesman said Mr. LeBow was unavailable for an interview.
The settlement requires court approval.
The proposed settlement calls for payment of as much as $900,000 to attorneys for the plaintiffs.
Brooke Group also controls New Valley Corp., the parent of Western Union Financial Services Inc., which is seeking to reorganize under Chapter 11 of the federal bankruptcy code.
And it is an investor in a Russian real estate venture.
