Whatever the outcome of Sen. Robert Packwood's courtroom battle to limit access to his private diaries by the Senate Ethics Committee, he still faces a major obstacle to a fair hearing if the committee ultimately charges him with misconduct.
The problem lies in current Senate rules.
Those rules provide that the same committee members who direct the preliminary inquiry and vote to issue charges also sit in judgment of the charges at a trial-like hearing.
By that time, however, the members will no longer be impartial.
Because they prejudge the evidence when voting to issue the charges.
The Ethics Committee subpoenaed Mr. Packwood's diaries to get information that may reveal additional misbehavior beyond the allegations of sexual harassment and witness intimidation that were the original focus of the investigation.
The subpoena targets new information about an alleged solicitation by Mr. Packwood of a job for his estranged wife from lobbyists interested in legislation before a committee on which he served.
Mr. Packwood attacked the subpoena in court for seeking information irrelevant to the original inquiry.
The committee defended its subpoena by drawing an analogy to the criminal justice system.
At this stage of the case, it argued, the committee acts just like a grand jury investigating a crime.
Its subpoenas should therefore be allowed the same wide latitude as those of a grand jury that can follow evidence wherever it leads.
The trial court sided with the committee, and Mr. Packwood is now appealing.
The criminal justice analogy works for the first stage of the committee process.
Like a grand jury that issues an indictment at the close of its investigation, the committee will issue charges against Mr. Packwood at the end of its preliminary inquiry if it finds "substantial credible evidence which provides substantial cause" to conclude that he violated Senate rules.
Once the committee issues charges, however, the analogy no longer holds.
In the criminal justice system, the charging and judging roles are separated, performed by different individuals.
A grand jury's job is done once it finds probable cause that a crime has occurred and issues an indictment.
The task of judging guilt or innocence is left to a petit jury that hears the evidence for the first time at the trial.
In contrast, the same Ethics Committee members who act as "grand jurors" and vote to issue charges simply switch hats and become "petit jurors" at the trial-like hearing.
They will then be judging whether Mr. Packwood is guilty or innocent of charges they voted to bring.
How can the committee members possibly be viewed as objective judges when they have already reviewed the volumes of evidence amassed during the investigation and concluded that they provide "substantial cause" to believe that Mr. Packwood violated Senate rules?
Even with a stricter burden of proof in his favor, Mr. Packwood will be fighting an uphill battle at his hearing, having already failed to persuade the same individuals not to charge him in the first place.
That the full Senate ultimately votes on disciplinary action does not remedy the unfairness, since by then the momentum is seriously against the member.
The problem is illustrated by what has already happened in this investigation.
During the Senate debate on judicial enforcement of the subpoena, Ethics Committee members played their current role as investigators with vigor.
In defending the subpoena, Committee Chairman Richard Bryan (D., Nev.) even went so far as to argue that certain diary entries raise questions of possible criminal violations by Mr. Packwood (a suggestion that led the Justice Department to issue its own subpoena for the diaries).
Is it reasonable now to expect Mr. Bryan to shed the tough demeanor of a tenacious investigator and assume at a hearing the calm persona of a dispassionate and unbiased judge?
In a 1972 case involving a senator charged with bribery, the Supreme Court noted the shortcomings of the congressional disciplinary process in comparison with a conventional criminal trial: "An accused Member is at the mercy of an almost unbridled discretion of the charging body that functions at once as accuser, prosecutor, judge, and jury from whose decision there is no established right of review."
In other words, Congress is a political forum, not a court of law.
Still, for the sake of public confidence in the proceedings and fairness to the accused, it is important that the Senate's disciplinary process have credibility and integrity.
The Senate should not allow the Ethics Committee to compare itself to the criminal justice process in the interest of enforcing its subpoenas, while begging off the analogy to indulge the political convenience of having the same members perform what should be separate roles.
Ironically, when formulating the rules that govern the Ethics Committee, the Senate expressed a concern for fairness, declaring that "the rules and regulations of the Select Committee {on Ethics} should provide for strict procedural protections to safeguard the interests of the individual under investigation."
Yet one elementary rule of fairness was overlooked -- those who charge should not judge.
This is not to say that the committee members don't have every intention of keeping an open mind at a hearing on charges of misconduct.
It is simply to say that the rest of the Senate expects too much of their colleagues on the Ethics Committee by asking them to perform all the roles in the disciplinary process.
The appearance, if not the fact, of impartiality suffers under the current system.
As recently as the investigation of former Speaker Jim Wright, the House had the same system of allowing identical members to issue and judge charges of ethical misconduct.
In the wake of similar criticism, the House changed its procedures with the passage of the Ethics Reform Act of 1989.
The House Ethics Committee now has an "investigative subcommittee" conduct the investigation and vote to issue charges, while the balance of the committee members sit in judgment of the charges at an adjudicatory hearing.
The Senate, like the House before it, should change this flaw in its ethics process.
It should designate separate senators to weigh the evidence and pass judgment on any charges that may be brought against Mr. Packwood.
Like the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate President Clinton's involvement in the Whitewater affair, this reform will enhance the appearance of impartiality in the process and increase public confidence in the result.
If the Senate is eager to exorcise the ghost of the Clarence Thomas hearings by vigorously pursuing charges of sexual harassment against one of its members, it should do so without sacrificing a level playing field for the accused.
Mr. Campbell is a Washington attorney who has defended members of Congress in both criminal and ethics cases.
