The head of the Central Intelligence Agency has launched a complete review of the spy agency's internal security and counterintelligence procedures that appear to have been violated by accused spy Aldrich Ames.
In his first detailed response to the charges against Mr. Ames, who allegedly received $2.5 million from the Russians for selling some of the nation's most vital secrets, CIA director James Woolsey named three former officials to oversee the review.
They are: Brent Scowcroft, White House national security adviser during the Bush administration; Harold Brown, a former secretary of defense; and Doug Gow, who formerly headed counterintelligence efforts at the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"We will examine it.
We will learn from it and we will act on what we learn," Mr. Woolsey said, during a brief appearance after a three-hour grilling by members of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Mr. Woolsey also promised a detailed assessment of the damage allegedly caused by Mr. Ames, who formerly headed the agency's counterintelligence operations against the former Soviet Union and its former satellites.
Earlier yesterday, during a hearing in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., federal prosecutors asserted that Mr. Ames's demands for money were so large that the Russian spy system initially didn't know how to deliver them.
Mark Hulkower, an assistant U.S. attorney, released part of a nine-page document found in a closet in Mr. Ames's home.
It referred to payments the Russians made into two bank accounts in Geneva that were controlled by Mr. Ames.
The document, described as a list of tasks assigned to Mr. Ames by his Russian handlers, says that "in order to transfer a large amount of money in such a short time, we would have to use some special cannels [sic] including illegals," or agents without diplomatic accreditation.
"That means we would have to open very sensitive information about your account to some people."
Apparently describing the method that Russians used to feed the Credit Suisse Bank accounts, the document adds: "Our man would have to go to the same bank for a second time.
That could lead to practical opening of his legend."
Leslie G. Wiser Jr., the lead FBI investigator in the case, said "legend" is a term Russian intelligence officials use for a cover story.
Cautioning Mr. Ames to revise his own "legend," by which he made one account appear to be controlled by his mother-in-law, the document adds: "By the way, at the next two meetings with Sam, we could deliver to you $300,000."
Just who Sam was is one of the many mysteries that remain to be solved in the tangled financial side of the case, which involves 12 bank accounts used by Mr. Ames and his wife, Rosario, in the U.S., Switzerland, Italy and Colombia.
As the Ameses sat together, sometimes talking softly in the front of the courtroom, Mr. Hulkower said, "It's clear that defendants have squandered incredible amounts of money that can never be reacquired."
While the Geneva accounts were used to wire over a $1 million into U.S. accounts, investigators believe that they now contain a total of $188,000.
Judge Claude M. Hilton, who is likely to preside over the trial of the case, ordered the Ameses yesterday to arrange to have all the money they have hidden in foreign accounts returned to the U.S. and placed in an escrow account until a jury decides whether they should forfeit it as the payment for espionage.
Mr. Wiser, the FBI investigator, said the Swiss so far have failed to cooperate in the case and that banks in Italy and Colombia had not offered to help the FBI resolve the question of where the money came from.
The judge's order requires the Ameses to bring the money back, or to be held in contempt of court.
But it wasn't clear how he could force compliance by the couple, who are being held in the Alexandria jail without bond.
Judge Hilton's order freezes the Ameses accounts in the U.S., but the prosecutors worry that the foreign accounts remain open and could be emptied by anyone using the Ameses coded identification numbers.
Rep. Robert Torricelli (D., N.J.), a member of the House Intelligence Committee, which heard testimony from Mr. Woolsey Wednesday, said the first result Congress will look for from Mr. Woolsey is to make sure that the managers who failed to penetrate Mr. Ames's rich lifestyle and employees who fed him information "are found and removed."
"There is a national obligation to deal with quality of personnel and failures of internal mechanisms," said the congressman, who added that Mr. Woolsey may find his CIA budget being cut if he doesn't act swiftly.
