The U.S. merchandise-trade deficit narrowed in November as imports and exports dropped from October's record highs.
The deficit fell to $10.17 billion from October's revised $10.90 billion, the Commerce Department said.
Exports fell less than 0.1%, to $40.07 billion, and imports fell 1.5% to $50.24 billion.
Although smaller than the previous month, November's gap continued the trend of monthly deficits exceeding $10 billion.
For the first 11 months of 1993, the merchandise trade deficit totaled $108.80 billion, exceeding the $84.50 billion for all of 1992.
The 11-month deficit was the largest since 1987, which ended with a record gap of $152.12 billion.
The figures don't include the U.S. trade surplus in services.
Large trade deficits are the price the U.S. pays for having a relatively stronger economy than other industrialized countries.
The U.S. economy has been steadily growing and imports increasing since the bottom of the recession nearly three years ago.
The worsening economic troubles of Japan and Europe, in the same period, have led them to buy fewer U.S. goods.
Brian Horrigan, an economist with Loomis & Sayles, a Boston money-management firm, pointed out that the trade balance would be much worse if it weren't offset by the drop in imported oil prices to $13.69 a barrel in November from $14.60 in October.
Despite the woeful economic condition of Europe and Japan, U.S. exports grew 6% in the 12 months ended in November, and continued in the latest month near the record highs set in October.
Joseph Liro of S.G. Warburg & Co. said this indicates U.S. manufacturers have improved quality and reduced unit-labor costs to re-emerge as "tough global competitors."
The politically explosive trade deficit with Japan shrank in November to $5.72 billion from $6.09 billion in October.
The deficit with China decreased to $2.12 billion from $2.66 billion.
The trade position with Western Europe took the hardest hit, with the deficit increasing to $1.19 billion in November from $170 million in October.
Dr. Liro said this was mainly because Europeans cut back on purchases of capital goods, such as machine tools and communications equipment.
Big export gains were reported by civilian aircraft engines and tobacco.
Big export declines were recorded in nonmonetary gold, which has been unusually high all year, and civilian aircraft, which has suffered from the weak global economy and competition from Europe's subsidized Airbus Industrie.
Beginning with January statistics, the Commerce Department will begin reporting monthly on trade in both goods and services.
Currently, data on services are available only on a quarterly basis.
Figures are adjusted for normal seasonal variations except those given for individual countries or regions.
