Trans World Airlines Inc. expanded previously announced fare cuts to all of its domestic markets, pushing rival carriers to match the discounts.
Last week, TWA cut round-trip excursion fares an average of 35% in response to a sale initiated by USAir, a unit of USAir Group Inc.
TWA yesterday expanded those discounts to its 1,200 U.S. markets, including Hawaii and San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Most major airlines matched the discounts in competitive markets.
Passengers seeking the less expensive TWA tickets must purchase them by Thursday.
The lower fares apply to flights between April 19 and June 15.
Tickets are nonrefundable and require a Saturday night stay-over.
While TWA's expanded offer expires this week, some industry observers said the initiative could signal even more pricecutting.
"It certainly forebodes the possibility of an out-and-out fare war," said Lee Howard, president of Airline Economics International in Washington.
"We're creeping up now into peak season, and no carrier is going to allow their traffic to be stolen."
Airline bookings have been weak recently, as winter and early spring are traditionally slower seasons.
Moreover, consumers appear to be holding back until they see signs of further discounting.
"Everybody usually waits for the next fare war," said David Sparkman, an industry analyst at Airline Forecasting and Economics in Washington.
He added that the duration of TWA's less expensive flights, through mid-June, presents "a much longer window than we usually see."
TWA, which emerged from bankruptcy-law protection in November, has been searching for ways to come up with cash.
The airline recently slashed the number of its daily departures from Atlanta to 11 from 57, effective June 1.
On Monday, the nation's seventh-largest carrier named Jeffrey H. Erickson, chief executive of Reno Air, as its president and chief operating officer.
The airline suffered a management shakeup three months ago, when both its CEO and co-vice chairman resigned after more than 20 years with the company.
