Riding into Beijing on Friday, Secretary of State Warren Christopher seemed like the sheriff in Mel Brooks's farcical Western "Blazing Saddles."
With his gun pointed to his head, he shouted: "Stop or I'll shoot."
Mr. Christopher, following President Clinton's executive order of last May, threatened to deny favorable trading status to China if it doesn't clean up its human-rights act.
But to do that at this point in world history would be a colossal economic mistake, hurting the U.S. as much as China.
China is the most dynamic economy in the world today; it has the potential to contribute more to U.S. growth and living standards over the next two decades than any other nation on the planet.
A recent Commerce Department study touted the 10 "Big Emerging Markets" whose total annual imports will grow $1 trillion by 2010; but among them is only one Really Big Emerging Market, China, which accounts for almost half of that total.
"We often talk about our desire not to isolate China," says Harry Harding of the Brookings Institution.
"There's no danger of that.
The choice we confront is whether we want to isolate ourselves from China."
But if denying Most Favored Nation status would be a huge economic mistake, not denying it would be a political, diplomatic and moral error of almost equal proportions.
In the past few weeks, the Chinese government has brazenly thumbed its nose at the U.S., detaining and intimidating dissidents with little regard for U.S. concerns.
Ever sensitive to ideology, the Chinese have concluded that the U.S. ideology is capitalism, and that we can be counted on to follow the money.
Mr. Christopher's talks concluded with tensions between the two nations strained to nearly the breaking point.
As a result, Mr. Clinton is in a box.
By his own order, he can call for renewal of favorable trade treatment only if he declares the Chinese have made clear progress on human rights -- and they haven't.
Says Rep. Lee Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat, "We cannot renew Most Favored Nation under the terms of the president's order unless the president lies."
In recent days, the administration's dilemma has sent the U.S. multinational business community into a near-panic.
At a conference held by the Economic Strategy Institute last week, attendees worried that Mr. Clinton might do the unthinkable.
Not only are the Chinese giving him few ways to save face, but the Whitewater scandal has left him in a position where he can ill afford to be seen abandoning a solemn commitment on human rights.
"In a period of three weeks, we have gone from thinking MFN renewal would be a cakewalk to really worrying what happens if MFN is not renewed," says William Lane, manager of governmental affairs for Caterpillar Inc.
"If it is not renewed, we're going to see a lot of export opportunities transferred to Europe and Japan."
Is there a way out of this box?
Surprisingly little effort has been expended in Washington answering that question.
In part, that is because positions are so polarized.
Businesspeople, as well as many Clinton economic officials, can't see why anyone of sound mind would contemplate removing MFN; they blame wrongheaded members of Congress for creating the problem.
But human-rights advocates criticize those who would sell out human freedom for a quick buck.
They note that their view is shared by a majority of the public, as the latest Wall Street Journal poll shows.
"Human rights has to be an important factor in . . . foreign policy," says Rep. Hamilton.
"It rises from the basic instincts of our people."
Any solution to this dilemma will have to recognize that basic American instinct, which dates to the founding of the republic.
Simply leaving human-rights issues to the unending muddle of multilateral discussions won't wash.
There needs to be some weapon the U.S. can use in the post-Cold War world to punish those who violate basic standards of human behavior.
Mr. Hamilton is one of those looking for such a solution.
George Fisher, chairman of Eastman Kodak, is another.
He suggests restricting loans from the World Bank.
The U.S. holds considerable sway there, and China is among its top three borrowers.
Administration foreign-policy advisers are eager to consider any alternative.
When Gerald Seib of this newspaper wrote a column recently suggesting human-rights issues with China should be handled the way they were with the Soviets in the 1980s, Mr. Clinton sent it to his top economic and foreign-policy advisers.
Even the aides realize that MFN isn't the ideal sanction.
But the search for an alternative had better proceed quickly.
Otherwise, Mr. Clinton will be forced to choose between two options that both bode ill for America's future.
Canfor Corp. said it will ask shareholders to approve a 2-for-1 stock split at the forest product concern's annual meeting April 25.
Canfor said holders will also be asked to approve the redesignation of the common shares as Class B multiple voting shares, with 10 votes attached to each share.
Shareholders also will vote on the creation of new Class A subordinate voting shares, with the right to one vote each.
Canfor said it doesn't plan to issue any Class A shares at the present time.
But it said approval for the new class of shares will give the company additional financial flexibility, allowing it to issue equity without diluting existing voting rights.
Canfor is based in Vancouver, British Columbia.
