The Canadian dollar has few fans these days.
It has sunk to a seven-year low against the U.S. dollar, and some analysts say it has further to fall.
Others argue that the decline has been so steep and steady that a powerful rebound is due in a matter of weeks.
But even those who expect to win short-term trading gains on a turnaround acknowledge that over the long term, fiscal worries and political uncertainty will drag the Canadian currency into lower trading ranges.
Late Friday in New York, the dollar traded at C$1.3698, up from C$1.3617 at the end of the previous week.
The dollar also traded at 1.6965 marks and 106.10 yen, compared with 1.6825 marks and 105 yen a week earlier.
The dollar is seen heading higher against both currencies eventually, but it has been held back by the slow pace of monetary-policy change in the U.S. and Germany, and by dollar-selling from Japanese corporations.
Financial markets in Tokyo were closed Monday for a national holiday.
The relentlessness of the Canadian dollar selling puzzles market players.
The currency's troubles aren't new; no fresh crisis looms.
Analysts in the due-for-a-rebound camp take that as evidence that dealers have now discounted all bad news for the currency.
"The bearish fundamentals are priced in," says Jerry Cornille, marketing director for CM&M Futures Inc., a subsidiary of HSBC Holdings Ltd.
"The market is oversold.
It's ripe for a correction if not a reversal."
He sees the exchange rate reaching C$1.3450 before the Canadian dollar resumes its decline.
Some dealers say selling volume is already thinning as participants brace for that correction.
"Everybody has sold Canada," says David Solin, foreign-exchange manager at Toronto Dominion Bank in New York.
"All you need is a little good news, and everyone has to run to buy it back."
But Canada bears contend that there's nothing on the horizon to trigger a correction worth the name.
"People said C$1.33 was a good place to buy," says Christopher Han, currency options trader at National Westminster Markets, a unit of National Westminster Bank PLC.
"Based on what?"
Cheap options prices suggest that market players generally aren't looking for wild price swings, but instead expect a steady decline, Mr. Han notes.
"The currency's going to get trashed," he says.
He and other bearish dealers say C$1.40 is a likely target.
Narrowing spreads between U.S. and Canadian short-term interest rates weigh most heavily on the currency.
Friday, the 90-day Treasury bill spread was 65 basis points, wider than 31 last week, but significantly narrower than the 1993 average of 127.
A basis point is 1/100th of a percentage point.
Canada's economic recovery has turned anemic, precluding monetary tightening and depriving currency players of their usual motive to buy Canadian -- the pickup in yield over U.S. rates.
"The economy didn't strengthen as much as we thought it would," says Anita Lauria, economist at Salomon Brothers Inc.
"That clearly means that Canada won't be able to follow U.S. tightening, at least not willingly.
And that will put downward pressure on the currency for the next several months."
Traders also doubt the Liberal government's stomach for cutting spending on social welfare programs.
Economists characterize the federal budget announced in February as a cautious one that should control the growth of debt.
But they agree that further cuts will be needed down the road.
"There will have to be more spending cuts and program adjustments by the end of the decade," says Carl Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics, a consulting company.
The prospect of a Quebec secession is also keeping currency players on edge.
Provincial elections must be called before November; Wood Gundy Inc. chief economist Jeffrey Rubin sees voters going to the polls on June 13, meaning the call would go out in late April.
If the separatist Parti Quebecois wins, it is expected to call for a referendum on separation.
