The nominee to head the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. told her confirmation hearing that she wants to relieve banks of cumbersome regulation.
But Republicans tried to turn the hearing into a session on President Clinton's connections to a failed Arkansas thrift.
Ricki Tigert won strong support to head the FDIC from members of the Senate Banking Committee.
While giving her views on banking issues ranging from derivatives to discriminatory lending, she managed to sidestep Republican efforts to force her to recuse herself from any agency investigation of Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, a failed thrift that has been linked to Mr. Clinton's political campaigns and his investment in Whitewater Development Co.
The FDIC is tangentially involved in the Madison Guaranty affair, which is the subject of an independent counsel's investigation.
The agency hired the Rose Law Firm of Little Rock, Ark., to sue an accounting firm that had done work for Madison before it failed.
Hillary Rodham Clinton was a partner in the Rose firm and was at one time retained to do legal work for Madison.
Now the FDIC is trying to decide whether Rose accurately informed the agency of its ties to Madison.
Although Ms. Tigert is a friend of Mrs. Clinton's, she rebuffed efforts by GOP Sens. Lauch Faircloth of North Carolina and Alfonse D'Amato of New York to have her recuse herself from any FDIC consideration of the case.
Instead, she said she would check with FDIC ethics officers and "take the necessary steps to insure the credibility of the regulatory process."
In fact, the issue may be over before Ms. Tigert, a banking lawyer in the Washington office of Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, reaches the FDIC.
Andrew Hove, the agency's acting chairman, told the panel that the agency will complete an investigation of the Rose issue in 10 days to two weeks.
Mr. Hove has been nominated to another term as vice chairman and is expected to win confirmation without controversy.
Anne Hall, a third nominee to the five-member board, is also expected to win confirmation.
Ms. Hall is a vice president of Banc One Corp. in Columbus, Ohio.
Republicans have been trying to get the Banking committees in both the House and the Senate to hold hearings on Madison Guaranty, but the Democratic chairmen have refused.
Yesterday, however, the two chairmen, Sen. Donald Riegle of Michigan and Rep. Henry Gonzalez of Texas, said they will hold hearings on oversight of the Resolution Trust Corp., which disposes of failed thrifts and launched the Madison inquiry in the first place.
Republicans hope to use these hearings as a vehicle for raising questions about the ties between the Clintons and Madison.
The former owner of Madison was a partner with the Clintons in Whitewater Development, a land company, and was a political fund-raiser for Mr. Clinton when he was governor of Arkansas.
One issue is whether Madison funds were improperly used to fund campaign contributions and business investments.
Ms. Tigert strongly supported the Clinton administration's proposal to consolidate four bank regulatory agencies into a new Federal Banking Commission to streamline bank supervision.
"A more thoughtful structure for bank regulation should increase the energy and funds that banks can devote to the U.S. economy," she said.
"Banks must be relieved from confusing, duplicative and overlapping regulation that is not essential to safety and soundness."
She expressed hope that the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board, where she once worked, will resolve their differences over the proposal.
She also supported allowing banks to operate interstate branch networks as a way to cut costs and increase efficiency.
A House panel is expected to approve an interstate-branch plan this week.
The rapid growth of bank involvement in derivatives-products used to hedge against interest-rate fluctuations and other risks -- is "a source of concern," Ms. Tigert told the panel.
She said that the financial industry has issued recommendations for limiting the risk of derivatives and that the Clinton administration is monitoring the derivatives market.
Ms. Tigert also said she was worried by surveys showing that many people who purchase mutual funds from banks mistakenly think they're covered by federal deposit insurance.
She suggested that more disclosure may be necessary.
Yesterday, the banking industry issued a statement, based on government guidelines, designed to end confusion about bank sales of mutual funds.
