But now, with sequels to "Aladdin" and "Darkman," respectively, Walt Disney Co. and MCA Inc. are making movies that will skip the theaters and go straight to video.
More large studios are likely to follow, which could change the economics of the business in myriad ways.
Part of their motivation is defensive: Paramount Communications Inc.'s movie studio will soon become part of an empire that presumably will include Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., the world's largest video retailer.
Blockbuster's 70%-owned Aaron Spelling Productions unit already is quietly planning a four-hour version of James Michener's "Texas" that will first appear in video stores late this year or early next.
The budget for "Texas" is about $10 million -- a bit high for a video movie -- but Capital Cities/ABC Inc.'s ABC network is kicking in about 40% for the right to air it a couple of months after the video release.
"They get a better rate, but it's a good deal for them because the amount of people who would rent it is negligible compared to the TV audience," says Lawrence Lyttle, president of Spelling's TV unit.
The new interest in direct-to-video releases is in part due to the conventional wisdom that video stores are headed the way of the Betamax.
Visions of a near-future in which viewers could select movies from home are causing studios to build up their film libraries by making more movies to fill the expanding universe of available channels.
Until then, studios are prowling for new distribution outlets.
If they can make direct-to-video movies economically viable, a major expansion of film production could result.
And for at least the near term, video stores would be able to provide something consumers can't find elsewhere.
The video marketplace already is vast and lucrative.
An estimated 57 million customers visit their local video store each week, providing the studios with as much as 45% of revenues on some movies.
Tom Adams, managing director of the consulting firm Advanstar Associates, estimates that if the studios could get a 10% increase in revenue from video, they could match the entire pay-per-view market.
Disney revealed last week that its big summer video-release will be "The Return of Jafar," an animated sequel to "Aladdin" made expressly for videocassette.
Disney's Buena Vista Home Video division aggressively sells its animated films for less than $20 apiece, often in mass-merchant discount stores.
Backed by a massive marketing campaign, "The Return of Jafar" would appear to be a slam-dunk, even if it sells only a fraction of the record-setting 21 million "Aladdin" units sold.
Ann Daly, president of the division, says Disney also is looking seriously at making live-action movies for video rental.
MCA is planning to go after the rental market, a trickier proposition.
The company, a unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., hasn't announced its plans yet, but people close to it say it will release a sequel to its 1990 sleeper hit "Darkman" directly-to-video this fall, then follow with several more.
The film starred Liam Neeson, now the star of "Schindler's List," but the sequels will not.
"Darkman," filmed for a relatively paltry $15 million by cult director Sam Raimi, became a surprise hit for MCA's Universal Pictures, propelled by an effective "Who is Darkman?" marketing campaign.
The film sold about $33 million in tickets in the U.S., and was an even bigger hit on video.
Still, MCA was reluctant to sink money into a full-blown sequel, which would probably not match the performance of the original.
Instead, the film's producers went to the Fox network where programmers told them it was "too dark" for a weekly television series, says producer Robert Tapert.
"They were right," he says.
Normally, that would have been the end of "Darkman."
"But we believed it was a franchise that deserved to live," says Mr. Tapert.
MCA and its home-video president Louis Feola decided to take a chance.
The film was a known commodity, and the violent superhero-action genre was aimed straight at young males, the best videorenting audience.
Mr. Feola's division agreed to split the costs with MCA's TV division, and the producers went to work.
Experienced in making low-budget films, they made the movie for a bit more than $4 millionslightly more than the average TV movie, and much less than the nearly $30 million required to make a feature film.
MCA, however, will have to spend more money on advertising.
When a studio-made movie is released in theaters, it typically gets a two-week blitz of TV and print advertising which often can cost more than $10 million.
Whether the campaign sells tickets or not, it creates an awareness that lingers in video stores a few months later.
But most studios don't do much consumer advertising for videos because they get paid not by the number of times customers rent a movie but by how many copies store owners buy.
MCA has experimented with consumer advertising in the past.
"It creates goodwill with the retailers," says Mr. Feola.
MCA also plans to increase normal spending for publicity and in-store advertising for "Darkman," executives say, and a trailer for the film could be placed on other videos.
Video retailers traditionally have been cool to the idea of risking money to load up on copies of movies that never played in theaters.
"They want to say, `Hey, this movie did $20 million at the box office, so I can order X number of copies and it'll rent X number of times," says Ron Castell, senior vice president of programming and communications for Blockbuster.
But now, retailers say that their customers crave something new.
Retailers also have experienced success from some independently produced direct-to-video movies, like "Prehysteria," which tapped into last year's "Jurassic Park" craze by providing an alternative for young children.
"Prehysteria" was produced by Full Moon Entertainment, a near-legendary direct-to-video producer of such low-budget fare as "Bloodlust: Subspecies III."
The company has created a children's line, distributed by Paramount, called Moonbeam.
Paramount helped send Full Moon's head Charles Band -- a flamboyant salesman -- to two dozen cities last year to visit video retailers.
"We're trying to create a brand name," says Robert Klingensmith, president of Paramount Home Video.
