Philip Morris Cos. filed a $10 billion lawsuit against Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and two employees, escalating the corporate backlash against investigative reporting by network newsmagazines.
In a suit filed in Richmond, Va., Circuit Court, the company charged ABC with defamation for the Feb. 28 and March 7 reports on its "Day One" newsmagazine.
Philip Morris said the ABC reports alleged that the tobacco industry artificially spikes its cigarettes with nicotine to make them more addictive.
"Philip Morris does not in any way, shape or form spike its cigarettes with nicotine," said Murray Bring, senior vice president and general counsel of Philip Morris.
"These allegations are not true and ABC knows that they are not true."
An ABC News spokesman said the network was reviewing the lawsuit, "but ABC News stands by its reporting on this issue."
The two employees named in the suit are correspondent John Martin and producer Walt Bogdanich.
Legal experts said they believe the suit is the largest defamation action ever.
Highly publicized lawsuits have proliferated in the past year along with network newsmagazines, which have used investigative reports as a way to make a ratings splash in the competitive format.
The four broadcast networks air 10 newsmagazines a week, five of which were launched in the last year.
Since General Motors Corp. used a lawsuit to successfully counter a damaging report on NBC News's "Dateline" a year ago, numerous companies have tried a similar tactic.
In a February 1993 news conference, GM methodically showed how NBC, a unit of General Electric Co., staged a test crash to buttress a report that fuel tanks in GM pick-up trucks were prone to explode on impact.
NBC settled the lawsuit the next day, making an on-air apology and agreeing to pay about $2 million to cover GM's investigation costs.
Legal experts called Philip Morris's $10 billion lawsuit a shrewdly calculated public relations move, but one that could backfire if defense lawyers are successful in uncovering company secrets as part of the lawsuit.
The release of tobacco company documents in the discovery phase of the lawsuit could be valuable in health-related suits against cigarette companies.
The suit was announced the day before Food and Drug Administration Commissioner David A. Kessler is set to testify before a congressional subcommittee on whether cigarettes should be regulated as a drug.
"It's a carefully orchestrated public relations maneuver," says Bruce Sanford, a prominent Washington libel defense lawyer.
He called the suit a "preemptive strike" designed to beat back the prospect of FDA regulation.
"The audience is clearly the Washington legislative and regulatory community," he said, a sentiment that was echoed by ABC executives.
Philip Morris denied that the timing of its lawsuit was meant to deflect attention from today's hearings.
Philip Morris was not the focus of the ABC reports, although it was mentioned.
The company never asked ABC for a retraction, or agreed to interview requests, although it did send ABC a statement before and after the first broadcast.
ABC's broadcasts looked at a decades-old process of making cigarettes out of reconstituted tobacco, in which the industry grinds up scrap tobacco, extracting the nicotine and water to make a sheet of tobacco, and then adds back the nicotine.
The process results in 20% to 25% less nicotine in the finished cigarette than was there before the process and no nicotine is added in the reconstitution process, Philip Morris said in its complaint.
Philip Morris said that contrary to the claim by "Day One," no powerful extract containing nicotine and flavor is added in the cigarette manufacturing process.
The company also said that the denatured alcohol used in the cigarette manufacturing process doesn't add measurable amounts of nicotine, as ABC inferred.
ABC's reports caused legislators to call for inquiries, caused the company's stock price to fall and "poisoned the well" of public opinion, said Mr. Bring.
The suit seeks $5 billion in compensatory damages and $5 billion in punitive damages.
Most of the post-GM lawsuits have had more public relations value than economic success.
Southeastern Eye Center, of Greensboro, N.C. -- which filed a suit against NBC's "Dateline" last summer -- got news organizations to examine NBC's reporting, and some concluded the clinic was treated unfairly.
But the clinic dropped the suit in October.
NBC paid nothing and strongly defended the report.
In November, High Technology Electronic Services, a repair company in Falls Church, Va., won its defamation case against ABC's "PrimeTime Live," which included the company in a report on fraudulent repairs.
But High Tech was awarded a mere $1 in damages.
Lawyers that sue tobacco companies were gleeful at the prospect of getting their hands on Philip Morris documents in the discovery process.
"I would have a field day with Philip Morris," says J.D. Lee, a Knoxville, Tenn., lawyer.
Mr. Lee, who has filed a dozen unsuccessful suits against cigarette companies, said the suit will probably result in a fresh batch of claims.
"Addiction is going to be on the cutting edge of future cases," he said.
An attorney for Philip Morris, Herbert M. Wachtell, of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, indicated that the company would fight to keep from releasing a list of ingredients in cigarettes, a closely guarded secret.
Mr. Wachtell said the complaint focuses on the spiking charges, not on the questions of ingredients.
