Many European stock markets, which were buoyed Monday on speculation about a broad round of interest-rate reductions, reversed course yesterday.
London share prices dived 1.7%, after fears that U.S. interest rates may rise undermined bond-market sentiment and spilled into equities.
Frankfurt equities slumped 1.2% in nervous trading, while Paris stocks tumbled 2.5% in reaction to U.S. data that widely startled financial markets.
Tokyo stocks advanced 1.1% Tuesday, the fourth gain in a row, to their best finish in three weeks on greater investor optimism about an economic recovery for Japan, even though a sampling by the country's central bank showed businesses aren't so sure.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.25, down 0.49, reflecting lower American and European markets and higher Asia/Pacific markets.
Fishing stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 81.55, up 1.23, or 1.5%, with Nippon Suisan of Japan posting a 3.4% gain in its local currency.
Biotechnology stocks trailed at 72.10, down 1.99, or 2.7%, with Chiron of the U.S. sliding 5.3% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index slumped 57.5 points to 3270.6, also the intraday low, and only about a dozen of these issues managed to gain.
The FT 30-stock index sank 28.1 points, or 1.1%, to 2536.0.
Volume was 709.2 million shares, compared with 705.4 million shares a day earlier.
The 100-stock index reached a high of 3328.8, but the market was spooked by anxiety about higher U.S. interest rates that was fueled by new U.S. economic data that showed manufacturing is generally declining and that revised gross domestic product expanded at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 7.5% in the fourth quarter, the fastest pace since the 1984 first quarter; a rate of about 6.7% had been anticipated.
Thus, London investors expected the U.S. Federal Reserve to tighten monetary policy, which could hurt the bond and stock markets in turn.
Meanwhile, the German Bundesbank quashed hopes of significantly lower interest rates by cutting its repurchasing rate to 5.97% from 6%; a reduction to as deep as 5.75% had been expected.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index retreated 24.52 points to 2067.05, as most players fled to the sidelines.
Investors were worried about a range of factors, including weaker U.S. Treasurys and equities, lower expectations for another immediate easing of key German interest rates, and depressed futures trading.
In Paris, stocks' sharp fall was led by futures trading, and selling was aggravated by early tumbles in U.S. stocks and bonds following the release of the U.S. economic data.
Many Paris investors were surprised by the extent of the French market's drop, even though they had expected a correction following Monday's 2.4% rally.
The mood turned bearish when the German central bank shaved its repo rate less than expected, and the U.S. data triggered fears of more interest-rate increases.
In Amsterdam, equities fell sharply, undermined by a weak U.S. dollar in foreign-exchange dealings and lower stock prices abroad; disappointment about the marginal German rate easing expanded negative sentiment in the Netherlands, aggravated when the Dutch central bank not only declined to lower rates but indicated it would maintain current levels for at least a week.
In Madrid, stocks had sharp losses, as the bourse was damped by drops on Spanish and European bond markets because of the prospect of higher U.S. interest rates.
In Stockholm, shares slumped as the market was depressed by rising interest rates in Sweden and major markets abroad; an agreement Sweden reached yesterday on terms for eventual membership in the European Union didn't affect the market.
In Zurich, stocks fell, pulled down by futures trading.
In Brussels, prices retreated from highs to close mixed, and banks and insurers mostly fell despite a Belgian central bank cut to 6.25% from 6.4% in its money-market lending rate.
In Milan, shares drifted lower as some investors lightened positions ahead of Italian elections at the end of this month.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 193.82 points Monday, climbed 219.42 to 20216.62, near the intraday high of 20240.92.
In trading Wednesday, the Nikkei index sagged 309.33 points to close the morning session at 19907.29.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 500 million shares, up from 467 million shares on Monday.
Gainers overwhelmed losers, 780-269.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which surged 21.84 points Monday, rose 13.77 to 1645.48.
The Nikkei stayed above the 20000 perceived support level all day.
Investors were encouraged by Japanese economic data released Monday and Tuesday that showed surging housing starts, rising industrial production and improving labor market conditions.
The quarterly tankan survey by the Bank of Japan that gauges business sentiment was in line with expectations: Corporate confidence was flat compared with the November tally -- yet while business pessimism didn't grow, it didn't diminish either.
And as the Japanese bond market weakened to levels unseen for several months, rising bond yields could be bearish for equities.
In Hong Kong, shares sputtered down 2.5%, despite positive corporate earnings.
The main index fell from the opening and at one point was down 3.2%.
Rallies lately, such as the one on Monday, have met with selling; stocks rose 3.1% Monday following a 6.7% decline for all of last week.
The market on Tuesday was concerned that differences between Britain and China about Beijing's taking control of the British colony in 1997 would spill over into economic areas.
And sentiment didn't improve on the scheduling of Chinese and Hong Kong officials this week to discuss the territory's new airport project, as financing proposals aren't expected to gain quick acceptance.
Financial stocks plunged 7.5% Tuesday.
In Singapore, stocks lost 1.3%, as institutions took profits in cautious, quiet dealings.
In Kuala Lumpur, prices dropped 1.1%, hampered by steady profit-taking, especially among blue chips, as fund managers narrowed their portfolios in the lackluster market.
In Manila, equities sank 3.7% to post a new low for this year.
The drop was attributed to foreign selling.
In Taipei, shares staged a technical rebound, as gains in industrial stocks halted the market's two-week bear run, in which prices had fallen 10%.
In Wellington, stocks gained 1.2% as the market continued rising, fueled mainly by positive overseas sentiment and bullishness about the New Zealand economy.
In Mexico City, equities plummeted 2.8% in light dealings damped by poor corporate results and concerns about Mexican politics in reaction to a peasant uprising and about higher U.S. interest rates.
Yesterday's drop took the market down 12.7% from its high set Feb. 8.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
