Coca-Cola Co. introduced a line of fruit drinks in a bid to capture a major portion of the $6 billion market for alternative beverages, which includes juices, teas and sparkling waters.
The beverages, called Fruitopia, will be supported initially by a $30 million promotional budget.
An additional $15 million will be spent on 5,000 fuschia vending machines and 7,000 coolers that will stock bottles of the new product in stores.
Coca-Cola said it expects the brand, with eight flavors from Raspberry Psychic Lemonade to Strawberry Passion Awareness, to appeal to consumers in their twenties and older.
Sales this year, the company added, should reach more than $400 million.
The new venture is the first evidence of Coke's previously announced plans to accelerate the pace at which it brings new products to market.
Soft-drink consultants said they expect Coke's investment, combined with its Nestea venture, to bolster sales of all alternative drinks.
"There's a flavor revolution going on," said Tom Pirko, president of Bevmark Inc., a consulting firm.
Consumers are looking for flavors to be "new and scintillating."
Coke, he added, "can spend enough to swamp the category."
Michael Bellas, president of Beverage Marketing Corp., estimated noncarbonated juice sales at about $300 million to $325 million annually, adding that the category doubled in size last year and will double again this year.
Sergio Zyman, Coke's chief marketing officer, said he expects the Atlanta-based soft-drink concern to double its share of the alternative drink market to 15% this year, and to reach 30% in three years.
Coke will be competing with more than 100 brands of similar juice drinks, including lines from Snapple Beverage Corp. and PepsiCo Inc.
PepsiCo promotes three lemonades and five other juice drinks, called Splash, in its joint-venture with Ocean Spray.
The Coke products and three TV ads by Chiat/Day will start their rollout in four weeks and go national by this summer, the company said.
The drinks will sell for about 89 cents for a 16-ounce wide-mouth glass bottle, which looks similar to Snapple's containers.
Mr. Pirko said that price point may be too high, noting that there is "tremendous price resistance" to alternative drinks that are priced substantially higher than regular soft drinks.
Indeed, consumer tastes in alternative beverages have been extremely fickle; Clearly Canadian Beverage Corp. in Vancouver, British Columbia, once a roaring success, has recently seen sales slip.
Fruitopia reflects Coke's broader attempts to respond to consumers' preferences.
After interviewing groups of people in their 20s, company marketers junked the word "juice" from its promotions and put in "fruit," Mr. Zyman said.
They also lightened up the package design, which features psychedelic lettering and Paul Klee-like stick drawings of icons such as a jumping body and a planet.
"We made it more wacko, funky," he said.
Previously, when Coke developed new products, "We had to ask the bottlers and executives and sell ourselves on the idea before we sold the consumer," Mr. Zyman said.
"Today we sell the consumer before ourselves."
Marketing consultants said they think the imagery has big appeal, but differed on to whom it might appeal.
Marian Salzman, president of BKG America, a New York consultant, said the product's look will attract those in their 20s and 30s "nostalgic for a 70s lifestyle" -- but the drink itself may be "too much like Kool-Aid" to sell them.
Whatever the reaction, Coke says it's prepared.
Said Mr. Zyman: "No brand is final.
We will constantly be tweaking it to make sense."
