The U.S. and France will ask NATO to set an early deadline for the withdrawal of all heavy weapons from around Sarajevo, and back it up with the threat of air strikes.
At the same time, the Clinton administration will try to bolster the Bosnian Muslims' diplomatic hand and revive the near-moribund negotiating process, by offering to play a new, "high-profile role" in peace talks.
The U.S. dispatched two top officials to Europe last night to outline the new diplomatic initiative, which includes sending a special U.S. envoy to Sarajevo to help the Muslim government craft a peace proposal that then would be championed by the U.S.
The U.S.-French proposal for ending the siege of Sarajevo would give the Bosnian Serbs and the Muslim-led government about a week to withdraw their artillery, mortars and tanks, or face allied air strikes.
In practice, however, the Serbs, who have the overwhelming majority of the firepower, and who have been doing most of the killing, would bear the brunt of the demand.
The proposal will be presented today in Brussels at a meeting of the North Atlantic Council, the political arm of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
NATO has threatened air strikes before, but failed to follow through mainly because of fears of provoking Serbian retaliation against European and Canadian peacekeepers.
Anger over last weekend's slaughter of 68 people in a Sarajevo market has gone a good way to shift opinion in the alliance.
But U.S. officials acknowledged that the plan could be radically altered or even rejected today.
The U.S. is hoping that its diplomatic initiative will strengthen its credibility among the allies and bolster the joint proposal.
France, which originated the proposal for securing Sarajevo, could prove even more persuasive.
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe threatened to withdraw French peacekeepers from Bosnia unless NATO agreed on "specific and forceful action."
As part of the joint proposal, U.S. officials say the Bosnian government would be allowed to place their heavy weapons under United Nations monitoring while the Serbs would be required to withdraw their weapons altogether.
"There is no chance that the Muslims would be the first to be punished," for any violation, said a senior U.S. official.
The U.S. also will offer to provide special radar to U.N. forces to monitor the withdrawal of the weapons and to pinpoint the source of any shelling.
U.S. officials were hoping that the appearance of even-handedness would defuse Russian objections to the threat of NATO air strikes against Serbs.
As of last night, Britain was believed to be leaning in favor of the proposal, while Canada was still firmly opposed.
To address their concerns, NATO planners have been working to come up with a way to better protect lightly-armed peacekeepers.
One senior U.S. official described the approach on the ground as simply "hunkering down" for awhile.
Even then, officials acknowledged there could be heated debate at today's meeting about a variety of issues including the timing of the deadline -- or even whether to set a deadline -- as well as the distance for withdrawal of the weaponry.
As of last night, the U.S.-French proposal would have the weapons withdrawn about 12 miles beyond the center of Sarajevo with a deadline of seven to 10 days.
In Washington yesterday, Sam Nunn (D., Ga.), Senate Armed Services Committee chairman, warned that the U.S. needs to consider military actions beyond any air strikes.
"You have to be prepared to take other steps," he said.
"They may retaliate. . . .
Nobody knows what will happen after the first strike."
Until now, the U.S. has resisted European demands to get more involved in the negotiations, saying they wouldn't force the Muslims to accept any plan.
But the U.S. also is expected to warn the Muslims that their battlefield gains in recent weeks can't last in the face of superior Croat and Serbian forces.
"We're going to tell the Muslims that they've got a great opportunity here, and they've got to seize it," said a senior Pentagon official.
"I wouldn't call it pressure, but we're going to encourage them to come up with a bottom line -- and we're going to say to the Serbs, take it, or expect the worst.
And we'll say to the Croats, take it, or we'll put you in the sanctions."
Thomas E. Ricks contributed to this article.
