With Greg Gumbel demurely conducting, CBS continues to hit some high notes.
Monday night's minidocumentary on the injury and rehabilitation of American moguls champion Donna Weinbrecht was amazing for the scope of its video.
The camera followed her for more than a year -- to the famous Steadman Clinic in Colorado for knee surgery, home to New Jersey for a period of thoughtful healing, and on to Tignes, in the French Alps, for a triumphant comeback.
Best of all was what didn't get shown: the usual lurid slow-mo of her injury.
CBS may have been justified in pretending not to know the outcome of the luge competition when it broadcast an introductory segment raising hopes for American Duncan Kennedy.
Mr. Kennedy had already crashed and been eliminated, but still, he is interesting and obscure.
On the other hand, the evening coverage of Dan Jansen's failure was a gross breach of taste from beginning to end.
As all the world knew, the snakebitten speed skater had missed yet another chance at a medal Monday; his latest personal disaster was carried live in the morning.
The decision to broadcast Ed Bradley's evening "Profile in Courage," all about how he and his family would be crushed by another failure, simply constituted piling on.
Worse, the rebroadcast of Mr. Jansen's race featured slow-motion instant replay of his wife breaking into tears, and concluded with a cameraman chasing Mr. Jansen down a hallway while a reporter hollered painful questions.
"Georg Hackl is not a complex person.
Give him a beer garden and a luge, and he's happy."
Thus did CBS's reporter sum up a biography of the German champion, who likes beer.
The segment mentioned in passing that Mr. Hackl built his own house, fabricates his own sleds, and wins Olympic gold medals, but evidently dimwitted condescension is still acceptable when it's directed at ice people.
CBS's Monday prime-time broadcast drew 21.8% of the nation's 94.2 million TV households, according to A.C. Nielsen Co.
That was 14% more than the first Monday night of the 1992 Albertville Games.
An estimated 65 million people watched part or all of the coverage, giving CBS its highest-rated Monday since Nov. 2, 1987.
NBC drew 10.6% of viewers in prime time, and ABC had 8.4%.
"Late Show with David Letterman" drew 8.8% in 30 major markets, its highest rating since the first two nights of its premiere week, Aug. 30-31, 1993.
The broadcast featured the debut of the show's Olympic correspondent, David's Mother, Dorothy, who interviewed Hillary Rodham Clinton.
CBS in prime time is cleaning up in the ratings, but the Games on the morning show and on poor cousin TNT are picture-poor.
In general, the most interesting videotapes are being saved for the evenings.
That leaves TNT with day-old events plus live and tape-delay hockey.
The decision leaves Paula Zahn and Harry Smith with little to do but say good morning to each other.
Travelers in China are getting their Winter Games exposure, too.
Air China, seeking to emulate other airlines, is offering in-flight videos of the Olympics -- the 1992 Albertville Olympics.
