Japan's rice stocks are down.
So Japanese rice stocks are going up.
With this nation's supply of rice dwindling because of last year's bad weather, many investors have been making capital grains investments.
The share prices of Japan's rice-related companies -- many with solid inventories of the sacred grain -- have been skyrocketing due to a national panic over tight supplies.
Lines outside supermarkets still carrying the treasured national product stretch for blocks.
Robberies of native rice have become commonplace.
And government-provided foreign alternatives are neither sufficiently sticky nor bland-tasting enough for local palates.
The Rice Problem Hotline, set up by an Osaka consumer group, was flooded with gripes about rice gouging (reportedly as high as $73 a pound for the good stuff) and private stockpiling.
Consumers are stocking up ahead of a mandatory foreign rice-Japanese rice blending program.
Japan's egalitarian government thinks everyone should eat his or her share of the alien cereal.
Consumers don't agree.
"My sister lined up for two hours for rice," says Tomoko Aikawa, a securities company employee in Tokyo.
"My mom has been asking all her friends for Japanese rice."
Ms. Aikawa's colleagues in the stock market, meanwhile, have found ways to make the rice shortfall a stock windfall.
There's Genki Sushi Co., a restaurant chain with a stockpile of local rice.
Investors figure Genki and other sushi shops will see a boom from Japanese who need the real thing under their raw fish.
The stock has climbed 3% in the past two weeks (the overall market is up 2%).
Not a bad return but nothing compared with the 13% gain in shares of Showa Sangyo Co., which makes a pungent rice-flavoring sauce that can smother supposedly smelly Thai rice.
Shares in Honen Corp., another sauce maker, have gained 10% in the past two weeks.
There's even a "Let them eat bread" stock play.
Some traders are pushing Yamazaki Baking Co., on the assumption that Japanese bread (which, like Japanese rice, is generally sticky and bland) will be favored over foreign rice.
The stock price hasn't moved, but the company confirms that sales this week are 3% above normal.
And climbing?
Well, Japan's Meteorological Agency recently predicted another cold summer this year.
