THE PRESIDENT LIFTED a 19-year-old U.S. trade embargo against Vietnam.
The president said he believed the step would further efforts to get a full accounting of Americans missing in Vietnam.
He insisted that removing the trade embargo wasn't the same as restoring full diplomatic relations with Hanoi, saying the U.S. is demanding more answers on the MIA issue.
The decision will set off a race by U.S. companies to catch up with foreign competitors in Vietnam, one of Asia's fastest-growing markets.
Clinton, who avoided military service in Vietnam, played down the business opportunities, in deference to the families of missing soldiers.
Many veterans groups opposed lifting the embargo.
The Senate confirmed William Perry to be U.S. defense secretary.
The 97-0 vote came slightly more than a week after Clinton nominated Perry -- until now the No. 2 Pentagon administrator -- to succeed Les Aspin.
Perry was sworn in last night.
Transportation officials unveiled new, comprehensive regulations that institute alcohol testing and expand drug testing in the transport industries.
The rules call for random alcohol and drug tests for pilots, truckers, bus drivers, train engineers and others in jobs that affect public safety.
Bosnian Serbs bowed to a U.N. threat of force and removed a roadblock outside Sarajevo, giving peacekeepers access to the capital.
A day earlier, the new U.N. military commander in Bosnia, Gen. Michael Rose, promised a "hard-nosed" effort to aid civilians and threatened to use combat vehicles to force a way past the roadblock.
Nation of Islam leader Farrakhan said he had dismissed a top aide for making "repugnant" anti-Semitic remarks in a November speech that sparked denunciations in Congress.
But Farrakhan coupled his rebuke with an attack on a Jewish group, the Anti-Defamation League, which he called "self-centered" and antiblack.
Japan's ruling coalition shelved a dayold tax-cut plan that had threatened to topple the Hosokawa government.
But finance ministry officials predicted a package with tax cuts will be worked out before the prime minister meets with Clinton in Washington next Friday.
EPA chief Browner announced the administration's plan for rewriting the Superfund law, to mixed reviews from members of Congress, environmentalists and industry.
The space shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Fla., carrying five U.S. astronauts and a cosmonaut on an eight-day research mission.
The head of Russia's space program praised the apparently flawless liftoff, considered a prelude to a shared space station.
The administration is seeking to boost spending on job-training programs by 13%, to over $7 billion, focusing on middle-class unemployed workers but adding funds for the inner-city poor.
Mexico's deputy foreign minister issued a statement criticizing a U.S. congressional hearing that convened this week to discuss whether last month's Chiapas uprising might spread.
Rozental said Nafta doesn't give U.S. lawmakers "the right to sit in judgment" on Mexican issues.
Emergency quake aid was approved by the House, which rejected attempts to finance the assistance through new cuts in other programs.
The $7.7 billion in Los Angeles earthquake aid, and another $1 billion in loans, won approval in a 337-74 vote as part of a broader measure authorizing supplemental spending.
Anti-Russian guerrillas killed Georgia's deputy defense minister with a remote-controlled bomb and tried to assassinate Defense Minister Karkarashvili a few hours before Russian leader Yeltsin arrived in Tbilisi to sign a treaty of cooperation.
The pact reasserts Kremlin military
The Senate agreed to deny federal funds to any state or local agencies that bar constitutionally protected prayer in public schools.
The 75-22 vote came after Sen. Helms modified the language in his proposal to ensure that it would apply only to studentinitiated voluntary prayer, which is permitted under the Constitution. influence in Georgia in exchange for economic aid.
