"Follow the money" is the trusted rule of thumb for aficionados of unseemly political behavior, and there's no bigger money trail than the $1.3 trillion municipal bond market.
Used by local governments to finance everything from sewers to prisons, the muni market has lately been struggling through the conflict-of-interest swamps.
In New Jersey last year, a top aide to then-Gov.
Jim Florio had to quit after it came out that Merrill Lynch & Co. had hired his tiny brokerage firm to take part in muni underwriting for the state.
New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman lost her re-election bid after receiving a $450,000 campaign loan from Fleet Bank, which subsequently won a city contract.
Similar scenarios have played out from Louisiana to Chicago.
White House aide Rahm Emanuel worked as a consultant to Goldman, Sachs while serving as an adviser to Mayor Richard Daley.
And U.S. News & World Report has reported that the Stephens Inc. banking empire, a leading contributor to Bill Clinton's campaigns, participated in 45% of Arkansas' bond business between 1980 and 1993.
The system is known as "pay to play."
The way it works is that an underwriter who competes for a government agency's business must also fork over campaign contributions to elected officials who run the agency.
It's an awful system.
Wall Street develops a vested interest in bigger and fatter governments at all levels, while a function that most voters would regard as a public trust becomes a wallow in sleaze at both ends of the deal.
The hidden costs of "pay to play" are ultimately paid by the taxpayers and bond buyers.
More broadly, this corrupt way of doing business has the potential to spook many of the small, individual investors who have flocked into munis recently.
Enter Arthur Levitt, appointed last year by Bill Clinton as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Mr. Levitt, a top fund-raiser among his former Wall Street colleagues, knows bonds and politics firsthand.
And he's concerned that they've mixed in unhealthy ways.
"I clearly regard this as a risk to the market," he tells us.
His solution is for underwriters to stop giving campaign contributions to officials with whom they do business.
Tired of shakedowns from pols, many firms are happy to oblige.
Last fall, 17 Wall Street underwriters voluntarily agreed to stop making donations.
Now the SEC head wants to require all underwriters to wait two years after making a contribution before seeking bond business from the recipient.
The new SEC rule also would require firms to disclose the hiring of politically connected "consultants."
The Levitt reform has generated howls of outrage from -- you guessed it -- the politicos pocketing the moola.
Today, Mr. Levitt will go into the lion's den to deliver a tough speech to a meeting of state treasurers in Washington.
We doubt that he'll be able to pacify the pols, many of whom have been writing and phoning the chairman to harangue him.
One amazing letter from the National League of Cities says limiting bond firms' contributions is "fundamentally incompatible with our American system of government."
Gosh, do they teach about "pay to play" in eighth-grade civics classes these days?
Maybe they should.
What's bad news for professional politicians may be good news for everyone else, however, since it's a safe bet that underwriters, like most special interests, overwhelmingly give to incumbents.
Cutting off this source of entrenching cash may make for more competitive elections.
It's also hard to shed tears over the complaint made by some small, regional muni underwriters that the SEC rules would unfairly hurt them.
The big Wall Street firms -- the Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanleys -- will get a piece of the underwriting business no matter what, this argument goes.
It's the small guys who need to grease their way into the deals.
But many of the big Wall Street firms have been the biggest culprits -- or, depending on how you look at it, the biggest victims -- in "pay to play" schemes, mainly because they've had the most money to throw around.
Perhaps once all contributions are banned, small dealers will have a fairer shot at landing business because they won't have to compete against the cash of the Wall Street powerhouses.
The SEC rule isn't a panacea, as Mr. Levitt admits.
It leaves a large loophole by not covering contributions made by contractors or lawyers connected with the underwriters.
But if, as expected, the SEC adopts the rule later this month, it will be an important confidence-building measure for the nation's bond investors.
