Union Pacific Corp., in its largest natural-gas purchase since entering that industry in the 1950s, said it agreed to acquire the oil and gas assets of Cyprus Amax Minerals Co. for $819 million.
The acquisition will increase the Bethlehem, Pa., railroad and natural resources company's gas reserves by 20%, even after it sells some of the new properties in a related transaction.
Most of the properties the company will retain after the acquisition are long-lived natural gas producing, gathering and processing assets in Texas and Louisiana, some of which are close to holdings already operated by Union Pacific.
"It's one of the larger oil and gas acquisitions in the last three years," said David Bradshaw, oil and gas analyst for PaineWebber.
The company said that upon closing, it will sell Amax's Northern division, including properties and facilities in Oklahoma, the Texas Panhandle, New Mexico and Colorado, for $94.5 million to a Questar Corp. unit, Universal Resources Corp.
This will bring the cost of the Amax transaction to $725 million.
In New York Stock Exchange trading, Union Pacific shares fell $1.125 a share to $58.625 a share, while Cyprus Amax fell 37.5 cents to $29.875 a share.
"We'd looked at a number of natural gas properties in the last three years.
None fit as well as this" in terms of location and type of geologic formation, said Jack Messman, president and chief executive of Union Pacific Resources Co., Union Pacific's oil and gas unit in Fort Worth, Texas.
Union Pacific said it will fund the acquisition primarily through loans, initially commercial paper.
However, the sale of Wilmington Field, Calif., properties to the Port of Long Beach for $405 million, which also was announced yesterday, will provide proceeds for the acquisition.
A spokesman said that Union Pacific's debt to capitalization level will rise because of the acquisition, but will remain "well within the target range" of 40%.
He added that Union Pacific isn't contemplating any other significant acquisitions in the near future.
Meanwhile, Denver-based Cyprus Amax, which put the Amax properties up for sale last year, said it will use some of the proceeds to finance a portion of mining projects it is pursuing in South America and to pay for some of the cost-reduction projects at its U.S. mines.
The company, which took on about $2 billion in debt when it acquired Amax Inc. last fall, doesn't expect to use any of the proceeds to pay down debt, a spokesman said.
But Cyprus Amax may use some of the cash as a "war chest" to acquire additional companies or mines, said Vic Lazarovici, mining analyst at Smith Barney Shearson.
Jim Higgins, an analyst with Brown Brothers Harriman, called the acquisition an excellent buy.
He said the company's estimated price per thousand cubic feet of gas reserves -- 77 cents -- "was right in line with recent acquisitions."
The wellhead price of natural gas, which fell to a low of $1 per thousand cubic feet in early 1992, has recovered to about $2 per thousand cubic feet.
Mr. Messman of Union Pacific Resources said that of the $725 million price for the properties the company will retain, $424 million will go to paying for reserves of 550 billion cubic feet of gas equivalents and $301 million for infrastructure, such as plant facilities and gathering lines.
Mr. Messman said that as a result of the purchases, Union Pacific Resources, already one of the country's most active drillers, will boost its drilling activity by 240 wells a year to an average of 660 wells.
In 1992, Union Pacific Resources had operating revenue of $1.26 billion and operating income of $315 million.
Separately, Moody's Investor Service Inc. confirmed Union Pacific's ratings, saying that even with modest returns on the new investment, credit quality measures will improve in the intermediate term.
