There's a widening cultural gap in Japan these days between bullish foreign economists and their pessimistic Japanese counterparts.
The disagreement over the outlook for Japan's ailing economy has reached remarkable levels, particularly in forecasts of corporate pretax earnings for the year that starts April 1.
The explanation stems from a differing view of Japan's rising joblessness and its impact on consumer spending and business sales.
Some Western analysts who have seen earnings recover amid corporate bloodletting are relatively confident about Japan's short-term prospects.
They see consumer spending improving or holding steady despite job cuts and reduced overtime and are upbeat about the prospects for healthier corporate bottom lines.
Baring Securities (Japan) Ltd. economist Geoffrey Barker says Japanese pretax profit may rebound as much as 40% next fiscal year.
"If the U.S. can do it in '92, Japan can do it in '94," says Mr. Barker.
The Japanese, on the whole, disagree, and the debate says a great deal about the differences in mentality among the two groups.
Among the biggest bears is Industrial Bank of Japan economist Kozo Koide, who sees an 11% plunge in earnings.
Though Japanese companies largely have avoided large-scale layoffs and other jarring Western-style restructuring moves, more workers are concerned about their jobs.
Mr. Koide and others believe it will take some time for consumer sentiment to recover in a land where lifetime employment is the ideal.
"The labor situation is going to worsen in 1994, making it hard to loosen the purse strings," says Mr. Koide.
Japan is all but certain to see a fourth consecutive year of declining pretax profit for the year ending March 31.
Meanwhile, Japan's unemployment rate has risen to 2.8%, a six-year high, and observers on both sides believe the rate could top the record 3.1% this calendar year.
The differing schools of thought don't split purely along ethnic lines.
One of the pessimists is Lehman Brothers analyst Paul Summerville, who expects earnings to fall between 10% and 15% next fiscal year.
And the wide range in forecasts is understandable, given the uncertainty over variables such as the yen-dollar exchange rate, which sways exporters' earnings.
Many Japanese companies expect the rate to fluctuate between 100 yen and 120 yen to the dollar.
But many economists do emphasize the cultural split -- and note that last year, the roles largely were reversed.
Japanese economists, particularly at Japanese institutions, on the whole were slower than foreign economists to forecast the weaker growth that since has plagued the nation.
"Most of the Japanese institutions in the past couple of years were too optimistic," says Donald Kimball, an American economist at Mitsubishi Bank Ltd.
The pessimists can cite plenty of grist for their mill.
Because of the worsening labor situation, "people's expected lifetime earnings have fallen in the last year," says IBJ's Mr. Koide, who has been bearish for some time.
That dashing of hopes, he believes, will suppress the spurt in consumer spending needed to buoy corporate sales.
He reckons that will be the case even if Japan's government slashes income taxes, which many people -- and the U.S. administration -- are pushing for.
Some bears note that despite the anxiety over jobs, Japanese companies aren't cutting labor costs fast enough to widen their margins, which have shrunk to an 18-year low of 1.4% of sales.
That is because most big Japanese companies still follow traditional labor practices, such as lifetime jobs and annual wage increases.
Susumu Kato, economist at CS First Boston (Japan) Ltd., believes the cost of labor will grow 2% or 3% next fiscal year, outweighing lower depreciation costs.
That will help drag down corporate earnings 5% or more, he predicts.
Some Western analysts in Tokyo argue that the pessimists overemphasize the labor situation.
"In Japan, where you have a full-employment tradition, it's not obvious that you can have growth without full employment," says S.G. Warburg strategist Tom Hill.
"In my view, rising unemployment should be associated with rising profit," since job loss signals that companies are paring costs.
Mr. Hill places greater weight on other factors: Japan's record-low interest rates, he says, put money in corporate coffers by slashing interest payments to creditors.
The yen should weaken to 120 or 125 to the dollar, he believes, a shift that would boost the competitiveness of exporters.
(The Japanese currency has weakened to 111.73 against the dollar since nearing parity with the penny in August.)
So despite weak gross domestic product growth of 1% next business year, earnings should advance 30%, he argues.
Baring's Mr. Barker is even more upbeat.
Booming markets in countries like the U.S. will buttress exporters' sales, he says.
Moreover, he says, the current price slashing in Japan's new discount stores will lure consumers into shops despite job anxieties.
Who's right?
Consumer spending hasn't collapsed, say the bulls, despite the jump in unemployment.
But the bears argue that the worst is yet to come.
"We're facing a very interesting test point for both camps" in the coming months, says Mr. Hill.
One big test should come this month, when Japan's government promises to deliver details on new measures to spur the economy.
Japanese leaders have missed deadlines for action on the economy in recent months, however.
The latest signals from politicians suggest leaders may be considering a package of additional stimulative spending for the remainder of the fiscal year, including as much as four trillion yen ($35.58 billion) in public works.
Business leaders also are awaiting an expected income-tax cut; recent numbers reported in the media put its size at as much as seven trillion yen.
Finance Ministry officials say tax-cut details haven't been worked out.
