Alas, it was just a bit too good.
There hangs a spy story of the wireless age -- embroiling the national intelligence agencies of the U.S., Britain, France, the Netherlands and Australia in a secretive, four-year tussle with some of the world's biggest telephone companies.
The end came only a few months ago, with the spooks winning and the phone engineers losing.
But hard feelings linger.
"Possibly they watch too many James Bond movies," grumbles Kari Marttinen, a Telecom Finland executive who tangled with the intelligence agencies.
But there's more to this story.
The strange case of A5/1, as the code is called, was the first, precedent-setting instance of an increasingly common conflict in wireless communications: Car-phone users want privacy, but governments want to listen in on criminals, terrorists or foreign agents.
With most mobile phones today, it's a snap for anyone -- whether policeman or voyeur -- to eavesdrop over the airwaves.
But as the technology advances, it becomes harder.
Thus, Western intelligence agencies are battling to draw the line right now, to keep future generations of mobile phones safe for official tapping.
"They're looking ahead," says James Bidzos, president of RSA Data Security Inc., a Redwood City, Calif., cryptography concern that has clashed often with the intelligence agencies.
"They're seeing that eventually everyone will be carrying portable, personal communications devices" that, if too secure, could make intelligence work even harder.
"They don't want this security technology to get out.
It's a threat in any form."
The story begins in the late 1980s, when a committee of telephone engineers from around Western Europe was designing what would soon become one of the world's most advanced mobile-telephone systems.
The first all-digital car-phone network, "GSM," or Global System for Mobile Communications, by now has a million users in Europe and 50 million forecast world-wide by 2000.
It and some rival systems being tested in the U.S. and Japan are to succeed the current generation of analog cellular telephones.
In contrast to static-prone analog systems, a digital car phone electronically converts conversations into the bits and bytes of a computer to offer a clearer connection and extra features.
A big problem with analog systems is that they leak secrets like a U.S. congressional committee.
To eavesdrop, all it takes is an off-the-shelf radio scanner.
The world's most celebrated case occurred in Britain, when someone taped a compromising cellular call between Princess Diana and a male friend.
The tape was leaked to newspapers in 1992, and soon all Britain was reading about the princess's chat with "Squidgy," as she called him.
The mystery of who dared eavesdrop on a royal call has never been resolved -- though most signs pointed toward Britain's aggressive intelligence agencies.
GSM might have preserved the palace decorum.
Because a GSM phone works like a computer, it can scramble a caller's words by cranking the electronic signals that represent them through a prearranged secret code.
It all happens electronically, so the caller doesn't notice.
And the telephone company computer uses the same code to unscramble the words.
Yet to anyone listening in over the air, the conversation sounds like the squeals of a computer modem -- but one that's speaking a nonsense language no normal computer can fathom.
The heart of this system is the cipher itself -- and that's where the cryptographers came in.
The European GSM planners turned to Britain, a world center for ciphers ever since the British cracked Nazi Germany's famous "Enigma" code in World War II.
Their goal was to make the code tough -- but not impossibly so.
The cryptographers "weren't building a military-grade cipher algorithm," or mathematical formula, says one industry official who declines to be named.
Instead, the aim was "to provide a reasonable commercial level of security, to prevent people from building scanners" to eavesdrop as easily as with the old analog systems.
In hindsight, it appears they overdid it.
They called their brainchild A5/1: "A" for algorithm, "5" for the fifth of nine formulas involved in GSM security, and "1" for the first version.
How it works is secret even today: Cellular-telephone manufacturers using it must sign confidentiality pledges and get a special license from the British government.
But in general, part of the code is held by the phone-company computer, part on a computer chip inside the GSM phone, and part on a special credit-card-like device that the user slips into the phone to turn it on.
Without all three, the algorithm can't function -- a feature to discourage someone from cracking the code just by stealing and analyzing a GSM telephone.
Even tougher: For every call, a new code is created.
The GSM planners at Europe's major telephone companies were delighted with A5/1.
They figured such tight security would be a big selling point, and the main car-phone makers in Europe -- Motorola Inc., Sweden's Telefon AB LM Ericsson, Finland's Oy Nokia and the Panasonic division of Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. -- began inscribing the code on silicon chips.
They and GSM's biggest phone-company backers -- including Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, France Telecom and British Telecommunications PLC -- began planning GSM systems at home and trying to sell them abroad.
Interest has been high: 45 nations have agreed to open GSM systems, and 33 more say they plan to.
But in 1989 a snag arose: Britain began refusing export licenses.
The security agencies there, and in Washington, Paris and The Hague, had started comparing notes and getting alarmed at the thought of just anybody getting hold of the codes.
In part, says one American telephone executive, the spy agencies didn't want a promising new opportunity for electronic eavesdropping -- new mobile telephones in, say, Russia -- rendered untappable.
They also worried that the code technology itself could be taken from GSM phones and applied to military projects -- say, missile-guidance systems in Iraq.
Their objections took the GSM planners by surprise; they hadn't thought to check with the security agencies in advance, and by now the industry had already spent too much money on A5/1 to walk away from it.
Besides, many industry engineers thought the worries overblown.
Even with the code working, says Telecom Finland's Mr. Marttinen -- for a time chairman of the GSM planning committee -- a security agency could still eavesdrop by tapping into the phone lines or switches; only the radio-wave portion of the call is encrypted.
"There are so many different ways" to eavesdrop; "the radio part is the most stupid and difficult" to tackle, he says.
But the agencies held the trump cards: veto power over the export licenses.
A compromise emerged last year.
Western European nations and a few other privileged markets -- including Hong Kong, Australia and Hungary -- get the original A5/1 code.
U.S. mobile-phone companies haven't decided yet whether they will use GSM at all; they have some competing digital technologies with as-yet unresolved encryption disputes.
Most other nations that take GSM get a new, easier-to-crack cipher called A5/2.
And the most sensitive countries -- such as Russia and Iraq -- don't get any cryptography at all in their GSM systems.
Unfortunately, this ruffles diplomatic feathers.
Malaysia is miffed that it gets the weak code while neighboring Singapore gets the strong one.
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait complain that the United Arab Emirates and Qatar got special dispensations to use the high-grade code.
"How do you explain to the Saudis that we'll give it A5/1 to the UAE but not to you?" asks George Schmitt, an executive of German mobile-phone operator Mannesmann AG and current chairman of the GSM planning committee.
"Those are the tough things for me as chairman, and they don't make a lot of sense."
The case of Russia is more complex.
Though local politicians there grouse about the perceived indignity of getting cipherless GSM, Russian security agencies may be pleased.
Earlier this year, Moscow issued licenses to Western telephone companies to open GSM systems in 12 cities -- and the license includes peculiar language ensuring "the ability of the state security organs to work with the GSM operator to determine information," says one Western telephone executive.
Nobody knows exactly what that means, but the Westerners assume they may have to help the local security forces eavesdrop on the cipherless GSM calls in Russia.
Industry executives expect a further easing of the rules this year -- perhaps upgrading the no-code countries to get A5/2.
But similar quarrels are going on right now over the many other flavors of digital mobile technology that have emerged since GSM.
U.S. manufacturers recently agreed to weaken the encryption for cellular digital packet data, or CDPD, a new standard to send data over cellular-phone networks, says RSA Data's Mr. Bidzos.
And other controversies are still unresolved, such as over how to encrypt data over networks of portable computers.
For these quarrels, says Mannesmann's Mr. Schmitt, the GSM case provides a clear lesson: "Encrypt it good, but don't encrypt it too good."
Mr. Hudson is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's London bureau.
