Three hundred dollars buys a little of Arun Alagappan's time (an hour) but a lot of information (the meaning of the word "papal," for example, or how to handle two-variable equations).
Mr. Alagappan (pronounced al-uh-guhPAN) is a private tutor in Manhattan who specializes in preparing students to take standardized tests, including the Scholastic Aptitude Test, prerequisite for admission to most undergraduate colleges.
As such, he has made a small business into a big moneymaker.
Despite his high cost -- or maybe because of it -- Mr. Alagappan has developed a fanatical following in the highstakes, high-pressure world of college preparation.
"Somewhere between spectacular and indescribable," says Frank Biondi, president and chief executive of Viacom Inc., whose daughter Anne studied with Mr. Alagappan.
"The most wonderful person in the world," says Judith Hirsch, a tax accountant, whose daughter Rebekah was another Alagappan client.
Since Mr. Alagappan typically sees kids for an hour and 40 minutes a week -- which adds up to $500 -- for 10 to 15 weeks, costs for all that wonderfulness can quickly mount up.
Jayme Stewart, a high-school guidance counselor, figures she has spent $22,000 with Mr. Alagappan over the past several years getting her son and twin daughters through a battery of precollege tests.
Colleges say large sums spent on improving SAT scores are misplaced.
"If they are going to spend upward of $10,000, it would be better spent getting involved in some outside activity," says Drusilla Blackmun, dean of undergraduate admission and financial aid at Columbia University.
And Educational Testing Service, which administers the SAT, disputes most claims of higher scores attributed to tutors.
It says research shows that on average 40 hours of coaching can increase a test score by only 30 to 50 points.
Mr. Alagappan says he does not teach test-beating techniques; instead, he says, he systematically "deconstructs" published SAT exams and teaches the underlying mathematical and grammatical principles.
The 2,000-plus words he hands out to memorize (abide, strife, allegory, forgo, embolden) "aren't an arbitrary set of words," he says.
"They are words that are linked to performance in college.
If you read Melville you will see the words we give out."
He broke the math exam into 14 types of problems (like fractions, decimals and exponents) and teaches the concepts behind the questions.
He teaches old-fashioned mnemonics (TACOS: The total area minus the cutout equals the shaded region) and associations (Gregarious: Think of Greg on "The Brady Bunch" -- "a friendly and outgoing person").
There is even a special vocabulary list of words Manhattan kids have trouble with.
The troublesome categories?
Farm animals (bovine, equestrian, foal, gander, ewe), church (chapel, clergy, heathen, hymn, pagan) and sports (error, fumble, mitt, goal).
A graduate of Princeton and Harvard Law School, Mr. Alagappan started Advantage Testing -- which now has about 20 tutors -- in 1986 after having worked for a big Manhattan law firm.
Now 34 years old, he was born in India, the second of four children of a United Nations official, immigrated here at age two and grew up in the New York City borough of Queens.
"Every Saturday morning my Dad took me to the library, not to baseball games," he says.
"I took my studies very seriously."
But even more important than his knowledge, some students say, is his calming influence.
"The two go hand in handneurosis and New York," says client Tanya Friedman, now a senior at Harvard.
"He really knows that, and he does his best to allay everyone's fears.
He's very relaxing."
Another client, Ms. Stewart's son, Tripp, says of Mr. Alagappan: "He got me a good enough score to get me into Princeton, which I can't praise him enough for."
Tripp Stewart says his scores jumped to 1300 from 1050 after a year's tutoring.
Some observers see the popularity of Mr. Alagappan's and other private tutoring services as a byproduct of New York's pressure-cooker mentality.
"In a lot of New York private schools, there is such a high premium placed on getting into a college with a name that glows in the dark," says Stephen Singer, director of college counseling at Horace Mann School in Riverdale.
George Mayer, retired head of the English department at Manhattan's Trinity School and himself an SAT tutor, says: "There are a lot of wealthy parents in New York who assume that the more they pay, the better the tutoring is, which is stupid.
They tend to assume kids must have SAT training the way they see an orthodontist."
Advantage's top tutor earns about $100,000 a year.
Mr. Alagappan won't disclose his own income but says he tutors for about 60 hours a week, 11 months of the year and only raises his rates when he gets twice as many requests for his services as he can fill.
He says he is sensitive to charges of elitism.
He and his company tutor 15% of their students pro bono and also offer less expensive tutors and classes for people who can't afford Mr. Alagappan himself.
As for the high fees charged to those who can afford them, Mr. Alagappan says his charges are deliberately high.
His reasoning: "My strong and explicit agenda was to attract to private teaching people who might practice other professions because they aren't going to be rewarded financially for teaching."
