Back in the days when money was called "dough," and high-net-worth individuals were simply called "rich," it was a cinch to know what your broker was talking about.
But today, brokers, insurance agents and other financial salespeople use a new vocabulary that glosses over the hard fact that they're, well, selling something -- and hoping to earn a commission on the deal.
Walk into a broker's office these days.
You won't be sold a product.
You won't even find a broker.
Instead, a "financial adviser" will "help you select" an "appropriate planning vehicle," or "offer" a menu of "investment choices" or "options" among which to "allocate your money."
Investors who aren't current with the lingo might fail to keep their consumers' wits about them and end up buying a lemon.
(Forget about "buying," however: these days you're "choosing," "selecting," "investing," "allocating" and otherwise empowering your assets.)
"If you understand the terminology, you're half way there," says James E. Wilson, president of the Consumer Financial Education Foundation, in Columbia, S.C.
"You at least know what questions to ask."
Take the word "commission," that old-fashioned term for what brokers charge for doing business with you.
Commissions are the real reason brokers talk to you -- and why they might recommend one product (such as a variable annuity, which pays a 6% commission) over another (such as a fixed annuity, which pays 3%).
But the new sales vernacular generally doesn't speak of commissions, even though you still pay them.
Sometimes the charges are built into the price of the investment, as they are for bonds, insurance policies and over-the-counter stocks.
More often, they go by some other name.
For instance, when you buy mutual funds from a broker, you typically pay "front-end loads."
When you sell such funds, you might pay "back-end loads" -- also known as "surrender penalties," which seem to imply you've done something wrong.
Thus, a sales pitch that clamors "There's no commission, so all your money goes to work for you at once!" often translates to: "There's a doozy of a fee when you take your money out."
To complicate matters further, many mutual funds sold by brokers don't have front-end or back-end loads.
But that doesn't mean they're "no load" funds, like those sold directly to investors by mutual-fund companies.
Rather, it probably means the broker is hawking "Class C" shares, where sales charges are rolled into the fund's annual expenses.
Instead of commissions, you have "expense ratios" that are about twice as high as those for other funds.
For investors, it ends up being the same thing.
Indeed, whenever a broker makes a point of insisting there's no commission at all, start looking for one.
No matter what anyone says, you can count on this: There's always a commission -- these people don't push these products for free.
Insurance agents likewise abhor the use of commissions -- the word, that is.
And because insurance salespeople aren't required to disclose such charges, unschooled investors may think they don't exist.
In reality, insurance policies have among the highest commissions of any financial product, running as high as 100% of initial investments.
If you plunk down a $13,000 first-year premium for whole-life or universal-life insurance, roughly $9,000 would go to the agent as a commission, about $2,000 would go to the general agent as commission, and the remaining $2,000 would go to cover other marketing costs.
That's why if you cancel your policy in the early years, you walk away empty-handed.
To be sure, agents do discuss commissions among themselves, but when pressed in public, they insist that regulators limit such charges to 50% or so of the first-year payments.
Commissions above that level are simply renamed "expense allowance reimbursements," says Consumer Financial's Mr. Wilson.
And what are those agents selling anyway?
Nothing so prosaic as life insurance.
Instead, they peddle such euphemisms as "private retirement accounts," "college savings plans" and "charitable remainder trusts."
Peter Katt, an insurance adviser in West Bloomfield, Mich., says he even saw a policy marketed as an "intermediate-term bond fund with a mortality charge."
Increasingly, "the life insurance industry spends its time trying to concoct ways to avoid using that term," says John R. Graham of Graham Communications, an insurance marketer based in Quincy, Mass.
"Salesmen" and "brokers" have also been expunged from the new sales lexicon.
Insurers nowadays rely on "estate planning specialists," "retirement planning specialists" and "benefits specialists" to sell their policies.
"You rarely see a business card from a life insurance agent that has the word `insurance' on it," says Mr. Graham.
"The last thing they want to be known as is an insurance agent, because they don't think anyone will want to talk to them."
On Wall Street, meanwhile, it's the "financial consultants" and "investment advisers" who do the touting these days.
(They were calling themselves "financial planners" for a while, but planning didn't have the same sex appeal as advising.)
"It's a way to immunize yourself from criticism," says H. Lynn Hopewell, editor of the Journal of Financial Planning in Falls Church, Va.
Such language makes it "harder to dislike brokers or question their motives or advice."
Investors have code names, too.
A quick scan through the trade literature that brokers and insurance agents read to pick up selling tips reveals that individuals are "clients" to their face, and "prospects" behind their backs.
The best kind is a "risk tolerant" "high net worth individual" -- or HNWI (pronounced hen-wee) -- which is someone with a lot of money who is willing to take a flier.
Alternately, the "risk averse" HNWI is a prospect who will buy bonds.
Among other linguistic sleights of hand in common usage these days: saying tax-free when, in fact, it's only tax-deferred; high yield when it's downright risky; and projected returns when it's more likely in your dreams.
"Guaranteed," like "lite" and "all natural," more often than not, means nothing at all.
