AGING POPULATIONS add to the troubles of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet republics.
The U.S. Census Bureau reports that one in 10 people in these 22 countries -- Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia still counting as one each -- was 65 or over in 1990 and that by 2025, the proportion would be one in five.
Aging populations characterize all industrialized nations -- in the U.S., for example, one in eight is elderly -- but Census suggests that the aging trend is more of a problem for the former Communist nations.
One reason is that most have very liberal pension policies, which will strain scarce economic resources.
Efforts to reduce pensions or inability to meet pension obligations could add to political instability.
Another factor is that women greatly outnumber men among the elderly in these countries, and aged women usually require more medical and other care.
Elderly women outnumber elderly men practically all over the world, but the disproportion is particularly great in the former Communist countries due to male deaths in World War II.
In Russia, for example, elderly women are almost three times as numerous as elderly men.
The chief cause of the increasing proportion of old people in Eastern Europe and most former Soviet countries is long-time low fertility rates, says census specialist Victoria Velkoff.
With fertility often below or just at replacement levels, existing generations bulk larger and larger in the total population.
Countries with the highest ratio of old folks are Hungary (13.4%), Bulgaria (13%), the Czech Republic (12.5%), Ukraine (12.1%) and Latvia (12%).
Russia, with its huge total population, had by far the most elderly men and women -- almost 15 million -- but they represented just 10% of its total.
DETROIT WHITES grow slightly more comfortable about black neighbors.
Blacks back away from white neighborhoods.
Demographer Reynolds Farley and colleagues at the University of Michigan's Population Studies Center compared residential preferences of blacks and whites as revealed in two large surveys, one in 1976 and the other in 1992.
Given the long history of racial antagonisms in the area, they expected heavy white opposition to black incursions into white neighborhoods and perhaps heightened black apprehension about moving there.
The surveys involved large random samples in Detroit and its suburbs.
White respondents were asked their reaction to having different combinations of black and white families living around them.
In 1992, 84% said they would be comfortable with one black family out of 15, up from 76% in 1976, and 70% said they'd feel OK about three black families out of 15, compared with 58% earlier.
Though only 35% said they'd feel comfortable living with an eight-to-seven black majority, this was up from 28% in 1976.
Moreover, the percentages saying they would try to move out if black families moved in dropped significantly in each case.
Practically all those who would try to move out gave concern over a drop in property values as their main reason, with fear of increased drugs, crime and violence as their next.
In both surveys, blacks were asked about their desire to move into different types of neighborhoods, from all-black areas to ones where they would be the only black family.
Changes between 1976 and 1992 were small, but in every case indicated "a slight shift away from residential integration."
Those preferring all-black or predominantly black areas gave as reasons simply wanting "to live with our own kind" or feeling such neighborhoods would be more "welcoming."
Dr. Farley thinks results in other metropolitan areas with a history of racial tensions probably would be similar to the Detroit results, but that both whites and blacks would be more integration-ready in areas where relations have historically been better than in and around Detroit.
FULL-TIME legislators become more common at the statehouse level.
An analysis by the National Conference of State Legislatures shows that the percentage of incumbents listing themselves as full-time lawmakers has risen to almost 15% from 2.7% in 1976 and 11.5% in 1986.
Lawyers, traditionally the largest group, still top the occupational list at 16.5% of the 1993 total, but that's a considerable falloff from more than 22% in 1976.
The conference says stringent disclosure laws and the increasing length of legislative sessions probably explain the drop.
Business owners accounted for 10% of the total in 1993, down from 15.8% in 1976 and 13.8% in 1986, but they remained the third largest group.
However, the proportion of legislators identifying themselves as business executives or middle management inched up during the period.
There are fewer self-proclaimed farmers than in 1976, though they still are the fourth largest group, making up just under 8% of all legislators.
The number of real-estate agents and insurance men and women also declined considerably.
Classifications showing small gains included doctors, retirees and homemakers.
In general, however, there seems "remarkable stability in the occupations represented in state legislatures," the conference concluded.
DON'T GO WALKING on Saturday night.
Metropolitan Life Insurance finds that one out of five pedestrian deaths occurs on Saturdays, with about two-thirds taking place between 6 p.m.
Saturday and 3 a.m.
Sunday. . . .
Many older adults tend to underestimate their mental abilities, believing these skills have declined more than they actually have, according to research by Penn State psychologists.
