The full federal appeals court here will reconsider two decisions striking down federal restrictions on indecent broadcast and cable-television fare.
In November, a three-judge panel of court struck down a Federal Communications Commission rule banning indecent broadcasts between 6 a.m. and midnight.
The panel said the ban was too broad and thus violated broadcasters' first-amendment rights.
The FCC was under orders from Congress to extend the ban as a way to protect children from indecent programming.
The same panel also struck down FCC rules letting cable-TV operators limit programming they deemed indecent on cable systems' public-access channels.
Whether the decisions will be reversed by the full court, which currently has 10 judges, is uncertain.
Efforts by Congress and the FCC to lengthen the ban had been struck down twice before the November rulings.
The November appeals-court decisions, however, were made by Chief Judge Abner Mikva along with Judges Patricia Wald and Harry Edwards, the court's most liberal members.
The FCC defines indecent programming as language or material that "depicts or describes, in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards for the broadcast medium, sexual or excretory activities or organs."
The commission has been tinkering with the indecency rules since 1987, and has been operating under a stay of its rules, leaving the original 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. ban in place.
Jane Mago, an FCC lawyer, said the agency was pleased at the prospect of a full-court review.
"We felt we had solid arguments to present to the court," Ms. Mago said.
The appeals court's latest action caught the FCC's opponents off guard.
"The decision was a surprise to us," said Timothy Dyk, a Washington lawyer who represents a coalition of broadcasters and Action for Children's Television Inc., which challenged the rules.
He noted that the panel's November decision was in keeping with two earlier rulings in cases brought by Action for Children's Television, a public-interest group that has supported better programming for children and firstamendment rights for broadcasters.
