Everybody knows women love clothes.
Or do they?
In the past year, women's passion for shopping seems to have abated.
In 1993, women's apparel sales rose just 2.6%, compared with 6.4% for all retailers, according to Salomon Brothers.
The year before, women's apparel sales grew 7% while all retail sales gained 4.9%.
Retailers aren't quite sure why women didn't buy clothes with their usual gusto last year.
One easy, but unconvincing, answer is lower interest rates, which make durables like furniture and cars more affordable.
"But that alone can't explain it," says Carl Priestland, chief economist for the American Apparel Manufacturers Association.
Nor can weather, another popular explanation: Weather is always unpredictable.
The truth is several trends converged last year that made women rethink their relationship to clothes.
Here are six of them.
Clothes departments, expecially in big stores, look like nunneries.
"I go in, all ready to buy, and I see a bunch of black and neutrals," complains Judith Langer, a consumer market researcher in New York.
Marvin Goldstein, president of Dayton Hudson Corp.'s department store division, says when times are tough, apparel makers would rather not gamble on color.
Colors can be faddish -- remember neon? -- but black endures.
Apparel makers, on the other hand, blame the store buyers.
"I'm screaming at the designers, `We need color, we need color,' but then the store keepers end up selecting our sophisticated blacks and neutrals," says Howard Bloom, chief executive of Chetta B. Inc., a women's apparel maker.
Susan Garfield last year bought two black sweaters, a black turtleneck and black wool pants.
Black makes a body look slimmer, and it's "always safe," says Ms. Garfield, a bookstore employee in Cambridge, Mass.
"I don't have to deal with matching colors."
Wendy Liebmann, president of WSL Marketing, tells of a Barneys New York shopper who asked a salesperson why the store only carried black clothes.
"We don't carry only black," the salesperson replied.
"We also have gray."
Retailers must predict what skirt lengths will be fashionable at least six months before the clothes will arrive in stores.
The retailers chose long -- and wrong -- for '93.
Apparel makers constantly experiment with skirt lengths, hoping to start a new trend.
"I think it was an effort by some designers to kick start the business a little bit," speculates Mr. Bloom of Chetta B. Alan Millstein of Fashion Network Report says designers already had hiked up hemlines so high "there was nowhere left to go but down."
But designers' runways, magazines and television showed shorter skirts.
And with high-fashion commentary reaching the mainstream by way of Elsa Klensch of CNN and Cindy Crawford of MTV, even the fashion hinterlands can't be fooled.
Janet Diederichs, a Chicago public relations consultant, calls the long look "too dumpy looking.
They age the wearer."
Short skirts have the virtue of showcasing the legs, which hold up to the challenges of aging better than some other parts of the body.
Ruth Rubinstein, a New York fashion sociologist, says long skirts -- a more restrictive look popular in the 1930s -- work better if women are depressed about the economy.
Styles tend to reflect consumer confidence -- in 1980, Nancy Reagan wore a red, body-hugging dress to the inauguration.
"Unless you're making shrouds," says Mr. Millstein, "sex appeal is a paying proposition."
"Who are these people catering to?" wonders Sheila M. Entenman, citing the billowy, romantic blouses and baby-doll dresses retailers flogged last year.
"I'm sorry, but those just won't work" on the job, she says.
Ms. Entenman, a Chicago lawyer, laughs about skin-tight body suits often advertised with jeans and skirts.
Ditto for 1993's grunge, bell-bottoms, platform shoes and velvet everything.
Working women don't want pirate-style cuffs that get caught in fax machines and file cabinets.
"Consumers today want well-designed, timely -- not gimmicky -- good value clothing they can comfortably wear to work . . . tone down for the weekend and tone up for an evening out," says Ms. Liebmann of WSL Marketing.
Consumers' closets are full of basic, Gap-like clothing.
Citing a lack of inventive styles for its buyers to choose from, Mercantile Stores Co., a Fairfield, Ohio, department store chain, says: "There's no really compelling reason for consumers to update their fashion wardrobe."
Ms. Diederichs, who shops the sales along Chicago's Michigan Avenue, says styles and brands are so repetitive that if she doesn't find a good price on a dress at, say, Neiman Marcus, she tries Saks Fifth Avenue across the street.
Designers and apparel makers argue it's not the designers who are too conservative, but the retailers.
Gone are the merchants with an eye for style, they say.
Instead, efficient buyers briskly replenish the proven crop of styles.
"That's fine for jockey shorts, but not for the fashion business," says Bernard Holtzman, president and chief designer for women's wear maker Harve Benard Ltd.
"Retailers are decrying something they fostered themselves."
Carol Farmer, a Boca Raton, Fla., consultant, calls the phenomenon "closet-based cynicism": in stores, shoppers keep seeing versions of clothes they already have.
And since so many different hemlines and styles are acceptable now, clothes can be kept and recycled.
Professional women have come a long way, baby.
The women who a decade ago felt they had to buy expensive power suits to get ahead now realize they don't have to look a certain part to climb the ladder.
"Women are really past the prove-it stage," says Ms. Langer, the market researcher.
Women are trying "to go to the outer edge of informality without freaking people out," says Ms. Farmer.
That kind of clothing isn't always easy to find.
"This is the hardest year I've ever had shopping," says Jan McLaughlin, a personal shopper in Seattle, whose clients are baby-boomer professionals who want pants and easy jackets with soft blouses or sweaters underneath.
Designer Carole Little's best sellers last year fell into this so-called "soft career dressing" genre.
As baby boomers age, buy homes and have children, trendy clothing isn't quite as important to them.
"We're getting real as we get to middle-age: We don't look as great as we used to.
Why play a game you can't win?" says Ms. Farmer.
"Clothing totally dropped off my list of things I like to spend money on.
I'd rather buy a rug so I can look at it everyday."
Ms. Entenman, the attorney, paid $120 for a beautiful black and white houndstooth sweater only to have her toddler's pink ear medicine leak all over it.
"You don't want to be wearing a silk blouse when your three-year-old comes at you with peanut butter and jelly on her fingers," she says.
