The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board said it plans to provide the Securities and Exchange Commission and other regulators with surveillance reports on the municipal-bond market.
The MSRB's plan, which would give regulators a new tool for enforcing securities law, is the latest sign that the municipal-bond market will be subject to heightened oversight in the period ahead.
The MSRB last spring announced plans for a pilot program to enhance "transparency" in the municipal-bond market by collecting and publishing data daily on market volume and prices of frequently traded bonds.
The program is designed to give individual investors and other market participants ready access to such information.
The board provided new details yesterday and said it hopes to have the program operating next January.
The MSRB is a self-regulatory body subject to SEC oversight.
The commission has been a leading advocate of improving transparency in all securities markets.
The board said it will use inter-dealer transaction data submitted for automated comparison to produce daily, public reports containing volume and pricing information and to provide "more detailed surveillance reports" for the agencies charged with enforcing board rules -- the SEC, the National Association of Securities Dealers, and bank regulators for bank dealers.
The daily reports would provide aggregate data about market volume on the previous business day and specific price and volume data about those issues that were traded four or more times.
The reports wouldn't identify the dealers.
Initially, the surveillance reports would contain "the details of inter-dealer transactions, including the identity of the dealers involved in the transactions and prices of individual transactions," the MSRB said.
It stressed that the surveillance reports would be used exclusively for market surveillance and enforcement purposes and wouldn't be made public.
The MSRB said it plans to adopt a rule later this year requiring dealers to report inter-dealer transactions to the board for the purpose of providing public access to information on transaction volume and prices.
The board's agent for receiving data from dealers would be the National Securities Clearing Corp., a clearing corporation registered with the SEC.
The board said the initiative is designed specifically to minimize the costs to dealers of reporting trades.
"As the industry and the board obtain experience with transparency through the pilot program, the board will seek cost-effective means to further increase transparency, with the ultimate goal being the dissemination of comprehensive, contemporaneous pricing data," it said.
The MSRB said it would "ensure that interested parties are provided access to the daily report on a nondiscriminatory basis and in a manner that would not confer special or unfair economic benefit to any person."
