FOR THOSE WHO'D LIKE to step back from the Whitewater din for a moment and scope out a hot new issue, here's one: re-employment.
Re-employment is a new-wave term that simply means this: ditching the existing unemployment system and replacing it with a new one that takes in workers who have lost their old jobs, trains them in new skills, and finds them work in new industries.
With layoffs and downsizings continuing apace, this is one way to attack the job worries that dog American workers even as the economy seems to be humming along.
So the Clinton administration is hot on the re-employment case.
But its approach is flawed in one crucial respect.
It doesn't really clean out the federal government's hopeless swamp of 154 job-training and education programs.
And that has given a nice political opening to some smart Republicans and maverick Democrats who favor a more radical attack on the bureaucracy.
At first blush, re-employment may sound like one of those ideas only a Beltway policy wonk could love.
Not so.
Consider just one story about how it plays in the real America, where two million workers are displaced annually.
When President Clinton gave his State of the Union address in January, Stanley Greenberg, the pollster who has mastered the art of putting him in touch with every public mood, organized a group of Dayton, Ohio, voters to watch the speech.
This Ohio group consisted of wavering Clinton supporters and Ross Perot voters -- in other words, the pivotal middle-of-the-road constituency that holds the balance in U.S. politics today.
EACH OF THESE VOTERS was given a meter and told to move the dial up when they heard something they liked and down when they heard something they didn't like.
To nobody's great surprise, the meters jumped the highest when Mr. Clinton mentioned the popular three-strikes-and-you're-out proposal to put repeat felons in prison for life.
But to the considerable surprise of some Clinton advisers, the meters jumped nearly as high when Mr. Clinton uttered the following passage: "We must literally transform our outdated unemployment system into a new reemployment system.
The old unemployment system just sort of kept you going while you waited for your old job to come back.
We've got to have a new system to move people into new and better jobs because most of those old jobs just don't come back."
Clinton political adviser Paul Begala now rates re-employment as one of a handful of key issues of this election year (the others being health care, crime and welfare).
And though the development was virtually drowned out under waves of Whitewater coverage, the administration has just proposed the Re-employment Act of 1994, an ambitious, $13 billion plan to revamp the nation's unemployment system.
The administration plan is pathbreaking in many respects.
It proposes to create "one-stop shopping" centers for the unemployed, where workers who have lost their jobs for any reason could go to get both benefits and help in searching for work.
Perhaps more important, badly underskilled workers who have been permanently laid off could get long-term "re-employment insurance" to give them time to complete serious training programs, and grants to help pay for the training.
The administration proposal also would open the door to privatizing some of the unemployment system by allowing businesses to bid for the right to open and run the one-stop career centers for laid-off workers.
Public-employee unions, predictably, hate that idea.
But it excites the centrist Democrats over at the Democratic Leadership Council, whose think tank has just produced a paper gushing that the new system will inject "the dynamics of the marketplace into the job training system."
BUT THE CLINTON PLAN also pulls its punches in one crucial area.
It would merge just six current federal training programs for dislocated workers, leaving the scores of other training programs to drag on.
Nobody can pretend the current system really connects trained workers with real jobs.
By one estimate, the federal employment system's share of job placements in the U.S. has fallen by two-thirds since 1952.
But some congressional baron or subcommittee has a stake in keeping alive each of the outdated training and education programs, and the administration decided it didn't want to battle all those forces just now.
But others aren't so shy.
Kansas Republican Sen. Nancy Kassebaum, along with Democrat Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, has introduced legislation to "wipe the slate clean" by giving a new commission two years to figure out how to dismantle all existing programs or consolidate them into one system.
Down deep, this is what many Clintonites would like to do as well.
Sen. Kassebaum may be doing them a favor by presenting what she calls "an opportunity that shouldn't be missed."
