John Sculley, who astonished the high-tech industry in October when he joined a tiny wireless-technology company that had no profits, no profile and a checkered past, jolted the industry again yesterday by abruptly quitting his new job.
In resigning from Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., the former chairman of Apple Computer Inc. summarily dropped what he had called "a little gem that fell in my lap."
He has been forced to admit that he accepted a multimillion-dollar pay package without knowing the company was under federal investigation.
He has all but given up his grand design of leading the wireless revolution.
And his shining reputation as a high-tech visionary has dimmed.
In Mr. Sculley's wake, Spectrum was forced to restate recent financial results yesterday, turning slender reported profits into losses.
The company's stock price crashed, falling to $2.25 from $5.56 on Friday.
Mr. Sculley filed suit against the Spectrum executive who recruited him.
It charges Spectrum President Peter Caserta with "fraudulent misrepresentations" and alleges what amounts to a plot to reap profits on stock sales after Mr. Sculley's hiring sent Spectrum shares soaring.
The company responded in a press release, denying any misrepresentation and saying Mr. Sculley had been "fully aware of the circumstances that he now cites as his reasons for his departure."
Only two weeks ago, Mr. Sculley denied news reports that Spectrum was being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission -- which turned out to be true -- and that he planned to resign.
Spectrum later confirmed that an SEC probe had been going on since May, leading some industry executives to wonder whether Mr. Sculley had been duped.
Associates maintain that the onetime PepsiCo Inc. marketer turned technology guru was startled by word of the SEC probe and, in particular, by the fact that Mr. Caserta hadn't disclosed it.
He was further alarmed last week when new auditors -- brought in at his insistence after Spectrum fired the previous firm in a dispute over accounting practices -- said two quarters of results should be restated to show losses.
But associates say the last straw came when Mr. Sculley read newspaper reports detailing how Mr. Caserta and two other top Spectrum executives had exercised stock options and immediately sold shares in the weeks after Mr. Sculley was hired.
While SEC filings show the trio reaped more than $13 million in combined profits, the options package that lured Mr. Sculley to the company ended up all but worthless in the near term, as Spectrum's stock price fell on the negative headlines.
Yesterday, he said he was giving up those options.
The travails at Spectrum have been a bitter culmination for Mr. Sculley, who left a top post at Pepsi a decade ago and rose to stardom in the technology industry, largely after ousting Apple founder Steven Jobs and guiding the company to a tenfold rise in revenue.
But Mr. Sculley eventually was all but ousted as Apple's chairman as the company's sales and profits soured.
He was criticized for creating a swirl of high expectations for the Apple Newton, the hand-held personal communicator, only to have it run a year late and get publicly trashed for glitches in handwriting recognition.
Spectrum was to be Mr. Sculley's comeback -- and his vindication.
He became intensely interested after a Spectrum team demonstrated, in a meeting in his dining room, how the company's wireless technology could enable the Newton to send a wireless fax -- something the Newton couldn't do, despite Mr. Sculley's own pronouncements, when it was unveiled last year.
Mr. Sculley had been introduced to the Manhasset, N.Y., concern by a fellow jogger and friend from his days at PepsiCo.
Exhausted by his rancorous split with Apple last year, and eager to plot his future outside the gossip mill in Silicon Valley, Mr. Sculley had retreated east to his home in Greenwich, Conn., with his wife, Leezy, and their dogs.
A short time later, the jogger, Lynn Petronella, linked Mr. Sculley up with her friend, Mr. Caserta, telling him that Mr. Caserta ran a small Long Island company that had the software technology to make the Newton send messages flawlessly.
Mr. Caserta and a small entourage that included his son, Peter Caserta II, demonstrated the Spectrum wares.
Sitting at Mr. Sculley's dining-room table, Mr. Caserta had Mr. Sculley scribble a message on his Newton: "To Peter Caserta: Let's make Spectrum a success.
John Sculley."
Mr. Sculley then pushed a button and sent the message over the cellular airwaves to a fax machine elsewhere in Mr. Sculley's house.
"It worked.
It was like Alexander Graham Bell's experiment," Mr. Caserta related in an October interview.
"John said, `If we had 50 reporters in this room right now, it would prove that the Newton can work.'"
Almost immediately, Mr. Sculley and his lawyers began negotiating with Mr. Caserta to become Spectrum's new chairman and chief executive officer.
By the time he announced his surprising decision in October, Mr. Sculley, never one to strike a humble pose, likened his move to that of another high-profile executive, Barry Diller.
Mr. Diller had quit as CEO at Fox Inc. and turned to home-shopping company QVC Network Inc., later embarking on the protracted fight to acquire Paramount Communications Inc.
Spectrum was tiny by comparison.
And while Mr. Sculley is said to have studied Spectrum's patents intently, he apparently spent less effort poring over the company's finances and its controversial past.
"He felt genuinely duped by Caserta," a spokeswoman for Mr. Sculley, who has hired his own public-relations firm in this fight, said yesterday.
"The SEC probe and the insider trading were the straws that broke the camel's back."
In his suit, filed in federal court in New York, Mr. Sculley contends he was "deceived by Caserta -- whose apparent short-term goal was to reap huge profits by selling large blocks of Spectrum stock driven up in value" after the announcement that Mr. Sculley would join the company.
The suit seeks $10 million in damages.
Mr. Sculley was given a million-dollar salary and options to buy 18 million shares over five years at the exercise price of $6.125.
Three million of those options became exercisable after the first week in October -- the week before Mr. Sculley's appointment was announced.
That would have brought him a profit of as much as $15 million, based on the high point of Spectrum's stock -- $11.125 -- on the day of the Sculley announcement.
A trio of top Spectrum insiders went for the quick profit.
SEC filings show Mr. Caserta sold just under half of his stake, exercising options to acquire one million shares at $1.13 apiece and then selling them at an average $9.50 apiece in mid-November, for a pretax profit of $8.4 million.
Albert Panico, a vice president, dumped more than half of his holdings, selling 333,000 shares at $8.55 apiece, for a pretax profit of $2.5 million.
Salvatore Marino, the chief financial officer, chopped his holdings 63%, exercising 300,000 options at $1.13 a share and selling at an average $8.71 a share for a pretax profit of $2.3 million.
Mr. Sculley didn't sell anything.
His anger in the fallout appears most directly aimed at Peter Caserta.
Indeed, Mr. Sculley went to great pains yesterday to single out Mr. Caserta as his nemesis, filing the suit against the Spectrum president individually without suing the company.
In a prepared statement, beyond which Mr. Sculley wouldn't comment, he furthered that objective: "While my experience with Peter Caserta has been tremendously disappointing, I feel others in management are trying to deal with the current situation in a responsible manner."
That led some observers to ask whether Mr. Sculley might have tried to borrow a page from his honeymoon-turned-divorce at Apple, where he succeeded in winning over the board and ousting founder Jobs.
Since taking on Spectrum, Mr. Sculley had told some confidants that he was out to clear the decks and impose his own team.
But it doesn't appear he had anywhere near enough clout to try a similar ouster of Mr. Caserta.
For one thing, Mr. Caserta had absolute control over the Spectrum board.
It consists of a small handful of loyalists, most of whom were appointed by him.
Some board members serve with Mr. Caserta on his local volunteer fire department.
Had Mr. Sculley taken more time to investigate his new prospective employer, he might have discovered a pattern of bold self-promotion -- the trait that got the company in trouble with the SEC.
The latest round of trouble actually began last May.
Mr. Caserta, ebullient over signing a patent-licensing agreement with American Telephone & Telegraph Co., boasted that it would bring Spectrum "hundreds of millions of dollars" in royalty payments.
That sent Spectrum shares soaring -- only to have them crash a day later when AT&T smacked down Mr. Caserta by publicly countering that the deal was, at best, worth a few million dollars.
That day in May, Spectrum's shares set a record for volume trading on the Nasdaq stock market.
Spectrum broke its own record yesterday as its shares plunged once more, as some 35.4 million shares -- almost half of the company's total outstanding common stock -- changed hands.
The stock fell in part yesterday because Spectrum restated its earnings for the past two quarters.
Instead of net income of $1.1 million, or one cent a share, which the company had claimed for the first six months ended Sept. 30, 1993, the restatement showed a loss of $5.3 million, or seven cents a share, on lower revenue.
Back at its high before the AT&T disavowal, Spectrum shares were at a healthy $13.125.
The SEC ultimately began probing the May claim and the subsequent stock crash, a probe that has continued and that the company confirmed, for the first time, in recent weeks.
But the company had racked up a record of aggressive promotion even before the May incident.
Its former chairman and founder, Dana Verrill, who was pushed out when Mr. Sculley joined the company, used to tour the country courting analysts and investors.
Occasionally he got help from Gene R. Morgan, a Los Angeles investor and large holder of Spectrum stock.
Mr. Morgan, a former Spectrum board member, regularly promoted Spectrum stock on his cable television show, "Charting the Market at 1:30."
Sometimes, he had Mr. Verrill appear on the show to help him out.
By June 1991, Mr. Morgan, now off Spectrum's board, was helping Spectrum over another financial hump -- its de-listing from Nasdaq.
The National Association of Securities Dealers in December 1990 had deleted Spectrum from its listing after the company "had fallen below the minimum capital and surplus required for continued inclusion," Spectrum's public documents state.
But a June 1991 offering through Mr. Morgan's investment company, Gene Morgan Financial, brought Spectrum sufficient capital and surplus, and by April 1992 the company was re-listed.
Still, Spectrum drew scant notice in the telecommunications industry until Mr. Caserta, who had been advising the company on management issues and on raising capital, joined up in 1992.
An elegant dresser with a flair for earnest gab, the 50-year-old Mr. Caserta has bragged in the past that he was a key management engineer on the Apollo space program.
Actually, he has no college degree, but holds a two-year certificate from the defunct RCA Institute of Technology.
He had worked for a NASA subcontractor's engineering team in the 1960s, according to a former spokeswoman for Spectrum, Jean Young.
Mr. Caserta, who has declined comment on his track record, revels in an engineering and technical services firm he founded in the 1970s whose "major projects were the Space Shuttle and the Alaskan pipeline."
InterGlobal Technical Services Inc. was a sort of temp agency for technically trained people, including engineers.
Mr. Caserta and his brother, Frank, who actually managed the company, sold InterGlobal to CDI Corp. in 1988, which used a couple of InterGlobal offices to fill out its coverage in the Southwest and California.
Mr. Caserta later formed management consulting firms called the Caserta Group and Caserta Enterprises Inc., which raise capital for small companies.
Today Mr. Caserta and his management firms are embroiled in a fractious legal struggle with a number of these clients, suing them in a local Long Island court for fees for services that the client companies claim were never rendered.
Now Mr. Caserta and Spectrum are saying Mr. Sculley was well aware of the company's problems when he accepted the generous pay package and agreed to join the company.
Mr. Sculley, known for his own ample abilities to create a vision and promote a new product, paints himself as a victim of Mr. Caserta's gift for hype.
Messrs. Sculley and Caserta declined through their attorneys to comment on the problems that drove them apart.
Spectrum says it was "disappointed" and called Mr. Sculley's resignation "clearly in violation of his employment agreement with the company," saying it "disregards his responsibilities to shareholders."
But Mr. Sculley's lawyer, Arnold Burns, contends the executive had no other choice but to quit once it became clear to him that Mr. Caserta had misled him.
"John looked Mr. Caserta straight in the eye at the time he agreed to join and asked him if there were any problems he should know about," Mr. Burns says.
"And Caserta told him everything had been settled."
Over the past weekend, with the SEC disclosures and word that one pending shareholder lawsuit was being expanded and that yet another class-action suit may be filed against the company, Mr. Sculley decided to bail out.
His attorney quotes Mr. Sculley as saying: "I can't run a race with the burlap bag these bastards tied around my legs."
