In trading in Stockholm, Ericsson's B shares fell five kronor (62 cents) to 356 kronor.
In the U.S., Ericsson's American depositary receipts closed at $42.375, down $2.75, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
In November, the Swedish telecommunications concern reported a ninefold surge in third-quarter pretax profit.
But U.S. investors responded by stripping 14% off the stock price in turbulent trading.
Once again, the culprit seems to be bloated profit projections among analysts.
"This was a good result for Ericsson compared to rivals such as Siemens AG and Alcatel NV," one London telecommunications analyst mused.
"But it's all about inflated expectations."
Alcatel is a unit of Alcatel-Alsthom SA.
In the fourth quarter, pretax profit rose 5% to 1.25 billion kronor from 1.18 billion kronor a year earlier.
That increase was achieved despite an unusually strong year-earlier period -- and a 305 million krona write-off of goodwill stemming from an acquisition Ericsson officials declined to identify.
Effects of the sharp depreciation of Swedish currency since November 1992 hadn't previously affected the company's profit -- but expiration of most remaining hedging contracts added an estimated 200 million kronor in currency gains to the latest period's profit, officials said.
Full-year pretax profit more than doubled to 3.1 billion kronor from 1.31 billion the previous year, squarely in line with the company's forecast.
In a guarded prediction for the current year, Ericsson Chief Executive Lars Ramqvist said earnings are expected to increase.
But stressing that the fourth quarter was, as usual, seasonally strong, Mr. Ramqvist warned analysts "not to simply multiply this latest quarter by four as an estimate of 1994 profit."
That comment suggests 1994 pretax profit of about 4.5 billion kronor, analysts said.
Ericsson said sales climbed 21% in the fourth quarter, to 20.49 billion kronor, and 34% for the full year, to 62.9 billion kronor.
Orders increased 17% to 18.39 billion kronor during the fourth quarter and 27% for the full year, to 67.6 billion kronor.
Currency fluctuations accounted for about 20 percentage points of the sales gain, the company said.
Mr. Ramqvist boasted that Ericsson entered 1994 with the biggest-order backlog in its history, about 45 billion kronor.
