Not only does this blue-collar city welcome prisons in its back yard, it would probably put them on the front porch and in the parlor.
Local leaders couldn't be prouder of the brand-new maximum-security prison looming in a former rice field just south of here.
Thanks to their lobbying, planning already is under way for four other corrections facilities, including a giant federal complex.
By 1997, Beaumont will be the home-away-from-home for some 9,000 convicted criminals, one of the largest such concentrations in the state.
If anyone has misgivings, they aren't speaking up.
That's because it's starting to look as though prisons may resurrect an economy that has been battered by downsizing in the petrochemical and refining industry, the region's mainstay since World War II.
"This is the biggest thing since Spindletop for us," says Mark Stiles, a powerful local state representative.
As Texas embarks on the most ambitious prison-expansion project in the country, many communities around the state are hoping for a gusher of their own.
In contrast to the time when towns fought tooth and nail to ward off prisons, now many are fighting just as hard to attract them.
Particularly in rural areas suffering from the oil and gas downturn, prisons are viewed as a godsend, bringing construction contracts, relatively high-paying jobs for low-skilled workers and, perhaps most important, stability.
"We don't have to worry about layoffs," says Reed Smith, assistant warden at the new prison here.
"I've been with them 15 years, and I've never heard of a layoff."
Indeed, since 1980, state prison employment has risen sixfold to about 24,000, while the payroll -- for everyone from guards to wardens -- has shot up tenfold.
And the trend is likely to accelerate: Under court order to build more facilities to house a surging inmate population, Texas passed a $1.1 billion bond issue to help finance a near-doubling of prison beds, to 143,000, by Aug. 31, 1995.
But the economic impact of the prison boom isn't necessarily all positive.
Setting aside the capital expenditures, the cost of operating the new facilities will add a staggering $1 billion to the 1996-97 prison budget, leading many experts to predict a big tax increase.
And even the towns that win the prison location derby may prosper less than they expect.
Since state inmates raise most of their own food, make their own clothes and even produce the stainless-steel fixtures for their cells, there's a limited need for local purchases.
Some skeptics also wonder whether communities are giving away too much.
For the sites awarded between 1987 and 1992, towns were generally required to provide free sewage and water hookups, and donate large tracts of land -- which were then taken off property-tax rolls.
Finally, some opponents contend that prisons hurt development by scaring off other businesses and driving down property values.
Last month, hundreds of Grand Prairie residents turned out to protest a proposal to place a state jail there.
But none of this has quelled Beaumont's enthusiasm for the prisons -- especially with chemical and refining employment in the region down about 9,350 jobs, or 39% below its 1981 peak.
Indeed, local home builders agreed to donate a 3,000-square-foot house for the new warden to use.
The city and county, meanwhile, spent about $10 million for land, utilities and other infrastructure.
The return on this investment: roughly $350 million of new detention facilities and an immediate boom in construction-related jobs -- some 4,000 over the next three years.
One early beneficiary was Rep. Stiles, who runs the concrete subcontractor for the new maximum-security prison, which incidentally is named the Mark W. Stiles unit.
(He points out that he was the low bidder.)
Over the long term, the winners will be the facilities' 3,700 employees.
Typical is Tim LeBlanc, a 38-year-old former refinery employee and plumbing contractor who struggled through years of sporadic employment before being hired as a prison plumbing supervisor.
Mr. LeBlanc says the pay, about $1,960 a month, is less than he would make at his old jobs "in the free world."
But factoring in medical benefits, perks such as free haircuts from the inmates and paid holidays, he figures he comes out about even.
Mostly, he adds, "It's nice to go home and know you're going to have a job next morning."
Note: Does not include four 500-bed private pre-release centers under construction or the addition of 13,500 beds to existing units.
Another Nail in the Coffin: In case there was any doubt about the future of Texas' current high-speed rail project, Gov. Ann Richards has weighed in with a resounding "no."
As reported, the company with the franchise to build the 200-mph train, Texas TGV Corp., failed to make good on promises to raise $170 million by a Dec. 31 deadline.
Although state high-speed-rail officials have said the company is in default, Texas TGV has yet to concede.
In a Jan. 25 letter to state Sen. Jim Turner, Gov. Richards gave her view.
"By missing the Dec. 31 deadline, the corporation has defaulted on the agreement," she wrote.
"I believe that the Authority should revoke the franchise."
