Individuals are shoveling billions of dollars into variable annuities, the tax-sheltered cousins of mutual funds.
But some experts question whether those investments are such a good deal.
The reason is that few variable annuities include the kinds of investments that experts rate most highly: top-performing stock funds with proven track records.
About one in five funds available in the 15 leading variable annuities meets those quality standards today.
The dearth of good choices means that many variable-annuity buyers may end up wishing they'd stuck with plain old mutual funds instead.
Despite such shortcomings, it's easy to understand why variable annuities are so popular.
Not only do they offer the same tax benefits as non-deductible Individual Retirement Accounts, but they also allow unlimited contributions.
Like IRAs, investors can switch their money among the funds without triggering taxes, and earnings are tax-deferred until the money is withdrawn -- at which point the gains are taxed as ordinary income.
But as with IRAs, investors who withdraw money before the age of 59 1/2 incur a 10% penalty.
The tax privileges apply to all variable annuities, but since some of these investments are much better buys than others, it pays to be discriminating.
The numbers usually speak for themselves if you know what to look for.
For instance, when comparison shopping among different variable annuities, investors should look for a wide variety of investment choices, particularly a good selection of stock funds.
Those funds should also have superior track records going back a minimum of three years, and preferably longer, the experts say.
The choicest annuities of all are those that combine top-performing stock funds with low annual fees.
Unfortunately, such pearls aren't so easy to find.
Among the 15 hottest-selling variable annuities sold to individuals, investors may get as few as four or as many as 22 investment selections, depending on the contract.
But fewer than half the total number of funds -- or 71 out of 145 -- invest in stocks.
Only 32 of those stock funds are above-average performers with proven track records, according to figures supplied by Morningstar, Inc., a Chicago firm that evaluates fund performance in variable annuities.
Why are stock funds so important?
They tend to have higher returns than other investments, which helps offset the high fees that otherwise eat away at variable annuities.
Insurers skim an average 1 1/4% from the funds' total assets each year, and that's not even counting the funds' management expenses.
Altogether, fees in variable annuities commonly top 2% of assets a year -- roughly twice as much as the annual costs for stock mutual funds.
Another reason to choose stock funds in annuities is that they give more long-term bang for the buck.
Investors can move in and out of the funds without triggering taxes, and the tax-deferred compounding goes a lot further when earnings are higher.
These points apparently aren't being lost on investors.
In 1993, individuals poured about $25 billion, or 62% of all new purchases of variable annuities, into stock funds.
That's up from $9 billion, or about 40% of new purchases, a year earlier, according to Eli Neusner, a consultant for Cerulli Associates, a financial-consulting firm in Boston.
The most popular choices were balanced funds (which include stocks and bonds), followed by growth funds, growth-and-income funds (which include stocks that pay high dividends), small-company stock funds, and international stock funds, Mr. Neusner says.
Some of the biggest variable annuities do offer stock funds with good long-term performance and a fully diversified set of investment objectives -- including Franklin Valumark II, Best of American IV/Nationwide and Prudential Discovery Plus.
On the other end of the spectrum, Lincoln National Multi Fund, Massachusetts Mutual Flex V, and VALIC Separate Account A have no stock funds older than three years with above-average performance.
Size isn't necessarily an advantage, as some of the best buys are to be found among smaller variable annuities.
One worth considering is Scudder Horizon Plan, from Scudder Stevens & Clark of Boston.
The three-year track records of its growth, balanced and international funds all rank in the top third of their investment categories.
At the same time, the funds' expenses are below average.
Their annual insurance charges total only 0.70% (compared with an industry average of 1.25%), and they don't have surrender penalties.
Most annuities have surrender penalties that amount to about 7% in the first year and last seven years or longer.
Another smaller variable annuity that might be worth a look is the Commonwealth plan from Life of Virginia, a Richmond, Va., insurer.
It has six stock funds whose three-year returns rank in the top third of their investment categories.
In addition, its two high-yield funds, its government bond fund and its corporate bond fund were also good performers.
Like many annuities, Life of Virginia includes both funds managed by outside mutual-fund companies, and funds run internally by the insurers' own investment managers.
Three of the company's top-performing stock funds are managed by Fidelity Investments of Boston, two by Life of Virginia, and one by Oppenheimer Management Corp., a New York unit of Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co.
However, Life of Virginia's annual insurance charges are slightly above average, at 1.30% a year.
The investment management expenses on its funds range from below average for funds managed by outside mutual-fund companies, to above average for internally managed funds.
If an annuity you own or are thinking of buying doesn't have a cluster of proven stock funds, don't assume the contract is a dog.
Some of its stock funds may be close to completing good three-year track records, or the variable-annuity issuer may be planning to add other top-performing stock funds that do have proven track records.
For example, the top-performing Fidelity funds available in Life of Virginia are also included in a dozen other variable annuity contracts offered by other insurance companies.
Several other annuity issuers are currently negotiating to add these and other top-performing funds by other mutual-fund companies to their variable annuities.
An annuity contract may include many funds, but may still lack a wide choice of stock funds.
Investors should focus not only on the number of stock funds available, but also on their performance.
Performance is most meaningful for funds in existence at least three years. average performance investment management fee of fund investors, and excludes those used in retirement plans include annual contract charges (typically $30) or sales charges investment management fee of fund
