BOSNIAN SERBS ORDERED a new military call-up to prepare for wider clashes.
While the extent of the mobilization wasn't known, it seemed to stem from the increasingly aggressive military stance of Bosnia's Muslim-led government troops as well as fears the West might intervene.
In recent months, the government forces have shown surprising strength against the Serbs and have taken territory in central Bosnia from ethnic Croats.
Amid the Serb and Croat military setbacks, there have been persistent reports that Croatia and Serb-dominated Yugoslavia have begun sending thousands of soldiers into Bosnia.
The U.S. endorsed a report by U.N. chief Boutros-Ghali giving the go-ahead for air strikes on Bosnian Serbs if they don't allow the replacement of peacekeepers at Srebrenica and the opening of Tuzla's airport.
U.S. Marines opened fire in a Mogadishu street crowded with Somalis waiting for free food.
At least eight people died and many were wounded.
A U.S. spokesman said the 22 Marines shot in self-defense after snipers shot at their five-vehicle convoy.
Somali witnesses and Bangladeshi peacekeepers said no one fired at the Americans.
Russia's privatization chief vowed to fight any efforts to slow economic reforms.
But Chubais, the only leading liberal left in the Russian cabinet, cautioned that the departure of Economics Minister Gaidar and Finance Minister Fyodorov "creates a real danger" of backsliding.
Embryonic brain cells were placed on electronic chips and were induced to grow, in what researchers said was a key first step toward creating microchips using living cells.
The scientists hope to be able to get the brain cells, or neurons, to grow connections to each other, crudely mimicking brain circuitry.
Two key Republican senators stressed that any health-reform bill should provide for universal insurance coverage.
The remarks by Chafee and Nickles came a week after Clinton threatened to veto any health bill that "does not guarantee every American private health insurance that can never be taken away."
Israeli cabinet ministers predicted a breakthrough in Israel-PLO talks as Prime Minister Rabin reviewed a draft agreement drawn up in Switzerland.
The accord, reached during discussions between Foreign Minister Peres and the PLO's Arafat, would help pave the way for Palestinian self-rule.
A U.S. human-rights report will fault China for not making enough progress, a senior administration official said.
The State Department's mostly negative report on China, due to be issued today, comes as Washington nears a decision on renewing Beijing's special trade status.
The annual report covers rights problems world-wide.
Teenage drug use rose significantly last year for the first time in more than a decade, a new study shows.
In 1993, 42.9% of high school seniors said they had used an illicit drug, according to the University of Michigan survey.
Drug use had been declining since 1980, when 65.4% of seniors said they had used illicit drugs.
Hair-dye use doesn't increase the risk of cancer, according to a large seven-year study conducted by the American Cancer Society.
The study was intended to address concerns that were raised by earlier research.
Kohl said that building democracy in Russia and eastern Europe is the "major future task" facing the West, and he urged the U.S. to maintain its global leadership.
"The world continues to pin its hopes" on the U.S., the German chancellor said in a Washington speech to state governors after a meeting with Clinton.
Mandela rejected a demand for changes in the voting rules for South Africa's first all-race election in April, making it even more unlikely that dissidents will take part.
A round of talks between Mandela's African National Congress, the white government and an alliance of opponents ended with little chance for an agreement.
Crimea's newly elected leader pledged to call a referendum on independence from Ukraine.
Yuri Meshkov, a pro-Russian secessionist, won Sunday's presidential runoff election with 73% of the vote in the autonomous republic.
He has said he favors a gradual reunion with Russia.
