In the early 1980s, while an executive at Columbia Pictures, Jonathan Dolgen negotiated a deal to sell the studio's movies to Time Warner Inc.'s Home Box Office for fees so rich that HBO ended up paying $35 million for one movie, "Ghostbusters."
The executive who took the heat from Time for overpaying on that deal was then-HBO president Frank Biondi, who later left the job and went on to become chief executive of Viacom Inc.
But he remained an admirer of Mr. Dolgen's skills: Yesterday , Mr. Dolgen was named chairman of the newly formed Viacom Entertainment Group, part of the giant created by the recent merger of Viacom and Paramount Communications Inc.
Mr. Dolgen, 49 years old, is leaving his post as president of Sony Corp.'s Motion Picture Group, which includes Columbia Pictures and TriStar Pictures.
At Viacom, he will report to Mr. Biondi, overseeing the operations of the Paramount motion-picture and television group, including the TV stations group and the upstart Paramount Network.
The group will also include Viacom's own TV production, distribution and broadcasting operations.
By Hollywood standards, it is a job on a par with just a handful of the industry's top players -- and a big step up for Mr. Dolgen, who has up to now been in more behind-the-scenes roles.
An attorney by training, Mr. Dolgen is regarded by many as one of Hollywood's shrewder deal makers and a stickler for fiscal responsibility in an industry where many studios are plagued by profligate spending.
But he has never run so sprawling an operation, where so many decisions hinge on creative issues that he has never been directly responsible for.
And he has an abrasive personality in business dealings that some say will need to be toned down in a job where diplomacy is a valued skill.
Moreover, he will have his work cut out for him with Paramount, whose operations have been plagued by losses.
Mr. Dolgen's admirers say he's up to the task.
"This is a job he's been in training for his whole life," says entertainment mogul David Geffen.
"This is Jon's moment."
Victor Kaufman, the chairman of Savoy Pictures who ran Columbia before it was acquired by Sony, says Mr. Dolgen gets along with creative people and is "the person who can best bridge the gap between the business and creative side."
Mr. Kaufman relied on Mr. Dolgen when they were both at Columbia to negotiate matters such as the HBO deal.
After a stint at a New York law firm, Mr. Dolgen joined Columbia in 1976 as an assistant general counsel and rose through the business ranks of the company.
Along with Mr. Kaufman, he helped form Tri-Star Pictures in the early 1980s, the first new studio to be launched in decades.
Mr. Dolgen was noted for designing unique film-financing techniques -- such as limited partnerships and foreign-rights deals -- to take the risk off the studio while leaving it with big upside opportunities.
In 1985, he left Columbia to join News Corp.'s Fox Inc., working under its then-chairman Barry Diller during the years when Mr. Diller was launching the Fox network and restructuring the studio, which had had heavy losses.
Mr. Diller was a tough boss, but subordinates say Mr. Dolgen was even tougher, prone to haranguing staffers and to flashes of anger.
He acknowledges that his style is rough: "I'm genetically incapable of not saying what I think, and I'm certainly not the mellowest guy you ever met."
But people who have worked with Mr. Dolgen say they learned valuable lessons under his tutelage.
Rob Fried, a film producer who worked for Mr. Dolgen at Fox as a young M.B.A. graduate, says Mr. Dolgen charged him with researching all angles of a deal before Mr. Dolgen went in to negotiate it.
"His work ethic was that you never entered a negotiation without doing all the homework," Mr. Fried says.
When Mr. Dolgen joined Sony Pictures in 1990, the studio operations were badly in need of cost containment.
After Sony acquired Columbia in 1989, it spent heavily to increase production under its new chairman Peter Guber, and Mr. Dolgen was brought in to tighten up the ship.
He slashed marketing and production costs for many films and got tough on movies that were running over budget.
Just two months ago, Mr. Dolgen was given new expanded responsibilites at Sony, to run both the Columbia and TriStar motion-picture operations with Mark Canton, chairman of the motion-picture group.
And late last year, Mr. Dolgen signed a new long-term contract with Sony.
But people familiar with the situation say that Mr. Dolgen insisted on a provision that would let him out of the contract, freeing himself from the threat of legal action that often hinders movie executives who try to leave a big job to go to a competitor when they aren't being fired.
Mr. Dolgen declined to comment on his contract but says Sony was willing to accommodate his desire to take the Viacom opportunity.
At Viacom, Mr. Dolgen says his task is to "fix" Paramount and "make it work in the changing landscape of the entertainment business, where the immutable truths about the business change every 24 months."
Though he admits his creative experience is limited, he maintains he reads scripts and has gotten involved in creative decisions.
At Paramount, he adds, he expects to leave most of those decisions to such executives as Sherry Lansing, head of the motion-picture group, and Kerry McCluggage, who heads television.
Mr. Biondi says Mr. Dolgen's skills as a deal maker and financial executive fit well with Viacom's needs.
"We want to make good, creative quality entertainment," Mr. Biondi says, "but we want to make it smart," by watching costs and making astute deals.
Says Mr. Dolgen: "This is almost a dream job.
I'm coming into a company with a great tradition at a very interesting point in the company's history -- and I'm working with people who I know and who are friends."
