Is the harrowing nightmare in the markets over?
Probably not.
Those words might have been written by a credit-market columnist looking for something to tell nervous bond investors after more than a month of steadily dropping prices and rising yields.
But they weren't.
They were written by John R. Williams, managing director of global research at Bankers Trust Co. in a weekly memorandum on the bond markets faxed to clients and journalists Friday.
He has lots of company.
It was obvious Friday afternoon, when such faxes from other firms also were loaded with gloomy talk about the bond markets.
Some people would argue that when this many people are beginning to talk like bears, it's time to get back into the bond market.
But even contrary-minded investors are nervous about the bond-jolting potential of this week's government price data, due out tomorrow and Wednesday.
The bond market is so jumpy that more investors are quick to react to rumors if facts aren't around to justify buying or selling bonds.
One of the rumors that helped push down bond yields on Friday was that the Federal Reserve was buying long-term Treasury securities.
The Fed occasionally does this but didn't send any obvious signals on Friday that it was doing so.
A Fed spokesman wouldn't comment.
Pessimism reigned in last week's faxes from Merrill Lynch & Co., Salomon Brothers Inc., Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, Bankers Trust, DKB Securities Corp. and Moody's Investors Service Inc.
The economists at all these firms are wringing their hands about rising rates and making every attempt not to appear as if they're saying the carnage is over.
Take the weekly bond-market report from DLJ's economic research department: "We do not think the market should be sold at this juncture, but simultaneously do not regard it as an aggressive buy, even though rates have reached or pierced what we had identified previously as our short-run objectives for early 1994."
Under the heading "Continued Caution," DLJ's head economist Elliott Platt says in his weekly fax that the firm is undertaking a "fundamental reassessment of the U.S. economic outlook."
DLJ has begun to believe that U.S. economic growth "may not decelerate as markedly as previously thought during the second half of 1994, from the rate of growth attained during the first half."
Translation: Don't sell your bonds but don't rush to buy piles of them either, because we're still trying to figure out what the heck is going on with the economy.
It may well be possible, but very difficult, to find 10 economists these days who doubt that the 30-year Treasury bond yield will rise above 7% before the market settles down.
On Friday its yield dropped to 6.91% from 6.98% on Thursday.
In fact, many of economists are positively terrified about what might happen to all their prognostications about interest rates come tomorrow and Wednesday when the government releases two important measures of inflation, the consumer price index and the producer price index for February.
If these indexes don't show prices rising slower than Wall Street's expectations, they could send the bond market back into paroxysms of selling.
That's because investors and money managers are still so nervous about the strength of the economy and inflationary pressures that anything other than a drop in prices is only going to make them worry that inflation is rising.
John Canavan, an analyst at Stone & McCarthy Research Associates in Princeton, N.J., said the bond market will be watching the inflation reports closely.
Stone & McCarthy is predicting that the consumer price index and the producer price index both will show gains of 0.3% in February from January.
If the two reports "come in right at expected levels . . . the bears will still be out there," Mr. Canavan says.
But "if there is a larger rise than expected in either index, the market will clearly and easily blow right through 7%" on the 30-year bond.
Unlike corporate treasurers and U.S. presidents, bond investors often revel in news of economic deceleration because it's supposed to damp inflation, the bane of the bond markets.
If the economy accelerates instead, that could mean higher inflation, which means the coupon on a 30-year bond will buy less and the bond itself will be worth less.
Mr. Platt's report for DLJ isn't all bad.
DLJ is not "turning outright bearish" yet and it still thinks it "possible that some form of fixed-income market rally could emerge during the second half of this year."
But the rally probably won't be as strong as DLJ expected earlier this year, the report says.
Some of the Friday forecasts were positively depressing.
"We find the continued rise in interest rates to be quite disturbing," wrote Thomas J. Sowanick, chief fixed income strategist at Merrill Lynch.
"If the market is unable to stabilize soon, perhaps by quarter end, then investment decisions and strategies that were imported from 1993 . . . will be in danger of being reversed during the second quarter."
Mr. Sowanick continued: "If the market does not begin to move to a firmer footing, then the second quarter could become considerably more volatile than the first, as investors elect to shift asset allocations to a more defensive posture."
John Lonski, senior economist at Moody's, thinks that even a 7% yield on the 30-year bond might not be high enough to ease the worries of investors all over the world.
"Unfortunately, a 7% Treasury bond yield may not be steep enough to attract enough buyers to at least stabilize the downward spiral of the world's most influential fixed-income market," he wrote.
He further wrote that a "pronounced deceleration of economic activity may be necessary to bring the 30-year Treasury yield back down to just 6.5%."
At first glance, James R. Solloway, director of research at Argus Research Corp., seems like an optimist.
On Friday he recommended that investors allocate more of their money to bonds, 25% of their holdings instead of 20%, and less money to cash, 15% instead of 20%.
He said the rest should be in stocks.
Over the next couple of months, he predicted, the 30-year bond yield could drop as low as 6.5%, But over the next year, he continued, the yield could approach 7.5%.
"As the economy grows and inflation becomes a more serious problem than it is currently, the Federal Reserve is going to be forced to raise rates" even more.
But right now, Mr. Solloway says, there are "very little true inflationary pressures."
Many economists expect the Fed to raise short-term interest rates again at the March 22 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, its policy-making arm.
The Fed last raised the federal-funds rate, which banks charge each other for loans, from 3% to 3.25% on Feb. 4.
After grazing 7%, the yield on the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond headed lower Friday, giving the market a welcome breather after yet another frenzied week.
On the day, the price of the 30-year bond rose nearly a point, or nearly $10 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 91 25/32 to yield 6.91%.
But the market is tuned for any signs of economic growth or inflation and remains ready to turn sour on any piece of bearish news.
"In terms of economic fundamentals, this market is still very, very afraid of strong growth and the prospect of strong growth," says Joseph Liro, chief economist at S.G. Warburg & Co.
Friday's uptick in prices was attributed to short-covering by traders jittery of holding short positions through the weekend.
In a short sale, a trader bets that prices will fall by selling a borrowed security.
The trader must replace the security at a later date and hopes to do so at a lower price.
To cover a short sale, an investor buys back the same note or bond that was borrowed, closing out the bet.
Laura Jereski and David Wessel contributed to this article.
