A man's gotta do what a man's gotta do, so yesterday I put on a red nose and floppy shoes and joined the circus.
The media circus, that is.
The occasion was "The Meeting," the first coincidence of Tonya and Nancy (no last names necessary) on Norwegian ice.
The place was the small practice rink alongside the stadium where the women's singles figure-skating competition will be held, beginning Wednesday night.
I got there 2 1/2 hours before the practice's 1:25 p.m. starting time, and the place was already half full at about 250 bodies.
By noon, it was SRO in the press section, or, rather, OSR, because everybody was standing to begin with.
What happened was this: Nancy arrived on time and Tonya was about five minutes late.
They shared the ice with two other skaters.
Nancy wore a bridal-white skating costume, the same one she wore the January day her knee was clubbed in Detroit.
Tonya wore a flowered dress over black tights.
Both skated mostly in their own orbits, taking frequent breaks to confer with coaches stationed behind the boards about 20 yards (oops, meters) apart.
Nancy smiled more than Tonya, who spent a lot of time coughing and drawing on an inhalator (she has asthma).
They neither touched nor spoke, and didn't visibly recognize the other's presence.
Nancy left first, Tonya about five minutes later.
They practiced again in the main arena an hour and a half later, and it went about the same.
I'm glad to report that my colleagues behaved well, their only transgression being an occasional, rule-breaking camera flash while the skaters whirled.
Some reporters shouted questions at Tonya as she left, but she responded only with a jaunty wave and thumbs-up sign.
As circuses went, it was about as dull as they come.
I could have left the nose and shoes at home.
I know that such an assurance will not calm the tut-tutting that has followed the full-court-press coverage of Skategate.
Among the tut-tutters was one Patrick D. Gilroy, the Oregon judge who brokered the legal deal that cleared Tonya's path to Olympia.
His order "urged" the news media to "remove their focus from these events {the Tonya-Nancy hubbub} in order that appropriate attention may be given the Games themselves."
If we news types should apologize for pursuing Tonya-Nancy, then our readers should apologize for gobbling up every morsel we feed them.
This story has it all: violence, greed, betrayal and scantily clad young women.
It's a tabloid's dream, ranking behind only "Dwarf Rapes Nun; Escapes in UFO," in headline Valhalla.
There was a novel by that title.
Make no mistake, though -- this is, at base, a serious matter, one that brought crime right into the sports arena, and we will have to deal with its outcome both inside and outside the world of fun and games.
The question it raises is whether there's a difference between breaking the law and breaking the rules.
It can be argued that the attack on Nancy, by a man employed by Tonya's live-in ex-husband and bodyguard -- and about which she has admitted knowing afterward but not telling -- didn't qualify as much of a crime.
All Nancy suffered was a bruise, and she was back on skates in a couple of weeks.
Indeed, as the commercial offers flood in, there's no doubt the incident enhanced her career.
But assault and battery isn't an exact science, and if the blow had landed an inch or two in another direction she might have been injured far more seriously.
One wonders how much sympathy there'd be for Tonya if Nancy had been hurt too badly to compete here, while Tonya did.
It also can be argued that figure skating is, really, show biz, a strenuous entertainment like ballet or circus acrobatics that's a sport only because someone decided to keep score, and, thus, its participants shouldn't be held to sports' stricter standards.
I think you can agree with the first part of that proposition without buying the second part.
The attack on Nancy both broke the law and altered the U.S. Figure Skating Championships, the Olympic-qualifying event, in a way that made it easier for Tonya to make the U.S. team.
The lawbreaking part will -- or, should -- be played out in criminal court with all legal protections due the defendants.
The U.S. Olympic Committee was to have heard arguments on the rule-breaking part, but backed down in the face of a $25 million lawsuit by Tonya (how could she claim damages until she was injured, anyway?) and agreed to delay its hearing until after the Games, giving her what she wanted.
And that isn't right.
Athletes can be suspended from competition for all sorts of offenses that don't involve criminal prosecution.
These include drug-taking, hanging out with questionable characters, missing practice or curfew or, for student-athletes, even cutting class.
The standards of proof for such offenses needn't match those of a court of law.
The closest recent parallel to l'affaire Tonya was Pete Rose's run-in with Major League Baseball.
Mr. Rose was banned from the game not for tax evasion, the offense for which he went to prison, but for gambling on sports, which violated baseball's rules.
It was his crime against his sport that has kept him out of the game's Hall of Fame, and, I think, rightly.
Tonya may or may not have to face criminal-charge music in the attack on Nancy, but the maiming of her chief rival by those near and dear to her, at the site of a major competition, breaks the rules of any sport I've ever heard of.
It ought to cost Tonya at least a game, even a very big one.
No circus, media or Olympic, should have distracted attention from that.
