These are recent commercials for mutual funds: white-haired ladies baking pies, a man fishing with his grandson and a young veterinarian delivering a colt while the vet's proud father watches.
Fund groups aren't pushing their products so much as they're plugging their names.
With more than 4,000 funds available and many touted as No. 1, it's hard to stand out in a crowd.
Alliance Capital Management L.P., for one, is widely known among institutional investors such as pension funds.
But market research showed the New York firm's name recognition was "virtually nonexistent" among individual investors, spokeswoman Linda Finnerty said.
Alliance Capital will attempt to change that starting Monday with cable-television commercials.
The ads are Alliance Capital's largest commercial campaign ever.
The company hired some big guns for the ads.
New York advertising agency Ferrell-Calvillo created the three 30-second spots.
The director, Gregory Hoblit, handles the same duties for the television series "NYPD Blue."
Janusz Kaminski, nominated for an Academy Award for cinematography for "Schindler's List," was director of photography for the commercials.
Alliance Capital, with $115 billion in assets, of which $37 billion is in mutual funds, also is plugging the brokers who sell the funds, Ms. Finnerty said.
Alliance Capital's funds are distributed through nearly 70,000 brokers, including those at major brokerage houses, banks, financial planners and insurance agents with Equitable Cos.'
Equitable Life Assurance unit.
Equitable Cos. owns 63% of Alliance Capital.
The spots, "Mutual Funds Without the Mystery," focus on three factors that complicate investing: cryptic and confusing fund names, information overload, and incomprehensible jargon.
In one, commuters discuss their funds, saying they invested in the Husney-Ferrell Tinsley Emerging Developing Global Balanced Biotechnology fund or the Vasco DeGama Special Select Emerging Municipal Short-Term Convertible Inverted World Income fund.
Yes, they're fictional names, but the commercial tries to play on how confusing some fund titles are.
Don Phillips, publisher of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a Chicago newsletter, said mutual-fund groups "see how the business is changing.
It's becoming more competitive and you have to create an image.
"It's a sign of where the market is," he said.
"Those who were going to become investors have done so.
Now they're trying to branch out and reach those who haven't been investing for one reason or another."
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. of Boston hopes all its products, including mutual funds, will benefit from its commercials airing during the Olympics that focus on brand names.
One shows a kingdom of animals coexisting peacefully as the voiceover says, "It is our hope that someday this is what real life will be."
Principal Financial Group of Des Moines, Iowa, has been running commercials thoroughout the Olympics.
The insurer, with $44 billion in assets under management, has a large niche in pension-fund management but is unrecognized by a "majority of Americans," said Mary O'Keefe, a vice president.
The commercials push all of Principal's products, including mutual funds, which account for $2 billion in assets under management.
The Principal commercials depict relationships between people and "the idea that they do financial planning because of the people in their lives," Ms. O'Keefe said.
The Principal name is mentioned eight times in the 30-second spots that are "warm and easy to watch".
But "happy family" advertising might not be effective, said Hal Ross, president of Mapes & Ross, a communications research company in Princeton, N.J.
It might be more effective to focus on the problems people face if they don't invest, Mr. Ross said.
Last year, Kemper Financial Services, a unit of Kemper Corp., unveiled two commercials that promoting mutual funds for long-term investment planning.
In a spot showing a man smiling proudly as his veterinarian daughter delivers a colt, the voiceover tells how he invested early to pay for vet school.
Last fall, Dreyfus Corp. introduced four commercials that focused on its brand name.
Not once did they mention a specific Dreyfus fund.
In one spot, white-haired ladies bake pies and chant "stocks, bonds, money markets" while sharing their motto: "Diversity is the spice of life."
Those commercials have been replaced by spots featuring Dreyfus' famous lion in which a cub grows into an adult, signifying investing needs to be done over time.
Dreyfus also plugs specific products.
Morningstar's Mr. Phillips said such "image" commercials by fund groups should be lauded.
"They're saying investing can be a part of your life and that it doesn't have to be overwhelming," he said.
