The Clinton administration has announced sweeping changes to America's strategic export control procedures.
Unfortunately, if enacted they would directly benefit the countries that worry us the most: Iraq, Iran and -- most important at the moment -- North Korea.
New legislation proposed on Feb. 24 was hailed by Commerce Secretary Ron Brown as "the first comprehensive change in the Export Administration Act in 15 years."
A parallel "discussion draft," introduced by Rep. Sam Gejdenson (D., Conn.), would go even further in gutting our national security controls.
While the administration rightly seeks to adapt U.S. export controls to the post-Cold War era, it has mistaken the absence of the Soviet threat for the absence of any threat to our national security.
If the new Export Administration Act or the Gejdenson draft becomes law, it would result in a dramatic escalation of the threat to U.S. interests world-wide through the proliferation of advanced technologies to hostile regimes.
Sophisticated computers, software, communications gear, electronic test equipment and scientific instruments -- just to name a few -- would become widely available for export without a license.
They would inevitably wind up in nations eager to develop weapons of mass destruction, either through direct sales or through middlemen in third countries.
In the past, we were concerned that the Soviet Union would use Western technology to strengthen its military-industrial establishment.
But as Desert Storm should have demonstrated, defeating threats from even a non-nuclear nation of the developing world can require a major commitment of U.S. force.
Think of the cost, in both men and money, if Saddam Hussein had possessed the Bomb.
The logic for retaining export controls today is to prevent sensitive and militarily useful technologies from fueling the unconventional weapons programs in rogue states.
The proliferation of such technologies -- and the avidity to acquire them of dictators like Kim Il Sung -- has created an international security environment that bears many similarities to the Cold War.
But instead of rallying our allies in a collective security effort, this administration has chosen to pursue selfish commercial goals.
Most dramatically, last autumn the administration moved to abolish the Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom, before negotiating an effective substitute.
North Korea was one of the primary targets of Cocom controls.
As of April 1, North Korea can buy all the high-tech it needs for its missile and nuclear programs.
In a harbinger of the export bill, the Commerce Department announced in October a dramatic loosening of U.S. regulations on the export of advanced computers.
Abandoning 45 years of multilateral efforts with our allies, the U.S. took this step without consultation, and with no regard for the strategic or political consequences.
When our negotiators informed our Cocom partners after the fact, they were greeted with shock and dismay.
Licensing criteria on computers were further relaxed by additional Commerce Department regulations issued Feb. 24.
As far as I know, this is the first time in the history of Cocom that the U.S. has unabashedly attempted to use export-control forums to seek a unilateral commercial advantage -- in this case, for the U.S. computer industry, which the industry's own lobbyists say currently controls about 80% of the world market.
It is no wonder our allies are still reeling from the shock.
Once the U.S. has shown that it will not hesitate to break the existing rules in pursuit of its own commercial interests, there will be no holding others back.
Even under today's rules, an export powerhouse such as Germany is doing a brisk $5 billion a year in trade with Iran, the vast majority of it in high-technology items.
Just think what will happen if the German government concludes that it need no longer scrutinize exports to determine whether they could contribute to Iran's nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles or biological weapons programs.
While no level of export restriction can prevent high-tech smugglers from obtaining small quantities of sensitive technologies, intelligent controls do prevent the rapid, open transfer of military capabilities to nations that we and our allies believe pose a threat to our collective security.
By removing controls unilaterally, the Clinton administration has in effect issued an open invitation to proliferators everywhere to buy American.
The cost of keeping controls in place is not prohibitively high.
Export licensing requirements under the previous regulations affected only 3.4% of U.S. exports; indeed, less than $780 million of proposed sales were actually turned down because of concerns that they might be used for nefarious purposes.
That is a very small price indeed to pay for our security -- far smaller than the cost of another Desert Storm.
U.S. foreign policy, and its national security policy, should not be driven by the commercial desires of a single industry.
In its deliberations on the administration's new Export Administration Act, Congress should give a careful hearing to the nonproliferation and national security communities, instead of engaging in a love fest with the computer industry.
Mr. Timmerman is the author of "The Death Lobby: How the West Armed Iraq" (Houghton Mifflin, 1991).
