Directors of Paramount Communications Inc. rejected a revised $9.3 billion takeover bid by Viacom Inc. and stuck to their earlier endorsement of a higher $9.9 billion offer by QVC Network Inc.
The board emphasized that final bids in the long-running takeover fight must be made by Feb. 1 under the bidding rules set by Paramount.
But the directors of the entertainment and publishing giant took only the mildest of actions in response to a QVC demand that Viacom be declared to have breached the bidding rules by making a new offer last Friday without increasing the overall value of its bid.
The new offer forced a two-week extension of the bidding war.
The board's rejection of Viacom's new offer was expected, and traders said it would have little impact on the four-month-old takeover fight.
Paramount's board, having been rebuked by two Delaware courts for improperly favoring friendly bidder Viacom initially, now has adopted a determinedly hands-off approach to managing the bidding contest.
In its latest offer, Viacom boosted the cash part of its bid to $105 a share for 50.1% of Paramount stock, from $85 a share for 51%; but Viacom also reduced the amount of stock being offered for the remainder of Paramount shares, leaving the total market value of its offer virtually unchanged.
In what one trader called "mild fingerwagging," Paramount Chairman Martin Davis said future bids will "continue to be rigorously reviewed with regard to their compliance with the bidding procedures."
In a statement, the board noted that Viacom's offer contained more cash than QVC's offer of $92 a share in cash for 50.1% of Paramount, but that QVC's package "represents the best value available to Paramount stockholders."
The board apparently felt it couldn't go any further in criticizing Viacom, a cable-television company, for restructuring its offer with more than $1.1 billion in additional cash.
As Viacom lawyer Steven Volk noted, "The Paramount board, in establishing the bidding procedures, expressed a preference for cash."
In a letter to Paramount directors dated Tuesday, QVC lawyer Martin Lipton had urged the board to declare that QVC, a home-shopping company, shouldn't have to extend its current offer beyond Jan. 21, the next deadline for the current bids, in response to a new Viacom offer.
The bidding procedures, agreed to by both Viacom and QVC, set Feb. 1 as the last deadline, because the bids, which must remain open for 10 business days, can't be extended beyond Feb. 14.
However, traders note that the procedures seem to have encouraged both sides to delay their best bids until the last minute.
And some say that even after the scheduled timetable expires and a winner has been declared, the board might be hard-pressed to drop its antitakeover defenses for the winner if the losing bidder quickly comes back with a substantially higher offer.
