Two dark-horse candidates have surfaced as possible successors to Eugene M. Freedman, who will retire this fall as chairman and chief executive officer of Coopers & Lybrand.
The two new names being mentioned at the fifth biggest U.S. accounting firm are Nicholas G. Moore, the 51-year-old vice chairman-client service, based in San Jose, Calif., and Samuel Di Piazza, the 43-year-old "cluster," or regional, managing partner in Chicago.
Three vice chairmen, William O'Brien, John Roberts and Stephen McKessy, have been mentioned as strong candidates.
Vincent O'Reilly, chief operating officer, might also run, some partners think.
Mr. Moore and Mr. Di Piazza are both lower-keyed than the 61-year-old Mr. Freedman, who is considered strong-willed and thrives in a turbulent atmosphere, according to several Coopers partners.
Mr. Freedman wanted to keep the job himself, so he did not, as is customary at major accounting firms, select a successor.
Mr. Freedman failed to receive strong enough support for a re-election effort from the firm's partners.
Therefore, the race for chairman is wide open, and "candidates with different styles than Gene Freedman and who haven't run before, like Nick Moore and Sam Di Piazza, have a good chance for the job," according to a member of Coopers' ruling council who declines to be identified.
An election will be held in May, and this time the partners may be asked to choose from three or four candidates, rather than only one, Mr. Moore said.
Big Six firms generally select only one candidate for voting by partners.
"We're considering putting more teeth into democracy at the firm and having the partners instead of the governing council select the next chairman," Mr. Moore added.
Other Coopers partners say Mr. Moore is quiet and popular.
Partners say he made a big contribution to Coopers & Lybrand's high-tech business, which he headed until late 1991.
Mr. Moore said he plans to run for chairman.
Coopers partners said Mr. DiPiazza also has a relaxed style and is well-liked at the firm.
Mr. DiPiazza was in New York visiting clients and couldn't be reached for comment on whether he plans to run for chairman.
Mr. Moore said that if he were elected chairman, he would continue to try to increase the firm's market share with clients in insurance, telecommunications, high technology, health care and manufacturing.
"We also have to boost our business share in the Midwest, where we haven't yet put money and teeth into new marketing programs," he added.
Gaining business would address a key worry of the firm's partners.
Coopers asked about 12% of its partners, or 160, to leave or take early retirement last year, in the face of slower growth than in the early 1980s.
But other firms have made deeper cuts in partners.
Mr. Moore said that if he were elected chairman, he wouldn't continue streamlining, but "wouldn't be caretaker, either."
He added: "We're about 30% there in the new stategy to boost business by focusing on industry groups, so there's a lot more work that has to be done."
Mr. Freedman had sought a change in the firm's bylaws allowing him to run for another three-year term as chairman.
He will soon reach the firm's mandatory retirement age of 62.
But when his poll of 1,200 partners showed that he hadn't gathered enough support, he choose retirement next Sept. 30.
Numerous partners have praised Mr. Freedman for trying to give Coopers more business focus by reorganizing the firm along the lines of industries served.
But some feel he often treated subordinates harshly.
"Gene sometimes comes on strong but really has the firm's best interests at heart," says Harold Dankner, a Coopers partner.
Mr. Freedman's secretary said he was in a meeting and couldn't be reached for comment.
Messrs. O'Brien, Roberts, McKessy and O'Reilly weren't available for comment.
