The parent company of 20th Century Insurance Co. said its claims costs from the California earthquake will reach about $325 million, making the catastrophe by far the costliest in the company's 36-year history.
Twentieth Century Industries said it expects to record a first-quarter loss after a quake-related charge of $161.7 million, or $3.15 a share.
The company is based in the Los Angeles suburb of Woodland Hills, a few miles from the epicenter of the Jan. 17 quake.
In the year-earlier quarter, the company posted net income of $23.9 million, or 47 cents a share.
The earthquake "damage is more severe and widespread, and the number of claims reported is greater than originally estimated," said Neil H. Ashley, chief executive officer.
A month ago, the company estimated its quake claims costs at about $160 million and the corresponding first-quarter loss at about $54 million.
Trading in the company's stock was halted on the New York Stock Exchange pending the announcement.
Before the halt, which came late in the session, the stock was down 25 cents at $25.125.
The shares didn't resume trading.
While the company's claims-cost estimate doubled, its anticipated loss tripled, reflecting exhaustion of all of its $75 million of reinsurance, said Richard Dinon, senior vice president.
To restore the reinsurance protection, the company must pay an additional $13 million.
Reinsurers take a portion of an insurer's premiums in return for sharing their risk.
Mr. Dinon said the company remains financially strong despite the "substantial charge" that will wipe out 26% of net worth.
At the end of last year, the company had capital and surplus of $655.2 million.
"We're still very responsibly leveraged even after this," Mr. Dinon said.
This event "far surpasses in magnitude anything the company has experienced before," he added.
The company's own headquarters building sustained damage from the temblor, forcing managers to temporarily set up tents and tables in the parking lot.
"Repairs are still taking place," Mr. Dinon said.
The company hasn't yet calculated the total damage to its operations.
"Where this quake hit was just about our worst-case scenario," Mr. Dinon said.
The company evaluates its exposures based on "well-accepted models," but "those models didn't work well in this instance."
The company's subsidiaries write homeowners, automobile, and personal liability insurance.
