The days of Cie. des Machines Bull as France's national computer champion are numbered.
Bull's new chairman says he aims to return the struggling French state-owned computer maker to profit by the end of 1995, with an aggressive restructuring and privatization plan inspired by the recent turnaround at Bull's U.S. subsidiary, Zenith Data Systems.
To achieve that target, Jean-Marie Descarpentries, who joined Bull in October, says each of Bull's seven business divisions must strike alliances with one or more industrial partners, in line with the French government's recent decision to privatize the company.
Though he didn't disclose any names, few of prospective partners are likely to be French.
"Nobody can remain national in my opinion," Mr. Descarpentries said in an interview during the CeBIT computer fair here.
"Each of our managers is looking for industrial partners.
There are six or seven (partnership discussions) on the way. . . .
Our plan is to have a portfolio of three or four industrial partners," he said.
None of these potential partners would acquire a majority stake in Bull, but ideally they would have stakes of 10% to 15%, Mr. Descarpentries added.
Among possible partners, he cited the German telephone-services provider Deutsche Telekom, Fujitsu Ltd. of Japan and its British ICL Computers Ltd. unit, as well as Japan's NEC Corp., which already has a 4.4% stake in the French company.
To be sure, Mr. Descarpentries faces several hurdles: He will have to convince prospective partners to take minority stakes without exercising management control over Bull.
He needs to stem the company losses -- and fast.
(Earlier this week, Bull announced its 1993 loss widened to 5.07 billion French francs ($883.2 million) from 4.72 billion francs ($822.2 million) the year before.)
And, last but not least, Mr. Descarpentries must wrestle the European Commission's approval for an 11 billion franc capital injection from the French government, a move that has already elicited howls of protest from Bull's competitors.
Still, computer industry analysts say that if one man can pull this off, Mr. Descarpentries is probably the one.
His strength is that he is an outsider in the computer business; Mr. Descarpentries has spent his career in the glass-making, packaging and beer industries, and he remains a director on the board of Interbrew SA, the Belgian privately held brewer of Stella beers.
That should provide Bull with some fresh thinking on how to survive in a business subject to ever more rapid technological change and relentless price pressure.
Not only has Mr. Descarpentries proved to be a skilled turnaround artist in previous jobs, but his management experience at Anglo-French packaging concern Carnaud-Metalbox, Asahi Glass Co.'s Belgian Glaverbel SA subsidiary, as well as at Interbrew means his perspective at Bull is that of a user, rather than a provider, of computer goods and services.
Other big computer makers also have hired executives from outside the industry to gain a fresh perspective, such as Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the former RJR Nabisco chairman hired last year to head International Business Machines Corp., or Gerhard Schulmeyer, the head of ABB Asea Brown Boveri's U.S. operations who is to join Siemens Nixdorf, Siemens AG's ailing computer division, later this year, possibly to succeed the division's current chairman.
"He looks like the right man," said Edward O'Hara, managing director North Europe at International Data Corp., the U.S.-based computer-market research firm.
To bolster credibility with its customers, Mr. O'Hara said, Bull needs "to recreate themselves and be successful in their own business."
Rather than just manufacture computers and design software, analysts argue, Bull and its competitors need to become providers of operational solutions that help businesses operate at lower cost and more efficiently.
That's exactly what Mr. Descarpentries says he intends to do.
"The strategy must be directed at the customer, Mr. Descarpentries said during the interview.
"You look at your skills, you listen very carefully to your customers and you try to match both up with partners."
Adds George McNeil, president and chief executive officer of Bull Europe: "We want to provide a broad range of products and services to our customers.
We don't want to be put in a single box."
That's a strategy that Bull's U.S. subsidiary, Zenith Data Systems, has put to good use in the past few months, Bull executives said.
Zenith last June acquired a 20% stake in Packard Bell Electronics Inc., and together both companies have cut costs, widened their product range and boosted distribution channels.
From number 16 in the U.S. personal computer market, Zenith jumped to the number 10 position in sales volume, said Jacques Noels, Zenith's president and CEO.
As a result, Zenith has moved "from a significant loss to near break-even," Mr. Noels added, though he didn't provide any specific figures.
"And we did it in less than a year," he said, which he and Mr. Descarpentries argued demonstrates it's possible to engineer a turnaround at Bull as well.
Mr. Descarpentries stressed that it's currently out of the question for Bull to divest its Zenith unit, as had been considered by the previous management and the French government.
Only business lines that do not show clear progress by the end of 1995 will be sold, he said.
Of Bull's seven divisions, he said, only two currently are profitable, turning up a combined profit of about 3.5 billion francs last year.
The five other divisions, he said, posted a combined loss of about seven billion francs, in addition to the 1.65 billion francs Bull set aside last year to cover restructuring costs.
He didn't specify which divisions are making or losing money.
Rather than lay off any of Bull's workers, the company's new chairman said Bull can slash as much as three billion francs in operational costs in other areas, such as purchasing, subcontracting and moving facilities to cheaper locations.
The previous management, Mr. Descarpentries said, had burdened Bull with "a bad organization, bad reporting.
Maybe when you're backed by a government you have not enough pressure" to perform.
Indeed, if Bull's current recapitalization plan is approved by the European Commission, the French government will have pumped a total of 20 billion francs in Bull in just five years.
Under the European Union's fair-competition rules, the commission must evaluate all state aid to industry, and normally only gives the green light if the subsidies are accompanied by a thorough restructuring plan.
Mr. Descarpentries met with EU Competition Commissioner Karel Van Miert earlier this month to discuss Bull's plans, and he said he's confident Mr. Van Miert will wave through the 11 billion franc injection, two-thirds of which has already been paid out.
"I don't anticipate any problems with Brussels," Mr. Descarpentries said, adding that Mr. Van Miert had assured him the cash injection would be approved by September and possibly as early as July.
Still, the plan could face opposition to other members of the European Commission, with which Bull in the past has had numerous fights over state aid.
Bull in the past certainly hasn't been a model of financial transparency, and Mr. Descarpentries indicated the company didn't even have a clear picture of its own financial situation.
"Now, with our new organization, we know where are the losses," Mr. Descarpentries said.
But under the new leadership, Bull's financial results are already showing progress, Mr. Descarpentries contended.
In the first two months of the year, group revenue increased 22% from a year ago, Mr. Descarpentries said, while Zenith's world-wide revenue rose 8.2%.
Bull will post a profit "or at least break even" in 1995.
"The privatization will be finished in two years," Mr. Descarpentries vowed.
"This isn't the most difficult turnaround I have done.
It's considered more or less like an impossible mission.
But it's very possible and not so difficult."
