Citicorp Chairman and Chief Executive John Reed said the nation's largest bank expects its trading revenue in 1994 to decline from last year's $2.8 billion record, but he predicted that overall earnings will continue to improve over the next two years.
Mr. Reed told a meeting of securities analysts that Citicorp's earnings growth will come from overseas.
"A third of our business is international, and it is growing in double-digits," he said.
However, that growth will not continue in Hong Kong, Citibank's most important profit contributor in Asia.
Rana Talwar, executive vice president for consumer banking in the Asian Pacific region, said Citibank has "capped" its growth in Hong Kong because of concerns about China's takeover of the colony in 1997.
"We are taking a more conservative view than many of our competitors," he said.
Two years ago, Mr. Reed said, "I put a ceiling on what I was willing to lose in Hong Kong, assuming a worst-case scenario."
He said the bank looked at what happened in Iran, Panama and Lebanon to gauge the potential impact of "adverse circumstances."
Nevertheless, Pei-Yuan Chia, Citicorp's vice chairman for international consumer banking, noted, "We have no intention of leaving Hong Kong."
He said Citicorp has been monitoring the political situation for the past five years, and that it expects to maintain its 26 branches in Hong Kong through 1997.
Mr. Reed said Citicorp's growth is unlikely to come from the U.S. market, and that the company is unlikely to participate in the continuing consolidation of the U.S. banking industry by acquiring other banks.
"We are not seeking to play the game of buying the bank next door," he said.
"The idea of buying a 200-branch bank in California doesn't compute for us."
He said Citicorp prefers to "stick to our knitting," meaning it will maintain its strategy of improving its balance sheet and focusing on high-growth foreign markets.
The bank is actively expanding operations in overseas markets other than Hong Kong.
Mr. Reed said Citicorp will increase operating expenses in those markets by "a couple of hundred million dollars."
Bank officials said revenues are projected to grow at 2.4 times the increase in expenses.
In 1993, Citicorp posted earnings of $1.92 billion, or $3.82 a share, before an accounting adjustment.
Earnings included about $300 million of charges.
Citicorp eased 25 cents to $38.625 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
