EMC Corp., continuing its rapid growth largely at International Business Machines Corp.'s expense, said fourth-quarter profit more than quadrupled, as revenue more than doubled to $248.6 million.
The Hopkinton, Mass.-based maker of data-storage systems for mainframe computers posted net income of $46.8 million, or 23 cents a share.
In the year-earlier fourth quarter, net income was $10.4 million, or six cents a share, on 15% fewer shares; revenue was $117.8 million.
The results came in slightly above most analysts' estimates of 20 cents a share.
The stock rose 25 cents to $21.50 a share in heavy New York Stock Exchange composite trading of more than 2.7 million shares.
"EMC continues to execute flawlessly while its bigger and more powerful competitors keep on stumbling," says Michael Geran, an analyst with the Pershing division of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
Michael Ruettgers, EMC's president and chief executive, called 1993 "a spectacular year for EMC" and noted that gross profit margins actually rose at the end of the year, to 53% from 52.7%, bucking the industry trend.
"I'd guess we were the only computer-hardware company with improved gross margin in the fourth quarter."
He predicted that the company would continue to grow and gain market share in 1994, and that competing products from IBM and Storage Technology Corp. wouldn't be widely available until midyear.
However, citing what he called "the law of large numbers," and the company's doubling of its annual revenue growth rate in 1993, he cautioned that "it would be difficult to grow at that rate again this year."
Analysts say EMC's rapid expansion is remarkable given that its market, mainframe data storage, isn't growing.
EMC's gains have come by grabbing market share from its much larger competitors, including IBM, Amdahl Corp., Storage Technology and Hitachi Ltd. of Japan.
"EMC has accomplished what no other company has been able to do for years: take a visible market share in the mainframe computer industry," says Barry F. Bosak, an analyst with Smith Barney Shearson.
EMC's share of the mainframe storage market grew to 14.7% last year from 6.2% in 1992, according to market researcher International Data Corp.
EMC accomplished this with a radical design approach in which scores of small hard-disk drives are wired together to function as a single large data respository, an approach known as RAID, for redundant arrays of inexpensive disks.
This takes advantage of the economies of large-scale production and commodity pricing of the smaller devices while providing more capacity in a smaller cabinet.
EMC buys its component drives from a variety of suppliers, wires them into racks and ties them together with the crucial software and cache devices that makes the individual drives work together as one.
Mr. Ruettgers says the company plans to push beyond mainframes this year into new market segments such as on-line systems and multimedia data storage, in which video, voice and interactive services demand far greater storage capacity than is needed today.
For the year, EMC's net income more than quadrupled to $127.1 million, or 65 cents a share, from $29.5 million, or 17 cents a share, on 14% fewer shares in 1992.
Revenue rose to $782.6 million from $385.7 million.
