Memo to individual investors: Be careful out there; the markets are littered with traps just waiting to ensnare the unwary.
Even before rising interest rates and inflation fears sent bond prices tumbling and fueled new uncertainty about stocks, investment pros were becoming increasingly concerned about the enthusiasm of many individual investors.
"The number of traps is growing," says Charles Clough, chief investment strategist for Merrill Lynch.
It's time for investors to re-examine their thinking about several overly popular stock-market investment strategies, pros say.
What are the dangerous traps in the market today -- and why should investors avoid them?
Here's what stock strategists, money managers, mutual-fund analysts and investment researchers pick as the seven most-hazardous market strategies:
Stocks in emerging markets had a fabulous performance in 1993, thanks to an infusion of U.S. mutual-fund money and economic growth.
But so far this year, many emerging-markets mutual funds, which invest in developing countries, are faltering.
One of the largest, Fidelity Emerging Markets Fund, is off 7% after soaring nearly 82% in 1993.
Many emerging markets, especially in Asia, are overbought, says Mr. Clough.
Ned Davis, president of Ned Davis Research, a Nakomis, Fla., investment-research firm, is worried about the huge inflow of money and lack of liquidity in many of these markets.
"How do you get out of Malaysia, Brazil and the Philippines if we get into a bear market?" he asks.
2) Investing in over-hyped industries.
Even though prices have dropped recently following the breakdown of Bell Atlantic Corp.'s proposed acquisition of Tele-Communications Inc., it may be years before telecommunications companies can generate the earnings to prove they are worth their high prices, Mr. Clough says.
"We still don't know what the information superhighway will look like," he says.
Many casino and riverboat-gambling stocks are selling at prices that assume there will be an endless supply of customers even though casinos and riverboats are popping up all over the country, says William Dodge, chief investment strategist for Dean Witter Reynolds.
"It might be better to go to the crap table than to buy these stocks," he says.
3) Keeping too much of your money in cyclical stocks.
Too many investors are paying inflated prices for cyclical stocks that aren't likely to produce earnings to justify those prices anytime soon, says Ron Baron, president of Baron Capital, a New York money-management firm.
"People are paying a big price for peak cyclical earnings that may or may not materialize," he says.
Cyclical stocks tend to follow the ups and downs of the economy closely.
Brad Perry, senior partner at David L. Babson, a Cambridge, Mass., investment firm, says chemical, paper and metal stocks are inflated.
Mr. Perry is concerned that managed care and new government regulations may cut growth rates for drug companies so sharply that the stocks at current prices still aren't bargains.
"It's a value trap," he says.
"The environment in the medical sector isn't back to normal and it may end up as subnormal.
It's too early to make a move in drug stocks."
The volatile Japanese stock market has risen so far this year, but it is far below its 1989 peak.
The Japan Fund, a mutual fund that invests in Japanese stocks, is up just over 19% so far this year after a five-year cumulative total return of minus 0.9%.
But one noted international investor, John Templeton, who sold his mutual-fund group to Franklin Funds but remains active as a private investor in Nassau, the Bahamas, doesn't think the time is ripe.
He agrees that the time to buy stocks "is at the point of the worst bad news, and Japan has reached that point."
But Japanese stock prices haven't reflected the depth of the bad news, as the average stock still sells for more than 60 times earnings, Mr. Templeton says.
Charles Cain, president of Cain Asset Management of New York, says too many risks remain in Japan with "fundamental uncertainties on the political scene."
Picking the stocks that are rising the fastest in price on the theory that "a body in motion tends to stay in motion" was a successful strategy last year, says Mr. Davis, the Florida investment researcher.
But these stocks tend to fall as fast as they rise, and when they fall, they usually don't have the earnings to support them, he says.
Last year, utility stocks took a sharp plunge and have continued to sell off this year.
Gold-mining stocks bounced around even though the group has moved up.
More gyrations are in store for momentum investors for the rest of this year, Mr. Davis says.
Now isn't the time to chase stocks that have tripled during the past two years, says Mr. Baron, the New York money manager.
Ken Gregory, editor of No-Load Fund Analyst, an Orinda, Calif., newsletter, says it has been easy to trash consumer-brand stocks based on the surge in popularity of generic "no name" products.
But too many investors have overlooked the fact that consumer brands are cashing in on a growing demand for their products outside the U.S.
As consumers in emerging nations get more disposable income, they are buying larger amounts of U.S. consumer brands, he says.
With all these traps, should an investor avoid the stock market altogether with any new money to invest?
Not necessarily, says Mr. Perry, the Cambridge, Mass., investment executive.
"The biggest risk for people in the long run is that they have too little money in stocks."
He advises investors to invest in the stock market gradually this year in stocks that aren't highly popular.
