The Whitewater special counsel is investigating whether two White House aides improperly sought to remove a political foe from the Resolution Trust Corp.'s inquiry into Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
A federal grand jury is scheduled to hear testimony tomorrow, from Josh Steiner, the Treasury chief of staff, about a Feb. 25 telephone call he received from George Stephanopoulos, one of President Clinton's closest aides.
Mr. Stephanopoulos called to complain that the RTC had assigned the law firm of Jay B. Stephens to look into the Madison case.
Mr. Stephens, a Republican, assailed the administration when he was removed from his post as U.S. attorney here with the change of administrations last year.
His review of civil liabilities linked to the failure of Madison will include looking at the role of the Rose Law Firm and Hillary Rodham Clinton in representing the Arkansas thrift.
According to administration officials, special counsel Robert B. Fiske has obtained a diary kept by Mr. Steiner that may reflect his account of the telephone call from Mr. Stephanopoulos.
Officials say the diary may indicate that the White House aide asked if anything could be done to remove Mr. Stephens.
Mr. Stephanopoulos acknowledged in interviews over the weekend that he called his friend, Mr. Steiner, to "blow off steam" about the hiring of Mr. Stephens.
"I was very puzzled by this decision," Mr. Stephanopoulos said of the RTC's retaining Mr. Stephens.
But he denied asking if Mr. Stephens could be removed, and maintained that once he talked with Mr. Steiner "that ended the matter as far as I was concerned."
Most major law firms have bid on and have received some of the RTC work.
The committee that selected Mr. Stephens's firm, Pillsbury, Madison & Sutro, may have considered it a natural because of the former prosecutor's experience in putting together complex cases.
But even some of the administration's staunchest critics questioned the prudence of the move.
The calls about Mr. Stephens were reported in Saturday's Washington Post.
Rep. Jim Leach (R., Iowa), who has become the administration's nemesis in the House on the Whitewater matter, said on NBC's "Meet the Press" yesterday that it was "natural that they would be upset" with the appointment.
"The White House may have made a mistake, but it would be premature to draw any extraordinary conclusions. . . .
I hope we don't make too much of this part of the story."
Mr. Stephanopoulos said that in the course of his conversation with Mr. Steiner "I asked how Jay Stephens had been retained.
Do I wish now that I hadn't gotten angry, that I hadn't blown off steam?
Of course, I do.
I wish I hadn't gotten angry."
Meanwhile, Mr. Fiske is also looking into a conference call the same day from Mr. Stephanopoulos and the White House deputy chief of staff, Harold Ickes, to Roger Altman, the deputy Treasury secretary, who was the acting head of the RTC.
In that call, the two White House aides are said to have complained that Mr. Altman told the New York Times that he was recusing himself from dealing with the Madison case before he had notified the White House.
Mr. Fiske is also reviewing whether either of the two Clinton aides asked Mr. Altman if he could remove Mr. Stephens from the case.
Mr. Stephanopoulos said that he doesn't recall talking to Mr. Altman about Mr. Stephens.
"All I remember about the conversation with Mr. Altman was that we asked Mr. Altman to explain his decision to recuse himself from all of the matter," Mr. Stephanopoulos said.
"I suggested that as a courtesy to the president he write the president a note explaining the decision.
That's all I remember about the conversation."
Rep. Leach, in the "Meet the Press" interview, said, "I tip my hat," to Charles Banks, the former U.S. attorney in Little Rock, for deferring the RTC's request for a criminal investigation of Madison during the 1992 election campaign.
Mr. Banks's decision, reported in the Los Angeles Times, would have been "an abuse of power" to raise the issue just before the election, Mr. Leach said.
