Tokyo shares climbed 1.6% Tuesday on buying by arbitragers and overseas investors following the previous day's slide, the steepest in 2 1/2 years.
London prices fell sharply in a late sell-off sparked by Wall Street's lower opening.
Frankfurt stocks continued to rebound, jumping 2.2%.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 113.41, up 0.42, reflecting higher Asia/Pacific and European markets and lower American markets.
Consumer electronics stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 123.63, up 3.40, or 2.8%, with Kenwood of Japan posting a 6.3% gain in its local currency.
Plantations stocks trailed at 187.50, down 28.97, or 13%, with United Plantations of Malaysia sliding 19% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which plunged 954.19 points Monday, recovered 295.12 to 18648.36, near the intraday high of 18662.27.
In trading Wednesday, the Nikkei index rose 182.72 points to close the morning session at 18831.08.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 280 million shares, down from 379.1 million shares a day earlier.
Advancing issues outnumbered retreating issues 852-184.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which skidded 70.85 points Monday, rose 20.32, or 1.4%, to 1519.38.
But some traders termed the rebound paltry, given Monday's 4.9% nose dive by the Nikkei.
While foreign investors bought positions, most others sold.
Japanese politics remained the market's focus.
The opposition Liberal Democratic Party agreed to join a parliamentary conference committee to try to work out a political-reform compromise before the Diet adjourns Saturday; rejection of that reform legislation had caused Monday's tumble.
Buying at lower levels by overseas investors was spurred by a Nomura Research Institute strategist's report that the market's weakness, from the political-reform legislation's failure, provided a buying opportunity.
Arbitragers bought heavily, selling Japanese government bond futures to buy Nikkei futures in the last half-hour of trading, when the Nikkei scored about half its gains.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index lost 37.4 points, or 1.1%, to 3444.0, also the intraday low, marking the biggest one-day drop in two weeks.
The FT 30-stock index slumped 25.2 points to 2646.2.
Volume was 984.9 million shares, compared with 800.2 million shares a day earlier.
Sporadic early selling snowballed in the afternoon, triggered by New York stocks' early declines.
The London market also was affected by news reports about potential effects of coming British tax increases.
Following the market's recent sharp gains, many dealers were short of stock and wanted an opportunity to take prices lower so they could pick up some shares.
Such dealers have been caught by surprise by the extent of the gains and been scrambling for stock to cover short, or oversold, positions.
Prices fell across the board; sectors hit hardest were banking, oil, retailing and pharmaceuticals.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index rallied 46.77 points to 2126.78.
The rebound began Monday after the main index had retreated 8.5% since reaching a record high of 2267.98 on the first day of trading this year.
Industrial stocks did well, along with banks, and the strong, stable U.S. dollar in foreign-currency dealings helped boost dollar-sensitive export shares such as chemical companies.
In Paris, stocks finished slightly higher, after gains were eroded in response to early weakness on Wall Street.
Profit-taking also was a factor following the market's recent advances, killing expectations for higher prices typical on the first day of a new trading account.
Corporate earnings indications were said to be making some investors cautious.
In Amsterdam, prices ended mixed but with a weak tone on a wave of late selling, partly because of softer markets abroad; declines were led by the financial sector, and profit-taking knocked down many blue chips.
In Milan, stocks rose on news of a preliminary accord among some centrist groups that brought some unity to Italy's political situation, which has been badly fragmented since a big turn toward fringe parties in last month's municipal elections; the Italian market also was supported by data showing the balance of payments swung to a surplus in 1993 from a deficit in 1992.
In Madrid, equities advanced after Spain's central bank lowered its benchmark lending rate to 8.75% from 9% in the regular 7-to-13-day repurchase tender.
This surprised the market, which had expected the bank to wait for the German central bank to move on rates first.
In Stockholm, prices dropped sharply in moderate trading, mainly because of big losses in the telecommunications sector, as well as retreats by drug issues stemming from poor performances by pharmaceuticals in other major bourses.
In Zurich, shares climbed, lifted by bargain-hunting among bank, chemical and other blue-chip issues.
In Mexico City, equities gave up 1.3%, pulled down from record highs by profittaking.
In Sydney, stocks eased, with losses reined in by lower-than-expected Australian inflation figures and some stability in the Tokyo stock market.
In Hong Kong, prices finished broadly lower, sparked by weakness a day earlier in stocks that also trade in overseas markets such as London.
Hong Kong activity was led mainly by prices of January stock-index futures contracts, which have been active ahead of their expiration Friday.
Foreign investors also dumped stocks late in the session, in sympathy with some weaker markets in the region.
In Singapore, shares opened lower and headed steadily down to finish with a 2.7% loss; weak sentiment was sapped further when buying from the previous session failed to follow through, and institutional investors sold heavily.
And in Kuala Lumpur, equities plunged across the board, ending 5% lower after panicky selling by investors who feared a further slide in prices.
Both the Singapore and Malaysian bourses corrected heavily early this month and have since consolidated broadly.
In Taipei, stocks also opened with losses and continued declining throughout the session, ending with a 2.1% drop; trading was sluggish, as many investors stayed on the sidelines, awaiting a loosening of the money supply by the Taiwan government, which has a conservative monetary policy.
In Manila, shares fell in light volume, hurt by profit-taking by Philippine and foreign institutions.
And in Bangkok, profit-taking pushed stocks down about 1% in active, choppy turnover.
But in Seoul, prices rose in active dealings, supported by rallies in the banking sector.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
