China has fined a securities brokerage house and suspended its operating license in what officials called the country's first crackdown on insider trading.
The Shanghai branch of the brokerage house, Xiangfan Credit & Investment Co., a unit of the Agricultural Bank of China, used advance knowledge of a corporate raid to reap profits on the stock of the Shanghai-listed target company, according to findings by the Beijing-based Securities Supervisory Committee.
The findings were reported in the weekend edition of the Shanghai Securities News.
Shenzhen-based Bao An Enterprises's raid on Shanghai's Yanzhong Industrial was China's first market takeover attempt since stock markets were revived in 1991.
The attempt resulted in the fining of Bao An, which was cited for accumulating in excess of 5% of a listed company without making a disclosure.
Since that time, China has experienced a rush of corporate raids, at least one of which resulted in the raider gaining a degree of management control over the target company.
The Securities Supervisory Committee presented the punishment of Xiangfan as the first step in a continuing investigation of trades related to the Bao An-Yanzhong incident and suggested that the investigation may reveal other violators.
Officials of Xiangfan could not be reached for comment over the weekend.
Investors in China's domestic A-share stock markets frequently complain that insider trading runs rampant among business leaders, government officials and brokers, who have access to undisclosed information about regulatory policies and corporate announcements.
Partly for that reason, investors have turned sour on many A-share firms, leaving the market in the doldrums for the better part of a year.
Xiangfan made 16.7 million yuan ($1.9 million) in profits by buying Yanzhong stock before the takeover attempt and then unloading at the height of furious buying by speculators, the supervisory committee said.
To finance the stock purchases, the firm used 6.7 million yuan of cash deposits of investors it represents, violating another regulation against intermingling of agent and client trades.
Under the ruling, all of Xiangfan's related trading profits were confiscated, the firm was fined an additional two million yuan, and the Shanghai office of the company will be effectively shut down for two months.
The firm must also sell off the 5,300 Yanzhong shares it still holds during the next three trading sessions, turning over any profit to the state treasury.
