A long-awaited analysis by the Congressional Budget Office says President Clinton's health-care plan would cost the government more than the White House projects and would increase, rather than decrease, the deficit over its first 10 years.
In addition, the report raised a new political obstacle for the White House by listing on the federal government's books the health-insurance premiums that businesses and individuals would be required to pay to new regional "health alliances."
That is likely to give ammunition to Republicans and other administration critics who charge that the proposal amounts to a huge tax increase.
The budget office's report, released yesterday, probably will be the single most important analysis of how the Clinton plan holds up financially.
That's because Congress will use the findings in its evaluation of the administration's proposal.
The administration itself has extolled the CBO's credibility; last year, for instance, it touted its use of CBO economic forecasts in its budget.
And in a recent interview with financial reporters, the president said that when Congress is in session, the CBO has more power than the Federal Reserve Board.
Despite its higher cost estimates, the report holds a considerable amount of good news for the administration.
It predicts long-term deficit reduction after 2004.
It concludes that the plan would shave national health expenditures an estimated $413 billion over five years beginning in 2000.
And, it says that businesses, many of which have been critical of the plan, would in fact see their health-care costs reduced by as much as $20 billion a year by the turn of the century, thanks to proposed government subsidies and caps on health-insurance premiums.
Not surprisingly, the White House chose to focus on those findings.
"The very important things seem to be quite positive," said Alice Rivlin, deputy White House budget director and former CBO director.
"CBO confirms that it is possible to cover everyone in the country with this kind of health insurance and still get the rate of growth of national health expenditures lower in a few years.
They also agree that eventually the deficit will come down."
The CBO had been under tremendous pressure from both sides as it reviewed the Clinton plan, and its report reflects a careful balancing act.
One troublesome issue for the administration is its conclusion that the administration plan would increase the federal budget deficit by $74 billion over the first six years after its enactment.
The White House estimates that its plan would shrink the budget gap by $58 billion during that period.
The main reason for the difference is that the CBO believes the administration substantially underestimated the cost of the subsidies to help small and low-wage employers afford required health-insurance payments.
By 2000, when the White House plan would be fully phased in, the CBO says the subsidies would cost $58 billion, $25 billion more than the administration estimates.
The higher subsidy costs, in turn, reflect the CBO's conclusion that premiums to pay for a comprehensive benefits package guaranteed all Americans would be about 15% higher than the administration estimates.
Moreover, the report suggests that an administration proposal to limit the government's financial liability by placing a ceiling on overall amount of the federal subsidy payments could fail.
The CBO analysis calculates that the subsidy payments would exceed the proposed ceiling as early as 1997, and that the discrepancy would grow sharply after the year 2000.
The cumulative overrun would equal about $283 billion through 2004, Mr. Reischauer said under questioning.
The net deficit impact would be less because the CBO agrees with the administration that large savings can be realized from Medicaid.
Still, lawmakers will have to reconcile this discrepancy if the caps are to be meaningful in the final legislation.
The budget office's cost estimates are based on the assumption that the caps the administration would place on private health-insurance premiums can be effectively imposed.
But the report calls into question whether such stringent ceilings, which would hold the growth of premiums and public spending to the general inflation rate plus growth in population, would be politically palatable.
"The full effects of limiting the rate of growth of premiums would be highly uncertain," the CBO says.
The issue of whether to count the required employer and individual payments as government receipts has generated enormous attention throughout Washington.
The CBO report says the regional health alliances, which would collect insurance payments from businesses and individuals, "would operate primarily as agents of the federal government."
Consequently, according to the CBO, their financial transactions "should be included in the federal government's accounts, and premium payments should be shown as governmental receipts."
President Clinton, who was touting his plan in Shreveport, La., brushed aside that aspect of the CBO report.
"We'll fix that, that's not a problem," he said.
"No serious person out here in the real world would be troubled by that."
The report underscores the immensity of the Clinton health-care endeavor.
By 2004, the alliances to be established under the plan would collect almost $750 billion in annual premiums from employers and households, the equivalent of nearly three current Pentagon budgets.
Examining the potential impact of the plan on the economy at large, the CBO predicts that savings businesses realize in health-care expenditures "would be largely passed on to workers in the form of higher wages."
But it warns that the size of the work force could be decreased by 0.25% to 1%, mainly because greater numbers of people, freed of worry about being able to obtain health coverage, would decide to retire early.
The report says the result could reduce overall economic output by 0.2% to 0.7%.
Republicans were quick to argue that the report seriously damages the Clinton health plan, saying that it brands the president's proposed mandatory health premiums as tax increases.
"I think it is no longer a serious player," said House Minority Whip Newt Gingrich of Georgia of the administration's plan.
"They are in fact saying this is a tax."
But some Democrats said they aren't concerned.
"I don't think it's a bother at all," said Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois of the CBO report.
"I think he Mr. Reischauer did us a favor by putting the numbers on the table.
I'd rather have it out there than have to skirt it for months while people carp."
While Mr. Reischauer said cost-projection techniques have improved since the Great Society programs of the 1960s, he was frank to admit he might end up a little outside the "ballpark" by the time 2004 arrives.
"We're in the town the ballpark is in," he said.
