Reading "The Silent Woman" (Knopf, 208 pages, $23), Janet Malcolm's new book about the poets Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes, I was often reminded of a remark attributed to Alice Roosevelt Longworth: If you don't have anything nice to say about anyone, come sit next to me.
Ms. Malcolm's book, which began life as a two-part article in The New Yorker, is full of unnice things about people, though I think few are sufficiently piquant to have appealed much to Alice Longworth.
One of Ms. Malcolm's earlier exercises in unniceness, a book about the renegade psychoanalyst Jeffrey Masson, earned her a much-publicized libel suit (which she lost, though the jury could not reach a decision on damages).
In the present case, she refers conspicuously to her notes and taped interviews, putting us on notice that they are all in order.
And one of the principals, Plath, is beyond suing, having committed suicide in 1963: The dead, as Ms. Malcolm reminds us, cannot be libeled.
But they can be abused.
As can the living.
And that, to a large extent, is the real subject of this book.
"The Silent Woman" is Ms. Malcolm's meditation on the tasks and responsibilities of journalists and biographers.
The large literary industry that has grown up around Plath -- since the mid-'70s there have been at least five biographies -- provided the occasion for "The Silent Woman."
But the point of the book is to bring us the news that, at bottom, biography is the literary form of voyeurism.
Indeed, Ms. Malcolm pictures the reader in "collusion" with the biographer, "tiptoeing down the corridor" with him "to stand in front of the bedroom door and try to peep through the keyhole."
This "transgressive nature" of biography "is rarely acknowledged," she says, but it is "the only explanation for biography's status as a popular genre."
A glance at the documents that have piled up around Plath -- most of them, anyway -- might well suggest that Ms. Malcolm is right.
The grisly facts of Plath's short life and gruesome death are custom-made for literary voyeurism.
Chapter one: Pert, neurotic American girl marries dashing English poet.
Chapter two: After six years of marriage and two children, marriage disintegrates.
Chapter three (and already the last): Deepening depression, a short burst of fierce creativity, and then suicide at the age of 30.
After setting out milk and cookies for the kids, she placed her head inside her oven.
The epilogue, which is still being written, is posthumous glory as a great poet.
The tragedy of Sylvia Plath's death has a bit of everything.
For one thing, it appeals deeply to the public's romantic sense that poetry should be a risky, existential endeavor.
Plath's handful of good poems, collected in the posthumously published book "Ariel," were written in the final months of her life, when she was struggling with depression.
For many, the fact that she lost the struggle validates the authenticity of her endeavor.
Plath's story also appeals to certain feminists, who like to picture her as a victim: of society, of her upbringing and especially of her husband, who abandoned her for another woman.
(The other woman was Assia Wevill, whom Mr. Hughes later married and who also committed suicide by gassing herself.)
With the exception of Anne Stevenson, whose book "Bitter Fame" (1989) is admirably circumspect, biographers and critics have seized on the sordid details of this story to mount a titillating morality play: Plath the blighted heroine, Mr. Hughes the misogynistic monster.
It is this story -- or myth -- that forms Ms. Malcolm's subject matter.
Much of the book consists of her accounts of visiting various of Plath's biographers and critics.
Olwyn Hughes, the sister of Ted Hughes and until recently the literary agent for the Plath estate, is a major character in this narrative.
Ms. Malcolm has plenty of sharp criticism of Ms. Hughes, who emerges in this book as unusually manipulative and interfering in her capacity as literary agent.
But then Ms. Malcolm has plenty of criticism for almost everyone.
She declares herself generally on the side of Mr. Hughes and Ms. Stevenson (which means they should buy armor).
Ms. Malcolm knew Ms. Stevenson slightly at college and admired her from afar.
Now is an occasion to whittle her down to size.
Seeing her again after all these years was "depressing."
Ms. Stevenson was "an upset, beset, wound-up woman pouring out her grievances."
She was also, Ms. Malcolm tells us more than once, a recovered alcoholic.
Between the visits to Plath's biographers, critics and acquaintances, Ms. Malcolm offers philosophical observations that often have a decidedly Freudian tang: "We all yearn toward the state of inanition, the condition of harmlessness, where we are perforce lovable and fragile."
Or, "Life, of course, never gets anyone's entire attention."
Of course!
Sometimes Ms. Malcolm seems alarmed by the gossipy, talk-show intrusiveness that she describes so meticulously.
She speaks of her "effrontery" and "shame" at her "complicity" in perpetuating the Plath myth.
But it would seem to be a shame that she is content to live with.
About halfway through her book, Ms. Malcolm describes the biographer as "a professional blabbermouth and tattletale."
Not all biographers are, of course; the best biographers give us an appreciation of their subject's life that transcends gossip.
But reading "Silent Woman" we certainly know what Ms. Malcolm means.
