LENDING LOSSES force libraries to step up security on stepped-down budgets.
Libraries expect to lose 1.1% of their materials from non-returns alone each year, says the American Library Association in Chicago.
A spokesman for the Atlanta-Fulton County Library System says: "People feel like their tax dollars paid for it, so they don't think of it as theft."
CDs, tapes and videos are particularly tempting for their resale value.
So, the Public Library of Cincinnati and Hamilton County, the Atlanta-Fulton system and others limit the number of CDs borrowers can check out.
Some libraries, including Houston's, turn to professional collection services for help.
The Carnegie Library in Pittsburgh says transient students are tough to track.
But so are lawyers: The Bergen County Law Library in New Jersey says razor blades are often used to slice out cases.
"It's an old law-school trick," the librarian says.
The public library in Cicero, Ill., takes a tougher policy stand on issuing cards.
To get a card in Cicero, applicants must show two forms of ID and a reference and wait three days.
To improve safety, the 23-branch Charlotte, N.C., area system installed "panic buttons" under librarians' desks.
PRINTING ON EGGSHELLS and such gets consumers to devour the message.
Continuous ink-jet printing technology coupled with new "food-grade fluids" permits more edible advertising, proponents say.
Ace Baking Co., of Green Bay, Wis., uses the process to zap Looney Tunes characters on ice-cream cones.
And American Crystal Sugar Co. in Moorhead, Minn., codes its paper bags of sugar with the dot-matrix printers.
Pennsylvania egg producer R.W. Sauder Inc. plans to use the system to mark a brand name on eggs and to print "U.S." on those it exports.
Videojet Systems International in Wood Dale, Ill., says only a dozen or two food processors are using its process so far.
But it expects growth as marketers catch on to new advertising and coding uses.
Ink-jet printing uses electrical impulses to shoot tiny drops of liquid onto delicate surfaces where the noncontact "printing" dries instantly.
A system costs about $15,000.
URBAN GOLF swings to the fore, powered by the real-estate down-stroke.
As demand grows for golf facilities, driving ranges and even a nine-hole course are opening in downtown areas in lieu of planned high-rises stymied by the real-estate slump.
"It provides for interim use of land that otherwise would sit undeveloped," says Charles Tourtellotte of Vintage Group.
The Denver firm is building the $3.5 million nine-hole course and driving range in a 31-acre Chicago site zoned for office buildings and condos.
In San Francisco, the year-old Mission Bay Golf Center sits on 7.5 acres near the financial district.
The site was slated for a school and playground under a stalled plan.
The centers run on short-term leases that let owners reclaim land for buildings later, says Steve di Costanzo of the Golf Range and Recreation Association.
The San Francisco center is leased for five-year periods; the Chicago site has a 15-year lease, but the owner can reclaim some parcels before then.
The number of free-standing driving ranges grew 14% in 1993 and 18% in 1992, Mr. di Costanzo says.
WHO WILL TAKE FLUFFY after you're gone?
Texas A&M University's Stevenson Companion Animal Life-Care Center will -- for a $25,000 bequest.
The center offers a "home-like atmosphere" for 30 pets plus the services of a veterinary student.
Endowment income covers the pet's care.
And when Fluffy goes, the fund goes to a vet-school program of the donor's choice.
AN RX FOR PHARMACISTS: An electronic-display system from National Data Corp. and Trans-Lux Corp. flashes customers when their prescriptions are filled.
The system aims to save time at large institutional pharmacies.
BUILD IT AND THEY WILL PAY.
Some 80% of shoppers surveyed by American International College, Springfield, Mass., say they would pay extra -- up to 20% more on a $200 item such as a gas grill or VCR -- if the manufacturer would assemble the goods.
REFINANCED BOOMERS are shopping again, but they want bargains.
When it comes to consumer spending, forget the 25-to-34-year-old "baby busters" -- they are still stretching to buy that first house, says Edward Yardeni, chief economist at C.J. Lawrence.
Watch the aging boomers who took advantage of low rates to refinance their mortgages and now will enjoy much lower monthly mortgage payments for 15 to 30 years.
Surprise: The extra monthly cash flow just about covers monthly lease payments for a new car.
Besides wheels, the boomer juggernaut is interested in household durable goods.
"Now that they're feeling more secure about their jobs, they'll probably fix up the houses they've got," Mr. Yardeni figures.
But don't expect the luxuries to start flowing.
"We're still in the `price club' era here," he says.
Overall, homeowners are saving as much as $50 billion a year from the mortgage refinancings, the securities-firm economist says.
BRIEFS: Block that cholesterol!
The Firehouse Restaurant in New York offers an all-you-can-eat Super Bowl Sunday menu of chicken wings, pizza and french fries. . . .
Meanwhile, for those who aren't into pigskin, the decorative-fabrics chain Calico Corners promotes an alternative with its "SuperBolt Sale."
