Like a lot of consumers, Ram Reddy, a Houston pharmacist, based his decision to buy a life-insurance policy on an elaborate chart depicting what he thought the policy would earn over time.
It has earned significantly less.
And now, because the company cut the dividend it pays policyholders, he has to pay an extra year of premiums for a policy that should have been paid for.
Unfortunately, Mr. Reddy, who bought the policy from Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., didn't know what the insurance industry knows: These complicated charts, called illustrations, are based on optimistic assumptions that might not occur.
The three of four policyholders who own whole-life or other forms of cash-value insurance, which offer an investment feature as well as a death benefit, may very well not earn as much as illustrated.
Although the charts generally carry disclaimers, too often the buyer -- either through ignorance or at the behest of his agent -- simply ignores it.
That has made illustrations one of the most potent and misleading weapons in the insurance industry's sales arsenal.
"If you get an illustration, you should throw it in the waste basket," says Joseph Belth, an insurance expert and editor of the Insurance Forum newsletter.
Illustrations, long in use, have always been problematic, but controversy over them is heating up because of falling interest rates.
Because insurance companies are earning less on their investments, they have been cutting the rates they pay policyholders.
The cuts, which some companies began making eight years ago, belie the returns shown on the charts.
Now state insurance commissioners are trying to help.
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners, a group of insurance commissioners from the 50 states, is considering steps ranging from banning the use of projected returns to setting standards on what assumptions can be used.
The group is scheduled to meet in Denver in March to consider the options.
Its decision could radically change the way insurance is sold.
Not only do illustrations paint what could be an unrealistically profitable return from life-insurance policies, they allow agents to talk up something other than the macabre death benefits.
In their presentations, agents point to the figures and describe how the money earned by a policy could be used to fund college tuition, retirement or other financial goals.
The return shown in an illustration is based on a combination of the policy's guaranteed interest rate and its "excess interest rate" -- often called a dividend -- that is entirely at the company's discretion.
Illustrations often assume a company's excess rate will continue.
If a company increases its dividend, the policyholder fares better than shown in the illustration.
If a company cut its rate, as many are doing, the policyholder loses.
While agreeing that illustrations should be modified, insurance companies object to drastic reforms.
They say the proposals discussed by the commissioners would hurt the consumer by making it difficult to compare companies' policies.
They add that illustrations are crucial in describing what happens to the policyholder's investment returns over the life of the policy.
"If illustrations are used appropriately, they are a good way to show what happens in a policy," says Gene Grabowski, spokesman for the American Council of Life Insurance, a trade group.
Others say the proposed changes, while well-intentioned, fall short of what's needed.
Amy Johnson, who heads the Texas Office of Public Insurance Advocate, a state-sponsored consumer watchdog, contends that changing the written materials doesn't alter the ethics of an unscrupulous insurance agent who, eager for a commission, oversells the product.
"You can't regulate people's conduct," she says.
She would prefer a warning label on life insurance that says: "If you don't hold this policy for five years, you're throwing your money down the drain."
Administrative costs and agent commissions contribute to losses in the early years of a policy.
To help clear up the confusion -- and head off radical changes by the state insurance commissioners -- the industry has come up with several suggested changes in the use of illustrations.
On Jan. 1, New England Mutual Life Insurance Co. began using an illustration that, like current ones, shows projected rates of return.
But it goes further by showing projections under three interest-rate scenarios.
It also shows the guaranteed investment return.
And, in contrast to many illustrations, the figures are displayed in a clear, easy-to-read manner.
"We want to send a message to policyholders about the variability of dividend," says Kernan King, the insurer's marketing chief.
"We think this is the way the rest of the industry should go."
He says the company's agents have been supportive.
The American Society of CLU & ChFC, an agent group, started a program to give agents more information about the policies they sell.
Called the Insurance Questionnaire, or IQ, it outlines the assumptions that go into an illustration and helps agents conclude whether they are unrealistic.
"It doesn't render a more accurate illustration, but it helps the agent interpret the illustration," says Richard Weber, a vice president with Merrill Lynch Life Insurance Group.
But consumer advocates say the chances of meaningful reform seem slight, noting that the insurance industry has a history of heading off efforts at reform.
For instance, when the Federal Trade Commission in 1979 called for greater disclosure requirements for life insurance, the industry successfully lobbied to ban the agency from having anything to do with insurance.
Legislation to bring federal oversight to the insurance industry has languished since being introduced two years ago.
The reforms, aimed at providing policyholders with more information, might help people like Mr. Reddy in Houston.
Mr. Reddy, who bought a vanishing-premium life insurance policy, says he read the fine print on his illustration that said the rates weren't guaranteed.
But he says his agent told him that the company, Metropolitan Life Insurance, had never cut rates and that he shouldn't expect it to.
"I absolutely did not think this could happen," Mr. Reddy says.
"They promise one thing, but in reality something else happens."
Met Life says its agent warned Mr. Reddy that the illustrated returns were only assumptions.
It adds that the agent was on pretty solid ground when he evoked the company's dividend history.
Because of rising interest rates, Met never lowered its dividends between 1942 and 1992.
