The House Banking Committee approved legislation that would let banks operate nationwide branch networks.
The committee voted 50-1 for a bill to remove the remaining restrictions on banks' ability to form unified branch networks across state lines.
Two weeks ago, the Senate Banking Committee unanimously cleared a similar nationwide banking bill, and the legislation's opponents conceded that Congress seems certain to enact it this year.
The committee approved the measure after a pair of 34-16 votes rejecting amendments dealing with service to the poor and minorities.
One would have required banks applying for approval of interstate-branch acquisitions to maintain or improve banking services in local communities, especially low-income or minority neighborhoods; the other sought to ensure that banks provide basic, low-cost services for poor people.
Michelle Meier, a lobbyist for Consumers Union, one of a number of groups fighting the legislation, said it will "dramatically change the traditional relationship between consumers and their banks."
While federal policy has been to limit bank size with curbs on interstate branching, the bill will give banks new freedom to collect deposits in one community and use them to fund loans across the country, making it "even harder" for consumers in slow-growth areas to get loans, Ms. Meier said.
But banking committee members argued that a stronger banking system that is more diverse geographically can better withstand blows like the credit crunch of the late 1980s.
Like the Senate panel, they avoided any attempt to restrict the ability of nationwide banks to sell insurance.
That kind of restriction had been a persistent obstacle to interstate banking, because major banks opposed giving up insurance sales as the price of gaining nationwide banking.
The measure still must be passed by the Senate and the House, and the minor differences in the two bills must be ironed out.
But Ed Yingling, a lobbyist for the American Bankers Association, said the House committee's action "should put this bill on the fast track toward enactment.
He said it "succeeds in balancing the needs of bank customers, existing state law and the long-term best interests of both large and small banks," without "throwing all kinds of unrelated baggage aboard."
The bill would, over three years, allow banks to create coherent national networks, moving into new states only through acquisitions.
The lone vote against the measure came from Rep. Bernard Sanders, the Vermont independent.
The House panel also voted 46-5 to make it easier for banks to package small-business loans into securities and sell them to investors.
The Senate Banking Committee late last year passed a broader bill that would also encourage the development of a private secondary market for small-business loans.
By voice vote, the House panel approved a measure intended to open foreign financial markets to U.S. firms.
The bill would strengthen the ability of federal regulators to curb the activities of foreign financial-service firms if those companies' host nations don't open their markets to U.S. institutions.
A similar bill has cleared the Senate.
The House committee also passed by voice vote a measure that would tighten controls on use of the U.S. banking system to launder money.
BANKING LEGISLATION approved Wednesday by the House Banking Committee would make it easier for banks to package a wide range of business, commercial real-estate, community-development and multi-family-housing loans or equity investments into securities for sale to investors.
A description of the measure in an article Thursday referred only to small-business loans.
