A quiet revolution is stirring in the school reform movement.
Now Hispanics are joining with black and Anglo parents in wanting a greater say in the teaching of their children.
From charter schools now operating in California to a new voucher program that's become law in Puerto Rico, Hispanic parents are increasingly saying "Ya Basta" -- Had Enough.
The red-hot center of this issue right now is Arizona.
Education reformers need only a handful of votes to pass a sweeping education reform bill.
It would include a pilot program of school vouchers for 2,000 Arizona children.
The voucher provision is opposed by liberal Democrats and a handful of Republicans siding with the state teachers union.
Hispanic Democrats in the legislature are the swing vote.
They're sympathetic to such ideas as school choice and charter schools, but are under enormous pressure from their party to side with the producers of education, rather than the consumers.
In the next few days they have to decide between the status quo or enhancing choices for their community.
Nationwide polls show that a clear majority of Hispanics favor school choice.
"It is our kids who suffer the most from failing public schools," says Texas State Rep. Hugo Berlanga, an Hispanic Democrat.
Last year, he sponsored a pilot voucher bill that came within a single vote of passing the Texas House.
In California, Hispanic parents provided major support for a new law that allows parents and teachers to form their own independent schools, which receive public money but are exempt from many stifling state rules and regulations.
Hispanic parents say public schools don't provide enough individualized instruction and often isolate their children in poorly designed bilingual classes.
They often leave elementary school with poor English skills, and are then shunted into classes for slow learners.
Clementina Duron is the principal of the Jingletown Charter Middle School in Oakland, Calif.
She says Jingletown students are becoming proficient in both languages because parents helped hire the bilingual teachers and agreed to both volunteer at the school and attend monthly meetings.
"Parents who feel teachers will listen to their concerns become more interested in the success of their children," says Joseph Samaniego, a parent who helped set up the Jingletown charter school.
In Puerto Rico, which last year created the second school voucher program covering U.S. citizens, the preliminary results are encouraging.
Education Secretary Jose Arsenio Torres says it's a myth that school choice will lead to the collapse of public schools.
Instead, the competition will force them to improve.
Mr. Torres notes that more parents have used the vouchers to transfer their children to new self-governing charter schools than to private schools.
It's evident that a lot of Hispanic parents have concluded that some public schools can't or won't provide their children with the tools they're going to need once they go out into the U.S.'s highly competitive work force.
It's also evident that some Hispanics think the anything-goes values system that's tolerated or even promoted in many American public schools is something they'd as soon not be part of.
Eventually even the politicians may begin to notice that rallies for educational reform from California to New York City to Texas to Arizona have more and more Hispanic faces.
