Martin Marietta Corp. pressured Grumman Corp. to reject the hostile advances of Northrop Corp.
But Grumman responded that it must at least provide information to Northrop.
Separately, Martin Marietta won the concessions it sought from the Pentagon over government space-launch contracts, clearing the way for the company to complete its $208 million acquisition of General Dynamics Corp.'s rocket business.
The exchange of letters between the chairmen of Martin Marietta and Grumman, revealed in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday, outlined the first differences between them since the agreement made earlier this month to allow Martin Marietta to acquire Grumman for $55 a share, or $1.93 billion.
Northrop later made an offer of $60 a share, or $2.04 billion, which is considered unfriendly.
In a letter Monday to Grumman Chairman Renso Caporali, Martin Marietta Chairman Norman Augustine said he believes that Northrop's offer violates a "standstill" agreement that prohibited Northrop from bidding for Grumman.
He says his company assumed Northrop was barred from bidding for Grumman.
Yesterday, Mr. Caporali wrote back that he believes Grumman had no choice but to at least provide Northrop with the financial information it sought.
"We would welcome any thoughts you have on this subject," he added.
Since the Northrop offer, much of the defense industry has been awaiting the next move by Martin Marietta, which could increase its own bid, or simply give up and let Grumman, based in Bethpage, N.Y., merge with Northrop.
Martin Marietta could also attempt, on its own, or in league with other companies, to take over Northrop.
Such a move could even come after a merger of Northrop and Grumman is completed, some industry watchers speculate.
Under federal guidelines, Grumman must respond to Northrop's offer by tomorrow.
A spokesman for Martin Marietta wouldn't elaborate on the letter.
A Grumman spokesman couldn't be reached.
A Northrop spokesman said managers there believe the prior standstill agreement between Northrop and Grumman "became unenforceable" once it became clear that Grumman was for sale.
Meanwhile, Martin Marietta, an aerospace and defense company based in Bethesda, Md., said it anticipated $450 million in savings during the next 10 years on Titan IV heavy-launch rocket costs, as a result of its purchase of General Dynamics' medium-lift Atlas-Centaur system.
Under existing Titan contracts with the military, all those savings would have accrued to the government.
But Martin Marietta's chairman notified the Defense Department late last year that the company would walk away from the proposed purchase if the Pentagon declined to share the resulting savings.
Martin Marietta had been the only obvious candidate to buy the Atlas-Centaur unit.
Under a new agreement confirmed by the Defense Department, the space-launch savings will be split between the government and the company.
In a letter yesterday to Martin Marietta President Thomas Young, a senior acquisition official at the Pentagon R. Noel Longuemare said the government decision was designed "to assure the adequacy of the defense industrial base while protecting taxpayer interests."
"It makes sense," said analyst Paul Nisbet of JSA Research of Newport, R.I.
"Why should the government get all the benefits of a risk deal that Martin Marietta enters into?"
While some rival defense contractors have privately criticized the prospect of government concessions, Martin Marietta officials have said buying General Dynamics' space-launch business doesn't make sense unless the government shares the savings.
The companies agreed to the sale late last year, but a formal sale document won't be signed until April 30 at the latest.
Antitrust regulatory clearances are expected soon.
