Lillehammer, Norway -- The Committee to Improve the World meets immediately after every Olympics, and this one was no exception.
As recording secretary of the group, I've been authorized to release the following recommendations:
-- Most VIP seats and other perks for Olympic bigwigs should be eliminated.
-- Any city picked to host a Winter Games should agree to salt its walkways for the duration.
-- Future figure skating competitions should be telecast without commentary, and their winners determined by the call-in votes of fans.
The committee noted that the International Olympic Committee's professions of democracy would be strengthened if, as at every recent Games, large numbers of the best seats at many events hadn't stood empty here, waiting for badge-wearers who never came, while people who wanted to get in couldn't.
Getting rid of VIP dining facilities at places where the hoi polloi have to settle for hot dogs wouldn't hurt, either.
The committee applauded Norway's commitment to things green, but thought it shouldn't have been achieved at the cost of the blacks and blues sustained by the numerous casualties of Lillehammer's icy streets, sidewalks and parking lots.
It opined that visitors' enjoyment of these Games was not enhanced by the thought that every step might be their last.
A committee majority reasoned that, figure skating being a show, its outcomes should be decided by the global applause of telephone voting.
Had that practice been followed here, most members thought Torvill and Dean would have won the dance competition and Philippe Candeloro the men's singles.
The vote on this matter was 5.8 to 5.4.
That said, the committee, and just about everybody else, proclaimed the Lillehammer Games a success.
Many of the athletic performances were brilliant, and thrilling contests, such as Sweden's shootout victory over Canada in Sunday's hockey finale, abounded.
The weather was fine for a Norwegian winter, meaning there were no blizzards.
The buses ran on time and, if you asked the drivers nicely, made unscheduled stops.
No one could expect more.
The real stars of the Games were the Norwegian fans, who, smiling and singing, jammed almost every venue.
Never have so many seemed so happy to be outdoors for so long in such cold weather.
It might be true that, as one native told me with a gesture toward the desolate landscape, "The first Norwegian was an idiot."
But it's also true that the guy's descendants have made friends with the climate.
"There's no bad weather, just improper clothing," chorused the thousands who, bundled, booted and backpacked, stood in the snow for hours to watch the action on the slopes, trails and runs, and showed up in such force for the indoor events that attendance set an Olympic record in terms of the proportion of tickets sold.
The fans rooted for the home team, all right, but cheered for the visitors, too, and their knowledge about the sports was impressive.
At one speed-skating session, a roar went up when an obscure non-Norwegian finished his run well back in the standings.
"What was that for?"
I asked a Norwegian colleague.
"He set a personal best," he replied.
How did they know that, thought I.
With a total of 26 medals, Norway also led the national count, no small achievement for a land of 4.3 million souls.
That works out to an astonishing one medal for each 165,000 inhabitants, a ratio so low that any Norwegian who didn't win one might well have felt ashamed.
Norway cleaned up in Nordic skiing, ski jumping and speed skating, its traditional strengths.
But it also scored in Alpine skiing despite the lack of an alp, and in oddball sports such as mogul and aerial skiing, proving that, with application, much is possible.
My nomination for best athlete goes to the Norwegian Johann Olav Koss, the speed skater.
He won three golds -- at 1,500, 5,000 and 10,000 meters -- and set world records in each.
Koss is a 25-year-old medical student who seems to be a genuinely sterling character; among other things, he said he'd donate his state-contributed prize money, equivalent to about $30,000 for each of his golds, to a group that's doing relief work in Sarajevo.
His countrymen ought to build a statue of him, and, in fact, they might.
The next most remarkable feat here, I thought, was the performance of the Russian team; its 23 medals were more than the former Soviet Union, with all its republics, won in some past Winter Games.
True, Russia is a wintry land with a large population, but recent events there have maimed its once-vaunted athletic infrastructure, and even gold medalists such as figure skater Aleksei Urmanov and speed skater Aleksandr Golubev complained about training difficulties.
Golubev, however, also provided a clue to his nation's persistence near the top of the medal heap.
Asked after his 500-meter victory how he could prevail over skaters from lands whose splendid indoor ovals provide year-around training opportunities, he shrugged and said, "Maybe skating outdoors all the time makes us better indoors when we get the chance."
The U.S.'s 13-medal haul, including six golds, was its best ever at one of these affairs, and although it was just two above that of the last Winter Games it seemed like more.
That might have been because of the opening-day triumph of Tommy Moe in the men's downhill skiing, the showcase Alpine event, and its follow-up two days later, Diann Roffe-Steinrotter's victory in the women's super-giant slalom.
Those wins, in a sport in which Americans were not expected to shine, cast a rosy, white and blue glow over much that followed.
Dan Jansen finally won the speed-skating gold medal his countrymen had prayed for for him.
Feisty Cathy Turner repeated in the women's 500-meter short-track race while rivals bemoaned her supposed roughhouse tactics.
If they wanted to skate in stately quiet, they should have picked their sport's "metric" (pairs against the clock) branch.
Bonnie Blair won two golds -- in the women's 500- and 1,000-meter speed-skating events -- to run her career Olympic total to five, the most ever for an American woman.
In the 1988 Games, when her victory in the 500 was one of just two first-place finishes by Yanks, George Steinbrenner, the New York Yankees owner and U.S. Olympic Committee honcho, applauded "the little girl from Illinois."
In fact, the Champaign, Ill., native is an athlete who has always delivered her best performances in her most important races.
In the words of her coach, Nick Thometz, she's "a warrior," a label that fits her much better than George's.
Blair, 29 years old, says she won't be back for the 1998 Games.
Neither, probably, will other return-Olympians Jansen, who's 28, Turner, 31, Roffe-Steinrotter, 26, or figure skating silver medalist Nancy Kerrigan, 24.
These Games were the last of three within a six-year period that permitted unprecedented continuity in the U.S. team, and others.
It's time to say goodbye to that bunch.
It's not yet goodbye time for the appalling Tonya Harding affair, for there are criminal charges to be resolved.
"Skategate" titillated many, and boosted the Games' TV ratings, but its real effect was to kill whatever was left of the feeling that sports were special, bringing them more firmly into a "real" world in which people try to get away with whatever they can.
And that's too bad.
