Tony Vanella wants a cigarette, but the travel industry won't let him.
The executive vice president for a Chicago-area travel agency has been shooed outdoors from no-smoking airports in Miami and Dallas.
He's encountered a "No Smoking" sign on a Hertz dashboard in Seattle.
He couldn't light up in a New York taxi, and he couldn't get an ashtray in his Ritz-Carlton room in Chicago.
"A water glass worked just as well," Mr. Vanella says.
The travel industry has declared war on the Marlboro Man.
Four years after federal regulations prompted U.S. airlines to ban smoking on domestic flights, UAL Corp.'s United Airlines and Northwest Airlines are banishing it in first-class on some international flights.
Hertz Corp. bars smoking in 80% of its fleet.
Marriott Corp. is pushing up the number of its nonsmoking rooms this year to 70% from 50%.
What's emerging, industry executives say, is the smoke-free travel experience, where puffing is prohibited on everything from half-day international flights to three-minute airport shuttles.
With nearly three-quarters of Americans as nonsmokers, market forces have driven the changes, as clean air, like security, has become an important service amenity.
While smoking bans are difficult to enforce and their success can't easily be quantified, travel executives say consumers will reward suppliers with the toughest restrictions.
"You will lose customers if you don't offer smoke-free rooms," says Arnie Quirion, general manager at the Hilton Hotel in McLean, Va., which bans smoking in 70% of its 457 rooms.
Mr. Quirion predicts that all the hotel's rooms will be nonsmoking within five years.
To some extent, hotels and airports are imposing smoking bans to comply with local ordinances.
The ashtray rebellion has spread to more and more restaurants, clubs, office buildings and other gathering places as evidence mounts that passive smoking is harmful.
Yesterday, a congressional subcommittee heard testimony on a proposal to ban smoking in all nonresidential buildings nationwide.
But smokers say prohibitions in rental cars and hotel rooms are assaults on their privacy.
"It strikes me as grossly unjust," say Mr. Vanella, who smokes a pack a day.
(Nonsmokers say the injustice is smelling tobacco from a previous hotel guest or rental-car driver.)
For some smokers, nicotine is a factor in choosing flight itineraries.
For Terry J. Little, flights of more than five hours are almost unbearable.
So when Mr. Little, a manager for a wall-coatings company, flies from his hometown of Houston to Hawaii, he plans a stop at Los Angeles International Airport, where he can serve his two-pack-a-day habit.
Mr. Little recognizes that the tide has turned against him.
"When I first started traveling in the mid '70s, smoking or nonsmoking was never an issue," he says.
"Then you had to request special accommodations if you were not a smoker.
Now you have to request special accommodations if you are a smoker."
The tobacco industry is doing what it can to keep the flame alive.
Philip Morris Cos. is subsidizing construction of 10 smoking lounges at Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport, where smoking is permitted only in bars.
Asked about the travel industry's crackdown on smokers, a Philip Morris spokeswoman says: "Any issue that is of concern to our consumers is of concern to us."
Philip Morris, the country's largest cigarette maker, has sued the city of San Francisco over its smoking ban.
Many smokers accuse travel executives of stamping out cigarettes to cut down on maintenance expenses and cigarette-related damage to property, particularly in hotel rooms.
"There's less cleaning up to do, there's less painting and maybe it reduces insurance," says a New York advertising executive, who once changed rooms four times in a Texas hotel before finding one that permitted smoking.
But hotel executives say smoking bans don't reduce insurance or cleaning costs.
In fact, they say, no-smoking rooms raise costs because every time a guest violates the ban, the hotel must pay for things like rug and drape cleanings to purge the tobacco smell.
Hotel managers and other travel executives say the no-smoking trend comes from customers in search of pure air.
"To come into a clean-smelling fresh room with no stale odors -- it's wonderful," says John Schmidt, general manager of Best Western's Seven Seas Hotel in San Diego, which converted half its rooms to nonsmoking.
As a practical matter, smokers who need a fix will find a way.
Writer Fran Lebowitz, for example, conceded in Travel & Leisure magazine that she's been caught a dozen times sneaking cigarettes in airplanes, without penalty.
Hotel and carrental executives concede that enforcement of no-smoking policies is essentially impossible, and they are not about to antagonize a customer -- and lose business -- over some ashes.
Consider Mr. Little's experience when he discovered his rental car in Florida was nonsmoking.
"I went back in and said that I wanted a car I could smoke in," he says.
The clerk said, " `Don't worry about it -- just keep the windows down.' "
