The Securities and Exchange Commission's Market 2000 report shaped up as something that only an investor could wholly love.
If the recommendations contained in the report become reality, investors' buy and sell orders will be exposed to a much broader range of orders from other investors.
The result will be stock prices closer to what the customers want, partly because the prices will be measured in tenths of a dollar, rather than eighths.
That's a big if, though.
Many of the recommendations made by the SEC's market regulation division will require action by the markets, not the SEC or Congress.
And the markets weren't exactly falling over themselves to embrace the proposed changes after the report was released yesterday.
Among the controversial suggestions: a requirement that markets publicly display customer orders to buy or sell at a specific price.
Such orders, called limit orders, aren't currently made public and therefore can easily miss being executed.
The proposal will have the biggest effect on the Nasdaq and other electronic trading systems.
Richard Ketchum, chief operating officer of the National Association of Securities Dealers, said the proposed display of limit orders would require "a major structural change."
He added, with a marked lack of enthusiasm, "that is something that we certainly will take a look at."
Similarly, neither Nasdaq nor some of the exchanges are wild about moving to pricing stocks in decimals.
"It's such a potentially traumatic step that I hope we take a real serious look at it before moving in that direction," said Nicholas Giordano, president of the Philadelphia Stock Exchange.
Nasdaq, meanwhile, is in the process of adopting the Market 2000 recommendation for an interim step: reporting stock prices in sixteenths, rather than eighths.
Beyond that, "we're not going to reach a conclusion until we look" at decimalization, Mr. Ketchum said.
On the other hand, Nasdaq and Mr. Ketchum are downright perky about the Market 2000 recommendation that would make it easier for companies to move their listings off the Big Board and a separate proposal that would lighten after-hour trading restrictions on firms that are members of the New York Stock Exchange.
"We're delighted by the pro-competitive spirit of the report," Mr. Ketchum said.
The Big Board's feelings couldn't be ascertained.
Officials declined to comment in detail on the report, saying they needed more time to study it.
In a statement, the exchange commended the SEC staff for the "depth and scope" of the Market 2000 report.
The Securities Industry Association, a trade group for Wall Street firms, was more specific about the report's depth.
"The report runs several hundred pages, representing some very hard work by the SEC staff," said Marc Lackritz, the SIA's president, adding: "Until we have had an opportunity to thoroughly read the report, we can't comment on any specific recommendation."
Only one of the 17 main recommendations in Market 2000 is believed to require legislation -- subjecting Nasdaq transactions to the same fees that transactions in Big Board and American Stock Exchange-listed stocks are now charged, which would raise about $29 million for the SEC.
But key members of Congress weighed in on the report nonetheless.
Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.), chairman of the Senate securities subcommittee, said he "may not necessarily endorse all of the SEC recommendatons, but I expect the report will serve as a sort of road map in showing the way toward more efficient, accessible and user-friendly markets."
Rep. Edward Markey, chairman of the House subcommittee on telecommunications and finance, said he was pleased with most of the recommendations in the Market 2000 report.
"The key question now is whether the commission and the exchanges will move quickly to implement the staff's recommendations for reform, or whether these recommendations will languish," the Massachusetts Democrat said.
"Over the next few months, the subcommittee will be holding hearings to hear from SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt and the industry on what concrete steps they are taking to implement the specific recommendations set forth in the report," Mr. Markey added.
