North American paper producers, battered by a four-year slump, may finally get some relief this year.
Fourth-quarter results are expected to show only modest improvement from the previous year's depressed levels for the industry as a whole.
But the U.S. economic recovery and higher prices for certain paper products should lead to stronger earnings growth in the year ahead, analysts and some industry officials say.
And wood products, the mainstay for many companies last year, continue to benefit from buoyant demand and tight supplies.
"It has been a very long down cycle and bottom," says Lowell Moholt, investor relations director at Weyerhaeuser Co.
But, "We're confident that we're on the upleg."
Chip Dillon, an analyst with Salomon Brothers, says annual earnings for the U.S. paper and forest-products industry could rise by more than 30% in 1994.
Mark Diverio of UBS Securities says the first quarter "will look a lot like the fourth quarter" of 1993, but he predicts earnings will gain momentum as the year goes on.
Some industry observers caution that various factors could still slow the pace of recovery.
While the U.S. economy is perking up, Europe and Japan are "still mired in mud," notes Vincent Hannity, an investor relations official with Boise Cascade Corp.
"Until consumption of papers in those regions strengthens, you won't see a full, robust recovery" for some paper grades, he says.
Meanwhile, makers of packaging materials are starting to benefit from U.S. industrial growth.
Prices for linerboard, used in corrugated containers, rose $25 a ton during the fourth quarter, to about $315 a ton.
And Union Camp Corp. and Stone Container Corp. have announced a further $30 price increase for Feb. 1.
The firming market for container-board "is indicative of the economic recovery taking place," says Weyerhaeuser's Mr. Moholt.
Corrugated boxes typically lead the way as shipments of industrial goods pick up, he says.
Prices for white papers used in offices tend to follow.
Makers of uncoated white paper for photocopying have announced price increases for January.
Analysts say those increases may not stick, however, partly because two new business-paper machines are due to start producing in the U.S. this spring, potentially increasing supply.
Newsprint producers, who pushed prices up last spring only to watch them roll back later, have announced a March increase of $48 a metric ton, or about 11%, in eastern North America.
Some have curbed production to soak up excess supply and improve prospects for implementing the increase.
Pulp prices, which were driven below half their 1989 levels late last year, are starting to edge up, but the business remains weak.
"We think we'll get increases in the first quarter, but it's basically supply-driven, because companies are taking down time," says Val Sharp, investor relations manager at MacMillan Bloedel Ltd. in Vancouver, British Columbia.
Prices for wood products, buttressed by environmental restrictions on timber harvesting, should stay strong in 1994, analysts say.
Latent demand for new homes is being unleashed as people sense that U.S. interest rates have bottomed out, says Weyerhaeuser's Mr. Moholt.
Even last November's proposal by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for more stringent pollution regulations could ultimately enhance the paper industry's fortunes, despite expected complaints from paper producers, some analysts say.
Mark Rogers, an analyst with Prudential Securities, says implementation of the proposals in 1995 could cause companies to spend capital on environmental equipment instead of new capacity, restricting supply and supporting prices in the following years.
