Last September, Juan Pablo Davila was just another young, stressed-out futures trader working overtime for his company, buying and selling metals contracts at all hours.
Today, he is Chile's most infamous yuppie, a speculator who secretly lost at least $207 million of the taxpayers' money in a few short months.
"Among the great scoundrels and fools of Chilean history, there will be a place for Mr. Davila -- and his computer," declares Fernando Molina, a politician who serves on the board of Codelco, the state-owned copper company.
Codelco employed Mr. Davila as its chief of futures trading until January, when the debacle was revealed.
It all started with what Mr. Davila said in sworn testimony was a slip of the hand: While typing a record of overseas futures transactions into his computer, he recorded several contracts to sell as contracts to buy.
(Futures contracts set the prices for the purchase or sale of a given quantity of a commodity at a specified date in the future.)
That typing error and Mr. Davila's ill-fated efforts to quietly undo the damage with a speculative trading binge on the London Metals Exchange led Mr. Davila to squander the equivalent of 0.5% of Chile's annual gross national product.
Losing so much taxpayers' money has brought the 34-year-old trader the kind of notoriety usually reserved for mass murderers.
Suddenly, his Italian suits, prodigious coffee intake, heavy smoking, workaholic tendencies, even the kind of computer he used at Codelco, are coming under the magnifying glass of Chile's press.
Editorial cartoonists portray a wild-eyed Mr. Davila kicking up a mushroom cloud with his tasseled loafers and wielding a computer keyboard like a chain saw.
A radio personality coined a new verb from his name: davilar, loosely translated as "to botch things up miserably."
Eager for insights into the character of the man who gambled away so much, a Santiago newspaper commissioned a graphologist to study Mr. Davila's handwriting and an astrologer to interpret his zodiac chart.
The handwriting expert found Mr. Davila "emotionally unstable."
The astrologer pronounced the Piscean "a mad genius."
Proceeding along more conventional lines are eight separate investigations into Mr. Davila's trading activities by organizations ranging from the Chilean Defense Ministry, which by law receives 10% of Codelco's sales, to Interpol, the international law-enforcement network.
Authorities haven't found evidence that Mr. Davila in any way profited from his ruinous dealings, though they haven't dismissed the possibility.
A few days ago, Mr. Davila was taken into police custody for the first time since the scandal became known.
He could be charged with criminal negligence or other felonies as early as today .
"An error of that size can't be committed only by putting a finger on the wrong computer key," says Codelco's new president, Jorge Rodriguez Grossi, who took office as part of a management house-cleaning in which several Codelco executives got the boot after the scandal broke.
"Davila is going to have to prove it was an error," asserts Mr. Rodriguez .
Mr. Davila wasn't available for interviews.
His attorney, Jorge Guerrero, notes that his client is cooperating with authorities in all the investigations.
"His only offense was to work too hard for the company," Mr. Guerrero maintains.
Commodities producers like Codelco often enter the futures market to hedge, that is, to protect themselves against price fluctuations.
While Codelco officials now rue the trust they placed in Mr. Davila, they say there was a reason: He was one of only a handful of Chileans who could claim first-hand knowledge of far-off futures exchanges.
After stints at a brokerage firm and a bank, Mr. Davila in 1986 was hired by Codelco, Chile's largest company with 20,000 employees and $3 billion in annual sales.
He was so dedicated to the job that when Codelco sent him to the London Metals Exchange for training, he postponed his wedding date to make the trip.
The hard work only continued.
Mr. Davila often arose in the wee hours of the morning to be in touch with traders in London.
He seldom left the office before 9 p.m.
Even when he escaped for weekends to a coastal resort west of the capital, Mr. Davila would take a bulging briefcase and fax machine with him.
The strain evidently began to take its toll.
"He had too much work," says Gaston Frez, a former assistant.
"He was very tired."
After suffering what doctors believe was a mild heart attack early last year, Mr. Davila began consulting a psychologist to help him deal with the stress, says Mr. Guerrero, his lawyer.
Apparently Mr. Davila had very little supervision from higher-ups.
His computer wasn't linked to the terminals of his supervisors.
Mr. Davila testified that he kept managers updated mostly by giving them oral reports.
A subsequent company audit found that Codelco controls on trading activities were ignored all around.
In his sworn testimony, Mr. Davila said he had no inkling he made erroneous computer entries until last October, when he visited London on business.
It seems that some brokers who bought his contracts became concerned that he wouldn't be able to pay, and asked him why he was maintaining market positions that were losing money.
The fact that his market position was unfavorable came as a shock to Mr. Davila.
"I was showing a profit," he told investigators.
"Then when I went back to check the trade and to fix the mistyped symbols, a loss appeared."
The initial loss was $30 million to $40 million, he said.
In a panic, Mr. Davila concealed the disaster from his superiors and set about trying to win back the money in a frenzy of about 5,000 speculative metals futures trades on markets in London and elsewhere.
He testified that he took short positions, meaning he bet that the price of a metal would be lower by the contract's expiration date than on the day he entered into the contract.
Some analysts conjecture that he was trying to use the sheer volume of his trades, which were backed by Codelco's credit lines from 18 big brokerage firms, to push metals prices downward.
But the price of copper, the metal he traded most frequently, rallied anyway and Mr. Davila lost another $180 million to $210 million.
"The lesson is that the biggest trader in Chile isn't bigger than the market," says Ray Prado, of A.M. Haut Commodities of Liberty Corner, N.J.
Mr. Davila finally confessed the catastrophe to his superiors in late January.
He was promptly fired and hauled before government investigators.
After he testified, his car was pursued through Santiago's sinuous streets by a pack of about 40 reporters.
Eventually, Mr. Davila stopped the car and confronted the mob.
"I have committed an error," he said in a quavery voice, "and I am going to assume the responsibility that comes along with that error."
Not all Chileans seem ready to forgive and forget, though.
In front of Codelco's headquarters, a protester seeking harsh punishment for Mr. Davila carries a sign referring to him as "Jaun Pbalo," a jibe at the trader's bungled typing.
