Cigna Corp.'s HealthCare unit said it selected a division of United HealthCare Corp. to produce report cards on the quality of care delivered by its managed care networks around the U.S.
The agreement means Cigna, based in Hartford, Conn., is apparently the first major managed health-care provider to contract with an outside company to develop data on quality rather than attempt to provide it on its own.
It also means that United HealthCare, Minneapolis, which already produces report cards for its own health plans, will provide the same service for a competitor in some markets.
The two companies have competing plans in some cities.
Officials at both Cigna and United HealthCare said the move is a boost to efforts to develop standardized reports on quality that employers and consumers can use to compare the quality of health plans.
"There's no common language for the measurement of quality," said Michael A. Stocker, president of Cigna Healthplans, which owns 44 managed care networks.
"Most of this stuff isn't useful if it isn't comparable and collected in a common way."
He also said the agreement would enable Cigna to develop the information faster, more cost-effectively, and perhaps more credibly than if the company prepared the quality data itself.
Mr. Stocker said the value of the contract is about $3 million over two years.
Several health maintenance organizations and other managed-care companies have already launched efforts aimed at measuring their performance in response to demands from major employers and in anticipation of requirements in both state and proposed federal health-care reform legislation.
Prudential Insurance Co. of America, for instance, recently established a center for health-care research in part to produce quality of care data.
United HealthCare's Center for Health Care Policy and Evaluation helped pioneer the report card movement and recently began publishing reports on its more than 20 health plans.
With the addition of the Cigna plans, the center will have a "database on the managed care of four million individuals distributed throughout the U.S.," said Sheila Leatherman, president.
That will provide an opportunity to analyze not only the performance of individual plans, but to study and help improve the quality of care delivered by managed care organizations, she said.
