Low vaccination rates aren't just a problem of the poor.
Relatively affluent parents with good insurance also fail to get their children properly immunized, a study of a drug maker's employees found.
In a study of 1,500 employees of Johnson & Johnson, less than half the employees' two-year-old children had received the recommended vaccinations, despite having insurance that covered all or most of the cost.
The parents blamed their inability to take time off from work and the wait to see a physician as the biggest impediments to getting their children vaccinated.
The findings mirror the experience of some health maintenance organizations that offer free vaccinations but still fall far short of immunization-rate goals.
"Even under good circumstances, paying for vaccines alone isn't enough to get all children properly immunized," said Jonathan E. Fielding, the lead researcher of the study and professor of health services and pediatrics at University of California at Los Angeles.
Dr. Fielding was employed by Johnson & Johnson at the time of the study.
Johnson & Johnson, a health-care company based in New Brunswick, N.J., doesn't sell vaccines.
The study buttresses the pharmaceutical industry's argument that societal barriers, such as inadequate clinic hours or insufficient public education, rather than vaccine prices have stood in the way of universal vaccination.
Dr. Fielding said that recently passed legislation providing government funding for vaccines may improve immunization rates.
But, he said, without improvements in the delivery system, funding alone isn't enough to reach the public-health goals of getting 90% of preschool children fully immunized.
The study's results, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, suggest improvements in immunization rates will require more flexibility from employers and physicians, and better education of parents about vaccine schedules, according to the researchers.
In the study, funded by Johnson & Johnson, 45.2% of the employees' children had received all the recommended immunizations -- diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, polio, measles, mumps, rubella and meningitis -- by the age of two.
By six years of age, 55.3% had received all their recommended vaccines.
The study was complicated by the newness of the meningitis vaccine against Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib), which was introduced in 1985 and underwent changes in dosage recommendations in 1990.
But the researchers classified children as fully immunized according to recommendations in place at the time.
Excluding the Hib vaccine entirely, 65.1% of two year olds and 70.3% of six year olds had received all their vaccinations, still below the national goal of 90%.
The study found that children were more likely to be immunized if their parents were highly educated or in the upper half of pay levels at the company.
Dr. Fielding added that the vaccination rates at Johnson & Johnson might be higher than at other companies, because the health-care company has better insurance coverage and a more highly educated and stable work force than many other companies.
Moreover, the company advocates preventive care through health promotion and education progams for employees, he said.
