"This is great; I'll get all this job training and child care," says the 23-year-old welfare mother, before reading down a few paragraphs of small print.
What's this about 24 months?
About this being only for two years?
What's going on?"
Her case worker explains, in a measured cadence, that "we'll just have to figure a way to make you self-sufficient before we hit that deadline."
Ms. McGill smiles wanly.
"They don't realize how hard it is these days to get off welfare," she says.
"I know, I done tried."
Setting a two-year limit on benefits -- a mantra now hummed by President Clinton and almost every U.S. governor -- was the easy part.
But, a month into Florida's pioneering reform program, the word from Pensacola welfare workers is that ending decades of dependency will be more painful and expensive than politicians are willing to acknowledge.
"We're looking at an avalanche of needs, people who've been neglected for so long," says Shirley Jacques, who's helping run this pilot program in northern Florida, the first mandatory program that combines a two-year time limit with almost all the features in a welfare-reform proposal President Clinton is preparing to send to Congress.
"Our case workers can't believe the depth and array of the problems.
Two years, and off?
I wouldn't bet on it."
While policies are being mapped out in Washington, states are racing ahead.
Next up is Vermont, where about 60% of the state's recipients will start signing onto a 30-month time limit in July.
In all, 19 states have received federal waivers to try their own welfare plans and will soon walk the same path Florida is now treading.
In trailer parks and public-housing projects on the gritty panhandle where Florida meets Alabama, abstractions found in the Clinton proposal, like "changing the culture of welfare offices," promoting "parental responsibility" and "making work pay," meet flesh and are often found wanting.
"There's no magic bullet," says Ron Mincy, a Ford Foundation program manager who worked with the president's welfare-reform task force until a few months ago.
To reduce the welfare population -- now at 14 million, a daunting 5% of the U.S. population -- "means inventing a way to attack underlying causes" he asserts, such as crime, drugs and illegitimacy, along with the inadequate education and skills of 70% of recipients who get off public assistance in their first two years -- generally into low-rung, service-sector jobs -- only to have most slip back onto welfare over the next three years.
Those who have studied state experiments that have road-tested parts of what the president is now proposing say the Clinton plan overstates effectiveness, and understates costs, of many welfare-reform programs.
"I wish he hadn't promised so much," says Judith Gueron, president of Manpower Demonstration Research Corp., a firm whose studies of state programs are relied upon by Clinton aides, "because we're sure to end up with a plan that spreads limited resources thinly across the whole country, and won't end up doing much, or even teaching us much about what works."
In Pensacola, the two-year clocks began ticking Feb. 11, with about one in four of those applying for welfare benefits being randomly selected -- in all, now, about 60 participants.
One morning last week, at a makeshift "family transition" office north of town, the new dialogue between welfare caseworkers and recipients -- with increased obligations on both sides -- is beginning.
Caseworker: "Would you be interested in seeing a counselor, to talk about some of your problems?"
Recipient: "Forget it.
Counselors don't do no damn good."
Caseworker: "Well, can we help you get a dress you can wear to a job interview?"
Recipient: "Got one, a church dress.
I'll be fine."
The recipient, Threasa Sledge, a pudgy 19-year-old sporting sneakers, a baseball cap and a don't-mess attitude, softens a bit when talk turns to her four-year-old son and how they'll manage if she is still jobless 24 months from now, when her welfare runs out.
"I have to make my own safety net," she says quietly.
"I don't know; I guess I have to start some kind of savings account, and put money in it."
Ms. Sledge -- who, like many recipients, works periodically in local fast-food restaurants -- signs a commitment contract, officially entering a program that may soon be commonplace across the country.
She'll get assessed as to her educational level, take some basic education classes, maybe work part-time, get job training and eventually be assisted in finding a secure job.
If one isn't found after two years, she probably will be put into a community work program in exchange for continuing benefits.
Of course, the troubled lives of many welfare recipients tend to resist such neat progressions.
"Job training -- you've got to be kidding," says supervisor Linda Jenkins, whose caseworkers have found themselves neck-deep in issues such as domestic violence and drug addiction.
"First, they need their electric bills paid.
They need to learn how to be parents, how to budget money."
Such realizations have helped transform the turnstile culture that has defined offices like this one in the past few years, as caseloads grew and resources shrank.
"The idea was to make sure they were eligible for continued benefits, and then get them out as fast as you could," says Lori Taylor, who worked in a nearby welfare office before becoming one of a few dozen caseworkers selected for the pilot.
"Sometimes, when they'd want to talk about their problems, you'd try to cut them off before it got too far.
You didn't even look at them."
Two months ago, Ms. Taylor had 200 welfare cases, seeing each recipient at six-month intervals.
Now she handles half a dozen recipients and is working harder than ever, running into the complacency and scarce resources of state agencies where attitudes haven't changed.
Success is often in simple acts: she buys a rocking chair for one welfare mother so she can rock her baby to sleep, helps another move from a cinder-block shack to adequate housing.
Caseloads will rise to a still-modest 80 per caseworker as the program expands to 2,500 participants over the coming year, a ratio probably too costly to replicate nationally, with the administration anticipating 1.6 million recipients in its proposed program by 1999.
Yet, welfare administrators here are quietly talking about loopholes, figuring that even their intensive program will leave many recipients without secure work when the two-year clocks run out.
"If we can't find them a job at the end of two years, we haven't held up our end," says Mamun Rashied, area social-services administrator and welfare-reform advocate, speaking of how fragile a new social contract may prove.
"Then the contract is broken."
Source: Department of Health and Human Services.
