Word is out that the Department of Housing and Urban Development, emerging clearly under Secretary Henry Cisneros as the most traditionally liberal of the cabinet agencies in the Clinton administration, will term homelessness a chronic problem of such scale as to call for a major increase in federal housing assistance.
A draft of the report, "Priority: Home!
The Federal Plan to End Homelessness," says that were HUD to be spending what it should, its budget would rise no less than $15 billion a year.
Key to such projections is the assertion that homelessness exists on a far broader scale than previous administrations have estimated.
Previous estimates of 600,000 homeless on the streets on any given night are dwarfed by a new figure: Seven million Americans are said to have been homeless at some point in the late 1980s.
How can there be such a disparity?
Underlying the new figure is the view that homelessness should be defined expansively, that it must go beyond the mentally ill and the substance abuser living on the street so as to include those individuals and families who can be said to be in danger of not having their own residence.
Thus, a single mother sharing an apartment with her own mother might be considered homeless.
Two families "doubled up," with two or three children sharing a bedroom, similarly exemplify this expansive definition.
Moreover, someone without sufficient savings to pay several months' rent if he were to lose his job can be classed as being in danger of becoming homeless.
The budgetary and social policy implications of this expansive definition are profound.
The term "homelessness" must not be allowed to mask what is really going on: a proposal for a major expansion of federal housing assistance.
The expansion is not predicated on an increase in the numbers of those actually living on the streets.
Instead, it would target those who may simply be housed at less than HUD accommodation standards and those among the working poor who live now with some form of housing insecurity.
There is good reason to be dubious that housing subsidies -- whether in the form of new or renovated federally subsidized apartment complexes, or in the form of more widely available housing vouchers -- are good policy in either case.
Housing reformers have long recoiled at the idea of children crowded into tenements or, worse, children sharing bedrooms with parents.
But "overcrowding" can also be seen as a way extended families marshal their financial resources as part of the effort of upward mobility.
Historically, it has been common for poor families to share accommodations with in-laws and grandparents, as well as to take in boarders.
Immigrant families today continue these traditions.
It may seem insensitive to suffering to view such crowding as beneficial in the long run, but consider the implications of the alternatives -- both for those already on public assistance and for the working poor.
Providing apartments or housing assistance for single mothers, for instance, may be seen as yet another reward/incentive for out-of-wedlock births.
Just as important, providing Section 8 housing certificates to poor families so they can scatter to available quarters in nonpoor neighborhoods undermines the incentive structure for those families who must strive and save to reach these same neighborhoods.
Moreover, housing subsidies can create their own abuses.
A June 1993 City of Boston study on "subsidized housing/absentee landlord issues" found a widespread community view of "absentee landlords renting units to subsidized tenants at rent levels substantially higher than market rates" and of subsidized tenants who, without the financial stake that arises from paying one's own way, were "acting out" and disrupting community life.
If it hopes to avoid both community resentment and a major new infusion of federal subsidy dollars, the Clinton administration would do well to consider alternatives to major new housing construction or assistance programs.
First, the administration should stop conflating the levels of the truly homeless with those who are simply not housed to reform standards.
At the same time, it should consider ways of increasing the supply of housing for both the troubled homeless and those who have difficulty affording their own residences.
Society has an obligation to help those -- the mentally ill, the drug and alcohol abusers -- unable to cope.
If we reject the tradition of large institutions for these unfortunates, we can move toward the emerging model of inexpensive single-room occupancy hotels, combined with treatment and counseling facilities.
HUD can encourage local jurisdictions to permit construction of such SROs in appropriate locations and with limited amenities so as to permit private builders to provide them.
At the same time, it can use its offices to suggest ways to increase the supply of habitable, nonsubsidized housing within poor neighborhoods for those who have difficulty affording their own residences.
Local standards might allow for minimalist renovation of older housing, as the Enterprise Foundation has persuaded Baltimore to countenance.
In other cases, it might be better to permit demolition of old, difficult-to-renovate apartment complexes to make way for cheap and utilitarian replacements.
New York City, for instance, has spent more per unit to renovate old apartments for subsidized tenants than Nehemiah Homes, a private builder with church-based financing, has spent to build new rowhouses in Brooklyn and the Bronx for individual private owners.
This is no time to let "homelessness" be used as a rallying cry to revive expensive and counterproductive policies -- especially when there are alternatives available.
Mr. Husock is director of case studies at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government.
