President Clinton has painted himself into a corner on the issue of U.S. trade with China.
Last spring, when he renewed China's Most Favored Nation trading status, Mr. Clinton said Beijing must make "overall, significant progress" in human rights to win renewal again this year.
But China isn't cooperating.
Now, the administration is reluctant to carry out its threat, for fear of disrupting the huge U.S. business opportunities available in China, the world's fastest-growing economy.
The administration has launched a campaign to persuade China that it must show human-rights improvements quickly or risk loss of favored trade status.
It has enlisted various congressional delegations going to China to deliver that message.
Most recently, it asked Rep. Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.), the House majority leader, to add a stop in China to his current trip to Asia so that he could tell Beijing's leaders about the need for substantial progress on human rights in that country.
The State Department's annual human-rights report, which will be published soon, is expected to say that China hasn't yet made sufficient progress to justify renewal of MFN under Mr. Clinton's standard, according to a report in the New York Times that was confirmed by people familiar with the draft of the report.
Moreover, a U.S. Customs Service memo says that China also isn't living up to its commitment to permit the U.S. to monitor certain facilities to make sure Beijing isn't exporting goods made by prison labor to the U.S.
The memo says China has allowed U.S. officials to visit only one of the five prison facilities that the U.S. asked to inspect.
During his presidential campaign, Mr. Clinton criticized President Bush for "coddling" dictators in Beijing by trying to maintain a broad relationship with China.
But last fall, following a policy review, the Clinton administration adopted its own "engagement strategy" toward Beijing.
Senior officials say the policy change was prompted by economic concerns and by the desire of other Asian nations, which are frightened by Chinese muscle-flexing, to see the U.S. maintain good ties with Beijing.
Since then, the administration has lifted several restrictions put in place after China's massacre of students at Tiananmen Square in 1989.
High-level military exchanges were resumed in November, the same month Mr. Clinton met in Seattle with China's President Jiang Zemin.
"The Clinton meeting was the greatest plum of all.
It was the ultimate recognition that the stain of Tiananmen has been removed," says Mike Jendrzejczyk, Washington director of Asia Watch, a human-rights group.
There have been signs that some administration officials would like to remove the human-rights issue from the annual MFN debate because they don't want it to be the controversial centerpiece of U.S. policy toward China.
Last September, following a trip to China, John Shattuck, assistant secretary of state for human rights, reported scant human-rights progress there.
But he added that if substantial progress occurred by June, the administration might not only renew MFN for a year but would consider ending the practice of linking Beijing's trade status to specific human-rights standards.
U.S. officials insisted that Mr. Shattuck's statement wasn't meant to suggest a policy shift.
And in a published interview last month, the U.S. ambassador to China, Stapleton Roy, said that improvement in the lives of China's citizens resulting from economic liberalization should also be taken into account.
Senior U.S. officials insist the administration has no immediate plans to stop linking MFN renewal to specific human-rights standards.
An official adds, however, that "we would like to see enough progress so we could go back to the pre-1989 standard," which was based mostly on whether Communist countries permitted free emigration.
Robert Rubin, head of the president's National Economic Council, is among those who believe that revoking China's trade status would harm U.S. companies more than China.
Human-rights activists worry that Mr. Clinton won't disrupt China trade as long as China makes some minimal progress on human rights.
In the meetings with Mr. Clinton and other officials in Seattle, China discussed releasing a handful of dissidents and sick prisoners from jail, resolving some cases of people who want exit visas and promising more cooperation on monitoring prison labor.
Meanwhile, in a recent address here, China's ambassador to the U.S. cited the "good opportunities for American businesses to increase their share in the China market" and said he hoped the administration would make "a sensible decision" on the MFN issue.
