After a two-year marketing romance, Equal is no longer sweet on Cher.
NutraSweet, the maker of Equal aspartame sweetener, is embarking on a new advertising campaign without the 47-year-old singer and actress.
Instead, new commercials will begin airing during the Winter Olympics on CBS with Lauren Hutton, the 50-year-old, gap-toothed fashion model.
NutraSweet faces several challenges as it aggressively markets its blue packets of Equal through television advertising.
One of its rivals, Sweet 'N Low, which contains saccharin, plans a major ad blitz, possibly beginning in April.
Furthermore, NutraSweet's patent on aspartame expired in December 1992, resulting in challenges to Equal by private-label products.
Cumberland Packing, the Brooklyn, N.Y., maker of Sweet 'N Low, is slowly rolling out nationally its own aspartame-based competitor, called NatraTaste.
Equal's new advertising comes as the artificial-sweetener category tastes a drop in sales.
According to data supplied by Nielsen Marketing Research, Equal's supermarket sales dropped 4.8% to $109.7 million in the 52-week period ended Dec. 25.
Supermarket sales for Sweet 'N Low fell 3.2% to $66.7 million.
Both companies say Sweet 'N Low outsells Equal in supermarkets on a unit basis.
Equal, which costs at least double the price of Sweet 'N Low, outsells its pink-packaged rival in drug stores and mass-market outlets in both dollar sales and unit sales, according to Nielsen and the two companies.
It is against this backdrop that Equal is breaking its new ads.
Although NutraSweet executives decline to comment on the ad budget, Olympics advertising time is so expensive that the budget is expected to be an increase over last year.
In the January-to-November period of 1993, Equal spent $11.3 million on advertising, according to Competitive Media Reporting.
Replacing Cher with Ms. Hutton is not without risks.
For one, Cher proved to be a popular spokeswoman.
In a September survey of 3,000 people by Video Storyboard Tests, Cher leapfrogged to the No. 3 position of top television endorsers even though she hadn't made the list the year before.
"Originally, we envisioned a series of celebrities for our commercials, but then Cher came out of the gate so well that we extended using her," says Tom Hall, chairman and chief executive officer at WPP Group's Chicago office of Ogilvy & Mather, Equal's ad agency.
The decision to move to another celebrity after two years coincided with Cher's choice to discontinue some product endorsements, says Debbie Lalla, manager of Equal's marketing.
"We want women who are known for looking great by taking care of themselves.
We also want women who are outspoken and very credible," she adds.
Marketing experts say that using middle-aged celebrities, as opposed to actresses in their 20s, isn't a faulty strategy, although they may not appeal as much to younger consumers.
"A personality like Lauren Hutton shows energy and vitality and timelessness," says Lillian Maresch, president of Generation Insights, a marketing consulting firm in Minneapolis.
"She is a wonderful icon with staying power."
And while Ms. Hutton may not command top-of-mind awareness among consumers in their teens or 20s, Ms. Maresch says the model "has qualities with strengths . . . ."
Equal's first ad with Ms. Hutton, which will air Feb. 16 on the Winter Olympics, will be seen on subsequent nights on "Seinfeld," "Mad About You," "Sisters" and "Roseanne," as well as "Late Show with David Letterman," among others.
Ms. Hutton will appear in three commercials.
The spot said to be the favorite of Ogilvy and NutraSweet shows Ms. Hutton scratching her cheek, saying, "My mother likes to take care of all her daughters.
And one day, I just got a box, a blue box in the mail with a little note that said, `Darling, use this.'"
(Mr. Hall says the commercial reflects a true story.)
Viewers are then told by Ms. Hutton that she uses Equal with her "espresso, tea and cereal."
Smiling her trademark grin, Ms. Hutton blows a kiss.
"Thanks Mom," she says.
In another spot, she says, "I pretend to work out all the time and eat all the right things.
But I don't."
She goes on to say that she does use Equal, however.
The commercials reflect "another dimension" to Ms. Hutton, says Mr. Hall.
"She is open, friendly, fun and has a twinkle in her eye."
Equal is just another factor in the Hutton comeback.
After a quiet period, Ms. Hutton adorns J. Crew catalogs.
And in April, she signed a new, three-year contract with Revlon.
One advantage Ms. Hutton has over Cher is that she isn't remotely controversial.
"We thought about having fun with the Cher spots," says Marvin E. Eisenstadt, president of Cumberland Packing.
"We toyed with the idea of hiring Sonny {Cher's one-time husband and singing partner}, but for reasons I don't remember, it didn't work out."
Andrew Balbirer, vice president of the tabletop group of NutraSweet, says more celebrities are on the way, although he declines to be specific.
"The people we use will be timeless," he says, not flashes in the pan.
Any chance a male celebrity will make it into an Equal ad, proving that endorsers are created equal?
"Equal is a product that appeals to women shoppers," says Ms. Lalla.
"But that doesn't rule out the possibility of men one day."
Fashion designer Donna Karan and creative boutique Arnell Group have ended their nine-year relationship, according to the New York agency.
Arnell Group said in a statement that Donna Karan advertising would be handled by the client's in-house creative-services group.
Donna Karan officials didn't return calls seeking comment.
Arnell Group said it would continue working for the designer through the summer.
Exact billings couldn't be determined.
However, Donna Karan Co. said in a registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it and its licensees planned to spend $25 million on advertising in 1993.
The SEC registration statement was for an initial public offering that the company planned last year but later called off.
Industry estimates put actual expenditures closer to $14 million.
Peter Arnell, chairman of Arnell Group, created high-profile campaigns for the designer's fashion and beauty-products lines.
His agency came up with the idea of the DKNY brand and also created striking print ads in 1992 featuring a glamorous model in the role of U.S. president.
"An agency gets known by its most visible work," Mr. Arnell conceded but added, "We both decided our businesses weren't going in the same direction."
As part of the split, Mr. Arnell said the agency's Tokyo office, a joint venture with Japanese advertising giant Dentsu, would close.
Ad Notes. . . .
NEON: Chrysler and BBDO, a unit of Omnicom Group, unveiled a pool of ads for the Neon subcompact car aimed at the so-called Generation X, a market primarily of trend-conscious buyers in their 20s.
Chrysler said 20% of its $50 million marketing budget will be spent on nontraditional-media advertising.
Those efforts include an ad in a sample video-game disk from Electronic Entertainment magazine -- and a music video, starring ex-Beatle Paul McCartney and several Chrysler models, that is intended to discourage drinking and driving.
CAMBODIA: Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson said it will open an office in Cambodia under an exclusive agreement with Khmer General Services, a Cambodian trading company.
Dubbed KGS advertising, it is McCann's first office in Indochina.
Several other international networks are preparing to set up shop in Vietnam.
Bill White, 64 years old, who retired last year as chairman of McCann's Thailand office, will be responsible for the office.
AGENCY SEARCH: ITT Hartford Insurance Group, an ITT unit, said it has begun a search for a new ad agency to replace McCaffrey & McCall, New York, its agency of 27 years.
McCaffrey was absorbed into Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York, earlier this week.
A Hartford Insurance spokesman said the company had decided to look for a new agency before learning that McCaffrey would be absorbed by Backer.
Billings are $3 million to $5 million, he said.
ACCOUNT: Bally's Health & Tennis Corp., a Chicago unit of Bally Manufacturing, tapped the Chicago office of Hal Riney & Partners for its estimated $50 million account, previously at SuissaMiller, Santa Monica, Calif.
