Investors held on to their stock in Paramount Communications Inc. in hopes of seeing higher bids in the 4 1/2-month-old takeover battle by today's 5 p.m. bidding deadline.
Viacom Inc. could have won control of Paramount yesterday if Paramount stockholders had tendered 50.1% of the publishing and entertainment giant's shares under Viacom's $9.7 billion offer, since rival bidder QVC Network Inc. didn't make a change in its $10.2 billion offer.
But some takeover-stock traders said they decided not to tender their shares to Viacom, a cable-television programmer, so they could get a look at a possible new offer said to be under consideration by QVC directors at a board meeting yesterday.
QVC didn't issue any statement after yesterday's meeting, surprising some traders who had expected the home-shopping company to make its intentions known in order to ensure that investors didn't accept the Viacom bid.
Paramount had endorsed the latest Viacom offer, despite its lower market value, because it contains more cash than QVC's bid as well as a security designed to provide an additional payment if Viacom's Class B shares don't rise in price following a Viacom-Paramount combination.
Under bidding procedures agreed to by Viacom and QVC, both companies are to make their final offers by 5 p.m. today.
If there is a wide gap between the offers, that could determine the outcome.
However, there are several scenarios under which the winner wouldn't be known immediately.
Both Viacom and QVC have to keep their offers open for 10 business days, until Feb. 14, to see if either bidder can gain 50.1% of Paramount's stock and win the contest.
Then the winner has to keep its bid open for another 10 days to allow investors who didn't tender their shares to do so.
If the bids are close, both QVC and Viacom are expected to mount intensive campaigns to solicit shares by Feb. 14.
In addition, traders have speculated that BellSouth Corp., which is already a QVC investor, could announce a plan to buy additional QVC shares, which by itself could boost the perceived value of QVC's cash-and-stock bid after the deadline.
Also, one or both sides could elect to make a large increase in its offer after the deadline.
Although such a move would certainly risk a lawsuit by the high bidder, the Paramount board might have an obligation to its shareholders to allow a much-higher offer even if it's made after the bidding deadline set by Paramount.
The process would also continue if neither side gained a majority of the shares by Feb. 14.
Paramount shares dropped 25 cents to $79.625 yesterday in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
QVC shares rose 25 cents to $44 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Viacom B shares dropped 75 cents to $35.25 on the American Stock Exchange.
