The Commodity Futures Trading Commission wants more information about the financial risks that holding companies and affiliates can pose for futures-brokerage firms.
The commission has had to scramble to help salvage the futures businesses of at least three large holding companies, including, most recently, Metallgesellschaft AG.
The German conglomerate's huge loss from a U.S. unit's speculation in oil futures "apparently caused severe cashflow problems for MG Futures," another unit that is regulated by the CFTC, the agency said.
Under rules proposed yesterday, the commission hopes to collect enough data from futures-brokerage firms to identify potential trouble spots with their parent companies and affiliates.
The rules also would require all futures-brokerage firms to draw up plans for dealing with financial reversals at affiliated companies that could affect the brokerage firms.
Much of the information that would be sought by the CFTC already is required to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
But the additional disclosure to the CFTC worries Joseph Dial, one of its commissioners.
"I find this document to be a bureaucrat's dream and a paperwork nightmare" for the CFTC and the firms, Mr. Dial said during the CFTC meeting yesterday, brandishing a copy of the 38-page rule proposal.
The commissioner said the proposed rule requires too much information to be digested by the one CFTC staff member who would be assigned to assess it and should be narrowed.
"It needs to be pertinent, timely information that we can move on quickly," Mr. Dial said after the meeting.
"The more I read the proposal, the more I thought this is not the way the commission ought to go."
During the meeting, Mr. Dial said the CFTC has been able to handle the fallout from holding companies' travails without having in hand the information the commission proposes to obtain.
He cited Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Stotler Group Inc., both of whose futures businesses had to be transferred to other firms after the parent companies ran into financial difficulties.
Customers didn't lose any money in either instance, Mr. Dial said.
Despite his concerns, Mr. Dial voted with the three other commissioners to issue the rule proposal, saying he expects futures-industry members to be "very forthcoming" with their own concerns.
Industry comments on the proposed rule will be collected for 60 days, after which the CFTC will vote on a final rule.
Separately, the CFTC approved changes to its rules under which customers can press claims against firms regulated by the agency.
Among other things, the commission shortened the period for certain claims filings and clarified its requirements for claimants seeking damages intended to punish firms.
In a related matter, the commission withdrew an earlier proposal that would have allowed class-action claims, in which a single complainant seeks reparation on behalf of everyone affected by a firm's actions.
In another matter, the CFTC also approved a request by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to revive trading in futures contracts on one-year U.S. Treasury bills.
