Orders for big-ticket factory items rose for the sixth straight month in January, suggesting that manufacturers will continue to increase production in the coming months.
The Commerce Department said orders for durable goods, those intended to last more than three years, last month jumped 3.7% from December, when they rose 2.1%.
Much of the gain stemmed from a 13.9% rise in transportation orders, particularly aircraft.
Excluding transportation equipment, which tends to be a volatile sector, orders were up a modest 0.3%, the eighth consecutive rise on this basis.
"The fact that we've been able to hold onto these gains for several months indicates that the manufacturing sector is very strong," said David Rolley, senior financial economist for DRI/McGraw Hill.
The ripple effect could be substantial.
To keep up with demand, factories are expected to increase production, and they may need more workers to do so.
John Silvia, chief economist at Kemper Financial Services Inc., estimates that roughly 20,000 new factory jobs a month will be created over the next three to six months.
Financial-market analysts read the report particularly closely because Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, in congressional testimony this week, said he considered it an important indication of the economy's underlying strength.
The stronger the economy, the more likely the Fed will see the sort of inflation risks that will cause it to increase short-term interest rates again.
At a hearing called yesterday to discuss the state of the government's thrift-industry cleanup, Sen. Donald Riegle (D., Mich.) said to Mr. Greenspan: "You don't see yet any broad evidence of a buildup of inflationary pressure that really worries you."
The Fed chairman replied: "That is substantially correct."
Mr. Greenspan explained that the Fed raised interest rates not because it sees inflationary pressures emerging, but because interest rates had been reduced to the level that "history tells us, if extended indefinitely, eventually does engender inflationary pressures."
When the durable-goods report was released yesterday, the bond market's initial reaction was to push up interest rates because the increase in orders was greater than anticipated.
The market reversed itself when closer examination revealed that much of the increase was in orders for aircraft, but after Mr. Greenspan indicated that the Fed is likely to continue to increase short-term interest rates, the market resumed its earlier direction.
The yield on 10-year Treasury securities was quoted late yesterday at 6.20%, up from 6.12%.
The rise in aircraft orders in January doesn't reflect the recently announced purchase of commercial aircraft by Saudi Arabia.
That order won't show up in the government's figures for several months.
In addition to the rise in transportation equipment, orders for electronic gear jumped 6.5% last month.
After several months of gains, orders for industrial equipment declined 2.6% and orders for primary metals slipped 0.2%.
Analysts said the continued strength in orders, particularly for capital equipment, is the result of low interest rates.
"There is also a brighter outlook and anticipation about the future," said Thomas Runiewicz, industrial analyst for the WEFA Group in suburban Philadelphia.
Shipments fell last month for the fist time since July, and the backlog of orders rose for the first time since early last year.
These changes were most likely weather-related.
Many plants closed down because of severely cold weather across most of the nation, as well as the California earthquake.
"Orders you can do on the phone but shipments have to go out the door, and that was impossible in some places," Mr. Silvia said.
Separately, the Labor Department said initial claims for state unemployment benefits rose 25,000 last week to 385,000.
The four-week average for claims during the week was 378,000, up from 371,250 the previous week and the highest level for the measure since the week of Oct. 12, 1992.
Although some of the increase in claims may reflect the severe winter weather and flukes in the way the government adjusts the figures to remove usual seasonal fluctuations, some economists have been troubled about the implications of the persistent rise in unemployment claims since the start of the year.
"The labor markets are signaling a somewhat less buoyant degree of activity," Mr. Greenspan said this week, citing the recent rise in claims for jobless pay.
Figures in both reports have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
