Liberty Brokerage Investment Co., a major broker for primary dealers in U.S. Treasury securities, said it agreed to provide pricing data to both Dow Jones Telerate and Reuters financial data services.
The agreement gives Dow Jones Telerate a second significant stream of interdealer Treasury securities pricing data.
Under a long-term contract, Dow Jones Telerate already provides data from brokerage firm Cantor Fitzgerald & Co.
The Liberty agreement doesn't affect its arrangement with Cantor, a Dow Jones spokesman said.
"We felt that the markets would be interested in seeing the Liberty information," a Liberty spokesman said.
He said the company wasn't under any government pressure to make the data more available, but added "it is very clear that regulatory agencies want as wide a distribution as possible," and one that is "as meaningful as possible."
The Liberty move partly reflects the growing importance of short-term bond data on the markets, some analysts and bond traders say.
Cantor Fitzgerald's strength is in longer-term fixed-income securities, particularly the 30-year bond; Liberty's specialty is in shorter-term notes, traders say.
However, Stuart Fraser, a Cantor senior managing director who runs the firm's brokerage business, said: "I don't think any one interdealer broker dominates the short end of the market."
The move is a big boost to Liberty because Telerate and Reuters together represent the bulk of computer screens on the bond market.
The agreements "give us the widest possible distribution, with European and Asian coverage as well as North America," the Liberty spokesman said.
The agreements are nonexclusive; Liberty said it would consider other vendors.
Liberty, formed in 1986, is owned by about a dozen primary dealers in U.S. government securities, and other investors including McGraw-Hill Inc.
Both Reuters, the information service unit of Reuters Holdings PLC, and Dow Jones Telerate, a unit of Dow Jones & Co., plan to begin offering the Liberty data on Treasury securities later this year.
Liberty's data are significant to the market because they, like Cantor's data, represent "attributable" trades, or actual trades reported by primary dealers in the Treasury market.
Liberty is also part of GOVPX, a government bond data distributor formed by U.S. Treasury security primary dealers, although GOVPX trades are unattributed.
The GOVPX data are already available on Reuters.
Dow Jones also publishes The Wall Street Journal, Barron's and other publications, electronic business information services, and community newspapers.
