What does a top international airline do to stave off shrinking profits?
Singapore Airlines Ltd., for one, is setting a course for Asia's fledgling aviation markets.
Government-controlled, publicly traded SIA, the grande dame among Asia's national carriers, hasn't been immune to the hard times afflicting the global aviation industry.
With operational costs rising at home and competition fierce on its mainstay long-haul routes, the airline is expected to report a second consecutive annual decline in profit, for the year ending March 31.
Like many of its rivals, SIA has been sniffing out cost cuts and trimming fares.
At the same time, however, it's moving into potentially high-growth regional markets, pursuing stakes in airlines in China, India and Indochina, and marketing its airline and support-services expertise throughout the region.
"We're very active.
We are pursuing, talking, sounding out opportunities," says Michael Tan, SIA's deputy managing director, in an interview.
The strategy may partly reflect SIA's response to the Singapore government's campaign to prod local companies to seek opportunities in the booming Asian-Pacific region.
But, as analysts point out, it also makes sense for a company striving to shore up long-term profitability amid lingering recessions in Japan and Europe and ballooning costs at home.
"They're moving to capitalize in areas of the aviation industry where there is intrinsic strength," says Patrick Russell, S.G. Warburg Singapore.
SIA's shares have generally tracked the downward trend on the Singapore market since the start of the year, closing Wednesday at S$7.60 (US$4.80), down 8.4% from their high so far this year of S$8.30, reached on Jan. 5.
Though analysts generally expect the shares to underperform the market in the coming year, Mr. Russell says, "If you're an airline investor, it's one of the best around."
In China, SIA is holding talks with municipal and provincial governments, as well as airline officials, about buying into one or more mainland carriers.
Company executives recently met officials in Sichuan province to discuss possible partnerships there.
Industry sources say SIA also is keen to take stakes in Guangzhou-based China Southern Airlines and Shanghai-based China Eastern Airlines, both of which are expected to list their shares on overseas stock markets later this year.
And in India, SIA has been talking about setting up a private domestic airline since the government's decision last year to open the country's skies to foreign investors in joint ventures with local partners.
Industry sources say that among SIA's potential partners are the Tata Group and ITC Ltd., a conglomerate with interests in cigarettes and hotels.
SIA sees China and India as the next great frontiers.
"These two markets offer tremendous potential for aviation," says Mr. Tan.
The first leg of SIA's journey into regional markets began in November, when the company agreed to acquire a 40% stake in Royal Air Cambodge, which is expected to take to the skies in July.
(The rest of the new airline's equity will be held by the Cambodian government and private Cambodian investors.)
SIA, which expects tourism to take off in Cambodia, is making an initial investment of S$10 million (US$6.3 million) in RAC, will get four seats on the airline's 10-seat board, and will fill senior management positions.
It also will train cabin crews and reservations staff, and supply pilots and computer systems.
RAC will initially fly routes between Phnom Penh and Singapore, Bangkok and Hong Kong.
"We'll make it a full-fledged airline," says Mr. Tan.
Sheldon Kasowitz, a director at Jardine Fleming Asia Research Ltd. in Hong Kong who tracks SIA, thinks that if the airline follows through with more deals like the one in Cambodia, rewards will be great.
"They could end up taking stakes in six or eight airlines," he says.
"If 80% work out, it's very good."
Debt-free and cash-flush, SIA is likely to maintain its position among the world's most profitable airlines in the long term, analysts say.
But it won't be immune to industry pressures in the short term.
SIA is "not totally able to swim against the tide," says Mr. Russell of S.G. Warburg.
SIA's profit slumped to S$850.6 million in the year ended March 31, 1993, from S$928 million the previous year.
Analysts predict SIA will report a further decline in profit, to S$820 million, for the year that ends March 31.
SIA's yield, or revenue earned on every metric ton flown one kilometer -- a leading yardstick of an airline's health -- dropped 10.5% last year and is expected to fall further for the current year.
That reflects stiff competition as well as the recent strength of the Singapore dollar.
No longer able to bank on superb service and generous amenities, SIA has had to lower fares and join a frequent-flier program.
In an effort to contain costs, SIA kicked off 1994 with the opening of a computer-software development and maintenance facility in Bombay.
Mr. Tan says this will mean big savings, since the average salary of a computer professional in Singapore has jumped 12% annually in the past five years.
In India, the starting salary in the computer field hovers around S$400 a month, compared with S$1,800 to S$2,000 in Singapore.
But unlike many other carriers, SIA has refrained from wholesale bloodletting.
It has avoided layoffs and hasn't canceled any aircraft deliveries.
In fact, SIA has continued to build capacity, up 18% last year, for an anticipated upturn in the industry starting in 1995.
"They will be very strongly placed to capitalize on a turnaround when it comes," says Mr. Russell.
SIA's core airline business accounts for 90% of the company's revenue, but that proportion is likely to shrink as subsidiaries continue to grow.
SilkAir, for instance, the company's lower-cost regional carrier that started out in 1988 by targeting the leisure market, last year launched a business-class service.
Meanwhile, SIA's aircraft-maintenance, ground-services and flight-catering subsidiaries are spreading overseas.
In September, SIA invested US$6.3 million for a 10% stake in a joint-venture aircraft repair and maintenance facility in Xiamen, China, through its SIA Engineering Co. unit.
And last year, the company's Singapore Airport Terminal Services unit signed an agreement with Beijing Capital International Airport to develop an airport flight-kitchen for US$8.4 million.
SIA Engineering and SATS have both placed bids to provide aircraft maintenance and cargo handling at Hong Kong's new airport at Chek Lap Kok when it's completed later in the decade.
In Vietnam, SIA wants to supply Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City's airports with ground-handling and other services.
Though keen to go local in certain Asian markets, SIA spurns many suitors.
Airlines in Europe, South America and Africa that are eager to grow have offered SIA equity or management opportunities.
It has declined about six such offers in the past two years, Mr. Tan says.
"We want to concentrate on this region," he adds.
"We are still growing, so we have to do this very selectively, very carefully."
