Anyone shocked by Northrop Corp.
Chairman Kent Kresa's challenge to the Martin Marietta-Grumman acquisition agreement might learn from examining the combative corporate culture at Northrop.
Something of a "Rocky" among defense contractors, the scrappy company has had to battle back for decades from such reversals as lost bids on major aircraft programs, scandals over foreign bribes and other alleged ethical lapses.
So some in this normally fraternal industry -- where leaders in their exclusive club called the Conquistadores del Cielo meet regularly in a Western dude-ranch setting -- were less than amazed when Mr. Kresa took on fellow "conqueror of the sky" Norman Augustine, Martin Marietta Corp. chairman, in pursuit of Grumman Corp.
Indeed, Mr. Kresa's actions appeared to be less than fraternal last week.
On Wednesday, as Northrop was putting together its hostile bid, Mr. Kresa sent word to an industry committee that he had missed his plane and couldn't make a regular meeting.
Mr. Augustine and Renso L. Caporali, Grumman's chairman -- among other executives at the meeting -- didn't seem to give the explanation another thought, joking at times about their deal announced Monday for a friendly merger of their companies.
The next day, Northrop made a $2.04 billion bid, equal to $60 a Grumman share, which exceeded by $5 a share the value of the Martin Marietta-Grumman deal.
Mr. Kresa, who turns 56 years old this month and has been with Northrop for nearly 20 years, eschews the notion that his motivation is to break up a negotiated acquisition among rivals.
He laments the harsh words that came from Martin Marietta, which snapped that "the attack by Northrop degrades the entire character of the rational consolidation taking place within in the United States' national security industrial base."
Mr. Augustine's company called the Northrop bid "a hostile attack that seeks to disrupt an agreement . . . for a friendly consolidation."
Responds Mr. Kresa in an interview, "I think that Norm's comments were unfortunate.
I certainly have no feeling that way at all."
Northrop was forced into the bid, he suggests, because its own lengthy discussions with Grumman were broken off, and his company wasn't given a chance to bid this year as Martin Marietta was.
"This is very important business for both our companies," he says of Northrop and Grumman.
His proposed Northrop-Grumman Corp., Mr. Kresa adds, represents a natural fit because of the two companies' common strengths in making airplanes, particularly those used on aircraft carriers.
Emphasizing the industry's history, the executive notes that the two companies, started by aviation pioneers Jack Northrop and Leroy Grumman, had "built and designed some of the most legendary aircraft" in their time.
He clearly aims some words at Grumman employees, who own a large chunk of the Bethpage, N.Y., company's stock, when he says that a Northrop combination would also "better retain critical defense industrial skills and jobs."
But Mr. Kresa concedes that his long Northrop career has been in an environment where "we are always smaller than someone else, and had to make up for it with excellent product."
He notes proudly that among the six or seven makers of warplanes over the past 20 years, his is the only company to have entered all newplane contests, and "has ended up No. 1 or No. 2 in every tactical aircraft competition in America."
Northrop failed to emerge on top in some critical competitions -- including the YF-23, beaten out by Lockheed Corp.'s F-22 for a huge Air Force fighter contract; the financially draining F-20 that Northrop built on its own, then couldn't sell; and a Northrop YF-17 design that led to the F/A-18 fighter for which McDonnell Douglas Corp. was named prime contractor (as a subcontractor, Northrop makes 40% of the F/A-18).
Even Northrop's technological coup, the revolutionary flyingwing B-2 Stealth bomber, encountered devastating flak from budget-cutters and critics concerning its soaring costs.
None of this makes Mr. Kresa an underdog, he maintains.
Nor does he feel bogged down in the legacy of ethical charges, involving such things as false testing of parts, that plagued his predecessor, long-time Northrop Chairman Thomas V. Jones.
"This is the '90s, and that was the '60s and '70s and '80s," Mr. Kresa says.
At the Northrop of today, "we analyze things in great depth, and see what the new trends are going to be."
Northrop's decision to pursue an acquisition of Grumman, one of the few fighter-builders remaining in the shrinking and consolidating industry, is a sign that "we've very diligently and deliberately looked at the downsizing of this industry," he says.
The New York-born Mr. Kresa, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology-trained engineer, is credited with helping Northrop move past the ethical problems plaguing it before he took over as chairman and chief executive officer in 1990 for the controversial and strong-willed Mr. Jones.
Now a full-fledged Californian, Mr. Kresa has homes both here and near the Bay Area.
To relax, he plays tennis, has tried his hand at golf, and more recently, has taken up rollerblading.
"My wife and I have found that it's one of our best forms of exercise," he says.
As Northrop has rolled toward its future, examining possible acquisitions, Mr. Kresa seemed to have adopted far less of a maverick role than had Mr. Jones.
"When Kresa was appointed, he made a very deliberate effort to steer away from the culture of the autocratic CEO, and to do things based on deliberate and careful work, rather than flamboyance," says Wolfgang Demisch, an defense-industry analyst for BT Securities in New York.
But Northrop became frustrated, Mr. Demisch says, as it examined General Dynamics Corp.'s fighter business and later Grumman.
He encountered a "process where Northrop does a lot of the homework, and somebody else buys the enterprise."
Thus, Mr. Kresa was forced into the dramatic hostile Grumman bid, because "there aren't many airframe makers left," says Mr. Demisch.
Mr. Kresa, the analyst says, "has become keenly aware now that fortune punishes the careful."
