Researchers say they have discovered a secret to the tuberculosis bacteria's alarming ability to develop resistance to one of the most widely used anti-TB drugs, isoniazid.
The discovery creates a powerful tool in the search for new drugs to treat drug-resistant tuberculosis, which affects a quarter of TB cases in some cities, said William R. Jacobs Jr., who headed the research team that made the discovery.
Pharmaceutical companies already have expressed interest in gaining access to the researchers' work, said Dr. Jacobs, a Howard Hughes Medical Institute researcher at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
The drug isoniazid has been used since 1952, when it was hailed as a milestone in the fight against TB because it wasn't as toxic and was much more effective than other drugs, Dr. Jacobs said.
Within a few years, however, TB bacteria began to show resistance to the drug, and additional drugs were added to the standard therapy, which proved effective for decades.
But new strains have emerged that defy the standard therapy, making treatment far more costly and difficult.
The standard drug therapy costs about $300, but the cost of drugs to treat resistant strains is 10 times higher, Dr. Jacobs noted.
But the Bronx researchers think they have found the gene mutation that enables the TB bacteria to resist the killing action of isoniazid.
In a paper published in today's issue of Science, the Bronx researchers and collaborators in New Zealand report the identification of the gene, inhA, which produces an enzyme that they believe is involved in the bacteria's ability to build cell walls and multiply.
The researchers hypothesize isoniazid binds to the enzyme and prevents the bacteria from multiplying.
The mutated gene, however, makes a slightly altered enzyme that doesn't allow the drug to bind, they theorized.
The researchers initially found the gene mutations in two related bacteria, called M. smegmatis and M. bovis, and recently in the TB bacteria itself.
TB researchers often work with M. smegmatis because it doesn't cause any disease, but is very similar to the TB bacteria and grows much faster.
M. bovis is also genetically similar to the TB gene and causes tuberculosis in cattle, which can be transmitted to humans through milk or meat consumption.
The researchers transferred copies of the mutant inhA gene into normal strains of M. smegmatis and M. bovis and found the altered bacteria were resistant to isoniazid.
Pursuing a second hypothesis, the researchers also inserted multiple copies of the normal inhA gene into normal strains of M. smegmatis and found the bacteria became resistant to isoniazid.
Because there's so much of the enzyme being produced, the drug may bind to some of it but miss enough to allow the bacteria to replicate and cause disease, Dr. Jacobs theorized.
The researchers are continuing research to understand exactly how the drug-resistance process works in the TB bacteria.
But the discovery of the gene and the mutation allows work to begin right away on finding drugs that will work against the enzyme, Dr. Jacobs said.
Negotiations are already under way to license the genetic information, he said, but he declined to identify the interested company.
