Keds, the sneaker that made a comeback with baby boomers in recent years, stumbled last year, and its advertising account has been placed in review.
Keds had sales in 1993 of $360 million, down 2.7%, according to Sporting Goods Intelligence newsletter in Glen Mills, Pa.
Last year's decline reversed a trend of increased sales for Keds.
In 1989, Keds had sales of $230 million, which increased each year, topping off in 1992 with $370.
The incumbent agency, Leonard Monahan Lubars & Kelly, says it was invited to participate, but declined.
The agency created ads with the slogan, "Keds.
They feel good," that featured homespun images of a man training a puppy, a thirtysomething mother bouncing an infant on her knee and a woman tossing a pair of Keds into a washing machine.
The actress Demi Moore supplied the voiceover for all the Keds spots.
The $8 million Keds account switch is another blow for the Providence, R.I., agency, which in the past year lost two major clients, American Tourister and Spalding Sports Worldwide, with combined billings of about $10 million.
Leonard Monahan hasn't fully replaced the lost business, winning only one new account in a year: Sylvania lighting products, worth only as much as $6 million.
In addition to the account defections, Leonard Monahan has been plagued by a spate of recent executive defections.
Just last week, Fran Kelly, chief operating officer and director of client services, left to join Arnold Fortuna Lawner & Cabot in Boston as executive vice president and chief marketing officer.
In September, David Lubars resigned as executive vice president to join Omnicom Group's BBDO Worldwide in Los Angeles.
And last March, Tom Monahan, a founding partner, resigned, but returned last fall as acting creative director.
"We were on a roll, but hit a streak of bad luck," says Bruce Leonard, the agency's chairman and chief executive officer.
"We haven't won anything new recently.
But we have a lot of positive energy right now."
Mr. Leonard says he has no apologies for the agency's work over the past five-and-a-half years for Keds, a unit of Stride Rite in Cambridge, Mass.
"We made a business decision that we would rather work to replace the business than to put our creative and collective energies in to save it," says Mr. Leonard.
Stride Rite wasn't the easiest client.
Mr. Leonard notes that it has had four chairmen since the agency won the business.
Last month, Robert Siegel was named chairman, president and chief executive, succeeding Ervin R. Shames, who is now heading up Borden.
Calls to Stride Rite weren't returned.
According to Sporting Goods Intelligence, Keds is ranked No. 3 behind Nike and Reebok in sales of U.S. brand athletic footwear.
No. 1 Nike grew 7.8% to $1.9 billion in 1993, but Reebok declined 10.5% to $1.3 billion.
Sales for the entire category last year grew 3.3% to $6.2 billion.
"Keds appeals to the female market and a customer who is a little older," says John Horan, publisher of Sporting Goods Intelligence.
"And they're cheap.
Keds is for a woman who wants a comfortable sneaker and little cachet."
However, Mr. Horan adds, Keds tripped up because "they milked the basic brand and had no product innovation.
There are only so many times you can go back to the well on the same shoe."
Stride Rite itself is experiencing some tough financial times: It is expected to report earnings of 20 cents a share, down 24% from 26 cents a share a year ago, according to an estimate from Josie Esquivel, an analyst with Lehman Brothers.
It is doubtful that Grey Advertising, which is the agency for Stride Rite's children's shoe division, will benefit from the Keds review.
Industry officials say Stride Rite wants two agencies to work on its business.
Mr. Leonard says no tears will be shed for the Keds loss.
"We're over it," he says.
And the agency will continue to serve the client until Keds selects a new agency.
"We can point to a lot of terrific work," he says.
Mr. Horan says he doesn't believe the advertising is to blame for Keds' sales decline.
He compares the Keds account switch to Reebok International Ltd.'s firing Chiat/Day last year.
"It isn't the ad agency's fault that sales are off," he says.
"They're just the ones that get blamed."
Robert E. Kennedy, the 52-year-old chairman and chief executive officer of North American operations at Saatchi & Saatchi Co.'s Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, is retiring from the agency after just a year on the job.
Ed Wax, Saatchi's 57-year-old worldwide chairman and chief executive, is assuming Mr. Kennedy's duties "for the foreseeable future," the agency said.
The news surprised Saatchi insiders and observers.
Mr. Kennedy rose through the agency's financial ranks and was considered the "commercial conscience" at the debt-laden agency, executives said.
He oversaw much of its massive retrenching in recent years.
But Mr. Kennedy didn't have close ties with any of Saatchi's clients, limiting his power base inside the agency, executives said.
"We've downsized, restructured and streamlined.
That's what I've done," Mr. Kennedy said.
"Now, it's time for the people who write the ads and sell them to develop more revenue.
It was all very amicable."
Mr. Kennedy joined the advertising business as a messenger at J. Walter Thompson when he was 15.
Before being named North American chairman, Mr. Kennedy had been chief financial officer and then president and chief operating officer at Saatchi & Saatchi Worldwide.
His retirement is effective March 1.
Frank Assumma, president of the New York office of Backer Spielvogel Bates, was named president and chief executive officer of U.S. operations.
And Andrew Cracknell, world-wide executive creative director and vice chairman at the agency's U.K. unit, was named to the additional post of U.S. vice chairman.
Mr. Assumma, 40 years old, succeeds Michael Bungey as U.S. chief executive.
Mr. Bungey, who retains the title of U.S. chairman, remains world-wide chief executive and heir to agency chairman and co-founder Carl Spielvogel.
The appointment of Mr. Cracknell, 47, was expected since November, when he was named creative heir to agency co-founder Bill Backer.
Ad Notes . . .
BURGER KING: Boston agency Hill Holliday Connors Cosmopulos said it has pulled out of the review for Burger King's estimated $100 million plus U.S. advertising account.
"The resources needed to help Burger King are so enormous that we simply don't want to put our current client relationships in jeopardy," the agency said in a statement.
Officials at Burger King, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan PLC, couldn't be reached.
The departure leaves five other agencies vying for the account.
ACCOUNT: Procter & Gamble's decision to fold its Clarion cosmetics line is bad news for Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, which created the advertising.
The account billed $9 million in the first 10 months of 1993, according to Competitive Media Reporting. . . .
Airship International Ltd. said it tapped D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, New York, to create advertising and sign up new advertisers for its fleet of blimps.
