For William Greenspan, who makes his living trading stock-index futures contracts at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the first clue that the Fed had tightened rates was the tumult of 300 voices screaming simultaneously to sell.
Two hours later, the value of a single futures contract on the Standard & Poor's index of 500 leading stocks had plummeted $6,450.
Traders slow to liquidate their "long" positions, or wagers that prices would rise, were suddenly tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars poorer.
"I don't know if this is the bottom, or if we go down farther from here," said a hoarse and breathless Mr. Greenspan, who is no relation to the chairman of the Federal Reserve.
"I just know that this market goes down a heck of a lot faster than it goes up."
The furor Friday in the CME's stockindex pit was just one example of an electrifying day for U.S. derivatives markets, which trade financial instruments whose values are based on other securities or commodities.
The CME led the pack, trading more than 2.3 million futures and options contracts -- about a million more contracts than any derivatives exchange has ever traded in a single day.
Investors ranging from banks and securities firms to individuals participate in these markets, using them to speculate or to hedge against unfavorable swings in stocks and other securities.
And because each derivatives contract controls securities with a high dollar value -- a hundred or more shares of stock, say, or $1 million worth of currency -- Friday's Fed tightening and the subsequent stock-market sell-off had an exaggerated effect on derivatives prices.
Prices gyrated wildly in contracts based on stocks, interest rates, foreign currencies and precious metals.
Many in the derivatives industry expect more fireworks today.
"The critical time will be lunchtime in New York," said William Floersch, vice chairman of the Chicago Board Options Exchange and owner of a firm that makes markets in stock-options contracts, each of which represents 100 shares of such blue-chip issues as McDonald's, Kmart and Xerox.
"The markets are sort of thin then," Mr. Floersch says.
"At that time, I think the stock market will turn down and finish down about 50 points for the day."
He believes that Friday's downdraft was the beginning of a modest 200-point correction of the Dow Jones industrials, which is necessary, he says, because the stock market rose too far too fast.
At the CBOE, which is the nation's biggest stock-options exchange, executives are bracing for another big day today, after trading an unusually high 1.1 million options contracts Friday.
Jack Wing, chairman of the Chicago Corp. brokerage firm, said his firm handled orders for about 180,000 stock-options contracts Friday at the CBOE, up from its normal daily volume of about 80,000 contracts at the Chicago exchange.
Nor are stock derivatives the only instruments affected by the Fed policy shift.
The vast majority of the CME's record trading volume Friday was in its Eurodollar futures and options contracts, which track the movement of short-term interest rates.
"The Eurodollar pit exploded," Mr. Greenspan said, after trading in a relatively narrow range for months.
The CME said it traded 1.7 million Eurodollar futures and options contracts Friday, each of which represents $1 million held in an interest-bearing account outside of the U.S.
The impact of the Fed's action on the Eurodollar market was intensified by the fact that the Labor Department had earlier released a monthly unemployment report, Mr. Greenspan said.
The CME's "open interest," or the number of contracts outstanding, rose by about 100,000 Friday.
That, CME officials say, is an indication that more of the day's trading activity was intended to open new derivatives positions than to close out old ones.
Much of the trading in the Eurodollar pit, for instance, came from banks looking to lock in favorable short-term interest rates and thus minimize payouts related to the tightening of the Fed Funds rate.
The Fed tightening also sent precious and industrial metals prices spinning lower -- and could continue to affect these and other commodities markets this week.
"We had a quick knee-jerk reaction immediately after the Fed announced the tightening," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"The fact that the Fed came out and announced it took everybody by surprise, because usually the Fed changes rates through some kind of intervention rather than a formal announcement."
At New York's Commodity Exchange, the price of gold for April delivery plunged $5 an ounce after the announcement, to about $387 an ounce from the day's high of $392.30.
Silver for March delivery dove about 15 cents to $5.36 an ounce from the high of $5.51 an ounce.
In late afternoon, however, as the stock market's decline intensified, the prices of both gold and silver stabilized and began to recover.
Each finished the day above its lows: April gold settled at $388.30 an ounce and March silver, at $5.427 an ounce.
The reason for the late-day recovery, Mr. O'Neill said, is that precious-metals prices tend to benefit from a decline in stock prices.
And if the sell-off on Wall Street continues this week, he said, metals prices should continue to rise, as investors move money from stocks into hard assets such as gold, silver and platinum.
A continued stock-market correction also could affect the prices of such conventional commodities as cattle and cotton, Mr. O'Neill said, which for reasons that baffle many analysts have always tended to move in the opposite direction of stock prices.
LIVESTOCK & MEATS: Cattle prices are expected to strengthen this week in the wake of a cattle survey released Friday by the Agriculture Department.
The government pegged the number of calves born in 1993 at 39.6 million, up 1% from 1992.
The government in July had forecast a 2% gain in the 1993 calf crop.
The smaller calf crop signals tighter-than-expected supplies of mature cattle available for slaughter later this year.
The Agriculture Department estimated the number of cattle and calves in the U.S. on Jan. 1 at 101.7 million head, up 1% from a revised survey that found 100.6 million animals on Jan. 1, 1993.
