CONTRARY TO popular belief, "double minorities" -- black women -- don't necessarily have an advantage in the workplace, researchers say.
That's particularly true for managers, says Audrey Murrell, a professor at the University of Pittsburgh's business school.
Her study of U.S. Census figures and other data shows that black women don't get an extra boost from company employment policies favoring minorities and females.
In fact, she says, it takes 10 months for black women to earn what white females and black males make in eight months, and white males earn in six months.
The pay gap stems from women's overrepresentation in lower-paying service jobs, as well as black employees' tendency to be at the bottom of corporate organizational charts, says Ms. Murrell, a professor of organizational behavior.
The double whammy divides black and white women in the workplace, says Ella Bell of MIT's Sloan School of Management.
In a study of female managers, she found that black respondents felt more isolated and that they had less organizational support than white women.
White respondents were more likely to believe that their firm had a strong commitment to advance women and minorities than did their black counterparts.
Black women, sensitive to historical images of sexual subservience to powerful white men, shy away from white male mentors, adds Ms. Bell.
"Sexuality is an issue for all women, but it's harder for black women to debunk the mythology about who they are," she says.
Reginald F. Lewis
THE MEMORY OF Reginald F. Lewis may get the kind of public attention the black Wall Street dealmaker avoided during his lifetime.
Today, the first anniversary of his death at age 50, a larger-than-life-sized wax sculpture of Mr. Lewis will be unveiled in Baltimore's Great Blacks in Wax museum, along with a 40-foot mural depicting the 1987 leveraged buyout that created his TLC Beatrice International Holdings, still by far the largest black-owned company.
The works will inaugurate a pavilion named for the late Baltimore native.
A family-authorized biography, including material written by Mr. Lewis, is scheduled to be published next fall.
In just a few years Mr. Lewis eclipsed the 50-year dynasty of Ebony magazine publisher John H. Johnson in the imaginations of younger black business people, says financial writer Tony Chapelle.
Johnson Publishing topped Black Enterprise magazine's annual ranking of black-owned businesses by sales from the list's inception in 1971 until TLC Beatrice joined it in 1987.
On last June's list, TLC Beatrice reported $1.6 billion in sales compared with $274 million for Johnson Publishing.
"He is a symbol, a player where we never had any other players," says Mr. Chapelle.
"Unfortunately, there hasn't been another black dealmaker to buy into the Fortune 1000.
We're looking for another superstar," he adds.
Beatrice spokesman Butch Milea says the firm still gets numerous requests for investments, donations and jobs from African-Americans, "a lot of them still addressed to Reg."
LOS ANGELES Times reporters are supposed to stay away from "WASPs," "Hispanics" and the "inner city" -- at least in their copy.
The paper's new guide defining how race-related words should be used has drawn snickers in the newsroom, but Times' editors argue that sensitivity to changing usage is a serious concern.
"If you write about Los Angeles and talk about a `ghetto' area, I defy you to define where one starts and stops or where they are," says Terry Schwadron, deputy managing editor.
Similarly, "inner city," denoting a poor black or Hispanic area, often is geographically inaccurate in sprawling cities, Mr. Schwadron says.
And "WASP," for white Anglo-Saxon Protestant, may be becoming pejorative, according to the guide.
The move is seen as a significant response by a major newspaper to the shifting demographics of the nation's No. 2 metropolitan area.
Hispanics, blacks and Asian-Americans comprise about half the 14 million Los Angeles area residents, according to census figures.
The Times uses "Latino" for Spanish-surnamed groups, because it is preferred over "Hispanic" by Mexican-Americans, the largest such group in the Southwest.
Most newspapers, including The Wall Street Journal, use "Hispanic," following the Census Bureau designation.
"I haven't heard any compelling arguments for changing it," says Paul Martin Sr., editor of The Journal's style book.
Parts of the Times' guide are "a bit silly," says Times assistant editor Linda Williams, who is black.
"But most of it makes good sense; it's supposed to make people think about what they're writing."
VALUING DIVERSITY is a uniquely American idea that may not travel well.
Asked by AT&T to study race and gender issues in overseas workplaces, New York consultants Cornelius Grove and Willa Hallowell found "the values that give impetus to diversity issues here don't necessarily exist abroad," says Mr. Grove.
Based on interviews with AT&T managers and executives, the two report that other societies view ethnic differences as an appropriate basis for assigning workplace roles.
In Mexico, for example, an American manager shouldn't expect to find indigenous Indians in management positions, which are controlled by European descendants.
In Japan, it took an AT&T manager months to get Japanese managers to talk to key East Indian employees, Ms. Hallowell says.
In the January issue of the newsletter Cultural Diversity at Work, the consultants advise American managers abroad to value equality without judging cultural norms.
BLACK ENTERPRISE magazine has been ranking the nation's black-owned companies by sales since 1973, not 1971 as stated in the Jan. 19 Business & Race column.
Also, Johnson Publishing Co. topped the list from 1984 to 1987, not 1971 to 1987 as stated in the column.
(WSJ Jan. 31, 1994)
