The chairman of the Senate Banking Committee asked the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board to resolve their differences over a plan to streamline bank regulation after committee members strongly endorsed the Fed.
A Treasury proposal to consolidate the regulatory functions of four bank supervisory agencies into a new Federal Banking Commission would remove the Fed from hands-on bank regulation.
Alan Greenspan, Fed chairman, told the committee that the Treasury plan would complicate the execution of monetary policy, weaken the central bank's ability to respond to financial crises and increase the chances of unnecessarily rigid bank regulation.
Democrats and Republicans lined up behind Mr. Greenspan, making it clear that the Treasury plan doesn't have the votes to pass without substantial change.
"There's a lot of support in the House and the Senate for retaining the independence of the Federal Reserve Board," Sen. Richard Shelby (D., Ala.) said.
Donald Riegle (D., Mich.), the Senate banking panel's chairman, and a strong supporter of the Treasury proposal, asked Mr. Greenspan to attempt to work out his differences with Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen during the next two weeks.
The two failed to reach an accord last fall.
Since the Treasury announced its plan, the banking industry has strongly supported the Fed's contention that the central bank must continue to play a significant role in bank regulation.
After two days of hearings before the Senate panel, Mr. Greenspan would enter a second round of negotiations with the Treasury having a strong political hand.
Mr. Greenspan went over for the committee the Fed's own, less-sweeping proposal for regulatory consolidation.
The Fed would fold the Comptroller of the Currency, the regulatory functions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and the Office of Thrift Supervision into a new Federal Banking Commission, which would regulate about 4,000 nationally chartered banks and thrifts.
The Fed would regulate about 7,600 state-chartered banks, a major expansion from the 970 state banks it currently regulates.
The goal is to eliminate duplicative regulation.
Today, most banking organizations are examined by at least two federal regulators.
Under the Treasury's plan every banking organization would be supervised and examined by the Federal Banking Commission, which also would issue banking regulations.
Under the Fed's plan, banks would be regulated by either the Fed or the new agency.
Currently, the Fed supervises all bankholding companies.
The Fed proposed one of two plans for dealing with those; either one would give the Fed considerable regulatory control over the nation's largest banking companies, such as Citicorp and BankAmerica Corp., even though their lead banks are nationally chartered.
