Huddled for warmth in a smoky canal-side shelter for drug addicts, Roger, a heroin user since 1979, says he lived a life of crime here for years without much worry about changing either of his dangerous habits.
"It'd be mostly stealing stuff from cars or robbing shops," says the 33-year-old homeless man, who finally was jailed last year -- in Belgium -- for robbery.
"Here they can catch you lots of times without taking you to court.
And a lot of the cops will give your dope back to you, because they know if they take it you'll just have to do another robbery to buy some more."
Adds another cavalier junkie: "If you take a camera from a tourist, the police might hold you for two hours."
The Netherlands has long been known for its liberal drug policies, but those days appear to be fading fast.
Faced with public disgust at home over soaring drug-related crime and pressure from other European Union countries to strengthen drug laws, Dutch authorities are implementing an aggressive program to reduce drug-linked crimes and disturbances and show new teeth in combating illegal drug sales.
For junkie criminals, the government plans to offer a stark choice: Complete a rigid drug-treatment program of as long as three months or go to jail for crimes like petty theft that often have gone unpunished.
Other recent measures include legislation to allow police to seize the profits from drug dealing, and a law making it easier for authorities to charge criminals for preparatory acts before a crime.
Just last week, the government announced a program to facilitate police tapping mobile phones to reduce drug trafficking from automobiles.
The parliament is expected this week to debate a proposal to widen the use of bugs in hotels or other places where trafficking might take place.
In Amsterdam, beefed-up police patrols are enforcing tougher loitering laws.
And with EU border controls largely dismantled, the government is looking at ways to clamp down on "drug tourism" among young people lured to the land of windmills and tulips by its famous soft-drug "coffee shops."
The government estimates that as many as 1,000 foreigners a day visit Maastricht, famous as where the European Union treaty was signed in 1991, but also just over the border from Germany and Belgium.
"People are absolutely fed up with all the troubles caused by drug addicts -- car windows broken, noise, whole streets almost given up to the drug problem," says Eberhard van der Laan, leader of the Social Democrats -- the major left-leaning party -- in the Amsterdam City Council.
Yet, while politicians seem convinced that a harsher approach to drugs is a vote winner in coming national elections, others urge caution.
Drug-rehabilitation professionals are divided over whether pushing addicts into treatment is effective without personal motivation.
And there's grumbling from activists who favor a liberal approach and some law-enforcement authorities that the Netherlands risks being railroaded by more conservative EU partners into changing policy.
While officials insist the country won't change its basic doctrine -- that drug addiction is a sickness and not a crime -- critics say the get-tough approach blurs the distinction.
"We have one Europe, but we do not have one drug policy," says the Rev. Hans Visser of the Paulist Church in downtown Rotterdam, which runs programs for drug addicts.
"So what's happening?
France is saying that Holland is too liberal -- the source of drugs in Europe -- and we should change our policy.
I think that's not the case: It's better for France to adopt the Netherlands' policy and help the drug users in Europe."
In junkie meccas such as Amsterdam's red-light district and Rotterdam's "Platform Zero" outside the main train station, addicts are aware of the changing attitude of the government and the public.
But there appears to be no widespread fear of the crackdown, and addicts are split on whether to choose jail or treatment if arrested for drug-linked crimes.
"I'd rather go to jail," says Skip of Rotterdam, who served a three-year prison term for stabbing a man in the neck ("he pulled a knife, but I pulled mine faster") in a dispute over stolen goods.
"I was in one of those treatment centers for a week and it ticked me off.
The problem with those places is that they try to break you down completely and build up a new personality.
I feel I have more freedom in jail."
Says Gideles, who claims to support a 150 guilder ($78) daily cocaine and heroin habit playing the flute for money on street corners: "I'd choose the treatment program, but three months isn't enough: Physically it might only take a week to `kick off' mstreet talk for quitting drugs, but you're still busy in the head with heroin.
That can take years."
The Netherlands has an estimated 15,000 to 20,000 heroin or cocaine addicts, with more than half of them in Amsterdam (7,000) and Rotterdam (3,000-4,500).
Although the government for several years has sought a treatment-or-jail policy, there has been a shortage of beds in treatment centers.
The new campaign calls for the 1,200-bed capacity to be nearly doubled at a cost estimated at some 60 million guilders ($31.3 million).
The plan will be discussed by parliament in the next few months.
After years at one level, the government plans to boost the number of jail cells to 11,835 in 1995 from 7,838 last year.
The plan gets attention because it stresses "the need to be stricter with the criminal element," says a Dutch government official who declined to be identified.
"The Social Democrats have always emphasized the softer side of drug policy, and this clearly marks a shift to the other side."
The Social Democrats, with 48 seats in the 150-seat parliament, are the junior coalition partners to the Christian Democrats, with 54 seats.
But with a center party called Democrat 66 making a strong showing in opinion polls, political analysts say the Social Democrats seek to move to the right on law-and-order issues with parliamentary elections May 2.
In local elections last week, Democrat 66 and a right-wing opposition party made a strong showing at the expense of the government-coalition parties.
And with crime a major issue in some contests, the extreme right did well in the big cities.
Nationwide, the number of reported crimes soared to 1.3 million in 1992 from 812,000 in 1981, with most of the increase stemming from property crimes.
Gun-related deaths -- many linked to drug disputes -- rose to 104 in 1992 from 47 in 1985, with the number wounded by guns up to 212 from 87 during the same period.
Yet the government's new treatment-or-jail approach has drawn a tepid response from drug-rehabilitation experts.
While welcoming plans to boost the number of places in residential clinics, they emphasize that any effective program must be based on strong persuasion rather than compulsion -- and be linked to followup for jobs and housing.
And they fear the high-profile plan may distort the severity of drug-related crime.
"There's a risk that people will get the impression that all criminality is done by drug addicts," says Martin Huksla, the Utrecht-based director of the Dutch Union of Addiction Centers.
Frans Leenders, director of Rotterdam's Bouman House substance-abuse clinic, says drug crime is "easy prey for politicians" and has developed into "kind of a hysterical issue."
But he discounts the problem's scope.
"Only 4,000 to 5,000 drug addicts are really active in criminality," he says.
"It's a very concentrated problem, and very visible because it's in the center of the cities, but is it really that serious?"
In Amsterdam, officials feel it is.
Because the city's downtown prostitution zone also is a popular tourist area, authorities have moved to prevent drug addicts from congregating there on narrow streets and picturesque canal bridges.
The city's crackdown extends beyond hard-drug use.
In January, an ordinance took effect to require licenses for the coffee shops that openly sell hashish and marijuana, considered soft drugs, and the country's health secretary recently suggested a similar law to control the estimated 1,500 coffee shops nationwide.
Although possession of soft drugs technically remains a misdemeanor in the Netherlands, the government since 1976 has practiced a "nonenforcement" policy for less than 30 grams.
Since 1991, rules on coffee shops have barred advertising, sales to minors and sales of hard drugs, such as cocaine and heroin, or more than 30 grams of soft drugs.
But those regulations aren't strict enough for nearby countries, especially France, which seek to keep young people from hopping the border for drugs.
