If only the average Mrs. Saito could dump out her handbag full of M&Ms, Snickers, Hall's cough drops, Clorets, Wrigley's gum and Polident denture cream on the desk of one of the legion of U.S. Japan bashers.
Then they might see how they mislead the American public by griping about Japan's "closed" markets.
In the suburbs of Tokyo, the only Americans you're likely to run into are plastic statues of Colonel Sanders and Ronald McDonald.
Yet the average Mrs. Saito can buy Johnson & Johnson products everywhere.
Lotions and baby shampoos, Plax, Q-Tips and Band-Aids compete for shelf space in suburban stores with Helene Curtis hair-care products, Pampers, Colgate toothpaste, and Gillette razors.
Not long ago the Kleenex people began widely marketing paper towels for the first time, and now Japanese families can't remember how they survived without them.
U.S. companies seem also to have largely taken over the maintenance of the Saito family pet.
Store shelves here are lined with products from Pedigree, KalKan and Gaines.
The bag with the familiar Purina collie can be found in stores everywhere.
Somewhat mysteriously, though, the words "Dog Chow" for English readers have been matched with the Japanese translation "Pleasant Food."
Contrary to the complaint that American products gather dust at the back of shops, U.S. brands are often positioned out front, presumably because they help to lure customers inside.
In the food and cookware sections of department stores, U.S.-made products are often labeled with small American flags.
It seems unlikely that Japanese merchandizers fly the Stars and Stripes because they think it drives customers away.
Just the opposite.
In other cases, U.S. manufacturers bend over backward to blend into the Japanese consumer landscape.
While shopping, Mrs. Saito will find an indispensable cleaner called "Kabikira" (literally "mold-killer"), which is recommended by Japanese housewives as the best way to attack the various forms of mold that collect in Japanese homes.
Kabikira is made by the same U.S. company that makes that old standby Johnson Wax, but unless Mrs. Saito searched out the corporate logo, she'd never suspect she's kiring her kabi with an American product.
There are large two-story McDonald's restaurants in every main shopping district in Tokyo.
In the suburbs, McMuffins and Happy Meals are sold with McRice cakes and McFish cakes or with miso (soybean paste) and seaweed soup.
Kentucky Fried Chicken competes with Wendy's, Denny's, Shakey's Pizza, Dunkin' Donuts, Subway, Famous Amos, Mrs. Fields' cookies, and Burger King.
On the streets in the afternoon, motorcycles whiz around delivering Domino's pizza to homes around Tokyo.
On television in these homes, a ubiquitous commercial features attractive, smiling Japanese youngsters singing "I feel Coke," reflecting a common perception among marketers that English sells even if it doesn't make sense.
Next up may be a commercial for Toilet Duck, an American-made blue liquid bowl cleaner.
The animated Toilet Duck flies across the bathroom and plonks its head happily down into the toilet.
Also appealing to the Japanese delight in anything cute, the Jolly Green Giant and his cartoon elves do more of the hard work selling frozen vegetables here than they ever did in the States.
But while pop-star Janet Jackson has a cute image in America, on concert posters in Tokyo's subway she's a sultry vixen.
And American tobacco companies, which appear to be extremely successful here, can revel in advertising and other freedoms they no longer have in the U.S.
Hollywood has landed in force as well, hawking both its own movies and U.S. consumer products.
The comedian Eddie Murphy sells coffee on television.
And a lookalike of actress Demi Moore promotes American Lux soap, repeating the mantra "I'm stylish, I'm stylish, I'm stylish."
The Japanese love American movie culture and movie stars, the all-time favorite being Audrey Hepburn.
One theater in Tokyo has devoted itself to showing her films since her death last year.
Cary Grant, Elvis Presley and Marilyn Monroe are also favorites.
Snoopy and the Disney characters appear to be as much a part of Japan's culture as America's.
IBM Japan has been here so long that most people forget it's an American company.
The new IBM ThinkPad is so popular that demand has far outpaced production.
And like her counterparts around the planet, Mrs. Saito digs into her purse for her Visa, MasterCard or American Express when it comes time to pay for all her goodies, hardly aware of the dominance of U.S. companies in the global payments system.
In short, it is pretty easy for the average Mrs. Saito to "buy American" in Japan.
The visible success of so many American products leaves one wondering why these companies are silent in light of the Clinton administration's bashing of Japan.
One guess is that the painstaking efforts that lie behind these success stories are tantamount to trade secrets.
But before alot more U.S. companies come complaining about the "closed" nature of the Japanese market, their executives might pay a visit and do some independent research, maybe they could start by sending some of their people on a shopping trip to any Japanese department store.
Ms. D'Aguanno Ito recently moved to Tokyo from Washington, D.C.
