Rupert Murdoch, the billionaire chairman of News Corp., had a lot on his mind.
His Fox television network was secretly preparing to bid for the right to broadcast National Football League games.
He was charting expansion plans for BSkyB, a London satellite-TV business.
He was battling the Chinese government over Star TV, his new Asian satellite network.
Yet on a Thursday afternoon, working the phones at his unassuming office on News Corp.'s Twentieth Century Fox studio lot, Mr. Murdoch's attention was focused on decidedly smaller issues.
"I'm not saying he didn't try very hard; he just froze every time a camera turned on," he was saying to Michael Ovitz, the head of Creative Artists Agency.
"The question is, what's fair?
Paying a year's salary for six weeks' work is outrageous."
Negotiating failed talk-show host Chevy Chase's severance pay hardly seems like an issue of global urgency.
And Mr. Murdoch certainly has plenty else to do at News Corp., a company whose newspapers, magazines, books, movies and television properties brought in $7.5 billion in revenue for the year ended June 30.
Yet on the same day, Mr. Murdoch would also mull a proposal from TicketMaster to exchange guns for sports tickets at the local Fox TV station.
He would review the next day's lead editorial for the New York Post, the money-losing tabloid that his company also owns.
He would discuss new sports programming in Asia, noting that "basketball and soccer are very big in China."
Call it micromanagement, on a global scale.
It is a style that hasn't always won fans for the 62-year-old Australian.
Some company insiders resent his meddling; scores of journalists have quit over the years because of the way he uses his newspapers to press his personal views.
Others say his autocratic rule can be capricious, as he sours suddenly on projects he had only recently championed.
And though he relies on a fiercely loyal cadre of lieutenants, he can't seem to tolerate a strong No. 2.
Among the talented executives who have left are former Fox Inc.
Chairman Barry Diller, who now heads QVC Network Inc., and former Fox studio chief Joe Roth, now an independent producer.
"The atmosphere is sort of like a monarchy," says Greg Nathanson, a former head of Fox's TV stations.
"Everybody works for the king, and nothing else matters."
Yet Mr. Murdoch says this is what it takes to manage on a global scale.
In an era when the sun never sets on many multinational companies, executives are finding it ever more difficult to keep track of their far-flung operations, much less to manage them.
Mr. Murdoch has fashioned his own antidote to global sprawl: He focuses intensely on one business at a time -- his latest fascination has been the TV business in Los Angeles, though he is now turning his attention to Star TV in Asia -- yet he drops in on his other holdings at a moment's notice to take command of minor, even trivial, decisions.
"If you're going to get into a business," Mr. Murdoch says, taking a quick break between phone calls, "you should get as close to it as possible, even run it yourself for a period."
As a few days watching Mr. Murdoch in action make amply clear, the logistics of micromanaging a global company can be daunting.
Gray-haired and restless, with bushy, expressive eyebrows that rise to punctuate his sentences, Mr. Murdoch is constantly on the move.
He spends only about half of his time at his Los Angeles base; he is just as likely to be found in one of his other three offices, or at one of his six homes or on his new $1.3 million yacht, Morning Glory.
He is his own walking "virtual office": Wherever he is, News Corp. is in business.
He even clinched last summer's $525 million Star TV deal while vacationing with his family on his yacht in the middle of the Mediterranean.
It helps that he has six full-time secretaries spread across three continents.
In Los Angeles one morning, he awakens as usual at 5:30 a.m. for a quick swim at his Beverly Hills home.
Then he drives himself to the office in his forest-green Mercedes coupe -- he won't even delegate the driving to anyone else.
Before arriving at 7 a.m., he makes calls all along the way, peppering employees with questions, but in an impeccably polite tone that is his trademark.
Insiders say he runs his empire by "phone and clone," and even he admits to being a "phone freak."
A few times a week, Anthea Disney, editor of News Corp.'s TV Guide in New York, is on the receiving end of one of his car-phone calls; he will comment on a Dolly Parton cover, or ask about circulation trends.
Managers of other units never know when they pick up the phone whether they will hear, "Murdoch here.
How're things at your shop?"
The tactic gives the impression, at least, that Mr. Murdoch has mastered the tiniest details of numerous operations.
The calls can also throw divisions into turmoil.
"You must accept the fact that you work for someone who is in and out of your business," says one News Corp. executive.
"Occasionally he's going to dial you up and it isn't always about your priority for that day or that week."
Managers say they are sometimes paralyzed in decision-making as they wait to hear from him first.
Mr. Murdoch will spend about 12 hours at his office.
But he doesn't concentrate on any one issue for long.
Instead, he darts from one idea to the next, making constant spur-of-the-moment deviations from planned meetings and decisions.
Mr. Murdoch makes no apologies for taking on the small details that most executives leave to lawyers or underlings.
Asked why he personally handled Chevy Chase's severance pay, he replies: "On a matter like that, it was just easier for me to get involved than to involve lawyers, who make things nasty, costly and slow."
CAA's Mr. Ovitz, who negotiated on behalf of Mr. Chase, notes that Mr. Murdoch doesn't hesitate to get involved in "things a chief operating officer would sign off to a department head."
Mr. Chase's payoff is believed to be well under $10 million.
But his details-oriented style can also lead to costly mistakes.
In a burst of what he admits was "overenthusiasm" about foreign TV expansion last year, Mr. Murdoch personally devoted weeks to a minority investment in a Spanish magazine company and TV station.
"I wasted a lot of time going over there and trying to make it work, and it just wasn't right," he says.
About six months ago, News Corp. pulled out and took a $10 million loss.
Mr. Murdoch has been criticized on some other deals for paying too much.
He built his empire with $8 billion of debt, but against the pleadings of his advisers, much of it was short-term, leaving him at the mercy of his bankers and some say nearly driving the company into bankruptcy in the late 1980s.
News Corp. is profitable again now, and analysts currently are high on the company, but the jury is still out on some of its recent moves.
The Fox network has had flat ratings recently, and has just taken a huge gamble with its $1.56 billion football foray.
The Fox studio has been mired in a dry spell that only recently has been reversed, and then only by a single hit, "Mrs. Doubtfire."
Critics say Mr. Murdoch paid too much for Star TV, a multichannel service that includes news, sports and MTV, and that is facing competition and government interference.
"I like to be able to move fast," Mr. Murdoch says.
"Sometimes it leads to making mistakes, but other times it leads to getting an opportunity before other people see it."
Mr. Murdoch's musings are interrupted by his secretary, Dorothy "Dot" Wyndoe, who brings him a heaping plate of raw carrots.
She does this every morning at about 9 a.m.
"To keep my blood sugar even," Mr. Murdoch explains.
Matronly, brusque and intensely loyal, Ms. Wyndoe, the most senior of his secretaries, is a formidable gatekeeper.
She began working for Mr. Murdoch 31 years ago as a typist for the Sydney Daily Mirror in Australia.
She followed him when he moved his base of operations to London, then New York, then Los Angeles; now he is living part-time in Hong Kong to keep an eye on Star TV, and she says she would readily follow him there, too.
Ms. Wyndoe marshals the skills of an army tactician to keep Mr. Murdoch's schedule under control.
It is a daunting job, even when he is supposed to be off duty.
Consider his summer holiday last year, when he cruised the Mediterranean on his new yacht.
While anchored off the coast of Corsica, he spent time with his grown children, took in some sun -- and negotiated the $525 million purchase of a 64% stake in Star TV.
For the signing, he dispatched News Corp.'s corporate jet to fetch Star TV's Chinese owner from London.
The negotiators joined in a family lunch prepared by his wife, novelist Anna Murdoch.
Typical of Mr. Murdoch, he also used his vacation to map out another major move: The timing of a controversial plan to sharply reduce the newsstand price of News Corp.'s London newspapers.
The move, which many insiders predicted would be disastrous, prompted a 30% drop in operating profits from the British newspapers for the six months ending Dec. 31, though it also resulted in circulation gains of almost 30% at his London Times.
Critics say Mr. Murdoch's tendency to make such quick decisions, and not to take counsel from others, makes for capriciousness.
In 1991, for example, he pledged that he would spend $50 million to $100 million to start a record company, declaring that that would be News Corp.'s next frontier -- and then abandoned the idea.
"Most corporations are much more analytical about making acquisitions, while Rupert is instinctive," says Frank Barlow, managing director of the British conglomerate Pearson PLC, which had competed with News Corp. in the bidding for Star TV.
"I've no doubt that Rupert has made deals by scribbling a few calculations on the back of an envelope."
Mr. Murdoch's loyal lieutenants -- known as his "clones" among some insiders -- are generally happy to let him call the shots.
Several have followed him around the world and stayed with him for decades; he sometimes puts them in top posts in businesses in which they have no experience.
As Sam Chisholm, a relatively recent recruit who runs BSkyB, puts it: "I'd do anything for him.
This job isn't just a matter of life and death to me: It's far more important than that."
Mitchell Stern, president of the Fox TV stations, says that Mr. Murdoch's normal mode is "paternal and disarming."
But the boss can be "mean and tough.
I remember when Fox was only on two nights a week, and he was banging on the table in a meeting, saying, `We have to expand.
I want you guys to get it done.'"
Mr. Murdoch doesn't meddle equally in his various businesses.
Every Thursday, "flash reports" -- books of financial data -- land on his desk from New York, London and Sydney.
He reviews them all, but newspapers and television seem to interest him more than movies and books, perhaps because he built up News Corp. from a single Australian newspaper inherited from his father.
During the 1980s, for example, he ran the global company from his office at the New York Post.
Phil Bunton, former night managing editor, says it wasn't unusual for Mr. Murdoch to "critique the paper the next morning picture by picture, headline by headline, saying `Hate this.
Hate that.
Why is Patty Hearst in a swimsuit on the cover?'"
Then, after attacking the paper with a red marker, Mr. Murdoch would say, "Pretty good newspaper, huh?"
After he had to sell the Post in order to buy a New York TV station (he has since bought back the newspaper), Mr. Murdoch switched his focus to his British satellite-TV business, which was mired in losses until it merged with a competitor, leaving News Corp. with a 50% stake.
Next, he shifted his attention to Fox, moving to the West Coast, where he now previews pilots and spends hours pushing colored squares around the network schedule board in a conference room.
Peter Chernin, a Fox TV executive whom Mr. Murdoch promoted to head the Fox movie studio, says it was Mr. Murdoch who first suggested during a marathon schedule meeting that "The Simpsons" be switched to a time slot opposite rival NBC's "Cosby Show."
The bold move proved extremely successful.
More recently, he vetoed a proposed Howard Stern talk show on Fox after hearing about Mr. Stern's raunchy pay-per-view New Year's Eve special, and approached broadcaster Diane Sawyer about a Fox show.
By contrast, he is detached, almost indifferent, when it comes to books and films.
"He didn't read screenplays when I was there, or watch dailies or go to audience screenings," says Mr. Roth, the former studio chief.
"He mostly was interested in the movies that cost a lot of money."
The same goes for HarperCollins, News Corp.'s book publisher, though Mr. Murdoch did personally woo Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who was paid more than $8 million for an autobiography.
In November, when Mrs. Thatcher came to the U.S. for her book tour, he loaned her the News Corp. jet for 10 days.
He was left scrambling to take the "red-eye" overnight commercial flight to New York.
Executives from HarperCollins, the studio and other units are always anxious to grab some face-to-face time with their boss.
One Thursday, he summoned several dozen of them to the Four Seasons Hotel for a News Corp. technology conference.
This is a subject close to his heart.
For all the talk of the coming information superhighway, Mr. Murdoch admits to being a neophyte when it comes to interactive technology.
That same day, he had spoken to John Malone, chairman of Tele-Communications Inc., and after gossiping about the Paramount battle and what Ted Turner was up to, they had discussed the cost to cable companies of digital compression.
"How fast are you going to be digitizing?" he had asked.
Yet at the conference, Mr. Murdoch, bored quickly, slips out early.
He heads back for the office, where he peruses the flash reports and takes a select few phone calls from people like Mr. Ovitz and Time Warner's chairman, Gerald Levin.
Then, as he does at about seven each evening, Mr. Murdoch leaves for home, where he phones his managers in Australia because it is already the next day there.
He rarely hits the Hollywood circuit at night; an outsider by nature, he prefers to talk shop with people like Mr. Malone, himself a no-nonsense manager with a low-profile private life.
"I really enjoy Rupert," Mr. Malone says.
"I think he's a visionary . . .
He's willing to risk looking bad for a protracted period for overpaying on something like Star TV or getting the NFL, which I think was brilliant."
The most serious question facing News Corp., in Mr. Malone's view, is succession at the company, which is 32%-controlled by the Murdoch family.
Mr. Murdoch has said he wants to hand the company down to his three children by Anna, his second wife -- but not for another decade.
The eldest, 25-year-old Elisabeth, already works as the head of programming for FX, a soon-to-be-launched cable channel, and her Ghanaian-born husband does financial analysis for the Fox station group.
The other two, Lachlan and James, are still at college, at Princeton and Harvard respectively.
For now, Mr. Murdoch is keeping a tight grip on the reins.
"In Rupert's empire, there is only room for one emperor," notes Mr. Malone.
And that management style could prove to be fatally flawed.
"The real issue is what happens if something happens to Rupert," says Mr. Malone.
"The character of the company would have to change and become more traditional.
You won't find another Rupert Murdoch; he just doesn't exist."
