The Bundesbank chilled hopes for lower German interest rates, at least temporarily, by announcing an unexpectedly sharp jump in December money supply, which it traced to special factors.
The Bundesbank said its measure of broadly based M3 money supply rose at an annualized and seasonally adjusted 8.1% rate in December, up from a pace of 7.2% in November and moving further away from its 1993 target corridor of 4.5% to 6.5%.
For the fourth quarter, average M3 growth was up 7.5% from the year-earlier period.
Analysts suggested that the latest surge in money supply, which is an early indicator for future inflation trends, could offset the chance for lower interest rates created by a deceleration in western German inflation in January to 3.4% from 3.7% in December.
The German central bank last lowered official interest rates in October.
The U.S. recently increased pressure on the Bundesbank to resume its gradual reduction in interest rates to help pull Europe's largest economy out of recession.
Bundesbank President Hans Tietmeyer has claimed that the Bundesbank is willing to resume loosening credit reins again given more signs of easing price pressures in Germany's economy.
Private-sector economists believe that such indications could come before the next Bundesbank policy meeting scheduled for Feb. 17, by which time the Bundesbank could have a view of how M3 performed in January.
But German officials say they need clear evidence that inflation is under control.
Pointing to special factors that inflated money-supply growth in December, some economists expect that M3 growth in January could come in much lower, even below the new 1994 target range of 4% to 6%.
But other observers recall that a January M3 growth figure is rarely taken as a good indication because the annualized result is calculated on the basis of only one month.
The December money supply was pushed up by German companies that repatriated an estimated 15 billion marks ($8.66 billion) in liquid assets held abroad for the purpose of "window dressing" year-end accounts.
In addition, bank lending to companies and private individuals rose 46% to 58.4 billion marks from 40 billion marks in December 1992, as many people took advantage of a 1993 tax break on home purchases.
Also driving up money aggregates were tax changes affecting foreign investment funds, which caused heavy sales of such holdings up to the end of December.
