The U.S. is pushing Japan to agree to increase its purchases of U.S.-made auto parts by about 20% a year as the administration broadens its pressure on Japan to move on stalled trade talks.
The U.S. position underscores a hardline strategy for getting Japan to agree to targets for increasing U.S. imports -- making Japan choose between an agreement or a blowup in relations with its most important ally.
Japan has resisted the call for targets so far, leaving the talks stalemated.
The U.S. has indicated it would compromise on issues it considers of secondary importance.
Part of the U.S. strategy calls for going over the heads of Japanese bureaucrats whom the U.S. blames for blocking progress on the so-called framework negotiations.
To that end, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen is planning to meet with Japanese Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii on Sunday.
The U.S. wants the Japanese government, which now is consumed with a battle over political reform, to focus on trade issues as well and to follow through on earlier pledges to stimulate the economy.
The U.S. wants agreement on these issues before Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa visits President Clinton in Washington on Feb. 11.
"The message that Secretary Bentsen will be carrying is, the framework talks are important to our relationship and need to be successful," said U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor, speaking in Washington.
Jeffrey Garten, undersecretary of commerce for international trade, said the U.S. had informed Japan that it expects the recent growth in auto-parts purchases by Japanese companies to continue on its upward slant.
For the year ending March 31, 1995, Japanese car makers have pledged to buy $19 billion of U.S. auto parts, up from $9 billion for the year ended March 31, 1991.
"The trend line is about 20%," he said, although the U.S. expected that the actual results would vary from that figure, depending on the state of the Japanese auto industry.
The U.S. is pressing Japan to agree to annual increases of about 20% over the next three or four years.
The framework talks have deadlocked over the U.S. insistence that Japan agree to targets for its purchases of U.S. goods.
Japanese negotiators maintain that the U.S. position smacks of "managed trade," and they say that the U.S. auto-parts industry has problems in Japan because of poor-quality goods.
The U.S. argues that clearly stated targets are necessary; otherwise the U.S. and Japan will endlessly debate their trade differences without making any real progress.
At the same time, Mr. Garten signaled that the U.S. is backing off from several of the most controversial demands it has made of Japan in the auto talks.
In an October proposal to Japan, the U.S. urged that "special consideration" be given by Japanese car makers to "non-Japanese U.S. auto parts."
Mr. Garten, who entered office after the proposal was made, says the U.S. merely wants to collect separate data on U.S.-owned and Japanese-owned auto-parts makers in the U.S., but not favor the U.S.-owned ones.
A number of U.S. lawmakers from states with Japanese-owned auto-parts plants, including Reps. Butler Derrick (D., S.C.), John Duncan (R., Tenn.), Philip Crane (R., Ill.), Joe Knollenberg (R., Mich.) and John Tanner (D., Tenn.), have written President Clinton complaining that the original proposal "jeopardizes the existing employment" of U.S. workers in Japanese factories.
In addition, Mr. Garten said that the U.S. wasn't looking for the Japanese government to order manufacturers to buy more U.S. parts.
The October proposal had called for Japanese bureaucrats to issue "guidance" to car makers concerning their purchases.
Mr. Garten now says he is involved in intensive negotiations with Japan's leading car makers and auto trade groups -- as well as Japan's trade negotiators -- to get the companies to commit to greater purchases.
He called those talks "extremely constructive" although he added that the companies hadn't "committed to anything" yet.
Mr. Bentsen is in the midst of visiting Indonesia, Thailand and China to promote freer trade.
The Treasury secretary wants to offer Asia an alternative to regional economic hegemony by Japan -- and perhaps China in the future.
"This administration recognizes that there is more to Asia than Japan," Mr. Bentsen told the Indonesia Economists Association.
But Mr. Bentsen's likely visit with Mr. Fujii shows that the U.S. remains preoccupied with Japan.
The U.S. has a trade deficit with Japan of about $52 billion a year.
Apart from Japan, the U.S. is trying to build stronger relations with the fast-growing Asian countries that could be large customers of U.S. products and services.
For example, Indonesia estimates that it will spend $113 billion on infrastructure before the end of this decade.
U.S. banks and brokers want to help finance the projects, and U.S. manufacturers want to compete to provide the new telecommunications, transportation and other improvements Indonesia needs.
But Indonesia and many other emerging markets restrict access by U.S. firms.
The emerging markets of Asia are particularly important targets of U.S. economic diplomacy because rapid growth and high investment needs make them good targets for U.S. exports.
Export expansion has accounted for almost all the growth in U.S. manufacturing jobs in the last decade.
As one sign of expanding interest in Asian trade, Mr. Bentsen suggested that the U.S. may be about to lift its trade embargo against Vietnam.
"I think you'll see something forthcoming soon," he told the American Chamber of Commerce in Indonesia.
