Faulty engine mountings probably caused the October 1992 Amsterdam air disaster that killed 47 people, an independent report said.
The report by the Netherlands Aviation Safety Board also criticized poor communication between the crew and air-traffic control and said pilots and controllers need better training.
The tragedy occurred when an El Al Boeing Co. 747 cargo plane lost two of four engines shortly after take-off and crashed into an Amsterdam apartment block, engulfing it in flames.
The board concluded that metal fatigue in one of the pylons fixing the engines to the wings probably set off the sequence of events that led to the crash.
"The design and certification of the B 747 pylon was found to be inadequate to provide the required level of safety," it said in the 48-page report.
Crash investigators had previously pointed to a faulty pylon as the likely cause of the crash.
Boeing has already started equipping all 747 jets around the world with stronger engine mountings, thus meeting one of the Dutch report's key recommendations.
Neither Boeing nor El Al has acknowledged liability for the crash but they have made joint compensation proposals to victims of the crash and their relatives.
The Dutch board's task is to examine the probable cause of accidents and recommend measures to improve air safety, not to determine liability.
A Boeing spokesman said the Dutch report looked "very similar to the preliminary report we saw in October."
He said the engine pylon structures had been redesigned and that changes are being made in the fleet.
The report said the cargo jet's inner starboard engine had ripped loose, tearing off the outer starboard engine and damaging the wing as it fell.
The report added: "The exchange of information was at times inadequate.
The crew only gave sparse information concerning their problems and intentions.
The controller occasionally used non-standard phraseology which was not as explicit or understandable as would be desirable in an emergency situation," it said.
