Brazil and certain large creditors are scrambling to keep a $52 billion debt deal alive without the financial backing of the International Monetary Fund.
After holding emergency meetings late last week, Brazil and its bank advisory committee, led by Citibank, took the unusual step of asking nearly 800 creditors to waive a clause in their contracts that conditioned the deal on an IMF standby loan agreement.
Creditors holding at least two-thirds of the debt included in the deal must agree to the waiver by Thursday -- or risk a long delay.
Forging ahead with the restructuring without the IMF support could make the deal more risky and expensive for Brazil to complete.
But failure to complete the deal by the April 15 deadline could be even more damaging.
A delay could have a negative spillover effect on the bonds of other Latin American nations, which have become popular investments with U.S. money managers.
Latin American bonds have already been rocked this year by political worries in Venezuela and Mexico and rising interest rates in the U.S.
On Friday, Citibank Vice Chairman William R. Rhodes, who heads Brazil's bank advisory committee, said he was "confident" the committee would receive the necessary waivers.
The 19 banks on the advisory committee, which recommended the waivers to other creditors, already hold about a third of the total debt, he said.
Brazilian Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso insisted that the deal will go through.
"After 11 years, we have reached a final accord.
The banks have indicated that now, Brazil is solvent," he said Friday.
"Anyone who bets on Brazil has a chance to win."
A wait for IMF to give its blessing to the deal would have meant pushing the closing of the deal dangerously close to October's presidential elections.
With Mr. Cardoso still deciding whether to run for the country's top office, a further delay would mean the conclusion of the deal could land in someone else's lap if Mr. Cardoso devotes his energy to campaigning.
Despite the uncertainties, investors said an imperfect deal is better than none at all.
"I would say that a poor plan well executed is better than vacillatingly seeking an ideal," said Jerry Finneran, president at TCW Americas, which manages emerging-markets funds for Trust Co. of the West, a Los Angeles money manager, and has "substantial" investments in Brazilian debt.
"Both sides realized it was better to do something now rather than ask if anything was going to get better one month from now, or three or six months from now," he said.
Despite the confusion, the normally volatile market for Brazilian debt has been relatively stable.
J.P. Morgan's Emerging Markets bond index fell 1.14% on Friday, and has dropped 3.84% so far this month.
Brazilian debt, by comparison, rose 0.32% on Friday and has dropped just 1.83% so far in March, according to the index.
Brazil's restructuring deal was modeled on guidelines set up in 1989 by former Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady and used by Mexico, Argentina and other nations.
Under the guidelines, creditors agree to reduce the country's debt and convert what remains into bonds, many of which are backed by U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds.
The International Monetary Fund needed to approve Brazil's economic plan before it would provide a standby loan that would be used to help finance the purchase of the Treasury bonds.
With the IMF's approval, the U.S. Treasury then would have sold Brazil a special issue of bonds, which would have been placed into an account with the Federal Reserve.
But last Wednesday, the IMF said Brazil wasn't likely to get a standby agreement until it implemented a proposed new anti-inflationary program, which would go into place by June at the earliest, long past the April 15 deadline.
Brazil needs more than $4 billion of Treasury bonds to collateralize many of the new bonds to be issued as part of the agreement.
Of that amount, Brazil needs to purchase $2.8 billion in bonds by April 15.
The rest of the Treasury bonds must be purchased over the next two years.
Brazil is counting on some sort of international aid to help with the purchase of this last lot of bonds.
By buying the bonds in the open market, Brazil could end up paying more for them than it would have had it been able to purchase them directly from the Treasury.
Mr. Cardoso wouldn't say whether Brazil had already bought all of the Treasury bonds.
He did say that Brazil could finance the purchase by using some of its own ample foreign reserves -- which are about $35 billion.
In effect, Brazil would provide itself a bridge loan from its own reserves, to be replaced later with IMF funds if a standby arrangement is finally reached.
