In the Clinton era it's been fashionable to be an FOB, or Friend of Bill.
With the forced resignation of White House counsel Bernie Nussbaum we would like to suggest a new category -- COB, or Casualty of Bill.
There seem to be more COBs all the time.
This new designation seems especially apt because some in Washington are portraying Mr. Nussbaum as a unique case, a lawyer with a "political tin ear," the main source of White House missteps.
But what strikes us is how Mr. Nussbaum is just the latest in a remarkable string of departures that suggest there's more going on here than the judgment of a single White House lawyer.
Maybe the problem goes higher up the chain of command.
By now the COB list includes Phil Heymann, the former Deputy Attorney General who was well regarded by just about everyone but Clinton officials.
Clifford Wharton was shoved out the door as Deputy Secretary of State last year, joined later by then Secretary of Defense Aspin.
This followed the Lani Guinier fiasco, and of course the "diversity" search for an Attorney General without a y-chromosome.
Two accomplished women, Zoe Baird and Kimba Wood, found themselves in tatters before that search was over.
Senior White House aides Howard Paster and Roy Neel left voluntarily after only one year, claiming to be burnt out.
The briefest brush with the Clinton administration left Admiral Bobby Inman a COB, his previously sterling reputation now warped.
All of this in less than 14 months.
We would even add George Mitchell's surprise resignation to this casualty list.
Maybe the Senate Majority Leader did want to clear the decks for any Supreme Court opening, but it's hard to believe he would leave so powerful a post if the Clinton presidency were a great success.
If he felt any special loyalty to this presidency, why would the very liberal Mr. Mitchell make himself a lame duck in its crucial second year, with government health care on the line?
Mr. Nussbaum is of course the first member of the Clinton inner circle to be pushed over the side.
In an irony for the ages, he first met Hillary Rodham Clinton when he hired her to join the staff of the House committee investigating Watergate.
Mrs. Clinton was widely viewed as Mr. Nussbaum's shield after the Travelgate blunders last year.
And we can only assume that Mr. Nussbaum hasn't done anything that the First Lady and/or the president didn't want him to do.
In fact, Mr. Nussbaum's tart resignation letter described a view of the White House counsel's job as geared principally to representing the First Couple.
He said he was leaving "as a result of controversy generated by those who do not understand, nor wish to understand, the role and obligations of a lawyer."
But the Clintons already have a personal lawyer, David Kendall of Williams & Connolly.
A White House counsel has to make hard calls, but he is still paid by the taxpayers, which means he has a broader duty to the public trust.
Just ask John Dean.
The same goes for the other FOBs who met with Mr. Nussbaum to discuss the "independent" Whitewater investigations.
If Mr. Nussbaum's mistakes warrant dismissal, what about Roger Altman, the Treasury regulator who provided what he himself called a "heads up" to Mr. Nussbaum?
Jean Hanson, the Treasury general counsel, went so far as to betray the fact that the Resolution Trust Corp. had made a criminal referral to Justice.
The ethical blind spots go beyond Mr. Nussbaum.
This suggests the problem won't be solved by appointing Gergen II.
(We wouldn't be at all surprised to see David Gergen announce his own resignation soon, declaring that he'd done his patriotic duty by saving Nafta -- which would be right.)
The names of those subpoenaed by a grand jury include FOB Bruce Lindsey, deputy chief of staff and FOB Harold Ickes, and the First Lady's chief of staff, Margaret Williams.
It's hard to believe that some white-shoe Beltway lawyer/potentate would be able to rein in this crowd.
That said, we don't much like the grand jury spectacle.
The mistakes so far (Arkansas goings-on excepted) don't seem to deserve criminal investigation.
The Clinton team is suffering, alas, from the new standard of criminalizing politics that Congressional Democrats established to punish Reaganites in the 1980s.
We'd prefer to see Mr. Altman and the rest testify before Congress, where the public can find out what happened.
But when the stonewall fell, Democrats so dreaded a public accounting that they hid behind a special counsel, who is now issuing the subpoenas.
The larger problem, in any event, isn't the ethics of Mr. Nussbaum but the ethical tone set from the top.
The president and First Lady came of age in an Arkansas political culture in which conflict of interest was a way of life.
They've brought that same standard with them to Washington, and it will continue to produce casualties until they abandon it.
Perhaps a razorback, unlike a leopard, can change its spots.
