The dollar recovered somewhat against the yen yesterday, pushed higher on sentiment it had been oversold in the dizzying descent that followed the failure of the recent U.S.-Japan trade talks in Washington.
The dollar refused to budge out of a fairly narrow range, as players brushed aside the announcement by U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor that Japan's violation of an agreement on cellular telephones may lead to retaliatory measures in coming days.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 103.70 yen, up from 102.65 yen late Monday in New York.
On Monday, the dollar skidded more than four yen, from 106.80 yen late Friday in New York; it touched an intraday low of 101 yen.
The dollar also regained some of the ground it lost against European currencies, which appeared to mimic dollar-yen fluctuations throughout the day.
The U.S. currency changed hands at 1.7305 marks late in New York, up from 1.7273 marks late Monday.
Sterling was trading at $1.4735, down from $1.4840.
About midday Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 103.60 yen and at 1.7308 marks.
"We have been pursuing access to this market since 1985," Mr. Kantor said in a widely awaited news conference during the North American afternoon.
"Three agreements and almost 10 years later, U.S. cellular-telephone systems remain effectively excluded from over half the Japanese markets."
Despite Mr. Kantor's tough words, traders noted that he didn't make any comment on recent currency fluctuations, leaving the market to act mainly on technical factors.
"People were extremely short on dollars, and were expecting something more stringent from Kantor," said Victor Polce, foreign-exchange manager at Commerzbank in New York.
Mr. Polce said traders are worried about holding oversold dollar positions following Monday's furious dollar sell-off and are feeling vulnerable to an equally volatile correction.
"Traders see that the rubber band has been truly stretched to the limit, and the snapback could be violent," he said.
Another problem is that traders are deeply divided over what effect the imposition of trade sanctions would have in the direction of the dollar-yen.
The U.S. will decide soon on what action to take over the failure of the trade talks, Mr. Kantor said yesterday.
Traders are quick to note that fundamental economic factors argue for a much stronger dollar, and that trade sanctions would only hurt Japan's flagging economy even more.
"I would venture to guess the dollar should be in the 120s against the yen, based on economic fundamentals," said Carl Amendola, vice president of Bayerische Hypotheken-und Wechsel-Bank AG in New York.
He noted that the Japanese stock market remains weak and the recently unveiled economic-stimulus package looks too small to pull Japan out of its recession.
The dollar began its halting move upward yesterday on repeated intervention by the Bank of Japan, which bought an estimated $3 billion in a bid to boost the U.S. currency, according to some analysts.
But even central bank intervention was seen lacking the firepower to move the dollar appreciably higher.
"I think the market is getting jaded to central bank intervention," said Cathy Witt, vice president, foreign exchange, at Continental Bank in Chicago.
"Three billion dollars isn't enough to push around a market that typically trades in trillions of dollars," she added.
