Adobe Systems Inc. said it will buy Aldus Corp. for stock with an indicated value of $515.8 million, or $37.375 a share, in a deal that unites the two companies credited with inventing the desktop-publishing industry.
The combination creates a company with more than $500 million in annual sales and a dominant position in software for creating, displaying and printing documents electronically.
Aldus, however, has suffered in recent years as competitors erased the company's early lead in page-layout programs.
Under the definitive agreement, Adobe will exchange 1.15 shares of its common stock for each share of Aldus, which has about 13.8 million shares outstanding.
The companies said they expect the transaction will qualify as a tax-free reorganization and a "pooling of interests" for accounting and financial purposes.
The accord was announced around the time the markets closed yesterday.
Adobe shares fell $1.25 to $32.50, and Aldus shares rose 75 cents to $26.25 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday.
Starting about 10 years ago, both companies played a major role in the success of Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh system, which encountered slow sales until it became popular in publishing.
Under Paul Brainerd, a former newspaper executive who coined the term "desktop publishing," Seattle-based Aldus developed a program called PageMaker that allowed Macintosh users to lay out professional-looking newsletters and other documents.
It also sells Persuasion, a program used to make slide shows and other presentations.
Adobe, based in Mountain View, Calif., supplied software that allowed such documents to be printed with fancy typefaces on laser printers.
Adobe has added other programs for drawing on computers and editing photographs and videos.
In addition, Adobe is backing an ambitious effort, using a program called Acrobat, to popularize the electronic publishing of documents on networks and CD-ROM disks.
John Warnock, Adobe's chief executive officer, said in an interview that the company decided that Aldus's products could be easily integrated with Adobe's, allowing the combined companies to lead the market for software used to create and deliver all types of multimedia information.
"We looked at the fit, and the fit was perfect," said Mr. Warnock, who will lead the merged companies.
Charles Bigelow, a professor of digital typography at Stanford University, agreed that the two companies' product lines and technical teams should mesh well.
"In terms of product array, it makes a really well-integrated company," he said.
Chuck Geschke, Adobe's president, will be president of the combined companies.
Mr. Brainerd, who announced plans last year to relinquish the president's title at Aldus, will have no operating role, but he will join the combined companies' board.
He also granted Adobe an irrevocable proxy for all of his shares, which total about 22% of Aldus's stock.
Mr. Warnock said the companies see several areas where they can cut costs, including operations in Japan, though he wouldn't disclose further details.
The companies, which have 2,100 total employees, plan to keep separate facilities in California and Washington.
In Adobe's fiscal year ended Nov. 26, the company had net income of $57 million, or $1.22 a share, on revenue of $313.4 million.
In 1993, Aldus earned $9.5 million, or 70 cents a share, on revenue of $206.7 million.
The merger will be put to shareholders of both companies at separate meetings in July, and is also subject to regulatory approval, the companies said.
