Robert A. Watson just earned more than $10 million for 18 months of work.
And he isn't even a professional ballplayer.
Instead, Mr. Watson was brought in to liquidate the messy financial-services arm of Westinghouse Electric Corp.
At Westinghouse, which had a net loss of $326 million last year, his compensation is considered quite generous.
Mr. Watson left Westinghouse in December, but the company never publicly announced that, although it did tell the New York Stock Exchange.
So, how could he earn so much money so quickly at a company with such big losses?
Mr. Watson, who is 48 years old, was recruited from Transamerica Corp. in San Francisco in June 1992 by former Westinghouse Chairman Paul E. Lego to work at Westinghouse Financial Services Inc., where he became chairman and chief executive officer.
At the time, Westinghouse Electric was drowning in billions in charges because of sour loans by the credit unit.
Mr. Watson was promised a base salary of $600,000 a year and given a $400,000 signing bonus; he also got a guarantee of a 10% pay increase in January 1993 and another 10% raise in January 1994.
And he was promised an incentive bonus of at least $300,000 a year.
But here was the best part of his deal: Westinghouse wanted him to get rid of billions of the credit arm's sour loans.
If he could bring those assets down to under $3 billion, his job would be considered done -- and if he chose to leave, he would be paid all six years of his contract.
Soon after Mr. Watson joined Westinghouse, details of his employment contract were leaked to insiders, who began referring to him as "Rich Bob."
Within just about a year of getting the job, Mr. Watson seemed to have succeeded: The credit unit, which had $8.62 billion in assets -- excluding off-balance-sheet liabilities -- before Mr. Watson arrived, reached the $3 billion benchmark last June.
In fact, assets in Westinghouse's financial-services unit are down to about $1 billion.
On paper, it appears that Mr. Watson had a great record.
But, in fact, one big reason the assets shrank so quickly was simple: Westinghouse just wrote down about $2.65 billion.
"It got him a good part of the way," says one person close to the situation.
So of the $5.62 billion Mr. Watson had to get rid of, half of it was, in effect, just excised by the stroke of a pen.
Mr. Watson's employment contract didn't say how the figure had to get under $3 billion, so a pretax write-down was fair game.
Under Mr. Watson's leadership, Westinghouse also sold most of its commercial real-estate assets for $1 billion -- or 52% of the properties' original book value.
But it sold them, in a way, to itself.
After failing to sell that portfolio to General Electric Co., it formed a partnership consisting of itself and its main investment banker, Lehman Brothers Inc.
Westinghouse made a $150 million equity investment in the partnership.
In December, with his job done, he left.
Mr. Watson's employment contract also guaranteed that he would receive a pension as if he had started work at Westinghouse on April 15, 1968.
Add to that the fact that his contract expires in 1997 and he effectively is credited with 30 years of service.
Alan Johnson of Johnson Associates Inc., a New York compensation-consulting firm, estimates that Mr. Watson's pension-based on compensation of $900,000 a year -- would be between $400,000 and $500,000 annually.
In all, one person close to the situation says, Mr. Watson left with a payment "in excess of $10 million."
That included five years of base salary, or about $3.5 million; bonuses of $700,000 a year for five years, or $3.5 million; an "equity-plus grant under Westinghouse's long-term incentive program" of about $2 million for work performed in 1993; and an additional bonus of more than $2 million.
The company would neither confirm nor deny the $10 million figure.
"For the record, I'm choking, gagging," said Richard Koppes, general counsel for California Public Employees' Retirement System, a large institutional holder, when Mr. Watson's earnings were described.
But Westinghouse, which says it will disclose his compensation in its 1993 proxy statement, says Mr. Watson was worth what he was paid.
"Mr. Watson left because he had in a very timely manner, ahead of schedule, completed his assignment," says Frederick Wells Hill, a company spokesman.
Mr. Watson cut the company's portfolio exposure-assets and offbalance-sheet liabilities -- by billions, Mr. Hill adds, and did so at prices above book value.
Mr. Hill wasn't referring to the original book value but to a reduced value assigned after the company reviewed its portfolio.
Mr. Watson couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Lego, the chairman who brought in Mr. Watson, says, "I have no idea what Bob actually got.
But whatever he got he deserved, if you look at the problem he faced when he came in to work there.
We were not trying to find somebody who would work at minimum wage.
We were trying to find someone who would fix the financial-services unit."
Mr. Lego, who was forced to resign in January 1993, was succeeded by Michael H. Jordan.
Mr. Jordan received a $1 million annual salary and a $400,000 signing bonus when he joined the company last year.
His annual target bonus is no less than $500,000.
Depending on goals set before each year, he can receive 0% to 200% of that bonus.
Mr. Jordan also was included in Westinghouse's long-term bonus program, which started in 1992 and ends this year.
If the company reaches certain goals, he could get another $500,000.
Kit Bingham, a frequent critic of Westinghouse, said "you're kidding" when given a description of Mr. Watson's package.
But Mr. Bingham, director of research for Lens Inc., a Westinghouse shareholder, added: "Clearly, a company like Westinghouse would have trouble trying to attract talent. so I wouldn't want to criticize this."
Mr. Watson's job is still available.
