Nibbling at a few stocks, but not gobbling.
That's what some money-management veterans are doing now that the Dow Jones Industrial Average is off more than 5% from its peak.
Even in tough times, the pros don't stop buying altogether.
"It's a trader's market.
Things are moving," says Elizabeth Bramwell, the longtime associate of Mario Gabelli who struck out on her own this year.
But many market veterans are keeping some powder dry.
They want to be ready to snatch up bargains if the stock market's six-week slide continues.
Bramwell Capital Management in New York is about 10% in cash.
Dreyfus Growth & Income Fund has more than 20% cash, though fund manager Richard Hoey started to do a little buying yesterday.
Richard Arms, celebrated as a technical market analyst, has a fat 50% cash hoard in the mutual fund he started running this year.
While many investors have been spooked by tensions in Korea, Russia, Mexico, and South Africa, Ms. Bramwell is looking for the companies that can benefit.
"There's a lot of unrest in the world, so I like certain stocks" such as Loral and General Motors H shares (for Hughes Aircraft), she says.
Both are defense contractors.
(GM Hughes is also involved in a big project to bring satellite television into American homes.)
She also has been buying shares in OM Group, a Cleveland producer of specialty chemicals, particularly ones involving cobalt.
Fighting in South Africa might affect supplies of cobalt, she believes, but OM isn't as vulnerable as competitors.
On an unrelated note, Ms. Bramwell speculates that after the harsh winter just concluded, people might splurge on clothing.
She has bought shares in Talbots, Jones Apparel Group and J.C. Penney.
Ms. Bramwell doesn't want to talk specifically about stocks she's been selling.
But she is avoiding interest-rate-sensitive stocks.
For those, she says, "maybe there's a time to pick up your marbles and go home for a while."
Mr. Arms, creator of the Arms index widely used by technical-market analysts, runs $120 million at Arms Cos. in Albuquerque, N.M., including $40 million in Investors Research Fund, a mutual fund.
In private accounts that allow the technique, he has been short-selling S&P 500 index futures -- betting that the stock market will decline.
In his mutual fund, Mr. Arms can't play with index futures, but he has 50% in cash as he expects the market to continue to head south.
"We are seeing some very strange numbers on the Arms index," he says.
Lately, Mr. Arms says, rising stocks have been hogging a disproportionate share of trading volume even though the market has been falling -- a worrisome sign in his view.
"So many people out there believe that any pullback is a buying opportunity that they are pouring money into the few stocks that are rising," Mr. Arms says.
Mr. Arms has been doing some selective buying, concentrating on stocks that seem to have bottomed out after a long fall.
He has bought battered drug stocks such as Merck and Upjohn, computer stocks such as International Business Machines and Apple Computer, and food stocks including Kellogg and H.J. Heinz.
At the same time, he has been tossing out telecommunications stocks and "information highway" stocks he inherited when he took over Investors Research Fund at the start of the year.
Brett Brubaker, president of Abraham & Sons in Chicago, wasn't a bear for the past two years but now has 75% of his hedge fund's money in short sales.
A short sale is a bet that a stock will decline.
The short-seller borrows stock and immediately sells it.
Eventually he must buy stock to replace the borrowed shares.
But if the stock falls in the meantime, he profits because the replacement shares are purchased cheaply.
"The stocks that got way overextended are economically sensitive stocks" such as Chrysler and Airgas, Mr. Brubaker says.
Those are among his chief short positions, along with Lotus Development, which he thinks is too expensive at 43 times the past four quarters' earnings.
On the buy side, Mr. Brubaker has been choosing "beaten-up names" such as Amgen, a biotechnology company; Fleming, a food distributor; WMX Technologies and Rollins Environmental Services, both waste-disposal companies.
"My hunch is that we have seen the highs for some time," he says.
"The tide's going out, I think."
One gloomy sign, he says, is that the Dow Jones Utility Average is down about 20% from its high.
Since utility stocks are often considered a harbinger of interest-rate trends, he thinks more rate increases are still ahead.
(Bonds and utility stocks both rose yesterday, helping stocks recover from heavy midday losses.)
Mr. Hoey of Dreyfus Growth & Income Fund says that until yesterday he had been "raising cash by letting the cash flow that's coming into the fund accumulate."
Mr. Hoey won't say exactly how much cash he has in the $1.6 billion fund, but allows that it's more than 20%.
"You had a market that had gotten so overbought and boisterous that it was hard to buy even the stocks you liked," he says.
After six weeks of decline that began in early February, "the market has lost momentum, but it's not as expensive as it was."
He has turned neutral on the market, rather than negative.
Yesterday, Mr. Hoey unleashed part of his cash hoard to add a bit to his previous positions in Fluor, GTE and Albany International.
Fluor, he says, "has been dead for a long period of time" and "is a long-term beneficiary of the trend towards infrastructure demand."
GTE is "not a very exciting company but it's down from 39 7/8 to 31 and change."
(The stock yesterday was at 31 7/8, up 5/8.)
Albany International, which makes equipment used by paper producers, should ride on the tide of its customers' improving fortunes, he says.
Easing Back Mr. Hoey stresses that he is easing back into the market: "I don't see any grand reason to go racing in."
Meanwhile, he has chopped his holdings of stocks in emerging markets in South America and Asia, to 2.7% from 7.4% last fall.
"At the end of last year it just became . . . a blowoff in those markets," he says.
"Portfolio managers were frothing at the mouth."
Brokers, he says, were pushing "Peruvian stocks, Columbian stocks, Turkish stocks.
They hadn't gotten to Mars or Venus yet, but I knew it was coming."
Mr. Hoey says he rushed to lighten up after reading a brokerage report in December touting shares in Thailand's telephone company.
The analyst (Mr. Hoey says he doesn't remember who it was) said the stock -- then at 105 -- was worth only 85, but a buying frenzy would probably push it to 150.
"That is full and complete capitulation to the bigger-fool theory," says Mr. Hoey.
"I don't want to be the bigger fool."
After a smashing success last year, stocks in emerging markets have generally been weak this year.
Mr. Hoey said that when he sold shares in December and January, he was struck by how difficult the stocks were to sell, even on good days.
John D. Rogers, president of Ariel Capital Management in Chicago, says he hasn't changed tactics much this year.
Bargain-priced stocks are hard to find, he says.
"The correction hasn't been enough of a drop to find things to add to our buy list yet."
He has, however, padded positions in MBIA, the municipal-bond insurer, and Duff & Phelps, the money-management and bond-rating firm.
Both are hurt by rising interest rates.
But investors, he feels, have punished them excessively.
At the same time, Mr. Rogers has sold some shares in T. Rowe Price Associates, the mutual-fund management company, believing the stock had gotten "a little ahead of itself."
If the correction goes deeper, which Mr. Rogers thinks it will, he doesn't want to be overexposed to the mutual-fund business.
Mr. Rogers expects the decline will bring the Dow industrials down to the neighborhood of 3000.
The high on Jan. 31 was 3978.36.
Yesterday's close was 3762.35, off 12.38.
Most vulnerable, he believes, are highflying "concept stock" restaurant chains such as Boston Chicken.
One reason Mr. Rogers expects a stiff correction is that stock valuations were so high all last year.
Another is the "miserable" action of the utilities.
Before the correction runs its course, he thinks bargains won't be so hard to find.
Rep. Jim Cooper is the latest darling of health care reform, according to much of Washington.
The Business Roundtable endorsed much of his plan.
The nation's governors are reported leaning his way.
Even Ross Perot invited him to lunch.
But while the desperate search for an alternative to President Clinton's health reform plan is understandable, everyone should think twice before embracing Mr. Cooper's proposal.
"Clinton Heavy" may be terrible, but "Clinton Lite" is not a whole lot better.
Rep. Cooper's bill owes its popularity to the absence of many of the Clinton plan's worst features -- employer mandates, price controls, mandatory purchasing alliances, etc.
It even avoids the individual mandate popular in some "conservative" reforms.
However, a closer look at Rep. Cooper's proposal reveals its own litany of horrors.
Like its Clinton progenitor, the Cooper plan is based on the untested concept of "managed competition."
As Alain Enthoven, one of the leading proponents of managed competition admits, managed competition is not "a free market system."
He is certainly correct about that.
It is possible to have either managed health care or to have open competition in health care services.
It is not possible to have both.
Advocates of managed competition -- including both Mr. Clinton and Mr. Cooper -- want government regulation to substitute for market processes.
They lack confidence in the ability of health care consumers to make their own decisions.
Even more than the Clinton plan, Rep. Cooper's bill is designed to funnel Americans into health maintenance organizations.
He accomplishes this by limiting the tax deductibility of employer-provided insurance to the lowest-cost plan available.
Rep. Cooper and other advocates of managed competition have a tremendous faith in the ability of managed care to control health care costs.
However, a 1992 report by A. Foster Higgins Co. indicated that half of employers who switched from non-managed care plans to HMOs said their HMO rates were as high or higher than their previous rates.
Likewise, a Congressional Budget Office report found that shifting Medicare patients to HMOs "had little or no effect on hospital use and costs."
In addition, a recent RAND Corp. study indicates that managed care providers were as likely as fee-for-service providers to perform unnecessary procedures.
By pushing Americans into managed care, the Cooper bill holds the potential to severely disrupt the traditional doctor-patient relationship.
Managed competition changes insurers, in Mr. Enthoven's words, from "financial intermediaries with expertise in underwriting risks" into "health care delivery systems . . . organizing, managing and purchasing medical care."
In short, advocates of managed competition believe physicians should be responsible to insurers, rather than to the patient.
Thus, the patient's choice of physician should be limited to give the insurer increased bargaining power with the doctor.
And insurers must have increasing control over physicians' choice of treatment, so that insurers can "apply quality assurance or review of appropriateness."
Managed care plans are notorious for second-guessing physicians and limiting access to some types of treatment.
As Swiss medical philosopher Ernest Truffer has noted, the increasing interjection of third parties between doctor and patient "amounts to a rejection of the medical ethic -- which is to care for a patient according to the latter's specific {medical} requirements -- in favor of a veterinary ethic, which consists in caring for the sick animal not in accordance with its specific medical needs, but according to the requirements of its master and owner, the person responsible for meeting any costs incurred."
A second major problem with the Cooper plan is its requirement that insurers must accept all applicants, regardless of whether they are in perfect health or on their death beds.
That includes those with active illnesses, such as cancer or AIDS.
The goal for such a requirement, known as "guaranteed issue," is to increase access to insurance for individuals with pre-existing medical conditions.
But at what cost?
Studies indicate that while employers with high-risk employees would certainly notice improved access to coverage under proposed insurance reforms, overall premiums could increase substantially.
A study by the American Society of Actuaries found that claims costs of guaranteed-issue policies averaged 38% higher.
This confirms earlier studies by Community Mutual Insurance of Ohio and Tillinghast Corp. that showed premiums increasing by 25% to 35% under guaranteed issue.
Even the liberal advocacy group Families USA Foundation estimates that 50% of small groups would experience a rate increase if guaranteed issue is adopted.
The net result would be to force many small businesses to drop their current insurance coverage.
While some currently uninsured workers would move into the insurance market, others, who now have insurance, would be forced out.
Thus the Cooper bill could actually increase the number of uninsured.
These problems are compounded by the ability of people to "game" the system.
The reason that healthy people purchase health insurance is the fear that they may lack such insurance if they become sick.
However, if health insurance becomes available regardless of health status, much of the incentive to pay for insurance while healthy is removed.
Since the Cooper bill does not require people to purchase insurance, it would become a rational choice to do without health insurance until the need arises.
Automobile insurance provides a good analogy.
If it were possible to purchase auto insurance after an accident occurred, would people be likely to purchase insurance before the accident?
Rep. Cooper would also require modified "community rating" of insurance premiums.
Insurers would be prohibited from basing premiums on an individual's health.
Healthy people and sick people would pay the same for insurance.
But insurance is a business of risk allocation, in which the insurer receives payment in exchange for agreeing to cover the expense of certain risks.
The cost and scope of coverage is determined by morbidity/mortality statistical analysis.
To the degree that insurers are prevented from basing their contracts on such actuarial values, other policyholders will be forced to absorb the additional costs.
Thus, in order to provide coverage for a person with AIDS, a person without AIDS must pay a higher premium.
Moreover, the additional costs are highly regressive, forcing the highest marginal costs on those least able to afford the increase.
For example, if community rating causes the premiums for a family policy to increase by $1,000, that's a 5% surcharge for a family earning only $20,000 a year, but only a 1% surcharge for a family earning $100,000.
We should also recognize that community rating relieves individuals of the responsibility for unhealthy lifestyles.
There is no question that individuals who smoke, drink, use drugs, practice unsafe sex, have poor diets, and fail to exercise have far higher health costs than individuals with healthy lifestyles.
In fact, the top 10 causes of death in the U.S. are all lifestyle related.
By spreading the cost over the entire population, community rating and guaranteed issue "socialize" the costs in the truest sense of the word.
Unlike President Clinton's bill, Rep. Cooper's does not spell out the services to be covered under the minimum standard benefits package, leaving that task up to an independent commission.
This is apparently an attempt to insulate decisions on what benefits to include from political pressure.
But based on history and human nature, inclusion in the mandated benefits package is much more likely to be based on the relative lobbying strength of various providers than on a rational view of medical necessity.
Whatever benefits are mandated will increase the cost of insurance.
And consumers will be deprived of the ability to make individual choices regarding the benefits they wish to purchase.
Ultimately, the Cooper bill -- like the Clinton plan -- is based on the mistaken belief that government can manage a marketplace better than consumers themselves.
The talk on Capitol Hill is that health care reform will ultimately be a compromise between the Clinton and Cooper bills.
A compromise between a bad plan and a not-quite-as-bad plan cannot possibly be good for the American people.
Mr. Tanner is director of health and welfare studies at the Cato Institute in Washington.
