Manuel Camacho Solis heightened political tensions by threatening to launch a maverick presidential bid if the ruling-party candidate and government don't become more democratic.
By keeping the political situation uncertain, Mr. Camacho probably increases the prospects for peace in Chiapas, where he has been the government's negotiator with the rebels.
The reason is that, while the rebels aren't sure they can trust the official candidates, the possibility that Mr. Camacho could launch a powerful campaign for the August vote may make the government move quickly and irreversibly toward the reforms the rebels are demanding.
The rebel leader, Subcommander Marcos, had said in an interview published in Reforma on Friday that he wasn't happy with the government's progress and threatened to take up arms again.
Mr. Camacho's possible presidential bid also probably will keep the financial markets here uncertain.
Investors like the free-market policies instituted by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and the sort of continuity provided by the ruling party, which has won every presidential race for more than six decades.
With thinly veiled criticisms of the ruling-party candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, at a news conference Friday, Mr. Camacho certainly increased the friction between them.
Mr. Colosio -- who edged out Mr. Camacho as the ruling-party candidate -- has gone on the attack in recent days, criticizing some of the programs Mr. Camacho instituted as mayor of Mexico City.
Mr. Camacho retaliated by saying that his policies continued to be popular with most citizens here and said he wouldn't be blamed for the problems of others, apparently alluding to the fact that Mr. Colosio's campaign is off to a slow start.
Mr. Camacho also bristled about attempts to keep him out of the race and about people who are "inventing administrative problems" concerning his time as mayor.
While Mr. Camacho didn't take questions, he was apparently referring to an alleged campaign organized by hardliners within the ruling party to audit many of his programs, to fire appointees he left behind when he resigned as mayor late last year and to mount a press campaign against him.
Many political analysts here had expected Mr. Camacho to either declare himself in or out of the race by tomorrow, the filing deadline for presidential candidates.
But Mr. Camacho made clear at the news conference that he intends to take advantage of a provision that would let him enter the race as late as July 21, a month before the elections, by persuading any of a half-dozen minor-party candidates to step aside in his favor.
"If democracy isn't advanced and if in place of agreements there is polarization . . .
I would take the political decision necessary to advance democracy and help unify Mexico," Mr. Camacho said.
