Italian media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi and his right-wing Freedom Alliance looked set to gain control of the Italian parliament following the country's landmark elections.
But whether the odd group -- which also includes the neo-fascist National Alliance and federalist Northern League -- can form a cohesive government is still uncertain, Italian political commentators said.
In the first elections since the country's two-year-old corruption scandal decimated the reigning political establishment, the Freedom Alliance led voting in the lower house of parliament and was likely to claim an absolute majority, exit polls showed.
Based on projections of actual votes for the Senate, the Alliance also led voting in the Senate over the left-wing Progressive Alliance.
Final results of the historic election, which ends the near half-century rule of the departing Christian Democrat-led coalition, will not be available until today.
But two independent exit polls last night showed the Freedom Alliance with an absolute majority of seats in the lower house.
According to a poll by Directa for Telemontecarlo, the Freedom Alliance won an estimated 315 to 380 seats of the 630-seat Chamber of Deputies while the Progressives claimed an estimated 210 to 255 seats.
The Center, comprising former Christian Democrats and the reformist Pact for Italy, claimed 40 to 50 seats.
An alliance needs 315 seats for a majority.
In the Senate, an RAI TV projection based on an early vote count showed the Freedom Alliance won 41% of the votes, while the Progressive Alliance took 35%.
According to Doxa projections, the Freedom Alliance led voting in the Senate, winning 153 to 171 of the 315 Senate seats while the Progressive Alliance claimed 130 to 142.
However, an earlier exit poll by Doxa for Mr. Berlusconi's Channel 5 TV reversed the outcome, giving the Progressives 48% to 54% of the seats and the Freedom Alliance 37% to 44%.
"Three months ago we had an uncertain future in front of us with a leftist regime that would not have guaranteed freedom," Mr. Berlusconi declared triumphantly at a news conference in Rome after midnight.
In anticipation of a clear majority for either side, financial markets reacted euphorically Monday, lifting the Milan Stock Exchange 3.8% and boosting the lira to 1,634 to the dollar from 1,653 on Friday.
The market reaction was not so much an endorsement of the victors, analysts said, as relief that a long period of political uncertainty appeared to be over.
With elections over, analysts say any new government will have little room to maneuver in the critical areas of reining in the state's galloping debt, privatizing industry and turning back the bloated welfare state.
Uncertainty clouds the future.
For one, the composition of the next government is far from clear.
Over the next few days, President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro will choose the next prime minister who will then be asked to form a government.
While Mr. Scalfaro is likely to pick a leader from the Freedom Alliance, if final results confirm a majority, formation of a government could prove problematic.
Mr. Berlusconi has made no secret of his ambition to head the next government; however, serious differences between his allies could split the Freedom Alliance and force negotiations with the Center.
In such a scenario, the Center has said it would favor reform leader Mario Segni as premier.
The fragility of the alliances will be a major obstacle not only to formation of an eventual government but to the actual programs of the government.
Mr. Berlusconi's Forza Italia is part of the Freedom Alliance with the federalist Northern League and the neo-fascist National Alliance.
Last night, National League leader Umberto Bossi signaled potential problems in governing with the neo-fascists.
"The League stands for modern, liberal Italy, not a reactionary Italy," Mr. Bossi said, referring to the National Alliance.
He said his party draws votes mainly from the poorer south, "which is trying to open up the wallets of the north."
The two-day poll was the first test of Italy's awkward new electoral system, where 75% of parliament will be elected through a U.S. style winner-take-all system and the balance through proportional representation.
