It's a rugged stock market.
So let's play it the hard way, some investors say.
Hard, as in capital goods.
As in steelmakers, and even aluminum companies.
It is a push that some market skeptics don't agree with, particularly in the case of the aluminum industry, where earnings have been poor amid record-low inflationadjusted prices for the metal.
But the bulls are adamant.
Major aluminum stocks have jumped 11% so far this year, after pulling out of the doldrums in late 1993.
Steel stocks this year have remained strong after a 31% jump in 1993.
Two of Wall Street's best-known seers -- Vanguard Group's John Neff and Lehman Brothers market guru Elaine Garzarelli -- are big fans of aluminum and steel, respectively.
"We have the aluminums large," Mr. Neff said Friday, acknowledging that "it's hard to warm up to them in terms of current earnings."
Mr. Neff envisions an easing in the global aluminum glut and growing aluminum demand, both from Detroit auto makers and from world-wide users of beverage cans.
His biggest aluminum holdings are Aluminum Co. of America and Reynolds Metals, despite having absorbed the latter stock's 15% decline in 1993.
But Mr. Neff recently sold his Alumax for valuation reasons, he says.
Ms. Garzarelli, meanwhile, is pounding the table for USX-U.S. Steel Group and other steel stocks, which fit into her scenario of a strengthening economy.
USX-U.S. Steel is the steelmaking unit of USX Corp., and trades on its own on the Big Board.
"This is the strongest underpinning I've seen for this economy since 1965," she told an investors' conference in Orlando, Fla., last week.
She recently upgraded the metals, paper and trucking industries, arguing that "this is the 1960s all over again . . . when capital goods outperform nondurables" such as tobacco and drug stocks.
In an interview Friday, Ms. Garzarelli elaborated: "The reason we like U.S. Steel is it's probably the most capital-intensive, capital-spending stock you can think of.
Steel goes into spending on plant, on machinery, just about every building there is."
The stock is even more inviting, by her reasoning, after declining 1 to 43 in Friday's market dive.
Steelmakers are selling as much steel as they can make.
In fact, for the first time ever, U.S. Steel is revamping a hot-strip mill on the fly: Instead of closing down the mill at Gary, Ind., for a month for the nearly $90 million project, it's idling the operation for 48 hours once a month.
U.S. Steel doesn't want to miss out on the auto market -- it supplies much of the steel for the best-selling Ford Taurus.
The steel industry continues to expect higher shipments this year than in 1993, itself a strong year.
And while there are some signs of rising imports, a big part of that is because U.S. steelmakers can't make enough steel to keep up with demand.
Bethlehem Steel's Burns Harbor, Ind., plant, for instance, is importing semifinished steel.
Another sign of the industry's strength: Armco's joint carbon-steel venture with Kawasaki Steel Corp. of Japan will be put on the market, via an initial public offering.
Some investors have a harder time getting comfortable with aluminum.
Aluminum stocks have been buoyed by the recent accord out of Brussels to cut global output by roughly 10%, an attempt to address oversupply.
But will the accord stick?
After all, the cuts are largely voluntary.
Maverick producers may choose to ignore them if prices rise.
Russian smelters, desperate for currency, may not go along with their government's wishes to slash production.
Aluminum Co. of America, known as Alcoa, just reported a wider-than-expected quarterly net loss of $86.9 million, or $1 a share.
"It's crazy," says a large New York investor who is shorting the stock.
The bullish story is fine, he says, but not when Alcoa's stock price, at 76 1/8, "is selling close to its all-time high."
A short sale is a bet that a stock will decline.
"The last time Alcoa stock sold at this level was in the '50s and they were earning $10 a share; and now they're losing money," the investor growls.
"The thing that's implausible to me is: If aluminum prices are really going up, then inflation is back, and that's bad for the market."
Indeed, there isn't universal agreement about the metals stocks, even among proponents of one metal or the other.
Aluminum fan Mr. Neff, manager of Vanguard's Windsor Fund, has his doubts about steel.
"We did have big holdings in steels, but they've had a pretty good run and we've lightened up there -- without naming names," Mr. Neff says.
