A bipartisan federal advisory committee called for an overhaul of the Head Start program for preschool children, with more emphasis on quality and less on quantity.
In an 84-page report expected to serve as a legislative blueprint for reforming the government's health and education program for low-income, preschool children, the committee said inconsistent quality among the various Head Start centers is one of the program's biggest problems.
Measures outlined by the panel range from establishing minimum performance standards to raising teacher salaries to reducing staff caseloads.
Beyond focusing on quality, the committee also said Head Start should be expanded.
Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.), chairman of the Senate Labor Committee, said he planned to introduce legislation incorporating the recommendations within the next few months.
But Douglas Besharov, a member of the advisory panel, warned that if just half of the recommendations were adopted, the cost of Head Start would rise to $10,000 per child each year from about $4,000 currently.
"It makes Head Start too expensive even for this administration," said Mr. Besharov, a lawyer at the American Enterprise Institute.
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala said Head Start will receive "a substantial investment" in the administration's new budget, but she added there were many ways to improve quality without pouring money into the program.
Head Start, which now serves about 721,000 children, will receive $3.3 billion in federal money this fiscal year.
Edward Zigler, one of Head Start's founders and a member of the advisory committee, praised the plan as a "complete overhaul," the first attempt in the program's 29-year history to tackle its real problems.
The Reagan and Bush administrations, he said, were more interested in increasing the number of children served than in dealing with quality control.
To improve quality, the committee recommended reducing caseloads for the program's social-service workers to 35 families each.
Some staffers now handle 100 families each, and Mr. Zigler said he knew of workers who had caseloads as high as 500.
The committee also suggested using federal money to buy new centers in some cases; one-third of the current centers are so substandard that they need to be replaced or extensively remodeled, according to a survey by the National Head Start Association.
The committee said Head Start also should be expanded to serve preschoolers for full eight-hour days, as well as toddlers.
The program currently serves mainly four-year-olds in half-day programs.
Given the large number of working parents, such programs no longer meet families' needs, the report said.
But the committee stressed the need to develop a plan to serve children under age three.
Research suggests the first three years of life are so critical that children shouldn't wait until age four to begin Head Start programs.
