In his own way, Helmut Werner is trying to steer Mercedes-Benz AG onto the track along which Chrysler Corp. has been racing.
One year into his makeover of the German luxury-car company, the chairman of Daimler-Benz AG's most prominent unit described how he intends to offer vehicles in segments where Mercedes-Benz hasn't had a presence, while cutting spending on new products.
Chrysler has become the toast of the car world by pulling off a similar feat.
Specifically, Mr. Werner disclosed that in the next five years, spending for development of new products will be cut to $18.7 billion marks ($10.74 billion), 11% less than in the past five years.
During the period, Mercedes-Benz expects to introduce a new luxury sport-utility vehicle, to open a factory in Alabama to build it, and to add a small city car and a sporty convertible, among other products.
"We will get much more for our investment than we did before," Mr. Werner said.
The executive was interviewed in the Detroit area while squeezed shoulder-to-shoulder in the back seat of a Cadillac, on the way to catch a plane to Mexico, where he was to open a new bus factory.
When asked about the world's toughest competitors today, Mr. Werner listed traditional archrival Bayerische Motoren Werke, the Lexus division of Toyota Motor Corp. -- and Chrysler.
The U.S. auto maker has been setting new standards for lean product development and has managed to extend and upgrade its product line in the U.S. with a string of hits.
Mr. Werner said his efforts to introduce a "Mercedes-specific lean logic" have led to cost reductions of about four billion marks a year since he took over operating control in January 1993.
That partly reflects the elimination of 14,300 jobs last year.
Mr. Werner said a further 8,000 jobs are to be cut this year, down from an earlier plan to eliminate 13,300 in 1994.
He said Mercedes-Benz's labor unions persuaded the company to lower its sights by agreeing to greater job flexibility.
Despite the dismal economic outlook for Europe, Mr. Werner was bullish about Mercedes-Benz's prospects for this year.
He forecast that the company's car sales would rise about 12% to 570,000 vehicles world-wide.
About 70,000 of those cars would be sold in the U.S., he said, compared with 1993 sales of about 61,000.
Mercedes-Benz's entry into new segments will expand the company's volume by nearly 250,000 vehicles a year to around 850,000 within the next 10 years, Mr. Werner said.
The biggest seller is expected to be a new subcompact city car that Mercedes-Benz is preparing to introduce in 1997.
That vehicle is expected to be priced in Germany around 30,000 marks.
