It's increasingly known that some of the Clinton administration's leading lights very much admire Germany, the capitalist welfare state that works.
Well, used to, maybe.
It would be an understatement to say that the economic news from Germany hasn't been good recently.
Western Germany's unemployment could reach 10% this year.
There is encouraging news on the policy front, however -- at least it's encouraging from our political perspective.
Some of Germany's leading figures have recognized that if the country is to compete with its less-prosperous neighbors to the south and east, significant reforms must be undertaken.
This represents the first major crack in the general unwillingness to blame the welfare state for dragging down the economy.
Proposals in the government's "Action Program for More Growth and Jobs" are forthright.
The 30-point plan just adopted is a dual acknowledgement that the German state can no longer provide the range of social services it offered during the Cold War era and that its burdensome regulation is an obstacle to German competitiveness.
Included are calls for deregulation, particularly in housing, and privatization of some state operations, such as the financing, construction and operation of state highways.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl says "these decisions are absolutely necessary to safeguard our future."
Boosting the credibility of the government's reformist spirit are other recent actions: nearly $3 billion in spending cuts, just agreed to following a December announcement of reductions in the government's generous unemployment benefits and child-support payments.
A federal program that compensates construction workers when bad weather prevents them from working will be modified.
Germany's biggest economic problem of course is high labor costs.
In a recent interview with the Hamburg newspaper Bild, Mr. Kohl conceded, "We all have to change our way of thinking now in order to secure Germany as a future location and make it competitive. . . .
The problem is labor has become too expensive in our country."
The German Chamber of Commerce and Industry reported in November that close to one in three of the country's manufacturers were expecting to transfer parts of their operations out of the country.
So the welfare state that works is being re-engineered.
We hope the administration's admirers of the old model will check it out.
