The Securities and Exchange Commission formally stepped up its pressure on municipal-bond issuers to make them behave more like publicly traded companies.
Under rules proposed yesterday, brokers and dealers would be barred from selling most municipal bonds unless the underwriters guaranteed that the issuers would file annual financial statements and provide notice of events that could affect the issuers' financial health.
The proposed rule would apply to brokers and dealers, because federal law prohibits the SEC from directly requiring the disclosure of financial data from state and local entities that issue bonds.
Issuers and other bond-market participants operate under guidelines for voluntary disclosure of financial data, but SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt said, "This is not enough."
The SEC has long wanted investors in municipal securities to receive more data about the financial health of the issuers.
The agency is taking preventative measures in the bond market and not acting "in the wake of some tragedy," said Elisse Walter, deputy director of the SEC's corporation finance division.
The proposal to codify the SEC's expectations for disclosure is likely to provoke criticism from both dealers and issuers, and the SEC scheduled an unusually long comment period of 120 days to gather reaction from all interested parties, including public bodies unaccustomed to dealing with the agency.
"These are state and local governments, and not fat-cat tender offerers," said Caite McGuire, chief counsel of the SEC's division of market regulation.
The Public Securities Association, a New York trade group for bond dealers, reacted coolly to the proposed rules.
"PSA supports the efforts of regulators to improve secondary-market disclosure," group President Heather Ruth said in a statement, adding that the group will provide more-detailed comment after reviewing the SEC's written rule proposal.
In a related action, the commission proposed a separate rule that would require, among other things, that investors be informed when the credit-worthiness of a municipal-bond issue hasn't been assessed by a rating concern.
"Customers are not always aware that they are buying unrated bonds, some of which may be speculative," Mr. Levitt said.
The SEC reiterated its support of federal legislation that would require issuers of "conduit bonds" to follow the same registration and disclosure rules for publicly traded companies.
Conduit bonds typically finance private ventures, such as nursing homes, but are treated like municipal bonds.
They also have a higher default rate than other municipal securities.
Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.), chairman of the House finance subcommittee, yesterday said he intends to introduce legislation soon to remove the exemption from SEC registration for conduit bonds.
The SEC restated its belief that municipal-bond issuers are required to follow the agency's antifraud rules, including those that require disclosure of financial condition, risks and "potential conflicts of interest."
The potential conflicts include political contributions from underwriters and others to elected officials who control the issuers' awarding of bond business.
But Mr. Levitt said that failing to disclose the information isn't in itself a violation of antifraud rules.
Liability would kick in only when investors have been defrauded, he said.
In a separate rule proposal, the SEC listed several items that it expects broker-dealers to disclose on forms confirming customer orders.
Among those items is the estimated yield of collateralized mortgage obligations, specialized securities whose yield is tied to the prepayments of mortgages.
The SEC has previously expressed concern that investors in CMOs are frequently unaware that early prepayment of mortgages can significantly affect the yield of the securities.
