THINKING ABOUT asking for a pay raise?
Maybe you should think twice.
Surprisingly enough, a fatter paycheck could cripple your career.
Just look at what happened last year to Mark Smythe, a 47-year-old middle manager for a big communications company in Chicago.
He got a pink slip a few months after he got a 6% salary increase.
The $125,000-a-year manager says he was let go partly because he had become too expensive for the company to keep.
In today's lean-and-mean business environment, corporations often view employees as expenses to cut -- especially when their salaries become a strain on departmental budgets.
So you should take stock of your workplace's economic climate as well as your salary before you seek your next raise, career strategists recommend.
A corporate checkup is a good first step.
Is your employer healthy?
Take a look at your company's financial performance and see how its products are being received and how it's faring on Wall Street.
Are executives bracing for another round of job cuts?
If the layoff rumor mill is running at full speed, this may be a bad time for even superstars to seek more money.
You also should look for any hidden cost-cutting trends, suggests Calhoun W. Wick, president of Wick & Co., management consultants in Wilmington, Del.
For instance, is the company replacing long-time employees with temporary workers?
Or is it giving more work to outside contractors?
One telemarketing manager didn't notice such trends until it was too late.
For a year, his telemarketing firm had been replacing experienced, well-paid employees with less expensive and less experienced people, Mr. Wick recollects.
The middle manager nevertheless sought and received pay increases twice during a 12-month period.
A year later, the man found himself out of a job.
He was replaced by a newcomer who was paid less money, according to Mr. Wick.
YOU ALSO SHOULD ask yourself: How does my salary compare with people doing the same job elsewhere in the same industry?
"One of the biggest mistakes people make in their careers is not knowing how their pay stacks up against others," says Celia D. Crossley, a career strategist and human-resources consultant in Columbus, Ohio.
A case in point: Three Midwest pharmaceutical executives never realized that on an industry-wide basis, their salaries overpriced them by about 30%, says Ms. Crossley.
All three lost their jobs one week after receiving generous pay increases and a company sales-incentive trip to the Caribbean.
The company gave the dismissed managers' duties to lower-paid employees.
The three executives "thought that just because they had gotten a pay increase, their jobs were safe," Ms. Crossley explains.
"That's just not true these days."
There are several ways to "benchmark" your salary.
Career counselors suggest using industry conferences to poll peers about salary levels where they work.
Your company's human-resources department also can help you determine whether your salary has reached a dangerous level.
Perhaps one of the best barometers of prevailing salaries are executive recruiters knowledgeable about your industry or profession, says Joseph Meissner, president of Power Marketing, a San Francisco outplacement firm.
"They know exactly how much companies are paying for various positions," he notes.
If you find that your salary is comparatively high, you could be a target for company cost-cutters.
"Generally, if you find yourself in the top third of your company's salary range, you are extremely vulnerable," cautions Mr. Meissner.
"Asking for a raise will send out red flags everywhere."
BONUSES REPRESENT a way to increase your income without actually increasing your salary.
"If you meet your goals, you'll get a bonus.
But next year, your salary will still be the same," notes John O'Neil, a vice president with BeamPines, a New York outplacement and career-coaching firm.
"With bonuses, you can show real, tangible results and you don't price yourself out of a job."
Instead of seeking more money, you might ask for nonmonetary incentives, suggests Marilyn Buckner, a senior vice president with Enterchange, an outplacement firm in Atlanta.
She says the possibilities might include extra vacation time, tuition for an executive-education program or stock options.
If you find yourself about to be axed because you're overpriced, career counselors suggest taking more of your pay in the form of a bonus keyed to results.
You also may want to push for more responsibilities or pursue a promotion.
But beware: Some promotions also can be perilous to your career's health.
Make certain that the proffered promotion isn't actually a dead end, career counselors advise.
Ben G. Stein, a New York paper company supervisor, fought so hard for a pay increase last year that the company finally relented and offered him a director's title and a 5% pay increase.
But the new position carried no real responsibilities, he recalls.
Frustrated, he quit six months later.
"I should have researched the new job more carefully," Mr. Stein concedes.
"If I had talked to a few people, I would have realized the new job went nowhere."
He remains unemployed.
