Besides the devastation of property and lives, the earthquake which struck Los Angeles Monday could have financial repercussions since California is the nation's largest issuer of municipal bonds.
Both Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard & Poor's Corp. said it was too soon to offer official assessments of the damage and its effect on bondholders.
But officials at both rating agencies suggested that while they weren't expecting any sweeping rating changes, certain types of bonds could be in for sharp downgrades.
Investors and market analysts said the value of municipal bonds outstanding won't necessarily drop because of the earthquake.
That's because the ability of local issuers to pay their bills will be helped by disaster relief coming from the federal government.
Meanwhile, the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose more than 1/4 point, or more than $2.50 for a bond with $1,000 face value to 99 22/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, dropped to 6.26% from 6.29% on Friday.
U.S. bond markets were closed Monday for the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday.
Last year, issuers in California sold $38.12 billion of new municipal bonds with maturities of 13 months or more, according to Securities Data Co., repesenting 13.2% of all issues sold in the U.S. Los Angeles County and the city of Los Angeles are two of the state's biggest issuers.
Early yesterday Greg Harrington, director of trading and research at Franklin Group of Funds, the nation's leading investor in California municipal bonds, directed his colleagues to call issuers in the Los Angeles area to get some idea of the extent of the earthquake damage.
Franklin owns about $16 billion of California municipal bonds in various funds it manages for investors.
"We couldn't find anything disturbing about our portfolio" of holdings, he said, though details of the damage are still sketchy because many public officials could not be reached.
"There is extensive damage," he said.
But Mr. Harrington said he expected the damage to be less than that of the earthquake which hit San Francisco in 1989.
"The main damage is to the highways," he explained, many of which are federal highways with part of the expenses to be borne by the U.S. government.
"There has to be some damage to local and county roads," he said, but that didn't appear to be as extensive.
More important for investors, it doesn't appear the earthquake will jeopardize the ability of many issuers to continue paying the coupons on bond issues.
But the ability to pay depends largely on the type of issuer involved, pointed out Joseph Rosenblum, director of municipal research at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. of New York.
Bonds issued to back specific projects seem most vulnerable to rating changes and even default, he said.
"The project may have been destroyed," he said.
Also at risk are lease financing bonds where an issuer pays off a debt with the revenues of a project financed by bonds.
Bonds backed by revenues of a water, sewage, transportation, or electrical system in the Los Angeles area may experience some short-term price drops, due to a disruption in revenues, but when repairs are made, the prices should recover, he said.
"The question is how extensive is the damage to the system," said Mr. Rosenblum.
According to a report from Moody's on the effect of the earthquake, "a more vulnerable class of debt is certificates of participation where debt-service payments are conditional upon having beneficial use of the asset being leased."
This form of bond is popular in the Los Angeles area, said Moody's, with nearly 100 certificates of participation rated by Moody's in Los Angeles County alone.
But about 40% of these carry the same ratings as the city and county of Los Angeles, which are unlikely to be sharply downgraded.
According to the Moody's report "the effect of a natural disaster on debt secured by a general government pledge is indirect.
This type of debt includes general obligation and essential purpose revenue bonds, and the pledge to make debt service payments is absolute and unconditional."
Moody's said it "does not expect any rating adjustment over the short-term to result for such bonds."
These so-called general obligation bonds, which are issued by state and local issuers are unlikely to be adversely affected by an earthquake, since they are not backed by any specific project by the full faith and credit of the issuer.
So even though there is severe damage to certain sectors of Los Angeles County, that does not totally hamper the county's ability to pay off its general obligation bonds.
The big caveat in this equation concerns the area's highways and how long it will be before they are repaired.
Tourism and business spending in Los Angeles could drop off if repairs are lengthy, and, over time, this could make debt payments difficult.
The impact of the earthquake on California will be different than that of other recent natural disasters, including Hurricane Andrew and the San Francisco earthquake, said Mr. Rosenblum of Sanford & Bernstein.
In the past, such natural disaster have "had little impact on municipal bonds," he said.
But California "has gone through a very rough period lately and this earthquake could discourage more investments and tourists in the area."
The earthquake has already delayed at least one municipal bond offering slated for pricing this week.
A $20 million Anaheim Public Financing Authority water revenue bond issue, to be sold competitively today, was delayed until Jan. 25 despite the absence of direct damage to the issuer's system.
Meanwhile, a $225.9 million refunding expected this week from Southern California Public Power Authority is being postponed mainly because of structural problems with the offering itself.
Scattered buying lifted prices of Treasury securities, with the best gains posted by issues maturing in 10 years or less.
There was no trading in the cash bond market Monday in observance of the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday.
The bond market began the day lower, continuing the sell-off sparked late last week by reports showing stronger-than-expected business activity.
But by midmorning, the tide began to turn.
Traders said the market got a lift from swap-related buying of intermediate notes and from buying related to municipal defeasance.
Under defeasance, a state or local government pre-refunds older, higher interest debt by issuing new securities.
The proceeds from the new issuance are frequently invested in Treasury securities until the older debt can be called.
About $300 million of municipal refunding debt was issued yesterday.
Participants said dealer short-covering also helped push prices higher.
In a short sale, a trader bets prices will go lower by selling a borrowed security in hopes of buying it back at a lower level and pocketing the difference.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated Jan. 20.
The 13-week bills mature April 21, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature July 21, 1994.
Paper-hungry investors snapped up $2.68 billion of new bonds yesterday in 15 different offerings.
Many of the offerings were by first time or infrequent issuers including Duty Free International Inc.'s $115 million offering, Tyco International Ltd.'s $105 million debt offering, and a $250 million debt offering from Mitchell Energy & Development Corp.
Other deals to hit the market were Southern Union Co.'s $475 million deal, Public Service Co. of Colorado's $212.7 million two-part issue and Union Pacific Corp.'s $150 million note offering.
In competitive bids early in the day, Virginia Electric and Power Co. sold $125 million of first and refunding mortgage bonds while GTE North Inc., a unit of GTE Corp., sold $250 million of debentures.
Trading in the investment-grade market was light.
Yield spreads of corporate bonds over comparable Treasury securities continued to narrow as investors searched for places to invest capital since the new-issue calendar has been surprisingly light, traders said.
Narrowing yield spreads are often a sign of strengthening demand.
"There's a lot of money out there and there's no place for it to go," one trader commented.
In the junk bond market, trading was light with the prices of many bonds ending unchanged.
Current coupon mortgage-backed securities finished moderately higher.
In secondary dealings, Government National Mortgage Association 6 1/2s for February delivery were up 5/32 at 99 22/32, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold 6 1/2s were up 6/32 at 99 28/32 and Federal National Mortgage Association 6 1/2s were up 5/32 at 99 23/32.
Separately, mortgage-backed participants were sorting out the effects of the Los Angeles earthquake on mortgage securities issued by private companies as well as by the quasi-federal agencies.
Most analysts said it was too early to gauge the extent of the destruction or how many homes damaged by the earthquake will result in homeowners walking away from their mortgage loans.
Lynn Adler contributed to this article.
