Universities are finding that teaching family business can be as tricky as running a family business.
Hoping to tap a rich market, educators are starting one program after another to help such family companies.
Since 1990 the number of colleges and universities offering family-business seminars, workshops and conferences has more than tripled to about 50.
They teach everything from succession and estate planning to resolution of disputes among siblings and treatment of nonfamily managers.
But the expansion has brought growing pains.
Some newcomers have trouble lining up members and sponsors.
Others fret over a shortage of program speakers and topics.
Potential students are griping about costs.
William Basler, chairman of Basler Electric Co., a family-owned Highland, Ill., electrical-equipment maker, says he has been solicited by Southern Illinois University but questions the program's $2,000 cost.
The fee admits two family members to four quarterly family-business forums.
At $500 a meeting, "you better be offering something fantastic," Mr. Basler says.
Southern Illinois University's program "sounds like a good idea, but like anything else, it's got to be worth the money."
Others think rivalry between programs is turning more heated as competition intensifies.
Earlier this month, for instance, the directors of some start-up family-business programs were prohibited from attending a three-day strategy meeting at the University of San Diego held by directors of about 25 mainly older programs.
Jacquelyn Freiberg, director of the university's Family Business Institute, says the session was limited largely to older programs to sharpen the meeting's focus.
But others saw the exclusivity as evidence of rising competition.
"It reflects a territorial fear of other universities coming into your backyard" to compete for members and sponsors, says Nancy Upton, director of Baylor University's Institute for Family Business.
Dr. Upton, whose seven-year-old program in Dallas is one of the oldest, says she boycotted the San Diego meeting in protest.
Some consider tensions inevitable as more universities turn to family-business programs.
They are "a higher-education financing tool in a market that's starved for financing," says John Vinturella, chairman of the Levy-Rosenblum Institute's family-business program at Tulane University in New Orleans.
At Tulane's one-year-old program, sponsor contributions and family-business membership fees alone bring in more than $100,000 annually, Dr. Vinturella says.
Schools also hope to be rewarded with grants from grateful -- and often wealthy -- family-business owners, he says.
In 1992, Case Western Reserve University's family-business program in Cleveland received a $1.5 million funding commitment from a foundation controlled by the Horvitz family, which made a fortune with businesses in construction, real estate and media.
Some relatively new programs are thriving.
At Belmont University's Center for Family Business in Nashville, Tenn., executive director William Bellet says it took less than a year to reach his goal of five sponsors and 25 members.
Yet many other schools rushing to tap this potentially huge funding source say the task has been tougher than they thought.
"People have underestimated what it takes" to establish a successful program, says Patricia Cole, who is organizing a family-business center at Nova Southeastern University in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
For one thing, many schools have discovered that family-business owners don't always knock down their doors to enroll.
"Most family businesses don't know they need this," says Dr. Vinturella, himself the president of a family-owned plumbing and building supplies concern in Covington, La.
To line up members, program directors "have to do missionary work," he adds.
Tulane recently hired an MBA graduate to devote 15 hours a week to recruiting, he notes.
At Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville, administrators hope their family-business program "not only will pay for itself but also develop a constituency for the university," says Richard Lumma, director of Southern Illinois University's office of management studies.
Yet after eight months of soliciting, including a mailing to 5,000 family businesses, the program has signed up only a dozen members, Mr. Lumma says.
He wants to enroll 30 to 40 companies.
Mr. Lumma so far has lined up three sponsors.
Yet that is only half of the six sponsors he hopes to enlist, and he says those he has attracted signed on only after he slashed their initial contribution in half to $5,000 each.
At Southwest Missouri State University's family business forum in Springfield, director Charles Pettijohn says it has taken the program a year to raise $4,000 apiece from just two sponsors.
He hopes to attract five sponsors.
"It has been a challenge," Dr. Pettijohn says.
"The sponsors want a return on their investment.
They don't want to regard it as a donation."
While interest in the family-business market clearly has grown among financial and professional service providers, many say it is unclear whether sponsorship of a university program is an efficient way to reach such companies.
One obvious obstacle: To prevent the appearance that their conferences are thinly disguised sales pitches, most schools make sponsors promise to never solicit members.
Despite such restrictions, "we've generally decided it's been a terrific investment" because of the long-term relationships program sponsorship fosters, says Donald Scotto, a Coopers & Lybrand tax partner whose Parsippany, N.J., office funds one university program.
But a Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co. agent who requested anonymity says funding university programs is a waste of money.
"How long am I going to sponsor these before I put money in my pocket?" he says.
"Insurance is sold.
I don't care how many seminars I give, these people aren't going to come up to me and say, `Can I buy a policy?'"
