Goldman, Sachs & Co.'s fiscal 1993 pretax profit of $2.7 billion ranks the New York private investment bank not only as the most profitable firm on Wall Street but as one of the most profitable companies in the world.
As Wall Street's largest private partnership, Goldman attempts to keep its balance sheet secret.
But a Jan. 28 financial statement released in Europe in connection with a Goldman Eurobond offering shows the firm's pretax profit jumped 82% in the fiscal year ended Nov. 26 to $2.7 billion on revenue of $13.2 billion, indicating a profit margin of 20.1%.
The firm reported $1.5 billion in pretax profit in fiscal 1992.
Goldman's chief rival and the nation's largest brokerage firm, Merrill Lynch & Co., rang up $2.42 billion in pretax profit on revenue of $16.6 billion in the year ended Dec. 31.
Salomon Inc., parent of brokerage firm Salomon Brothers, reported pretax profit of $1.46 billion on $8.8 billion of revenue in 1993.
Perrin Long, brokerage industry analyst at First of Michigan Corp., estimates that Goldman's profit margin of 20.1% was Wall Street's best, eclipsing Merrill Lynch's profit margin of 14.6% and Salomon Brothers' 16.6%.
As for the reason for Goldman's success, he says: "They're not trying to be all things to all people, they're very capable of trading for their own account, they have good research and a low profile," which is much more attractive to clients than it was in the go-go 1980s.
Investment bankers at rival firms say that the pretax profit figures among firms aren't comparable.
Other than the one-month difference in when the companies' fiscal years end, the Goldman profit total is before any payment to the partners.
Most notably, it doesn't reflect the sizable chunk of earnings that were set aside for 161 partners (there are now 150) as their 1993 bonuses.
Most of those executives earned bonuses in excess of $3 million each, although the partners don't have access to those funds until retirement or departure from the company.
The brokerage firms also face different tax treatments, with brokers such as Merrill paying a 40% corporate tax rate and Goldman paying a much-lower partnership tax.
In fiscal 1993, the financial statement reveals, it was Goldman's trading operations that were responsible for a sizable share of the gains.
Net income from principal trading and market-making activities rose to $4.02 billion from $2.9 billion a year earlier.
Over the past four years, Goldman's fixed income and equity trading have accounted for an 89% increase in total assets, to $115.9 billion from $61.3 billion, according to the financial statement.
