General Motors Corp.'s board is making permanent the revolution in the role of corporate directors that the board launched two years ago, providing a potential roadmap for directors at other companies.
A newly issued set of 28 "guidelines on significant corporate governance issues" formalizes the stronger control over management that the GM board began seizing in March 1992.
The guidelines embrace the concept of a "lead" outside director, call for thrice-yearly executive sessions of outside directors, and declare that board members shall "have complete access to GM's management," rather than being limited to funneling queries through the chief executive officer.
Institutional investors and experts on corporate governance, including Ira Millstein, the GM board's attorney, have long pressed for such steps.
While the boards of GM and other U.S. corporations have come to act more and more independently of management in recent years, GM's board is one of the first to go so far in setting forth formal guidelines on corporate governance.
Others are sure to follow, says Sarah Teslik, the director of the Council of Institutional Investors.
She called the guidelines "very commendable" and added: "They've instituted many of the things we've advocated."
"This is a very important document," declared Jay W. Lorsch, a Harvard University business-school professor who is a prominent thinker on corporate governance.
"They are attacking some fundamental issues here."
A lack of leadership has been outside directors' biggest handicap.
The GM guidelines, first reported by the Detroit News, make it a board policy to designate an outside director to chair the three-times-a-year meetings of independent directors.
John G. Smale, GM's nonexecutive chairman, currently fills that role.
If a future chairman should again also be chief executive officer, then the outside directors would elect a "lead director."
Mr. Millstein and some others have argued in favor of keeping the jobs of chairman and chief executive officer separate, as under the current GM scheme.
But the new guidelines declare that "the board should be free to make this choice any way that seems best for the company."
John F. Smith Jr., GM's president, currently is the chief executive officer.
It is understood that the board drafted the guidelines itself, with Mr. Smith's active participation.
The guidelines specify that the outside directors hold a discussion with the chief executive during each of their executive sessions and that the board make a formal evaluation of the chief executive each year.
The nonexecutive chairman or the lead director is to handle the performance review, which is to be based on "objective criteria including performance of the business, accomplishment of long-term strategic objectives, development of management, etc."
-- "On matters of corporate governance, the board assumes decisions will be made by the outside directors."
-- The board decided against establishing term limits for directors, as some have advocated, and instead instructed the committee on director affairs to review each director's continuation every five years.
Moreover, the guidelines call for directors to offer their resignations if their outside duties change, giving the board another opportunity to evaluate individual directors' contribuitions.
-- Chief executives are expected to offer their resignation from the board when they retire or resign from that position, giving the board the option to decide whether the former manager should continue as a director.
-- The board is to select and nominate new directors "in fact as well as procedure," and invitations to nominees are to come from the board, rather than just the chief executive.
Critics have long complained that too many chief executives -- including GM's -- have been able to handpick compliant boards.
