Rep. Jim Cooper, whose health-care plan was embraced last week by the Business Roundtable, received 35% of his identifiable campaign contributions from the health-care industry in the second half of 1993, according to an analysis by Citizen Action.
Citizen Action, a consumer group that opposes the Cooper plan and is pushing for a Canadian-style "single-payer" health system, found that of the $554,000 Rep. Cooper raised from large individual donors during the last six months of the year, $196,600 came from people associated with the health and insurance industries.
For all of 1993, the group found, 27% of the $1.3 million Rep. Cooper raised from large donors was contributed by people in those industries.
Campaign records are required to identify only those people who give more than $200 to a candidate.
Rep. Cooper, a Tennessee Democrat who is running for the Senate this year, doesn't take money from political-action committees.
"Rep. Cooper has taken a holier-than-thou position with regard to campaign financing," asserted Citizen Action's Michael Podhorzer.
"Yet without taking a penny from PACs, Cooper has managed to raise more money from health and insurance interests than any other member of the House."
Nonetheless, virtually every lawmaker with a prominent role in the health-care debate is being showered with money these days.
For example, Rep. Fortney Stark (D., Calif.), the House Ways and Means health subcommittee chairman who is sympathetic to single-payer advocates, received most of his large-donor contributions in the second half of 1993 from doctors and others associated with the health industry, according to Federal Election Commission records.
In addition, health PACs gave him tens of thousands of dollars in contributions last year.
Meanwhile, nearly a third of the PAC money sent to Sen. John Chafee, the Rhode Island Republican who has put out another health-care plan, came from the medical and insurance industries during the latter half of last year, FEC records show.
Rep. Cooper criticized Citizen Action for "attacking me personally" rather than "debating me on the merits of the bill."
The congressman noted that he has been running for the Senate for an entire year and has raised large sums from people in a variety of businesses.
He said he was campaigning with "one hand tied behind my back" by not accepting PAC money.
"I've probably turned down $2 million of easy health-care money that virtually any of my colleagues is willing to accept."
Upon filing his campaign-finance report last month, Rep. Cooper also said that three-quarters of his receipts have come from individuals in his home state.
"Raising money primarily from Tennesseans, rather than professional special-interest groups, is a better way to finance a campaign," the congressman said.
But Citizen Action said that 21 people associated with PacifiCare Health Systems Inc., a Cypress, Calif., health-maintenance organization, gave $13,500 to Rep. Cooper.
Contributors connected with five other companies, including Nashville hospital chains Healthtrust Inc. and HCA-Hospital Corp. of America, also sent Rep. Cooper at least $10,000 during 1993.
Rep. Cooper's health-care proposal, which enjoys strong bipartisan support, has gained considerable attention of late.
The Business Roundtable, a group of chief executives of America's largest corporations, voted last week to back a bill authored by Rep. Cooper and Sen. John Breaux (D., La.) as a good "starting point" for health-care reform.
