The Senate Budget Committee chairman, Jim Sasser of Tennessee, wants a constitutional amendment to force a balanced budget -- at least while he's running for re-election this fall.
But he doesn't want to start balancing it anytime soon.
There's nothing like a congressional budget debate to expose the gap between what lawmakers say and what they do.
As the Senate debates the blueprint for President Clinton's $1.5 trillion 1995 budget, members from both parties are loudly underscoring the foremost maxim of the budget-writing process: "Anybody can vote for cuts," cracks veteran Democratic Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont, "as long as it's in the abstract."
That's why this year's budget debate, until now uneventful, has suddenly turned into a game that Sen. Kent Conrad, a North Dakota Democrat, calls "pass the potato."
In the Senate Budget Committee last week, senators offered 10 amendments to reduce spending on specific programs, from the space station to energy assistance for the poor.
Every one of them was defeated.
Then Mr. Exon, a Democrat, and Sen. Charles Grassley of Iowa, a Republican, tried a different approach: an amendment cutting $26 billion over five years, from no program in particular.
That passed.
As a result, all factions are now jockeying on the Senate floor to ensure that their pet programs don't suffer.
Fearing liberals will gouge the defense budget, Republican Pete Domenici of New Mexico and conservative Democrat Sam Nunn of Georgia, who chairs the Armed Services Committee, proposed shifting most of the Exon-Grassley cuts from discretionary programs -- those for which Congress sets annual appropriations levels -- to entitlement programs like Medicare, where the money goes to anyone who qualifies.
But leading Democrats worked yesterday to fend off that plan by arguing it would steal money from their top priority, health-care reform.
"We all have different priorities," explains Sen. Simon, who backed the Exon-Grassley cuts but opposed the Domenici-Nunn proposal.
"The problem with the present system is that all of our priorities prevail."
For President Clinton, the problem with extra cuts is that all his priorities are under pressure.
Vulnerable from the right on defense issues, the president insisted in his State of the Union address that the Pentagon couldn't be cut any further.
He also confessed that his long-term economic programs "cannot work" without spending initiatives to improve education, infrastructure, technology and job training.
And any new Medicare reductions would complicate the financing of his health-reform plan, which is already in jeopardy.
"Do you want a government or don't you want a government?" complains Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D., Md.), who thinks "the president's budget shrunk enough" before extra cuts were added.
Yet few of Ms. Mikulski's Democratic colleagues are feeling bold enough to press the question.
Mr. Sasser, whipsawed between his fealty to Mr. Clinton's program and the need to preserve his election-year popularity in Tennessee, isn't in position to fight.
Days after backing the balanced-budget amendment, he argued in committee against additional deficit reduction this year by warning it would damage the economy.
But he isn't offering an amendment restoring the cuts.
(In a similar two-step last year, the budget chairman voted for a doomed attempt to repeal some of the very tax increases he fought to pass as part of Mr. Clinton's economic program.)
Even Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd of West Virginia, an unabashed defender of congressional spending with no re-election worries, apparently decided a straightforward move to restore the cuts was pointless.
Though many senators, probably a majority, wish the extra cuts had never come up, only a fraction are willing to vote against them.
An embarrassing attempt might then make it more difficult for Democratic leaders to quietly scuttle or dilute the cuts in subsequent negotiations with the House, which didn't add extra cuts in its budget resolution.
The attempts liberals did make yesterday to snatch money back for their favored programs illustrated the dilemma.
Democrat Christopher Dodd of Connecticut sought to restore $22.4 billion in education funds over five years for the most sympathetic of constituencies, the disabled.
But Mr. Dodd called for financing the shift with a specific cut of the Pentagon's Milstar satellite program, as well as reductions in intelligence programs and shaving back the discretionary cuts proposed by Sens. Exon and Grassley.
He lost lopsidedly.
Sen. Barbara Boxer (D., Calif.), by contrast, sought to add funds for children's programs with a vague call for cuts in "unnecessary travel" by federal officials.
She won 93-5.
"If you can put some money in a program and take it out of nowhere, out of the atmosphere, you can win," says Sen. Tom Harkin (D., Iowa).
Action on remaining budget issues came to a halt last night when Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.), upset that a school-prayer provision had been dropped from an unrelated education bill, in effect launched a filibuster.
One reason the White House suddenly finds itself on the defensive is that some administration officials have suggested that last year's five-year, $500 billion deficit-reduction program was all the deficit-cutting they need in Mr. Clinton's first term.
Yet projections show health-benefit programs widening the deficit once again by the end of the decade.
That leaves deficit hawks little choice but to mount the sort of guerrilla attack that materialized in the Budget Committee last week, even if, in the case of Democrats, it ties their own party in knots.
Of course, it's not just politicians who struggle with unresolved contradictions on the budget.
The same Americans who tell pollsters they want a balanced budget are certain to protest when their home-state programs get gored.
That prospect -- that angry voters will howl when a bow to austerity gets translated into cutbacks at somebody's defense base, Head Start program, or doctor's office -- represents the real hope for protecting Mr. Clinton's spending proposals in the months ahead.
"Grassley's on the right track," says conservative Sen. Alan Simpson of Wyoming, the Republican Whip.
But he adds, "the track just leads out into the desert.
Out in the desert, the constituency groups are lying in the sand, just waiting to shoot you in the rear end."
While much of the budget-cutting focus is on discretionary spending programs, its the entitlements such as Social Security and Medicare that really eat up tax dollars.
