Now that the government has won the convictions of all four defendants in the World Trade Center bombing case, it may have strong incentive to try to cut a deal with them.
The men who were convicted last Friday of conspiracy in the attack on the twin-tower complex are all unindicted co-conspirators in the coming terrorism case against Egyptian cleric Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 14 others.
That case, set to begin here Sept. 19 before a new judge and jury, alleges a foiled conspiracy to "oppose by force" the U.S. government and "to levy a war of urban terrorism."
While the Trade Center blast -- which killed six and injured more than 1,000 on Feb. 26, 1993 -- was the alleged conspirators' only consummated act of violence, other intended targets ranged from the George Washington Bridge to Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, according to the government.
The September trial is expected to last as long as a year and be much more political, confrontational and ultimately harder to prove than the Trade Center prosecution, lawyers say.
While the first case was built on extensive circumstantial evidence, the case against the sheik is expected to rely heavily on undercover tapes and the testimony of government informant Emad A. Salem, a former Egyptian army officer whose motives have been impugned by the defense and whose work for the Federal Bureau of Investigation was considered erratic.
Many of the defendants are expected to assert that they were entrapped by Mr. Salem and that they are completely innocent.
That's where the Trade Center defendants may come in.
The government may be willing to ask Judge Kevin T. Duffy for leniency in sentencing certain of them in return for their testimony, which would presumably bolster that of Mr. Salem, according to lawyers familiar with such cases.
The U.S. Attorney in New York, Mary Jo White, would not comment on the case against the sheik but acknowledged that there are no plans to indict the Trade Center defendants in that case.
That leaves open at least the possibility of a deal under which one or more would testify.
That would be a "very significant" but not unusual development, suggests former prosecutor and Fordham Law School Professor Daniel Richman.
Federal judges in Manhattan almost always accede to a prosecutor's request for leniency when a defendant "substantially" cooperates, and federal sentencing guidelines provide for the possibility.
"It's an incredibly potent tool," says Mr. Richman.
Still, in this case leniency would be relative, he adds.
"They still could serve a whole lot of time."
All face a maximum sentence of life in prison without the possibility of parole for five of the underlying crimes for which they were convicted -- including explosive destruction of property -- and up to five years in prison for conspiracy.
Defense attorneys in the sheik's case acknowledge the possibility of an agreement to aid the government.
"I think they will offer pieces of the courthouse" if they have to, says one of the defense lawyers, who asked to remain anonymous, citing a judge-imposed gag order.
But several discount the significance that the convicted bombers' testimony would have; the Trade Center bombing is but one facet of the larger case, the lawyers say, and only a handful of the defendants in the second case are said even to have known the Trade Center defendants.
The apparent political and religious "fervor" of those who have been convicted may also keep them from helping the government, the lawyers add.
Indeed, in one of the undercover tapes, a speaker suggests that it would be an "honor" bestowed by God to end up in jail.
On its own terms, the case that ended Friday was a clearcut victory for the prosecutors from Ms. White's office.
After four days of deliberations, the anonymous jury of eight women and four men accepted that the defendants choreographed what the government calls the "single most destructive act of terrorism" in the U.S.
One juror who spoke anonymously to a local television station said the extensive paper trail against the defendants -- coupled with the lack of defense testimony -- dictated the guilty verdicts.
Convicted were Mahmud Abouhalima, 34 years old, an Egyptian-born limousine driver who oversaw much of the construction of the homemade bomb in a Jersey City, N.J., apartment; Nidal A. Ayyad, 26, an American citizen born to Palestinian parents who used his position as a chemical engineer at AlliedSignal Corp. to purchase critical components; Mohammed A. Salameh, 26, an unemployed Palestinian who assisted in the general preparations and rented the yellow van that carried the bomb to its intended target; and Ahmad M. Ajaj, 28, a Palestinian by birth who worked in Houston as a pizza deliveryman before traveling to the Middle East and returning with bomb-making manuals.
The speed of Mr. Ajaj's conviction startled some observers who thought that his case would present a bigger challenge to the jury.
Despite the verdicts, many questions remain unanswered, including who financed and directed the noon-time attack and what was the ultimate goal.
"In the first case the issue was who did what, when . . . the why was never proven," says a lawyer for a defendant in the coming trial against the sheik.
The second case will allege a much broader scheme and thus will have to focus more on the ultimate intentions of the alleged schemers.
Some defense attorneys in the sheik's case say they will be able to benefit from statements made in the Trade Center case.
For example, one lawyer whose client is charged with helping to test explosives prior to the Trade Center blast plans to pore over transcripts to find instances in which prosecutors suggested that liability was limited to the four convicted defendants.
And a confession obtained by Egyptian authorities against Mr. Abouhalima that was not admissible in the first trial may be admitted to exculpate some defendants in the second trial.
But others, including William Kunstler, who represents defendant Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali and is expected to take a leading role in the second case, say they are less than sanguine about the prospects for the defense.
Given the publicity surrounding the first case and what he alleges were government leaks of evidence, Mr. Kunstler suggests that the defendants in the sheik's case are "doomed. . . .
The allegations are so horrendous in the second trial. . . .
It will be a charade; no jury can withstand this kind of publicity," Mr. Kunstler says.
General Motors Corp. is asking a federal appellate court to strike from the record a federal judge's finding that GM likely committed perjury in the ongoing controversy over the company's 1973-1987 full-size pickup trucks.
GM's move is the latest in a battle that's raged for more than two years between the auto maker and product-liability attorneys.
In case after case the product-liability bar has forced the auto maker to disclose more and more records pertaining to its pickups, making it easier to win personal-injury suits involving the controversial trucks with sidesaddle tanks.
In the most recent round, the plaintiff's bar is trying to use U.S. District Court Judge G. Ross Anderson's findings that GM may have committed perjury and destroyed papers to force GM to disclose documents for which it claims attorney-client privilege.
Last month, Judge Anderson recused himself from a pickup case and blasted GM in his recusal order, saying there was a "substantial likelihood" that the auto maker had committed perjury and that its lawyers may have destroyed documents related to the pickups.
GM, in a petition filed Friday to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, called the "purported findings completely improper and terribly unfair," and said the findings would prejudice GM in pickup cases across the country.
GM asked the court to vacate all portions of Judge Anderson's order except his recusal.
