Viacom Inc. regained the initiative in the high-stakes battle for control of Paramount Communications Inc. by boosting its bid to about $9.7 billion, or about $81.22 a share.
The current market value of the new offer still fell short of the $10.1 billion, $84.01-a-share bid by rival QVC Network Inc.
But many takeover stock traders said they prefer Viacom's bid because, unlike QVC's, it contains a new provision to protect shareholders against a downturn in the price of Viacom's stock, a major component of its cash-and-stock bid.
The timing of Viacom's new offer, which expires Jan. 31, may set up a tense two-day finale to the bidding war for Paramount, the publishing and entertainment giant.
Many traders predict that QVC will have to revise its bid by Jan. 31 to make sure Viacom doesn't gain the 50.1% of Paramount shares needed to win the contest.
Then both sides have one more day, Feb. 1, to make their best and final offer, under rules set by Paramount.
The four-month-long bidding contest for Paramount has pitted two diverse coalitions of cable-television and telecommunications giants in the race to acquire one of the last remaining independent movie studios and film libraries.
Under the bidding terms set by Paramount's board, Viacom's new offer means both sides now have to keep their offers open for 10 business days, until Jan. 31.
People close to QVC said the home-shopping concern is exploring ways to force the bidding contest to a quick conclusion without breaching the terms of the bidding procedures.
People in the QVC camp insist their offer remains clearly superior to Viacom's new terms, and that Viacom technically still hasn't increased its bid.
QVC has maintained that it doesn't intend to raise its bid, though some traders think the new offer by Viacom, a cable-TV company, forces QVC, too, to consider some form of price protection for the stock portion of its cash-and-stock offer.
Barry Diller, chief executive officer of QVC, said in a telephone interview yesterday that he will formally respond today but quickly added that investors shouldn't "look to QVC" to raise its offer today.
Many Wall Street traders yesterday said they would definitely tender to Viacom unless QVC changes its bid.
Charles Leeds, a partner at Omega Advisers Inc., which owns more than four million Paramount shares, or 3.3% of the shares outstanding, said, "I believe everyone would tender to Viacom."
Richard H. Schneider, a takeover stock trader, agreed that Viacom's offer "is a better bid, not because of the current market value, but because of the certainty that has been created" by the price protection in Viacom's new offer.
Viacom's new offer comprises $107 a share for 50.1% of Paramount shares, up from $105 in cash in its last bid, plus four different securities for the remaining 49.9% of Paramount shares, known as the "back end."
Those four securities are 0.93065 Viacom nonvoting Class B common share; Viacom preferred stock; a three-year warrant to purchase Viacom stock at $60 a share; and a contingent value right, or CVR, which provides extra compensation to Paramount holders if Viacom B shares trade below $48 a share a year after the acquisition.
Viacom can extend the CVR timetable to provide for the added value if Viacom trades below $51 after two years or $55 after three years.
But the protection won't cover any drop below $38 a share, prompting sniping from QVC, because Viacom B closed yesterday at $37.75 a share, down $1.375, on the American Stock Exchange.
The new Viacom bid sent Paramount shares surging $1.25 a share to $80 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, one of the few instances since a Delaware court in December ordered a new round of bidding that a new bid hasn't disappointed investors.
In terms of market value alone, Viacom's bid was higher by about $3.70 a share, or $450 million, than its last bid announced Jan 7.
Paramount's board plans to meet either Friday or Monday to review the new Viacom bid and the status of its own recommendation that holders accept QVC's offer, which comprises $92 a share in cash for 50.1% of Paramount stock, plus 1.43 shares of QVC common stock and a QVC convertible preferred stock for the remaining 49.9%.
The terms of the new Viacom offer sent traders scurrying to their mathematical models for pricing stock options to value the CVR, which incorporates two partially offsetting "put options" on Viacom B shares.
A put is an option that rises in value as the underlying security falls.
It is one of the first times that these kinds of derivatives -- securities whose value depends on other securities and which have swept Wall Street in the past five years -- have figured in such a high-profile takeover battle.
As the values of the two bids continue to fluctuate, both Viacom and QVC are continuing to make their case to Wall Street that each is the better longer-term match for Paramount.
Viacom, which announced an acquisition of Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. last week to get the money to raise the cash portion of its Paramount bid, is arguing that the video retailing operations of Blockbuster, Viacom's cable and TV operations, and Paramount's entertainment operations will, combined, provide more long-term value.
QVC, meanwhile, says that Mr. Diller's experience as the former head of two Hollywood studios and architect of the Fox Broadcasting network makes it more likely that a QVC-Paramount match will become a programming powerhouse.
Institutional investors who want to keep a hand in Paramount's future are weighing both arguments.
With a difference of just a couple of dollars a share between the two bids, one big Paramount shareholder says, "You have to decide who is going to do a better job of running the combined companies and have more upside down the road."
While Viacom Chairman Sumner Redstone and Blockbuster Chairman Wayne Huizenga are strong executives, "no one in the Viacom-Blockbuster-Paramount mix knows how to run a movie studio, which is still the crown jewel of Paramount, the way Barry Diller does," this holder said.
However, at this point in the bidding war, many long-time institutional shareholders have sold some, if not all, of their Paramount stock, leaving the contest in the hands of arbitragers, or takeover stock traders.
These short-term traders are primarily interested in selling their Paramount stock for the best financial terms now, and are less interested in promises that could be years away.
And some of those traders contend that Viacom's proposed combination with Blockbuster, which Viacom plans to acquire for stock, could act to stabilize Viacom's stock by creating a greater base of current revenues and profits.
QVC could attempt to challenge the bidding procedures, arguing that Viacom's new offer doesn't require QVC to extend its offer by 10 days because it doesn't represent an increase over the current market value of QVC's offer.
QVC said last week that it wouldn't necessarily abide by amendments to the bidding rules announced last week by Paramount.
In a recent exchange of letters with QVC outside counsel Martin Lipton, Paramount's outside counsel, Richard Beattie of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, disagreed with an assertion by Mr. Lipton that any new bid by either side had to top the other side's offer in market value in order to trigger the 10-day extension.
Mr. Beattie wrote that "such a procedure would raise difficult valuation issues with respect to the back-end consideration that does not have a readily ascertainable market value, and definitional issues as to the term `higher.'"
Indeed, Viacom's latest bid is an example of how traders might actually prefer a bid with a lower current market value.
