Months of high hope and excitement have suddenly turned to disappointment for Merck & Co. scientists developing a promising new type of drug against the AIDS virus.
In recent conversations with AIDS activists and researchers, the giant pharmaceutical company said a two-year crash effort to develop a powerful, new AIDS drug was dealt a serious setback.
Merck said that in an initial trial begun last summer, the drug produced dramatic results, reducing virus levels in the bloodstream lower than any drug yet tried.
For about six months, blood tests of four patients who continued on the drug found the virus levels remained down, generating much optimism inside Merck.
But in late January, an especially sensitive test showed that some time within the six months, virus levels had actually returned to about where they had been before treatment started.
Scientists at Merck's research facility here say they aren't certain why the drug's striking initial effect was short-lived.
In an interview, Emilio Emini, who heads Merck's AIDS research program, said he suspects HIV, the AIDS virus, developed resistance, meaning it mutated into a strain able to evade the drug.
The initial effect of the drug -- which works by blocking an enzyme, called protease, that is crucial to the virus's ability to spread from cell to cell -- "was really profound," said Dr. Emini said.
He said all four patients got better and gained weight; and for months, researchers were barely able to detect the virus's presence.
"No other compound we know of has had that effect," Dr. Emini said.
But in late January, a special blood test not run often because of its complexity showed the virus had returned to pre-treatment levels, Dr. Emini said.
The Merck team, he said, "was absolutely chagrined."
The disheartening news poignantly suggests how difficult it is to create an anti-HIV drug, despite intense efforts by drug makers.
About eight companies are racing to develop similar protease-blocking drugs.
They aren't at all similar to existing anti-HIV medicines, such as AZT, made by Wellcome PLC of Britain, which have a limited benefit because they can be toxic.
Moreover, the AIDS virus is known to develop resistance to the AZT-like drugs within about six months to a year of treatment, meaning the drugs soon lose their usefulness.
Margaret Johnston, who helps coordinate new AIDS treatment efforts at the government's National Institutes of Health, said in an interview that experimental protease blocking drugs are the only medicines with a chance right now of doing better.
"I really have my fingers crossed because after the protease inhibitors, I don't see much in drug development," Dr. Johnston said a few weeks ago, before Merck released its newest findings.
Nonetheless, Merck said the latest test results have led the Whitehouse Station, N.J., company to scale back plans to test the drug, known as L-735,524.
In December, as a result of the initial positive findings with four patients and a shorter trial in about six others, the company said it planned to expand its test to several hundred patients in about five medical centers.
Now, in clinical tests to be limited to about 60 patients, Merck will try the drug at higher doses and in combination with an AZT-like drug.
While acknowledging that a drug that allows the virus to resurrect in six months isn't such an advance, Dr. Emini said that blocking protease may still be a viable strategy.
In fact, he said, the drug's initial favorable results suggest that a more potent protease blocker may yet work.
Dr. Emini believes such a drug will succeed, however, only if it delivers a big enough wallop to rid the body entirely of HIV, because even the tiniest amount of virus left intact appears able to mutate into a resistant strain that can swiftly replicate and spread.
Dr. Emini said Merck officials aren't nearly as crestfallen as they were in 1991, when another promising drug that blocked a different enzyme produced resistance within six weeks of treatment.
He said resistance then was so swift and devastating, it didn't appear as if any amount of that type of drug could overcome the difficulty.
Drug makers have been trying to create protease blockers since 1987.
Only recently have companies designed drugs that get through the bloodstream to infected cells in large enough amounts to be effective.
Even so, only a fraction of any of these drugs get through to infected cells.
Dr. Emini said Merck is working on other protease drugs that may yet deliver a more lethal dose to the virus.
Meanwhile, several other companies say their protease blockers may fare better.
Burroughs Wellcome Co., a unit of Wellcome, recently bought the rights to develop a promising protease blocker created by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc., a tiny company in Cambridge, Mass.
Burroughs hopes to begin human tests later this year.
Other candidates are being developed by Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc.; Monsanto Searle, a unit of Monsanto Co.; Abbott Laboratories; DuPont Merck, a joint venture of Merck and DuPont Co.; and Roche Holding Ltd.
