Small communications companies and entrepreneurs are fighting to make sure that giant competitors don't drive them off the coming information superhighway.
A big step in that fight begins today, when the Federal Communications Commission starts hammering out rules for auctioning pieces of the radio spectrum for personal-communications services -- a new way of sending voice, data and video messages.
The rules will strongly influence how big a role small firms play in a potential multibillion-dollar market.
At stake is the heart of a wireless system that will let businesses and consumers communicate without the land-based wires of the major telephone and cable companies.
Giant corporations such as MCI Communications Corp., American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and the regional Bell telephone companies are all maneuvering for places in this wireless system, where they could offer everything from hand-held phones to on-demand video games.
Small companies want to make sure that the FCC writes its rules in ways that also give them access to these lucrative new markets.
"This could be like the great land grab in the West, when certain people got most of the land, discovered oil and created enormous wealth," says Joseph Profit, president of Communications International Wireless Inc.
The small Atlanta firm is competing for a stake in this evolving multimedia industry.
"This is a chance for government to let a broad base of people participate in a new industry," he says.
Meanwhile, entrepreneurs heading small software concerns are creating products that will make wireless and other data networks valuable.
Those tiny companies could be playing for even bigger stakes, because their products will make business transactions, entertainment and education instantly available to consumers.
Small communications concerns also are pressing to make sure their interests are protected in sweeping telecommunications legislation now moving rapidly through Congress.
Their congressional lobbying has already helped small firms to gain an edge in the coming FCC rules on personal-communications services.
Last summer, Congress ordered the agency to devise a system that would aid the industry's small businesses, as well as those owned by women, minorities and rural telephone companies.
And the FCC has already signaled its intention to set aside two sections of the radio spectrum for those companies in its wireless rules.
But small firms say rules to ease their financial burden are the key to whether they will gain a stake in the new industry.
When the FCC auctions off the radio spectrum, these firms want to be able to make smaller down payments if they win a bid and to get the right to pay in installments for any spectrum slots won.
Another crucial factor will be the order in which the FCC auctions off parcels of the spectrum, because that will make clear which businesses dominate certain regions and could determine whether big and small companies form lucrative alliances.
Small companies got additional assistance from Capitol Hill in January from Sen. Dale Bumpers, the Arkansas Demo crat who heads the Senate Small Business Committee.
He wrote the FCC in support of its set-aside intentions and called for the extra financial help sought by small firms.
On the other hand, BellSouth Corp. recently wrote the FCC to argue that set asides would lead to "spectrum ghettos," which would decline in value.
BellSouth has led the regional phone companies in opposing the set-aside idea.
Faced with uncertain prospects, small communications companies are forming alliances to gain muscle in the coming FCC auctions.
American Wireless Communications Corp., based in Washington, is a business alliance of small firms that plan to help each other find financing and develop technical expertise as they compete for personal-communications services slots.
"We understood quickly that if we wanted to proceed against deep pockets, our most prudent play would be as a coalition of small-to-medium-sized businesses," says Walter Threadgill, president of the alliance, which was formed last fall.
Another consortium, the Small Business PCS Association in Portola Valley, Calif., aims to devise its own national personal-communications services network by linking small members' expected systems.
Robert Kyle, the group's chair man, says the 40-company alliance wants to offer a system in which a call to a subscriber's San Francisco office, for example, would be forwarded to an office the subscriber is visiting in New York.
Both alliances say they worry that the FCC, stung by industry criticism of its recent decision to cut cable-TV rates again, may delay many decisions that it is to begin considering today.
The alliances fear the commission may push back the auctions' debut from this summer until possibly the end of the year.
The small-business consortiums say such a delay would let cellular phone companies, major potential competitors, update their systems.
Personal-communications services are expected to be a threat to the cellular industry because they are based on a different technology that will be cheaper to use.
The FCC already has created controversy in the nascent industry by granting lucrative licenses to four players since last fall.
The commission said the four helped to develop the so-called PCS technology.
Omnipoint Inc., a small, closely held firm in Colorado Springs, Colo., won the right to offer one of the two data services in the New York City and northern New Jersey area.
Cox Communications Inc., the big cable concern, and American Personal Communications, a partnership of medium-sized and big media companies that includes the Washington Post Co., won free licenses to start wireless-data systems in Los Angeles and Washington, respectively.
Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Inc., known as Mtel, was granted one of the 11 nationwide licenses.
Because the FCC has granted a preference to some large companies, the agency should help small ones to a greater degree, argues Mr. Profit of Communications International.
"The big guys want to keep the old technology as long as possible," he adds.
"We want to put the new technology out there and bring the prices down."
The FCC is considered sensitive to the need to ensure that small communications companies can play a significant role in the emerging wireless arena.
It's still unclear exactly what rules the commission will adopt to achieve that end.
