Health-maintenance organizations and other insurers are starting to pay for a lot of "experimental" treatments that they traditionally have balked at covering.
The new leniency reflects HMOs' growing concern about their legal vulnerability if an ailing member is denied care.
Recently a California HMO, Health Net, lost a high-profile court case involving a 37-year-old woman who couldn't get the health plan to promptly approve experimental therapy for her breast cancer.
The woman paid for the treatment on her own and later died; a jury awarded her estate $89 million in damages.
"This is a hot issue, and it just got hotter," says Hyman Kahn, a medical director at U.S. Healthcare Inc., Blue Bell, Pa.
Like most HMOs and insurers, U.S. Healthcare says in its contracts with employers and members that it won't pay for experimental care.
But "we aren't going to hide behind that," Dr. Kahn says.
"If there's a medical request to do something, we will act on its merits.
More often than not, we cover it."
Many HMOs are setting up panels of independent researchers to help them decide when experimental care is appropriate.
That's an approach taken by U.S. Healthcare, which says that for some types of cancer, it now ends up approving 90% of the requests for coverage of experimental care.
These pioneering treatments sometimes carry steep price tags.
Experimental drugs to treat cancer or AIDS can cost $3,000 or more for prolonged treatment.
Spending for laser surgery to treat lung disease can top $20,000.
And new types of organ transplants often run more than $100,000.
Many seriously ill patients want such pioneering treatment -- and are willing to sue to get coverage.
Richard Carter, an Alexandria, Va., lawyer, says that in the past four years he has handled 300 cases involving patients' efforts to get experimental care paid for.
In most cases, Mr. Carter says, recalcitrant HMOs and insurers backed down quickly and agreed to pay.
"I'd say that less than 25% of cases have gone to court, and only eight have gone through a full trial," he says.
This willingness to bend affects HMOs' efforts to hold down costs on their most complex cases.
"In a vacuum, we'd like true evidence that something improves people's health before approving it," says Simeon Rubenstein, head of the new-technology committee at Group Health of Puget Sound.
"But the reality of politics and social pressure is that things aren't always that simple."
Some of the keenest debates involve high-dose chemotherapy followed by a bone-marrow transplant that helps revive a cancer patient's white-blood-cell production.
Such treatments can cost as much as $200,000.
Group Health did an about-face on its policy for bone-marrow transplants last summer after a member threatened to sue over the Seattle HMO's plans to deny coverage.
Dr. Rubenstein says Group Health chose to cover such treatment for breast cancer because new data from Duke University suggested that bone-marrow transplants worked better than expected.
He adds, though, that the threat of a suit spurred his HMO to re-examine the issue.
As pressure on insurers mounts, patients and their families voice relief.
Mark Burkdoll, a Clearlake, Calif., hospital technician, says he was braced for a major battle last summer with his HMO, Health Plan of the Redwoods.
Mr. Burkdoll's six-year-old son Colin was battling brain cancer, and doctors had recommended high-dose chemotherapy followed by a bone-marrow transplant.
To Mr. Burkdoll's surprise, the HMO quickly agreed to pay for the treatment after consulting with an independent doctor at Children's Hospital in New York, who said it was medically necessary.
"I felt as though Health Plan of the Redwoods was going to bat for me," Mr. Burkdoll says.
His son underwent treatment in October and appears to be doing well.
Most of the largest HMOs and insurers now regularly use panels of independent medical experts to help decide whether to authorize costly experimental care.
Aetna Life & Casualty Co., for example, refers cancer cases to a panel of 130 doctors at institutions such as Stanford University and the University of California at Los Angeles.
The panel is overseen by Grace Powers Monaco, a patient-rights activist in Washington, D.C., who picks three panelists to review medical records.
These doctors then issue opinions about whether experimental treatment is warranted.
"This makes it a much more cooperative relationship with patients," says William McGivney, director of technology assessment at Aetna.
He says the outside panel approves about 65% of the experimental treatments sent its way.
At U.S. Healthcare, breast-cancer patients generally are offered access to controlled research trials, where they have at least a 50% chance of getting an experimental treatment.
In some cases, the HMO lets patients undergo bone-marrow transplants right away, rather than take a chance on the research trials.
"There's a large gray area" between standard and experimental care, says Harris Berman, chief executive officer of Tufts Associated Health Plans, Waltham, Mass.
His HMO has regularly paid for experimental services that it thinks have promise, including 14 of 15 requests last year for bone-marrow transplants in breast-cancer patients.
The federal government at one time paid for most experimental care at established medical centers.
But in the early 1980s, federal funding dried up, while costs for such treatment soared.
As a result, Ms. Monaco says, insurers began in the mid-1980s to deny more care under the experimental-treatment exclusion.
But over the past two years, she says, "more and more insurers are saying: If the feds aren't going to pay for clinical trials, maybe we should."
Some HMOs, in fact, are trying to develop new contract language that will do away with the dispute about what is experimental care and what isn't.
A major Colorado HMO, Qual-Med Inc. has started letting employers choose between a plan that covers a wide range of controversial new treatments (such as lung transplants for cancer patients), and one that specifically excludes them.
The price difference amounts to about 1.5%, or $2.60 per member per month, says Malik Hasan, Qual-Med's chief executive officer.
Dr. Hasan says he thinks the premium plan will do well with large corporations and their health plans.
Major employers don't want the strife that often comes with denying insurance coverage to a desperately ill employee, he observes.
Qual-Med also would find a more explicit coverage system easier to manage, Dr. Hasan says.
His interest is more than academic; Qual-Med last month acquired Health Net, the California HMO that lost the $89 million damage case.
