WHATEVER the reason for the Rose Law Firm's review of Webster Hubbell's legal bills, top partners at other law firms say such scrutiny is hardly routine.
The issue arose recently after Mr. Hubbell, a top Justice Department official, described billing inquiries by his former firm as "in no way out of the ordinary."
Mr. Hubbell was responding to a Washington Post report that his former partners at Rose were investigating possible overbilling and alleged claims of personal charges as business expenses.
Mr. Hubbell denied the allegations, saying "issues frequently arise when a partner leaves a law firm which require his participation and assistance."
Chairmen of major firms confirm that the departure of a partner typically triggers an evaluation of pending matters and accounts receivable, and sometimes such reviews continue well after the member of the firm has departed.
But these lawyers said any more-comprehensive audit would be unusual.
"It's one thing if they're looking at one bill, and saying `Gee, Webb, there are two or three bills we're trying to resolve so we can clear up the year end and get our bills paid.'
That's as common as the sun coming up tomorrow," says a Washington attorney who sked not to be named.
"On the other hand, it's not common to have an internal review group going back and systematically looking at bills."
Although partners in law firms have a great deal riding on the integrity of one anothers' invoices, few firms have formal procedures in place to deter billing irregularities.
And virtually no major law firm conducts spot checks of its partners' bills as a matter of practice.
"Trust is a huge part of it . . . even though that probably sounds naive," says Decatur H. Miller, the outgoing chairman of Baltimore's Piper & Marbury.
Francis D. Logan, chairman of the New York law firm Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, says: "You wouldn't want people to think that there's some sort of police state."
AT Milbank, a 350-lawyer firm, the system is fairly typical.
If clients don't bring up questions, bills are reviewed generally as part of each partner's year-end evaluation.
The firm's billing oversight committee has responsibility "to make sure people get their bills out on time, but that would not necessarily mean members of this committee would investigate all the time records standing behind each bill, absolutely not," Mr. Logan says.
The 60-lawyer Rose firm hasn't commented on why it initiated the review or responded to overbilling allegations against Mr. Hubbell.
Managing partner Ronald Clark has said the firm hasn't reached any conclusions.
Meanwhile, the Resolution Trust Corp., a former client of Mr. Hubbell's, has started its own audit of Rose legal bills.
Some managing partners say internal second-guessing may be a bit more intense when a client is known to be especially watchful of legal expenses -- as is the RTC, which regularly audits billing of its outside law firms.
Piper & Marbury, for example, has a member of its accounting department assigned full time to the task of reviewing RTC bills before they go out.
But at Denver's 210-lawyer Holland & Hart, which also does a substantial amount of work for the RTC, managing partner Wiley E. Mayne Jr. says he doesn't see the need for an "independent review of some clients' bills but not others'."
Mr. Mayne says instituting a system of routine reviews "might have some negative effect on morale.
The person who does the work is the person best-equipped to prepare the bill."
Holland & Hart, he says, hasn't ever had a problem that prompted an audit of a partner's bills.
PROBLEMS have arisen elsewhere, however.
In a recent case, once-prominent New York trial lawyer Harvey Myerson was convicted in 1992 of overcharging clients more than $2 million and using his firm's coffers to pay for personal matters.
The problems came to light only after Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., a major client of Mr. Myerson's now-defunct law firm, Myerson & Kuhn, raised questions.
In another famous case prompted by a client complaint, attorney Joel Dolkart pleaded guilty 20 years ago to forgery after he was charged with appropriating $2.5 million from two prestigious New York law firms where he had been a partner.
The apparent need for firms to protect themselves, as well as their clients, is causing some rethinking among management at some major firms.
The chairman of a large Midwest law firm, who asked that his name not be used, says there has been "some discussion" of instituting system of spot-checking bills.
Currently at the firm, as at most law firms, bills are prepared in draft form by the accounting department and then reviewed, with occasional tinkering, by the partner in charge of the matter.
The firm has no formal requirement that any bill be reviewed by a second partner.
Under a spot-check system, the firm's chairman says, a certain percentage of the firm's largest bills would be audited at random.
Still, it seems unlikely that law firms will establish compliance departments like investment banks.
"I don't think spot-checking bills does anything," says Earle Yaffa, managing director of New York's Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.
"We review bills by comparing them against the agreement that's been reached with clients as to fees.
Unusual circumstances are reviewed by a legal-practice partner" designated by the firm, he says.
Most firms' chairmen say they don't plan to step up their internal monitoring.
Milbank's Mr. Logan says the firm hasn't ever had to examine a partner's bill for systematic irregularities.
"I'd be inclined to go into a higher gear if I felt inquiries from a client or the conduct of our other reviews indicated there would be some reason to do it.
But I'm feeling pretty comfortable," he says.
