Tired of investment scams and promises of high returns that can't be achieved?
Here's something that is almost too good to be true: a way to save on taxes, boost your return on assets and do a good deed all at the same time.
Charitable gift annuities -- offered by many religious groups, colleges, universities and philanthropic organizations -- provide donors with income for life in exchange for a contribution.
Although it's too late to save on your tax bill due April 15, it may be something to consider for next year.
"We can offer a good rate and stability, and the ability to make a gift that will do some good," says Neal P. Myerberg, head of the office of planned giving and endowments for United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies in New York.
It's a fairly simple process, usually requiring just a one-page contract between a charity and a donor.
The contribution generates a tax deduction, part of the income is tax-exempt, and the rate of return is higher than what's available on many conservative investments, such as Treasury bills and certificates of deposit.
"You agree to make a donation of "X" and the charity says it agrees to pay you "Y" for the rest of your life, period, paragraph," says Tal Roberts, chairman of the American Council on Gift Annuities, a volunteer organization of fund-raisers that sets rates for gift annuities.
"There's something to be said for that."
To be sure, you really do have to give the money away, and there are investments that pay more.
But the rates, which rise with the donor's age, are nothing to scoff at.
That's especially true for the many elderly investors who stick to conservative fixed-income investments like CDs and T-bills.
A 75-year-old donor, for example, would get the equivalent of a 7.7% yield on a charitable gift annuity, more than twice what's available these days on most CDs and T-bills.
Someone who's 85 years old would get 9.8%.
Younger folks don't do too badly either.
The rate of return for a 55-year-old is 5.9%.
The Council on Gift Annuities, based in Dallas, reviews rates at least every three years.
Rates are even higher for donors who defer income payments for a number of years, let's say until retirement, because of the effects of compounding.
A 35-year-old could make a $10,000 donation and get a tax deduction now, then get back $1,560 a year after retirement in 20 years -- an annuity rate of 15.6%.
"It's a way of making a charitable contribution now, getting a tax deduction while you're in a high bracket and having income later on," says Conrad Teitell, a White Plains, N.Y., tax attorney.
Gift annuities aren't for everyone, however.
Investors who are interested only in the money might consider a diversified stock portfolio -- if they have the time to ride out the market's ups and downs.
Over a decade or so, history suggests that their returns could average 10% annually.
Some people might be better off with a fixed-rate annuity from an insurance company.
A 75-year-old man, for instance, could expect an annual payout equivalent to 12% or so on certain kinds of commercial annuities.
(Charitable gift annuities offer the same rates to men and women.)
What's more, charitable gift annuities, like other fixed-rate investments, don't provide any sort of hedge against inflation.
A rate of 5.9% may look good now, when interest rates are low, but wouldn't be nearly so attractive if rates rise into the double digits.
People considering charitable gift annuities should keep in mind that their gift is irrevocable.
If you need the money later, you're out of luck -- no matter how badly you need it.
You also won't have it to leave to children or grandchildren.
Financial professionals, and the charities themselves, usually caution donors not to give away more than they can comfortably do without.
It's also important to know something about the organization offering the annuity, since donors are dependent on the charity to keep its end of the bargain and make the income payments.
Be careful about giving big sums to a group that may not be around to make the payments.
As for taxes, because the donation is used to fund an annuity, only a portion is considered a tax-deductible gift in the year of the donation, based on Internal Revenue Service tables tied to the donor's age.
A 55-year-old would be able to deduct $3,262 of a $10,000 gift.
The 75-year-old would get a $4,627 tax deduction.
The 35-year-old who takes a deferred payout would get an immediate $5,145 deduction.
(As with all charitable contributions, the amount you can deduct for the year in which you make the gift is limited to 50% of adjusted gross income, in the case of cash donations, and 30%, in the case of appreciated securities.
The remainder may be deductible in future years.)
The portion of income that is tax-exempt is considered a tax-free "return of principal" and is based on the donor's life expectancy.
The 75-year-old who donated $10,000 to a favorite charity would get $770 a year, of which $433.51 would be tax-free for 12.4 years.
A 55-year-old would receive $236.59 free of taxes for 28.5 years, of a $590 a year payout.
The full payout is taxed at ordinary income rates once the donor lives beyond his life expectancy.
The payout on certain commercial annuities also includes some tax-exempt income.
A 75-year-old man who puts $10,000 into a "life-only no-refund" annuity, for instance, would receive about $1,200 a year for life.
About two-thirds of it would be free of taxes, with no return of principle when he dies.
Insurance companies offer other annuities, usually with smaller payouts, that leave something for heirs at the end.
Charities themselves emphasize the doing-good angle.
"I ask people, would you rather have your money used for charitable good or for insurance-company profits?" says Mr. Myerberg of UJA-Federation.
"You might call it eating your cake and donating it, too," proclaims a leaflet from the UJA.
An outright gift now would provide a bigger tax deduction but no income.
Investing the money yourself and leaving a sum to charity in your will might give you more income in your lifetime, but no income-tax deduction.
From the charity's point of view, although most don't actually use the annuity principal until the donor's death, they like knowing it's in the pipeline.
Most charities offer charitable remainder trusts, too, which also promise income for life in return for a contribution.
These, however, typically require a larger donation to compensate for the costs of setting up the trust, and the payout rates are usually lower.
The New York Public Library, for instance, requires a $50,000 minimum donation to establish a trust, compared with $5,000 for an annuity.
For either one, the donation can be cash or securities.
There's no capital-gains tax at all on appreciated securities used to fund charitable remainder trusts; with annuities, capital-gains tax is due only on part of the donation and is prorated over the life expectancy of the donor.
Donors like the simplicity and the rates offered by annuities, says Judy Daniels, the library's manager of planned giving.
The library launched its annuity program in August and raised more than $1 million by December, with an average contribution of about $10,000.
There may also be estate-tax savings, since the size of the estate is diminished by the value of the donation.
And while fundraisers don't like to talk about it publicly, charitable donations may help the elderly qualify for government assistance for nursing home care by reducing their assets.
"Uncle Sam is sharing in your generosity," says Mr. Teitell, the White Plains attorney.
"You can be a philanthropist at wholesale costs."
