A mortar shell that slaughtered or maimed some 268 people Saturday in a crowded marketplace in Sarajevo has touched off yet another Western debate on what to do about Bosnia.
As is evident from the continued dithering about which Western leader is in charge of decisions, the preference is for continuing to do nothing, at least nothing involving military force.
This is increasingly inconsistent with the emotions of the Western public, stirred into a new burst of outrage by TV footage of the carnage in Sarajevo.
The war is not going away; the killing is not ending but continuing.
Many Western leaders were willing to concede a Serbian victory out of a belief that the fighting would subside into an unhappy modus vivendi for the Bosnian Muslims.
The ineffectiveness of the Western alliances and the United Nations would in time be forgotten.
But that is not happening.
The evidence it is not goes well beyond Saturday's awful event in Sarajevo.
What in fact is happening is that the Bosnian army is gaining strength and has begun to win back some of the territory lost to the Serbs and Croats when those forces were having things their own way.
This means a continuing war about which NATO and the European Union need to make some new decisions.
The fundamental decision is whether to support the Bosnians or leave them to their own devices.
Their own devices are becoming more effective.
For that they owe no thanks to the U.S., Europe and the U.N. Quite the contrary.
The U.N. arms embargo at the outset of the war put them at an initial disadvantage because the Bosnian Serbs could get arms and ammunition from Serbia.
But embargoes are porous, particularly when desperate people need weapons and have friends on the outside who are willing to supply them.
Paul Beaver of Jane's Information Group wrote in The Wall Street Journal Europe on January 27 that the Bosnians now are getting arms and organizational aid from several Muslim nations.
He reported an influx of some 2,000 professional fighters from Pakistan, Afghanistan, Morocco, Algeria and other Islamic states.
They have helped the Bosnians transform a ragtag army into a force of 80,000 troops armed mostly with light weapons.
Two special brigades, made up heavily of volunteers, have performed especially well against Serbs and Croats.
It was a matter of no small significance that the leaders of two important Muslim states showed up last week in Sarajevo to show their solidarity with Bosnia.
Prime Ministers Tansu Ciller of Turkey and Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan, wearing flak jackets, appealed to the world to defend Bosnia against the savagery of ethnic cleansing.
Both countries are important friends of the U.S.
If the West really wanted to do something to relieve Sarajevo, it would repeal the misconceived arms embargo and throw support behind the Bosnian forces, doing it not through the tangled web of the United Nations, but through NATO.
Giving the Bosnians heavy weapons, or at least sanctioning those who might supply them, would further even the odds.
The Turks, who may already be advising the Bosnians, could be invited, as members of NATO, to help manage the exercise on the ground.
This in itself might result in the kind of balance that has historically produced uneasy peace in uneasy parts of the world.
Unlike the maunderings of a Lord Owen, action that affects the battlefield would get the attention of the Serbs, who so far have had a marvelous time playing games with the peacemakers.
Even more direct support, if leadership were somehow found, would be both morally justified and militarily possible.
With a credible Bosnian force on the ground coordinating with NATO fighter-bombers, NATO air strikes against the Serbs and Croats would begin to make military sense.
Belgrade and Zagreb would be advised to reduce their involvement on penalty of direct NATO strikes at military targets in the Serb and Croat homelands.
Europe wouldn't know what to do about that colossus of the south, Greece, which is friendly toward Serbia and just happens to hold the EU presidency.
Bill Clinton is busily disarming and would be concerned about annoying the Russians.
On Monday, he was putting himself firmly in line behind Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
About the last thing Bosnia needs is the Clinton ploy of marching out with force and then backing down.
So the more likely prognosis is further drift.
Central European nations, having been shut out of NATO and having witnessed the weakness of the West, will start thinking about their own needs for a modus vivendi, with Russia.
Hungary and Bulgaria already are warming toward Serbia.
They understand all too well that the West did not defend the Bosnians, but through the embargo prevented them from defending themselves.
So if even after the current outrage no action is to be taken, the West could at least start to draw some lessons from its mistakes.
History teaches that violence can be contagious, and the collapse of the Communist empire has left scores of other Bosnias waiting to happen.
