Tokyo stocks gained strongly Wednesday, taking the benchmark index to its highest finish in six months, as overseas investors bought shares that have been laggards recently.
In London, shares lost ground as hopes of a cut in interest rates faded because of fresh British economic data.
Frankfurt prices rose for the third day in a row.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.46, up 0.42, reflecting higher American and Asia/Pacific markets and flat European markets.
Footwear stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 91.56, up 3.12, or 3.5%, with Nike of the U.S. posting an 8.5% gain in its local currency.
Tobacco stocks trailed at 80.83, down 0.85, or 1%, with Richemont of Switzerland sliding 3.6% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which fell 17.30 points Tuesday, climbed 168.92 to 20677.77.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei fell 116.71 points to close the morning session at 20561.06.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at a brisk 620 million shares, up from 561.5 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers trounced losers, 735-314.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which gained 3.07 points Tuesday, rose 10.33 to 1653.27.
The Nikkei seesawed throughout the session, as arbitrage buying, on strong stock-index futures, tussled with profit-taking.
Overseas investors helped to lift the market by buying recently depressed stocks such as chemical, textile and steel issues; foreign buyers were a bit more optimistic about economic recovery in Japan, boding well for the market in the fiscal year that starts April 1.
A pressure point eased because tokkin specified money trusts and investment trust funds closed their books for the fiscal year, following recent selling to dress up their portfolios.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 24.5 points to 3242.9, fractionally above the intraday low.
The FT 30-stock index dropped 16.5 points to 2552.8.
Volume was 625.5 million shares, compared with 616.3 million shares a day earlier.
Following big gains earlier this week, many investors snagged profits.
British economic data for February released early in the session showed a slide in unemployment and retail sales, but an increase in average earnings.
The positive effect that lower retail sales figures would have had on hopes for a British base lending-rate cut was erased by the the jobless and earnings statistics.
Sentiment also was damped by a smaller-than-expected cut by the German central bank in its repurchase rate, which discouraged investors who have been hoping for reductions in key European interest rates.
Though U.S. inflation data for February was in line with expectations, Wall Street was soft in early dealings, adding to pressure on stocks in London.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index rose 7.14 points to 2172.73.
The market shrugged off the Bundesbank's easing of its lowest accepted rate for securities repurchase agreements.
Financial shares benefited most from continued rate-cut hopes as the central bank was scheduled to consider monetary policy today.
In Paris, stocks weakened as investors took profits, as expected, on sizable gains logged in the previous two sessions; participants also were disappointed by the Bundesbank's meager rate cut.
In Milan, shares fell in technically dominated dealings on the last day of the March trading account; still, the underlying tone remained positive, with the expectation that European interest rates would decline.
In Madrid, equities fell as profit-taking set in after two days of large gains.
In Zurich, shares slipped in moderate trading, with interest-rate worries and technical factors contributing to the sour mood.
In Hong Kong, shares slumped 1.4%, setting a closing low for this year, on continued profit-taking.
Prices rose initially, but fell throughout the session to finish at the weakest point since mid-December.
In Taipei, stocks gained 1.1%, canceling out an identical percentage loss the previous day.
The broad-based rally came in thin trading led by domestic institutional investors' buying of blue chips.
Foreign institutions generally were sidelined, awaiting direction amid the recent consolidation.
In Manila, equities closed firmer in light volume, boosted by late bottom-fishing.
In Seoul, the main index fell amid continued bearishness, though advancing issues outnumbered decliners, with bank stocks among the strongest on expectations for offerings of rights issues.
Among corporate developments, in London, Tarmac rose 3 pence to 194 pence ($2.89).
The building materials and construction company will overhaul its U.S. operations in a cost-cutting move and will pump #100 million ($149.1 million) over three years into a capital investment program to raise productivity and earnings.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
