The economy's string of encouraging job gains was interrupted in January, but a healthy rise in factory employment suggests the labor market is still on solid footing.
The Labor Department said that only 62,000 jobs were created last month.
That's a big difference from the nearly 200,000 jobs the economy averaged in the four months before.
But the frigid temperatures experienced across much of the nation held down employment last month, according to Katherine Abraham, commissioner of the department's Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Even so, the manufacturing sector managed to gain 26,000 jobs, continuing growth started in October.
Hours of work and earnings both increased.
The unemployment rate, which was reported at 6.4% of the work force in December, registered 6.7% last month, but officials cautioned that the big increase in the rate shouldn't be perceived as a deterioration in job conditions.
January's employment report was the first under a new survey design, with different questions to which the answers are recorded on computers.
The department had said previously that the changes, while creating a more accurate picture of the labor market, would boost the unemployment rate by as much as 0.5 percentage point over time.
Ms. Abraham estimated that if the old method had been used during January, the unemployment rate would have actually fallen a bit to 6.3%.
It may be March before there's a good picture of how the labor market is shaping up this year, as the Los Angeles earthquake could distort February employment.
The cold had the most effect on service jobs, which served as a primary source of job growth for nearly two years but was flat in January.
Retail, finance, insurance and real estate all added fewer jobs in January than in December.
Construction jobs fell for the second consecutive month, but analysts expect increases in coming months to keep up with growth in the housing sector.
Weather aside, the employment figures were encouraging.
And the Federal Reserve definitely didn't view the small job gains as a sign the economy was headed for trouble, as it raised short-term interest rates midmorning Friday after the employment figures came out.
"There is a lot of strength here," said Donald Ratajczak, head of the economic forecasting center at Georgia State University.
The growth in manufacturing jobs centered in durable-goods industries, such as autos and furniture.
"This suggests that we may well have turned the corner on the manufacturing jobs front," said Laura Tyson, head of the president's Council of Economic Advisers.
In addition, nonfarm hours climbed 0.9% and manufacturing hours were up 0.3%.
"Those who did come to work certainly worked a lot harder," said Richard Berner, chief economist of Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
Average hourly earnings shot up 0.8%, the largest monthly gain since September 1983.
The latest unemployment report also changed the definition of "discouraged" workers and found fewer of them as a result.
The figure has been running at about 1.1 million for the past two years, but the new report puts it, before seasonal adjustment, at 600,000.
A discouraged worker is one who wants a job but can't find one; the new definition excludes those who haven't looked for work in the past year.
Also, the number of people employed part time for economic reasons was about one million lower in January than December, because respondents now must indicate they wanted and were available for full-time work.
Separately, the Federal Reserve revised capacity-utilization rates dating back to 1990 and industrial-production figures dating back to 1991.
The revisions show that industry was using slightly less of its capacity than previously thought.
In 1993, the Fed said, industry operated at 81.5% of capacity, rather than the 81.9% originally reported.
There were smaller revisions in earlier years: to 79.7% in 1992, 79.1% in 1991 and 82.1% in 1990.
Industrial production for 1993 was revised to show a 4.1% increase rather than 4.2%.
For the previous two years the figures weren't changed: up 2.3% in 1992 and down 1.9% in 1991.
The revisions incorporate more comprehensive monthly source data, results of a review of productivity relationships, and updated seasonal factors.
Figures in the employment report are adjusted for seasonal variations except as noted.
Here are excerpts from the Labor Department's employment report.
The figures are seasonally adjusted.
