The results of the just-completed Lillehammer Olympics should have been satisfying to the athletically patriotic.
U.S. competitors won six gold medals and 13 overall, the latter being this nation's largest total haul for any Winter Games.
The golds were won on both ice (metric and short-track speed skating) and snow (Alpine skiing), and, unlike in 1992, by men as well as women.
But if you're the sort to fret, there was grist for that, too.
All four skating medals won by Americans were at 500 or 1,000 meters, the shortest distances contested, and one of the skiing firsts was in the men's downhill, that sport's version of a sprint.
It has long been thus: Since Eric Heiden's sweep of the five men's speed-skating events in 1980, no American has won a Winter Olympics race of longer than 1,000 meters.
It's been much the same story in track and field, the featured activity of the Summer Games.
Of the 30 track and field medals captured by U.S. athletes in 1992 at Barcelona, only two -- both bronze -- came in races that required individuals to run more than 400 meters.
Except for Joan Benoit's marathon victory in 1984, no American has won a Summer Olympics gold medal at more than 400 meters since 1972.
People who spend time thinking about such things aren't surprised that the U.S. of A. has become a nation of sprinters.
This, after all, is the land of fast food, fast-forward and the fast lane, one in which the sports that consume the bulk of our time and money -- baseball, basketball and football -- require, mostly, quick bursts of energy.
"Our national attention span -- be it mental or physical -- seems to keep getting shorter," says Scott Pengelly, a sports psychologist in Eugene, Ore.
"On our feet, we're good for about a city block."
That's an oversimplification, and Pengelly chuckled when he said it, but he's onto something.
And while the subject might not match crime in the streets or universal medical care as a matter of pressing concern, it's certainly worth chewing over a bit.
One who has done just that is Jim Ferstle, a free-lance writer and recreational distance runner who lives in St. Paul, Minn.
He was a Bowling Green University track teammate of Dave Wottle, the becapped young man whose victory at 800 meters in the 1972 Olympics was one of two by American men at the longer distances that year.
"I hate to sound like an old-timer, but when I was in college sport was still sport, not tied so much to entertainment as it is today," says Ferstle, who is 43 years old.
"We were interested in what we could accomplish, apart from any dollars that might have been involved.
"I have a nine-year-old son, and to him basketball means slam-dunking a little ball through his little hoop.
Kids pick up the theatrical aspects of sports before they learn the basics.
They know from watching television which sports are popular and which aren't, and gravitate toward the popular ones whether or not they have any prospect of succeeding in them.
It's hard to convince them to do otherwise."
Jack Daniels medaled in the modern pentathlon, a mix of riding, fencing, shooting, swimming and running, in the Olympics of 1956 and 1960.
Now he coaches cross-country running and teaches exercise physiology at Cortland State College in New York.
He's noticed the same things Ferstle has.
"Americans have a problem with endurance activities; they've become associated with recreational jogging, not with what we've come to think of as real athletics," he says.
"Boys with a lot of speed, which is another way of describing natural athletic talent, are channeled into baseball, basketball or football, or sprinting in track.
Talented girls are steered toward tennis or golf.
It's only the kids who aren't fast, or mature late, who're told to go out for cross-country."
He continues: "I think athletics have taken the same path as much of education in this country, and a decline in general fitness is one result.
There's a small elite and there's everybody else, with no middle class.
You're judged to have it early on, or you don't.
The idea that someone can develop athletically over 10 or 15 years has pretty much gone out the window."
Rob Leyden, a former track coach who's a patent expert for Nike Inc. in Beaverton, Ore., says that even athletes who choose distance events and show progress in them often must surmount obstacles not of their own making.
"People talk about a coaching `system' in this country, but in many sports there is none," he contends.
"Organization is lacking, information isn't shared.
There's no continuity between the high-school and college levels, and once an athlete completes his undergraduate years there's nothing like the European clubs to sustain him.
That's certainly true of track and field, which despite its problems remains a fairly popular sport.
You can imagine what the situation is in, say, Nordic skiing, which has a tiny competitor base to begin with."
If there's a bright spot in this situation, it's that, given the personalities of many who relish the long, lonely haul, there's something to be said for neglect, benign or otherwise.
That's the view of Scott Tinley, whose more than 100 career victories in grueling swimming-bicycling-running triathlons have made him the premier American endurance athlete of recent years.
Tinley, who is 37 years old and lives in Del Mar, Calif., wasn't much of an athlete as a youth.
"I swam a little, rode a bike for fun and did a bit of cross-country running, but never lettered in college.
It was only later, when I was out on my own, that I came to enjoy the sort of training that an endurance athlete has to do," he says.
He concludes: "The kids I knew who were the big sports heroes in high school got tired of it and quit by their mid-20s.
That's when I was just getting started.
There are things you do for other people, and things you do for yourself.
I guess endurance sports fit in the second category."
