Mel Levine spent a decade in Congress as one of Israel's most aggressive supporters.
James Zogby has founded four groups to defend Arab and Arab-American rights.
They met only as opponents, jousting on CNN's Crossfire or at congressional hearings where, Mr. Zogby recalls, the California Democrat "raked me over the coals."
Now Messrs. Levine and Zogby are co-presidents of Builders for Peace, a private group trying to get Arab-American and U.S. Jewish business leaders to invest in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza.
Backed by the Clinton administration, the two men believe that bolstering the private economy is the best way to promote peace in the areas Israel has agreed to turn over to Palestinian rule.
The duo recently took a group of U.S. executives to Israel to explore the theory.
Builders for Peace is a microcosm of the complexities facing Israelis and Palestinians as they try to work out how to live together peacefully.
It is an idea full of promise, as exemplified by the warm relations of its two founders.
But it faces many daunting problems, not the least of which is the accumulated mistrust built up over the decades of tensions in the Middle East, a place where the past always intrudes upon the present.
Despite their past, and the ups and downs of Mideast peace, Messrs. Levine and Zogby have developed an easy rapport.
Mr. Zogby, the 48-year-old president of the Arab American Institute, a private political and policy-research group, complained recently that because of his work with Mr. Levine he was called a "collaborator" by the Association of Arab American University Graduates.
"You people have more organizations than we do," observes the 50-year-old Mr. Levine.
"Yeah, but that's because you people put all your groups together and call it a federation," retorts the cigar-wielding Mr. Zogby.
Yet affability alone can't bridge the vast cultural gap separating Arabs and Jews.
Mutual suspicions surfaced immediately when Messrs. Levine and Zogby brought together Arab and Jewish Americans for the first planning session of Builders for Peace.
And during the group's trip to Israel, Palestinian business leaders bitterly vented the frustrations resulting from a quarter-century of occupation.
Even Messrs. Levine and Zogby, two mainstream liberal Democrats who hold similar views on virtually every other policy subject, don't see eye to eye on the most vital aspects of Israeli-Palestinian peace.
Mr. Levine strongly opposes an independent Palestinian state, as do most Israelis.
"I wouldn't be doing this if I weren't convinced it was very much in Israel's interest," he says.
On the other hand, Mr. Zogby thinks such a state is "inevitable, necessary and desirable."
The two men also reacted differently in Israel when they heard a number of Palestinian entrepreneurs complain about rough treatment from Israeli officials, being taxed without receiving benefits from the occupying Israeli government and being barred from the Israeli market.
Messrs. Levine and Zogby had vowed to steer clear of politics, but Mr. Zogby couldn't resist citing the oppression even successful Palestinians are forced to live under.
Mr. Levine, a lawyer who divides his time between Washington and Los Angeles, sticks to the Israeli line.
He tends to play down the unequal treatment Palestinians receive and emphasize that Israel provides services, such as water and electricity, to the territories.
Unburdened by the emotions of occupation, Mr. Levine's message is to stop focusing on the past and concentrate on business opportunities in the future.
That's the goal of Builders for Peace, which was born amid the euphoria of the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord signed Sept. 13 at the White House.
The idea emerged from a meeting that day between President Clinton and a group of Arab-American and U.S. Jewish business executives.
Later, Vice President Al Gore asked Mr. Levine, an old friend and colleague from the House, and Mr. Zogby, a White House adviser on Arab-American issues, to head the private operation.
But the euphoria didn't last long.
About six weeks later, at the group's initial dinner at Washington's Hay-Adams Hotel, it looked momentarily like Builders for Peace would collapse.
As the group waited for Mr. Gore, who was an hour late, board member Najeeb Halaby, the former Pan American World Airways chief executive officer (and the father of Jordan's queen), began talking about the "intolerable" conditions in which Gazans and West Bank Palestinians live.
Attorney Max Kampelman rose to defend Israel and challenge the characterization.
"It wasn't horrible or aggressive," says Mr. Zogby, "but everybody was staking out his own ground."
Mr. Levine remembers experiencing a feeling of relief when Mr. Gore finally arrived.
When politics is kept aside, some promising opportunities emerge.
On the trip to Israel last month, for instance, Steven Green, chairman of Astrum Corp., a holding company that owns several luggage manufacturers including Samsonite, met with a luggage maker in Gaza.
The Gazan told Mr. Green that his company could meet Mr. Green's company's quality standards and manufacture its products in the Middle East.
Mr. Green was so impressed with the presentation, he says, that he asked Samsonite's president to fly to the region for further talks.
"I think I saw some impact," says Mr. Green.
"A dialogue was started today that allowed people to express both their concerns and their optimism about what they can do with their businesses."
Builders for Peace also will need to use its connections with Mr. Gore to help remove some bureaucratic roadblocks in the way of business opportunities.
Leo Kramer, an American consultant and businessman, says that U.S. government agencies such as the Agency for International Development move too slowly and aren't sufficiently accustomed to working with the private business sector to bring the needed quick payoff to the occupied territories, where the unemployment rate is about 40%.
Government aid is needed to build the structure in which private business can thrive.
The group's success also will depend heavily on the progress of the peace talks between Israel and Palestinians, as well as Israel's willingness to relinquish control over the daily lives of Palestinians.
Messrs. Levine and Zogby say they have a commitment from Israel's minister of Industry and Trade, Micha Harish, to appoint a liaison to work with Builders for Peace.
"Mel and I have differences about the past and about the future," says Mr. Zogby.
"But in the present we have a common interest in helping create stability in the West Bank and Gaza."
