Conventional wisdom has it that minority and inner-city voters typically support liberal Democrats and will often ignore ethical lapses.
But Democratic primaries in Texas this week, along with other recent elections, suggest that's wrong, that such voters are increasingly attracted to moderates who would rather build racial bridges.
The Congressional Black Caucus was surprised this week by results in two congressional primaries.
In a Houston open seat, the first-place finisher was Beverly Clark, a moderate black Democrat who campaigned as the "family values" candidate and won 37% of the vote even while only spending a paltry $9,000.
Conservatives, including Paul Weyrich's Free Congress Foundation, gave her crucial support.
Ms. Clark did well among the 27% of the district's voters who are black, but also forged bonds with socially conservative whites.
Her opponent in a runoff next month will be Ken Bentsen, a nephew of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen.
Almost as shocking was the landslide defeat of Rep. Craig Washington, an officeholder for 22 years.
In a solidly minority district, he lost 63% to 37% to Sheila Jackson Lee, a Houston city council member and former judge.
Ms. Lee attacked Rep. Washington for missing a quarter of all House votes last year.
She also scored political points by noting Mr. Washington voted against a celebration to thank the U.S. military for its efforts in the Gulf War.
Mr. Washington, a Nafta opponent, criticized Ms. Lee for backing the trade treaty.
But his attack flopped as business and Hispanic Nafta supporters flocked to Ms. Lee.
Rep. Washington might well have glided unopposed through his primary were it not for a term-limit law passed by Houston voters in 1991.
The law limited the tenure of Ms. Lee on the local city council, and helped convince her to challenge an incumbent congressman who'd been unopposed in previous years.
We've long maintained that term limits will encourage well-respected incumbents to try for higher office, and the evidence in state after state indicates that it does.
(Term-limit supporters also showed they have political muscle in Texas.
State Rep. Jim Tallas, a Republican who helped kill term limits in the legislature last year, was crushed 71% to 29% by a political newcomer whose main issue was term limits.)
The strong showings of Ms. Clark and Ms. Lee are the latest indications that many minority voters will no longer put up with ineffective leaders who blame outside forces for the problems of the inner city.
In 1992, Chicago Rep. Charles Hayes, a top House Bank abuser, was defeated by Bobby Rush.
Mr. Rush is a former Black Panther who now crusades against juvenile crime by saying, "We don't need to make excuses for our young people."
In a neighboring Chicago district, race-baiting Rep. Gus Savage lost in a landslide to Mel Reynolds, who like Ms. Lee supported Nafta and had strong business support.
Many black voters continue to support increased funding for federal programs, but they're also interested in policies that promote economic growth and personal responsibility.
It's likely that many more black candidates will start moving center, sounding more like Beverly Clark and Sheila Jackson Lee and less like Gus Savage and Craig Washington.
