Success has its price.
Ask any American lawyer in Russia.
Few Western interests have been as aggressive as U.S. law firms in trying to capitalize on Russia's economic reforms.
Since the late 1980s, a number of large U.S. firms have opened offices in Moscow, and they have been highly successful, partly because they are staffed by local Russian lawyers hired at a fraction of what U.S. lawyers make.
Now, amid growing ultranationalism, Russian law firms have been complaining that they are increasingly getting cut out of the action.
And while no one is suggesting total banishment, there are proposals to sharply curtail what U.S. firms can do to halt what some view as the exploitation of the Russian bar.
Recently, Yuri Kalmykov, Russian minister of justice, accused Western firms of renting prestigious offices in central Moscow and St. Petersburg at "minimal rates" and paying local lawyers "miserable wages," according to a letter he sent to the influential Russian council of ministries.
Spokesmen for U.S. firms deny those charges.
Nonetheless, Mr. Kalmykov, a former Communist Party member, has called on Russian President Boris Yeltsin to issue a special decree that will crack down on major Western law firms.
This isn't the first time that U.S. firms have had trouble when trying to hang out their shingles overseas.
Until 1986, U.S. firms were forbidden from even having offices in Japan, for instance, and they still can't hire Japanese lawyers as associates or partners.
Recently, France approved changes that require all foreign lawyers to take its bar examination, including those who don't even practice before the local courts.
In the U.S., a few big states, including New York and California, impose certain limited restrictions on foreign law firms; most states, however, have no regulations concerning lawyers from abroad.
U.S. lawyers with overseas interests see a common thread of protectionism running through the complaints from Russia and elsewhere.
"The local bar, like any other local bar, doesn't want to have the good business creamed off by the foreigners," says Sarah Carey, of Steptoe & Johnson, a Washington firm with a Moscow office.
In Russia, law in general and lawyers in particular have historically garnered even less respect than in the U.S.
For one thing, commercial law didn't exist under a centrally planned economy; and under the Stalinist regime, laws were more likely to be made after the fact to fit the crime.
As a career, "law was poorly paid and poorly respected before.
People were shocked when Gorbachev became a lawyer," says Marshall I. Goldman, associate director of the Russian Research Center at Harvard University.
But now, U.S. lawyers have apparently taught the Russians a valuable lesson.
"Suddenly, they see what they could be doing, and their reasoning is, `If we only could throw out the Western lawyers, some of that business will come our way,'" says Mr. Goldman.
Certainly, some U.S. lawyers went to Russia with altruistic intentions.
Many have spent time training judges, helping frame a new constitution or developing a new commercial code.
U.S. judges are teaching Russians that bankruptcy is not necessarily a bad thing.
Much of the work is being coordinated through a nonprofit American Bar Association project in conjunction with a grant from the Agency for International Development.
Among the dozen or so profit-seeking U.S. firms with offices in Russia are Baker & McKenzie and Coudert Brothers and several Texas firms, including Baker & Botts and Vinson & Elkins, with energy clients who hope to help revitalize the huge Russian oil and gas industry.
Another U.S. firm, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, plans to open a Russian office this summer.
Partner Robert Strauss, a former U.S. ambassador to Moscow, voices concern about restrictions.
The Russians, he says, "need to be encouraging anything that assists in outside capital coming into that country, and law firms are an integral part of that."
The U.S. firms acknowledge that their wages are low by U.S. standards.
Although estimates vary widely, the median wage for Russian lawyers working for big U.S. firms is believed by some observers to be about $2,000 a month -- not much more than what a starting lawyer at a top New York firm makes in a week.
Although no precise figures are available, it is believed that U.S. firms in Russia bill at a slightly lower rate there than at home; the disparity isn't greater, one U.S. lawyer says, because the costs of opening and operating an office in Russia are high.
As for wages paid to local lawyers, the Americans generally call the compensation generous.
"The level at which the Russian lawyers are compensated puts all of them in the top 1% of Russians by local standards," says John Huhs, a Russia expert at the New York firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae.
"They are extraordinarily well-compensated."
LeBoeuf Lamb has a policy of paying prevailing wages, regardless of location, according to Mr. Huhs.
When Russian lawyers spend summers working for the firm in New York, he says, they are paid the same as the Americans.
Under Mr. Kalmykov's proposed decree, U.S. lawyers would be barred from providing consulting services on Russian law and from doing work on certain kinds of arbitration cases.
Still other talk has been of a system of registering or accrediting foreign lawyers.
The proposals are now expected to be considered by the new Russian Parliamant.
Americans say such curbs could hurt.
The consulting ban could prevent attorneys from advising on certain aspects of major international transactions.
Limits on arbitration, an increasingly popular way of resolving business disputes, also could be damaging, says Eugene Lawson, president of the U.S.-Russia Business Council, an umbrella group for U.S. companies and law firms operating in Russia.
Arbitration "is near and dear to the hearts of a lot of law firms," he says.
A state judge in California threw out a $7.5 million libel award against New York Times Co. on grounds that the jury's verdict in October was factually inconsistent and excessive.
The case involved Leonard M. Ross, a Beverly Hills businessman who claimed he was libeled in 1988 articles published in the Santa Barbara News-Press, owned by the Times Co.
The jury awarded $5 million for damage to Mr. Ross's reputation and $2.5 million for emotional distress.
Mr. Ross contended that the newspaper wrongly linked him in two articles to a federal investor-fraud investigation of a former business partner.
Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Harvey A. Schneider found four responses by the jury on a multiquestion verdict form to be factually inconsistent.
He also ruled that $2.5 million for emotional damage was unwarranted because Mr. Ross never sought professional care and there was no evidence or testimony alleging permanent injury.
However, Judge Schneider said he agreed "in some respects" that the paper was negligent in preparing the articles.
"The unwillingness of the individual defendants at trial to concede even the possibility that a mistake had been made by them undoubtedly contributed to the excessive jury award," he wrote.
Rex Heinke, the lawyer for the Times Co. in Los Angeles, said that while the company was gratified by the judge's decision, he disagreed with the finding of partial fault.
"Since the judge doesn't say why he thinks we were negligent, I don't know how to respond, other than we disagree," said Mr. Heinke.
Lawyers for Mr. Ross could not be reached.
Milo Geyelin contributed to this article.
