Mutual-fund groups that charge sales commissions are discovering they have to work a bit harder.
"Load groups are waking up to the fact that they're losing market share," said Don Phillips, publisher of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a Chicago newsletter.
"Money was coming in, business was good.
They were turning in record profits.
But going forward, investors are actively seeking no-load funds."
No-load funds have made tremendous gains since 1988 when they accounted for about 37% of new stock- and bond-fund sales.
Last year, the no-load funds captured 43% of the market.
New sales of no-load funds in 1993 were $187.9 billion, or 43%, while load-fund sales were $249.5 billion, or 57%, according to the mutual-fund trade group Investment Company Institute.
Fund groups acknowledge they've let no-load funds batter their reputations.
"To say that isn't a part of it would be wrong.
We've abdicated the playing field," said Richard Redeker, chief executive of Prudential Mutual Funds, a unit of Prudential Securities that sells its funds through brokers.
Prudential Securities is a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, Newark, N.J.
"The load-fund industry has done a lousy job of marketing professional advice," said Jerry Potts, a senior vice president and director of sales development at Massachusetts Financial Services, a Boston unit of Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada.
"The no-loads have spent more money in advertising, and they've been more vocal as a group."
To combat the trend, mutual-fund groups are promoting the merits of load-fund investing.
Last week, Boston-based Putnam Investments, a unit of Marsh & McLennan Cos., unveiled a series of print advertisements stressing how financial advisers help investors select mutual funds.
Massachusetts Financial Services started similar ads in December.
Last fall Pasadena Funds, run by Roger Engemann Management Co. of Pasadena, Calif., brought out a brochure titled, "Ten Good Reasons Why You Should Pay a Mutual Fund Load."
With a choice of more than 4,000 funds and industry jargon such as "inverse strips" and "collateralized mortgage obligations" to complicate decision-making, the right fund can be difficult to find if an investor doesn't have the time, patience or knowledge, Massachusetts Financial's Mr. Potts said.
Many investors end up chasing funds in a frothy stock market or simply pick the hottest product.
That's where a broker or financial planner comes in.
The Pasadena Funds' brochure says a "financial adviser with whom you are comfortable" will help you understand the terms and decide whether to buy a volatile or conservative fund.
The Massachusetts Financial ads pose questions such as "When should I start investing for tax-free income?"
Or "If a bond has a guaranteed rate of return, why does its price fluctuate?"
The ads' answer: Ask a financial adviser.
No-load groups take issue with the advertising campaigns.
"You might be getting investment advice, but only on the products the broker is going to make money on," said Brian Blomquist, chairman of the 100% No-Load Mutual Fund Council and a vice president with the Lindner Funds in St. Louis.
Mr. Blomquist also said brokers and fee-based financial advisers are not the same.
Financial advisers charge a percentage of assets to be invested and select appropriate choices from among 4,000 funds.
Brokers sell in-house products and outside funds that have selling agreements with their firms.
Load groups, however, are on the right track after being so long on the defensive, Morningstar's Mr. Phillips said.
"They haven't trumpeted their stronger case, that if you pay a load, you get an added benefit of service," he said. " `Load' is such a hideous word.
How do you make a case for a load?
What you do is say that for investors who need help, they get someone to sit down and educate them about what they're investing in and why."
But many load-fund groups are "their own worst enemy," Mr. Phillips said.
Instead of touting the advantages of using a broker or a financial planner, load groups are shuffling pricing and confusing investors.
"They're trying to say, `we can be no-loads, too,' but they can't," Mr. Phillips said.
"Shuffling fees is insulting to brokers.
Instead of being upfront, they're trying to make it look more like no-loads.
It's like saying they're doing something wrong in the first place."
In general, "A" fund shares charge an upfront commission, while "B" shares are sold without that charge but usually carry a commission if an investor redeems the shares in the first few years.
"B" shares also usually carry a higher yearly expense ratio than "A" shares.
Now added are "C" and "D" shares, which charge a sales commission from yearly fund expenses.
These "level" load pricings on funds are attracting no-load investors at J. & W. Seligman & Co., a New York money manager that offers 30 funds, said Donald Pitti, a managing director.
While some investors resist paying an upfront sales charge and many call for lower fees, they still want financial advice, Mr. Pitti said, and that makes them willing to pay a 1% yearly fee that goes to brokers.
With the Seligman funds, the charge drops to 0.25% a year when the total amount paid by the investor reaches 6 1/4%.
Along with the new pricing, Seligman plans new advertisements with the working title of "No Charges.
No Fees.
No Help," Mr. Pitti said.
Morningstar's Mr. Phillips said load groups can't get by with advertisements alone.
They need to train their sales forces and make sure brokers recommend the right funds and not simply generate commissions, he said.
Putnam says that in addition to educating its sales force, it has rewritten fund prospectuses and investor literature to make financial terms more reader-friendly.
"It's so late in the game to make this positive case if it's only going to be halfhearted," Mr. Phillips said.
