Congress remains deadlocked on easing individuals' tax liability for their domestic workers, even after Bobby Ray Inman's ill-fated Cabinet nomination provided yet more evidence of compliance problems.
"If I ever saw a situation where there was gridlock, this is it," said Rep. Barbara Kennelly, a Connecticut Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee who has proposed a measure to remedy the matter.
"It's so obvious how to fix it," she added, "and yet nothing happens."
Action has been blocked largely by procedural hangups in the House and Senate tax committees, even though it's been a year since "Nannygate" gave rise to a bipartisan consensus in favor of changing the law.
Last January, President Clinton's nomination of Zoe Baird to be attorney general was torpedoed by reports that she hadn't paid Social Security taxes for domestic workers.
As some other nominees -- most recently, Mr. Inman -- have acknowledged similar lapses, many lawmakers have agreed that the current threshold for tax liability is unrealistically low, encouraging noncompliance.
Currently, employers must pay Social Security taxes for household workers who are paid at least $50 a quarter -- an amount that could cover even those who occasionally mow the lawn or babysit.
Rep. Kennelly and Reps. Carrie Meek (D., Fla.) and Amo Houghton (R., N.Y.) want to raise the threshold to $800 a year.
But Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) doesn't want to send a tax bill to the Senate for fear that senators will load it up with unrelated tax amendments.
And Senate Finance Committee Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D., Ill.) has been waiting to include a nanny-tax provision in a package of Social Security changes he's proposed.
The chairmen's same concerns helped hold up action in 1993.
"I was told, `Wait until next year,'" Rep. Kennelly said.
"Well, the next year is here."
In 1993, the House included in its version of budget legislation a provision raising the threshold for paying Social Security taxes to $1,800 a year.
It was dropped in the Senate on technical grounds.
Rep. Kennelly and others contend that the $1,800 threshold is so high that it would threaten the Social Security eligibility of many low-wage domestic workers.
Citing government figures, she has argued that some employers currently paying Social Security would stop doing so.
The lawmaker said she had hoped the Inman case would give impetus to her own proposal.
"How many times does this have to come up before we act?" she said.
