This is Monica Greenwood's first visit to Georgia's lone ski resort, known as Sky Valley.
But she already has learned a basic lesson about skiing the deep South.
"Skis don't slide on mud," says Ms. Greenwood, casting a rueful glance up the "mountain," which has no snow on it except for two narrow swaths created by Sky Valley's snow-making machines.
Unfortunately, Ms. Greenwood had to learn that lesson the hard way.
The secretary from Atlanta is covered with mud from glove to boot, having veered off the swath and into the dirt so as to avoid a couple of fallen skiers.
Mud is just one of many hazards at the dozen or so ski areas in the customarily snow-starved states of Georgia, Tennessee, North Carolina and Alabama.
Thanks to warm climates and low altitudes, skiers here frequently contend with slushy, icy, even grassy conditions.
Remarkably, none of that seems to damp enthusiasm for the sport.
Every winter weekend, thousands of Southerners put up with long lift lines and ski runs as short as a few hundred feet just to experience the thrill of downhill close to home.
"Hey, skiing is skiing," says Larry Clark, a Southern slope devotee from Kennesaw, Ga.
"If I can have time on snow -- whether it be on ice, slush or crud -- I'm happy."
Mr. Clark's attitude isn't uncommon.
"Southerners will ski on anything," says Gary Jones, who runs Alabama's Cloudmont Ski Resort.
Snow on Cloudmont's two tiny, lighted slopes is often so thin that skiers slide over rocks, which are pretty hard on skis.
"At night you can see sparks fly," says Mr. Jones, who replaced most of his rental equipment this year.
The vertical drop at Cloudmont is about 150 feet; 3,000 feet is more typical in a Colorado resort, where there are real mountains as well as real snow.
Even the highest Southeastern peak, North Carolina's Beech Mountain at 5,505 feet, is much lower than the base of most Rocky Mountain ski areas.
Beech Mountain gets 57 inches of natural snow each year on average; Cloudmont gets about six.
In the South, 60-degree winter days aren't unusual, so it's a constant battle to keep snow on the slopes.
And most snowmaking equipment, which works by spraying water high into the air, isn't effective unless the air temperature falls to 28 degrees.
Weather permitted just a month of skiing last year at Cloudmont.
North Carolina, the South's biggest ski state, draws about 500,000 skiers a year, according to Rick Kirkpatrick, who studied the industry as an economics professor at Appalachian State University, in Boone, N.C.
Southern ski trips can be impossible to plan.
Mark Mitchell, a Huntsville, Ala., schoolteacher, recalls the great expectations he and about 20 friends had when they scheduled a New Year's weekend retreat at Ober Gatlinburg ski resort in Tennessee.
"We were ready," he says.
"We all went out and bought the gloves and the little suits and the thermals -- and then there was no snow."
All wasn't lost, however.
Mr. Mitchell and his friends spent the balmy weekend riding Gatlinburg's Alpine Slide, a sled on wheels that snakes down an 1,800-foot concrete gully.
"It was pretty much fun," he says, "but you did skin your knuckles if you weren't careful."
Not all Southern skiing is so bleak.
The ski area at North Carolina's Sugar Mountain, for instance, has a 1,200-foot vertical drop, which is respectable for the East.
The more scrupulous resort managers try to keep lift lines under 20 minutes.
And after several warm winters, a long-running cold spell this year has kept many Southern slopes much whiter, albeit with man-made snow, than usual.
Still, no one is going to confuse the Appalachians with the Alps.
At Sky Valley, where a weekend lift ticket goes for $18, there are no jagged, snow-capped peaks, just rounded brown hillsides.
Even in a good year, the snow is so spotty that skiers have to duckwalk on carpet to reach the chairlift.
There's no need, as there is in Aspen, Colo., for trail maps with bold slope names such as "Perry's Prowl" and "Spar Gulch."
When skiers reach the top of Sky Valley's lift, they have two choices: "Easiest" and "Most Difficult."
On a recent Saturday here, difficult was all they had.
A driving Georgia rain followed by a cold front had transformed the two slopes into rivers of ice.
"This is absolutely dangerous," said J.B. Coram, an Atlanta commodities broker, peering up at a slope littered with fallen skiers.
"I've seen enough people on their butts to know it's time to take my butt home."
For resorts on the Southern ski circuit, alternate activities can make the difference between a going concern and going under.
Cloudmont supplements its income by doubling as a dude ranch.
Sky Valley, whose slopes sit just beyond the 10th tee of a golf course, now offers ski-and-tee specials and a Swiss-style lodge -- complete with apres-ski (or apres-tee) amenities like fireside dining.
Gene Head, owner of Ski Scaly resort, never harbored any delusions of grandeur.
His small operation, run out of a roadside building in the southwest corner of North Carolina, tries to compensate for its size (a leisurely skier can reach the bottom of Scaly's slope in 40 seconds) with a homey approach to customer service.
Mr. Head, who carved the Scaly ski slope out of his cabbage farm 13 years ago, tries to get to know every skier by name.
From a small cluttered office with a plate-glass window and a microphone hooked to the public-address system, Mr. Head, who wears a cowboy hat, provides a running commentary on the action.
One moment he compliments a skier's red jacket.
The next, he alerts his employees to a skier careening toward a fence.
For his efforts, Mr. Head says he takes in about $350,000 in a good year.
He has also earned a loyal following.
"This is perfect," says Shaun Kelley, a 12-year-old skier from Dahlonega, Ga.
He stops for a moment at the peak of Scaly's slope to take in the scenery, which includes a BP gas station across the highway and a red barn right next to the beginners' slope.
"The view is breathtaking," he says.
MOUNT MITCHELL in North Carolina is the highest peak in the Southeast.
In a page-one article Jan. 25 about skiing in the region, Beech Mountain was incorrectly identified as the tallest point.
Rather, Beech Mountain is the highest ski area in the Southeast.
(WSJ Feb. 2, 1994)
