Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co. wants you to believe that it treats family-business clients just like kin.
To promote that commitment, the Springfield, Mass., insurer is running a national advertising campaign that pledges to help "Keep the Family in the Family Business."
And during the past 18 months, Mass Mutual helped to sponsor forums at 22 universities where family-business owners talked about common problems.
"Our company has been selling to family businesses for a long time," says Ty Tryon, a Mass Mutual director of market planning and development.
Yet until recently, he adds, "no one here really recognized they had unique needs."
More providers of financial and professional services are now targeting family-owned firms as a distinct market segment.
But providers find they often must offer extra hand holding to serve family firms and cope with family tensions that can complicate the firms' business decisions.
Though a tough sell, family businesses represent "a market of enormous untapped potential," says Russ Prince, president of Prince & Associates, a Stratford, Conn., market-research and consulting concern.
He estimates that family businesses account for about half of affluent Americans with assets of $1 million or more.
Service providers are pursuing the lucrative family-business market harder as demand slows among downsized big corporations, their usual customer base.
One measure of the surging interest: the Family Firm Institute, a Brookline, Mass., trade group for service providers, says participation at its annual conference increased to nearly 600 last year from 100 in 1988.
The New York law firm of Kronish, Lieb, Weiner & Hellman, for example, formed a 13-member, interdisciplinary Family Firm Practice Group in late 1992.
The decision coincided with a year of monthly courses attended by about 10 Kronish Lieb partners and organized by Genus Resources Inc., a Boston family-business consulting firm.
Henry Welt, the practice group's co-chairman, says Kronish Lieb has invested more than $150,000 in course-related fees and partners' time "to educate ourselves about this market."
In December, three former Bank of Boston Corp. senior officers formed Heritage Partners Inc. to invest primarily in family businesses, joining the growing number of firms with that specialty.
Peter Hermann, a principal in Boston-based Heritage, says it already has raised $40 million of commitments from Bank of Boston, Continental Bank Corp. and Kleinwort Benson Group PLC, a U.K. merchant bank.
Yet Mr. Prince believes most service providers probably will fail to adopt the special skills required to fully tap the family-business market.
In a 1993 study of 124 family and independently owned firms by Mr. Prince's firm, family-business owners proved a much tougher sell.
They generally take longer to make buying decisions because the business makes up so much of a family's wealth and livelihood.
That same heightened sense of risk also makes family-owned companies more demanding customers once they buy professional services, Mr. Prince says.
Family businesses "are more expensive, time-consuming and troublesome" to attract and keep as clients, says Karen File, a University of Connecticut associate professor of marketing.
Indeed, some family-business owners are turned off by service providers' expanded interest.
"There are a tremendous number of people dressed as family-business financial advisers who you find out are just insurance salesmen," says Michaela McSheffrey, chief operating officer of family-owned Mija Industries Inc., a Plymouth, Mass., maker of pressure gauges for fire extinguishers.
On the other hand, Prof. File adds, family firms tend to be extremely loyal customers once they decide to buy.
Their acceptance of business services often leads individual family members to buy services for themselves, too.
To attract family-owned businesses, financial and professional service providers are replacing their conventional sales pitches with counseling roles that cement relations -- sometimes, long before they sell a single service.
At United States Trust Co., a New York financial-services concern, Dirk Dreux IV helps form advisory panels that act as quasi-boards of directors for family-owned businesses.
Mr. Dreux, an executive for U.S. Trust's Family Wealth Consulting Group, joined such a panel three years ago at Copley-Fradin Distributors, a beverage wholesaler in West Greenwich, R.I.
Yet U.S. Trust's only revenue so far from the Copley-Fradin relationship is Mr. Dreux's modest annual fee for his advisory panel participation.
"Much to his credit, Dirk has never really pushed" other services, says Charles Fradin II, president of a firm his grandfather founded 60 years ago.
Nathan Sachs, a Mass Mutual agent and president of a financial-advisory concern in Scottsdale, Ariz., is pursuing a similar low-key approach.
About a year ago, he decided to sell services solely to family-owned firms, which then represented 80% of his business.
He began to host a weekly radio talk show about family-business issues.
He also started to sponsor biweekly roundtables, now attended by 30 family firms.
Mr. Sachs says that he never solicits business on the radio or at his free roundtables.
"It's strictly exposure," he emphasizes.
"Ultimately, I know I'll sell more product."
But selling to those family-business prospects isn't easy.
Last year, he says, one life-insurance policy sale was delayed six months when the owners of an automobile dealership suddenly expressed doubts that two of their six children employed at the dealership were compatible enough to succeed them.
The parents had approached Mr. Sachs about buying life insurance to cover their estate taxes when they die.
The $3 million policy represented a $8,000 commission for the financial adviser.
The parents changed their minds on the day the sale was supposed to close last summer.
"The mother said, `These kids don't get along now.
They'll never get along when we're gone,'" Mr. Sachs recalls.
To revive the deal, he says that he arranged for the two siblings to work out their differences with help from a family psychologist.
In January, Mr. Sachs completed the sale.
