COST-CONSCIOUS companies, many of which paid huge sums in the 1980s to jury consultants in high-stakes cases, are starting to insist on more of a no-frills approach to jury-picking.
It's not that jury consulting hasn't worked.
In many major business cases and high-profile criminal prosecutions, using psychologists and sociologists to pick juries and then predict how jurors are likely to react to the evidence has become as routine as taking a deposition.
But in recent years, the field has lost much of its mystique.
As lawyers have become more accustomed to jury consulting, they also have learned that they don't necessarily need everything that is in a consultant's bag of tricks.
And like all other aspects of litigation, jury consulting has raised intense concerns about cost.
"Everybody in the field is aware of the pressures that are on the law firms to cut costs," says Beth Bonora, president of the Oakland, Calif., branch of the National Jury Project, a trial-consulting firm.
"They want more for less."
That approach is a far cry from the honeymoon atmosphere of the mid-1980s, when jury consulting first was embraced in a big way by commercial litigators.
Jury consulting enabled companies to glean how jurors were likely to react to defense theories, to witnesses, to visual aids of any color or dimension, even to the language used in a closing argument.
Because the process seemed mysterious, even magical, lawyers for companies were hard-pressed to bargain over the details of a work proposal that cost $500,000 or more.
Lawyers' willingness to pay nearly any asking price also was linked to the stakes involved: If a consultant might help win a billion-dollar case, it seemed tantamount to malpractice not to take advantage of the service.
TODAY, THOUGH, jury consultants have succeeded in educating litigators about the field.
Lawyers for companies know that a "shadow jury" sits through the trial and reports daily on its impressions so that lawyers can get a sense of what the real jury may be thinking.
But they also know that "shadow juries" often aren't worth the expense.
They know that pre-testing the case before multiple groups of mock jurors may be slightly more useful than performing just a couple of tests, but lawyers frequently find that one or two focus groups are enough.
After years of hiring jury consultants, "I'm a more competent, sophisticated purchaser of those services today simply because of my experience," says Thomas Heiden, a Detroit lawyer.
"I know what to expect for the money."
No-frills versions of jury research draw on smaller sample sizes and provide less analysis than the more expensive products.
Joseph Rice of Jury Research Institute in Walnut Creek, Calif., says his 10-year-old firm now offers "an a la carte menu" of individual services.
"We don't come in and say you need a $100,000 proposal," Mr. Rice adds.
A simple focus group starts at about $5,000.
JuryThink, a small Minneapolis firm that began last year, says that for $10,000, it will put together a surrogate jury to hear a case before the actual trial.
Not everyone is convinced, however, that the less expensive alternatives do much for clients.
Donald Vinson, one of the early leaders in the field and now head of DecisionQuest, a jury-consulting firm in Los Angeles, says clients are paying for accuracy, and that the less expensive consulting services can't offer the insight that more comprehensive studies provide into jurors' minds.
"It's not only costs.
Even more important, you've got to deliver value to your clients," he says.
"Focus groups are really in vogue today because they are cheap and easy.
Any dimwit can run a focus group."
Mr. Vinson's own firm, however, has some savings to offer, too.
He says that improvements in technology have brought down the cost of the research his firm provides, as well as of the electronic, three-dimensional graphics it prepares for use at trial.
"Very few jury consultants can come in and do any meaningful work for less than 50,000 or 100,000 bucks," says Robert Zeavin, a Los Angeles lawyer who often uses jury consultants.
Mr. Zeavin says that in a recent trial over environmental claims, he now wishes he had spent an additional $50,000 on jury consulting.
A mock jury was used in the case to evaluate reactions to opening statements.
But Mr. Zeavin says a more comprehensive study might have helped evaluate how the jurors would react to a complicated special-verdict form that was used.
Still, because of heightened concern about costs, the client might not have been willing to pay for the extra work, Mr. Zeavin says.
IN HOPES OF attracting new customers as prices decline, some jury consultants are teaming up with larger, more diverse companies such as accounting firms and technology manufacturers, which offer their own trial services and products.
Los Angeles-based Litigation Sciences Inc., formerly a unit of advertising giant Saatchi & Saatchi, last month was acquired by Quixote Corp., which produces trial graphics and high-tech data products for lawyers.
DecisionQuest has sold a stake to accounting firm Price Waterhouse, known for its expert-witness and financial-analysis services for litigation.
And FTI Corp., an Annapolis, Md., jury-consulting and engineering-analysis firm, last summer began an alliance with Arthur Andersen & Co.
Some lawyers, however, question whether the convenience of one-stop-shopping is much of a factor to clients.
Of course, there remain some trial lawyers who would just as soon not be bothered by consultants, frills or no frills, affiliated or independent.
"Why do I need someone telling me how to communicate?" says Frederick P. Furth, a trial lawyer in San Francisco.
As the chief executive officer of one of Mr. Furth's clients told him after watching jury consultants at work: "I thought that's what I pay you for."
