After almost being given up for dead, National Car Rental Systems is using a new broadcast and print campaign to signal that it is healthy again and spoiling for more market share.
The ads, created by W.B. Doner & Co. of Southfield, Mich., debut this weekend and are part of a bid by National to zoom past Beech Holdings unit Budget Rent A Car and take a solid hold on No. 3.
The industry leaders are Hertz, of which Ford Motor owns a majority stake, and Avis Inc.
The campaign portrays National as offering "momentum" to business air travelers.
National is trying to regain some momentum of its own.
As recently as a year ago, National was hemorrhaging so badly that parent company General Motors considered liquidating it.
But now, according to National's new president, Lawrence J. Ramaekers, part of the Jay Alix & Associates turnaround team that GM hired, the unit has stopped bleeding and is ready to make its move on Budget.
National's effort focuses on eliminating one of business travelers' leading concerns -- delays at the car-rental counter.
The new ad campaign hits that theme hard.
Of course the competition -- including Budget -- has long figured this out, too.
Remember O.J. Simpson running through airports for Hertz?
National's new video spots, which are to appear this weekend during NCAA regional basketball tournaments, show fast-moving business-travel scenes set to Matthew Wilder's up-tempo song, "Ain't Nothin' Gonna Break My Stride."
The message is that National renters get through the airport quickly.
At the end, a driver accelerates through a green traffic light to the punch line, "Green means go" -- a play on National's identifying color.
Print ads starting Monday will continue that theme.
One double-page spread declares (in green ink), "Only One Car Rental Company Makes All the Lights Green."
A series of green traffic lights underneath highlights selling points such as automated rental-agreement machines, an option allowing frequent travelers to skip the rental counter, and the lack of drop-off charges for one-way rentals.
"The interesting thing about the campaign is that National had to restructure, but now there is a sense of "Let's get on with it, let's get moving' -- and that's how business travelers are," says Alan Kalter, the president of Doner.
His agency won the $20 million, yearlong campaign in a competition with a handful of other agencies.
National has been mostly absent from the airwaves for several years.
It had been without a national agency since the end of 1992, when it dropped Chiat/Day.
National argues that the ad campaign should push its market share significantly ahead, says Michael Olsen, vice president for communications.
During the past couple of years, he says, "we went black, advertising and marketing-wise" and still managed to hold roughly 14% to 15% of the airport rental market.
There aren't any reliable industry market-share figures, but National believes it has edged slightly ahead of Budget in airport rentals, 14.4% to 14%.
Budget, on the other hand, believes it has a solid 15%-to-13% lead and plenty of momentum of its own.
"We aren't quaking in our boots," says William N. Plamondon, president and chief executive officer of Budget.
He observes that Budget's "Road Warrior" ad campaign, launched in January via Tracy Locke/DDB Needham, addresses some of the same quick-airport-exit concerns on which National is focusing, including an option to bypass the rental counter.
To get National ready for its relaunch, the Jay Alix turnaround crew focused on a number of nuts-and-bolts issues.
For example, to cut costs, the company gradually downsized its fleet, turning the "Emerald Aisle," from which frequent customers may choose their own car, into what some derisively began to call "Corsica Alley," named for the Chevrolet vehicle that made up many of the offerings.
Now National is back to its old idea of offering full-sized cars for reasonable prices.
The new management also stopped grading reservations agents on seconds per call and started rewarding them for closing deals.
National boosted morale by spending $95,000 on more-comfortable chairs for agents.
And after paying for 25,000 hours of computer programming, National's management now has computerized car-reservation and car-management systems that talk to each other.
And, adds Geoff Corbett, National's executive vice president for marketing and sales, "To deliver on our promises, our people have been empowered to deliver a no-hassle experience to the traveler."
The sooner all of that adds up to more market share, the thinking goes, the sooner GM may be able to extricate itself from the rental-car business.
GM is understood to be hoping to close a sale this year, although there is some speculation that with National back in the black, the auto maker may hold out for top dollar.
Reebok International Ltd. joins the gang of marketers trying to capitalize on the new movie "The Flintstones."
This week, the athletic-goods maker starts airing ads for its Cliffhanger outdoor shoes, showing young men and women climbing rugged rocks and mountain biking in tune to "The Flintstone" theme song.
The connection?
People participating in outdoor sports are "in many respects, the Stone Age Family of the 1990s," the company says.
The ads will air on network and cable.
Reebok joins such companies as McDonald's, Mattel and VF's Lee Apparel, which are flooding the market with Flintstones promotions before the movie is released in May.
Ad Notes. . . .
SWITCH: Kmart's Waldenbooks moved its estimated $2 million account from Deutsch/Dworin, New York, and awarded it without a review to Stamford, Conn., agency Scaros & Casselman.
Waldenbooks and Deutsch/Dworin couldn't be reached for comment.
SHOE ACCOUNT: TBWA Advertising of New York said it was awarded Timberland Co.'s accounts in Britain, France and Germany.
Previously, the shoe maker showed customized versions of its American ads in Europe, which were created by Mullen Advertising of Wenham, Mass.
