Despite the backing of prominent investors, Spectrum Holobyte Inc. faces hefty cash needs as it seeks to maintain its standing as one of the leading providers of entertainment software.
Spectrum, now raising funds from a proposed two million share offering, says in its prospectus that it may require additional financing to remain competitive.
And, Spectrum adds, it can't say "whether or when" it will be profitable.
The closely held concern in effect went public in December when it acquired the publicly held computer games software company, MicroProse Inc. of Hunt Valley, Md.
The combined revenue of both companies -- nearly $60 million in fiscal 1993 -- are mainly derived from the sale of entertainment software for use on personal computers.
The company also sells video-game cartridges used in Sega and Nintendo machines.
Spectrum has introduced more than 100 video games for personal computers, and sold more than 12 million copies.
Its most popular products include flight simulations, such as Falcon and F-15 StrikeEagle, puzzle games such as Tetris, and strategy and action games, such as Railroad Tycoon and Soldiers of Fortune.
The company this spring expects to introduce its first products based on the TV series "Star Trek: The Next Generation," through a license with Paramount Pictures Corp.
At current prices, a two million share offering would raise about $19 million for the company, which will use proceeds to fund new software developments, pay off debt, and for other business purposes.
Robertson, Stephens & Co. and Piper Jaffray Inc. are the underwriters.
After the offering, the company will have about 19 million shares outstanding.
The SEC filing says the company thinks that proceeds from the offering, together with cash from operations, will be sufficient to meet cash needs through the end of the 1995 fiscal year.
But it cautions that additional financing may be required, and that failure to raise financing might delay product introductions, adversely affecting the company's business.
Spectrum's stockholders include AT&T Ventures, the venture capital arm of American Telephone & Telegraph Co.; Paramount Communications Inc. and some venture capital firms.
For the nine months ended Dec. 31, Spectrum posted a net loss of about $52.8 million, which includes a one-time non-cash charge of about $46.3 million for certain write-offs related to the acquisition of MicroProse.
Spectrum said its 1993 revenue was affected by MicroProse's cash shortage during calendar 1993, which decreased the number of software titles that MicroProse could offer and ship out.
Yet a host of pressures could lead Spectrum to seek additional cash in coming months, including the high development costs of software products and the significant advance payments required for the manufacture of video-game cartridges.
In addition, with major entertainment, cable and telecommunications companies swarming into the interactive entertainment market, competitive pressures could intensify, resulting in "significant price competition and reduced profit margins," Spectrum warns.
To aggressively develop software for "next generation platforms," which feature more lifelike characters and realistic graphics.
Typically, it takes Spectrum 10 to 18 months to complete a new software title and six to 14 months to develop existing titles for different technology "platforms."
To seek to acquire additional software "properties" derived from movies, television, comic books and other sources.
To enter "strategic relationships" with other companies.
In order to grow, Spectrum is partly banking on a growing demand for powerful personal computers that incorporate CD-ROM technology and that are capable of higher speeds and improved graphics.
Computer networks, which enable several personal computer users to play games from different locations, are also increasingly popular.
Both these trends, Spectrum believes, "will ultimately lead to increased sales of both PCs and related software."
