A double whammy of plunging bond prices and the collapse of the Bell Atlantic acquisition of Tele-Communications knocked stock prices into a tailspin.
The dollar fell.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled 51.78 points, or 1.3%, to 3839.90.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index sank 6.43, or 1.4%, to 464.26, and the Nasdaq Composite Index declined 9.67, or 1.2%, to 779.44.
Stock prices plunged as the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond tumbled more than a point, or more than $10 for each $1,000 face amount.
The yield soared to 6.73%, its highest level since June.
Cable television and communications stocks were battered by fallout from the breakdown in Bell Atlantic's takeover bid for Tele-Communications.
Utility stocks also were hammered, with the Dow Jones Utility Average sinking 3.30 to 207.29.
Transportation stocks tumbled, sending the Dow Jones Transportation Average down 35.53 to 1763.20.
The Nasdaq composite suffered steep losses because it contains many communications-related stocks.
"It's incredible how much the mood has shifted on Wall Street," said Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer at First Albany Corp.
"It has gone from optimism to guarded optimism and now apprehension.
We're on the border of despair."
Mr. Johnson said that while the takeover's collapse weighed heavily on the stock market, the chief culprit remains the slump in bond prices.
The bond market's troubles yesterday began with the release of stronger-than-expected data on durablegoods orders for January.
That further emphasized the strength of the economy and stoked fears of inflation.
Moreover, in congressional testimony Tuesday, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan had identified durable-goods orders as a key indicator in determining monetary policy.
A closer look at the durable-goods data, however, showed that the bulk of the increase was due to motor-vehicle and aircraft orders.
But that discovery failed to ease the bond market's worries.
Nor did a solid auction of $11 billion in five-year notes.
Not even soothing words about inflation from Mr. Greenspan could calm bond traders' fears.
He said he didn't see a broad buildup of inflationary pressures.
Bond prices recovered a bit after his remarks but then resumed their descent.
"What's so troubling is that although there is some response to positive news, it's very clear the response is fleeting," Mr. Johnson said.
"The bond market is not responding to good news or attempts to help it.
That increases the apprehension in both the bond and stock markets."
Some traders linked the long bond's weakness partly to bond mutual funds shortening the maturities of their holdings.
Some bond traders said they saw heavy selling of longer-term bonds by mutual funds.
While mutual-fund companies say they haven't had to sell any bonds to meet redemptions, they conceded that money inflows into bond funds have dried up.
Dreyfus, Franklin Resources, T. Rowe Price and Vanguard said they've had slight outflows from bond funds this week as investors switched into money-market funds.
Some investors believe a good buying opportunity now exists in the bond market.
"My trigger finger is getting itchy to buy," said Richard B. Berner, chief economist at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
"But it's a very emotional market and it's difficult for anyone to establish value in this kind of environment."
Overseas markets contributed to Wall Street's gloom.
European stock and bond markets tumbled as investors feared higher U.S. interest rates and growing political tensions in Russia.
Traders said panic selling by U.S. hedge funds added to the rout in Europe's bond markets.
The British stock market slid 2.2%; France was down 1.9%, Germany 1.8%, and Switzerland 2.3%.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 0.19 to 115.63.
Stock prices tumbled.
Volume totaled 341.6 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 1,795 issues fell and 442 rose.
The dollar fell.
In late New York trading the currency was quoted at 1.7172 marks and 104.95 yen, compared with 1.7284 marks and 105.75 yen Wednesday.
