Unusually severe winter weather and the California earthquake caused retailers to report disappointing sales results for January.
But even allowing for the elements, sales at big retail chains didn't appear to reflect the improved economy and more buoyant consumer confidence, industry watchers said.
Sales Rose Up to 3.5% January sales at the nation's biggest retailers grew 3.5%, according to an index compiled by Salomon Brothers Inc.
A similar index compiled by PaineWebber Inc. saw retail sales climb 3.3%.
In both indexes, the January gain was lower than sales increases in December 1993 and in the year-earlier month.
In keeping with a recent development, retailers that sell home furnishings did better than all but a few of those that sell clothing.
Discount and department stores fared better than specialty retailers.
"It's very difficult to trace the transfer of renewed consumer confidence into accelerated spending," said Janet Mangano, a retail analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
"Consumers would rather spend their hard-earned dollars or borrow money for merchandise that they feel has a long-lasting value, which, in general, is merchandise for the home or cars."
The disappointing January results aren't likely to have a substantial effect on retailers' fiscal fourth-quarter earnings, though, because January normally contributes less than 20% of fourth-quarter sales and an even lower portion of profits, analysts said.
They added that the outlook for the next three months is good, because retailers face easier year-to-year comparisons than they did in December and January.
The fiscal first quarter, which began Jan. 30, will give retailers "probably the easiest comparisons back-to-back in a couple of years," said Jeffrey Feiner, a retail analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Mr. Feiner said he therefore remains "optimistic" about the big retailers' prospects.
He noted that at least a few companies posted strong apparel-sales gains.
J.C. Penney Co., said it got its biggest boost from its home-furnishings department, but added that its women's apparel sold well also.
Penney reported a 4.6% sales gain in stores open at least a year.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's largest retailer, posted a 5% same-store sales gain for January.
Sears, Roebuck & Co. said improved sales of womens' apparel helped it achieve a 9.1% same-store sales gain.
The severe weather worked to Sears's benefit in some areas, as it reported "double-digit" sales gains of tires and car batteries.
Other retailers were hurt badly by the elements.
Dayton Hudson Corp., said the California earthquake will cause it to take a pretax fourth-quarter charge of $20 million to $25 million.
Five of its 107 stores in Southern California remain closed.
Overall, Dayton Hudson posted a 2.9% sales gain in stores open at least a year.
Mercantile Stores Co. said stores in some of its "key" areas, such as Tennessee and Alabama, were hit with "the severest weather experienced in 17 years."
The company showed a 7.6% same-store sales decline in January.
May Department Stores Co. didn't include in its monthly report results from the seven stores that remain closed as a result of the earthquake.
Excluding those stores, May had a 5% same-store sales gain.
Looking forward, retail analysts said they already have detected evidence of increased consumer spending.
"There's a shopping spree going on in the first week of February on the East Coast," said Margo McGlade, a PaineWebber retail analyst.
-- Always stick around for one more drink.
-- Never go south of Gaston Street.
-- Observe the high holidays -- St. Patrick's Day and the day of the Georgia-Florida football game.
Not all Savannahians play by Mr. Odom's rules, of course, but his dedication to drinking, partying and a snobbery that ignores certain sections of the city is shared by most of the dozens of exotics who feature in John Berendt's entertaining account of good times, serious crime and raffish behavior, "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil" (Random House, 388 pages, $23).
I don't know what this book will do for Savannah tourism overall, but it is certain to attract anyone with a taste for old houses and enduring vices.
One Savannahian who had both was Jim Williams, a controversial and flamboyant antiques dealer.
How does it feel to be nouveau riche, Williams was asked.
"It's the riche that counts," he replied.
Of the old-money social elite, Williams told Mr. Berendt that if they share a single trait, "it's their love of money and their unwillingness to spend it."
Some members of old families fought with or snubbed Williams.
But Williams was famous for his Christmas party in his home, the largest private residence in the city.
The grandeur of his house, the beauty of its furnishings, his clever manipulation of his guest list and his lavish spending turned Williams's gala into Savannah's party of the year.
From Williams, Mr. Berendt got an introduction to Savannah's darker side.
"You mustn't be taken in by the moonlight and magnolias.
There's more to Savannah than that.
Things can get very murky," Williams said while describing a series of murders among the rich that had been swept under the rug.
Soon, murk descended on Williams himself.
In his study, he shot and killed a 21-year-old hustler named Danny Hansford who had been his lover and also worked in his furniture-restoration shop.
Hansford's fame for sexual ability had been spreading.
Prentiss Crowe, an old-money Savannahian, reacted to the killing with confidence that Savannah justice would once again shield a rich man caught in an exposed position, but with equal certainty that some men and women would be resentful.
He explained: "Hansford was known as a good time . . . but a good time not yet had by all."
In keeping with the elite's attitude toward the less fortunate dead, Williams was cool when asked in court about the appropriateness of his relationship with Hansford given their ages.
"I was 52-years-old, but he had 52 years' worth of mileage on him," he replied.
New York-based Mr. Berendt fell for Savannah's sinful ways and old-fashioned charms in the early 1980s and decided to take up bi-city living.
He wasn't there long before he saw a book before his eyes.
"Midnight" is at its best when it is sketching the nature of the city and introducing characters such as the black transvestite Chablis; Col. Jim Atwood, owner of Hitler's silverware; and Luther Driggers, a man who may or may not have a vial of deadly poison, but is more immediately determined to make goldfish glow in the dark.
The Williams murder trials -- there were three of them -- became the core story of "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil."
Mr. Berendt is a skillful narrator, but interesting as the Williams case is, it doesn't remain fascinating over all the pages Mr. Berendt gives it.
All the main characters are memorable, though, at least until the reader reaches the book's last page and finds an author's note revealing that a number of pseudonyms have been used and, what's more, Mr. Berendt has altered descriptions of some people to protect their privacy.
"Though this is a work of nonfiction, I have taken certain storytelling liberties, particularly having to do with the timing of events," Mr. Berendt adds.
Altered how?
Was Danny Hansford really Danielle Hansford?
And what storytelling liberties allow a nonfiction writer to alter chronology?
Faction is an unlikable hybrid.
A fully fictional evocation of another great Southern port city can be found in John Gregory Brown's "Decorations in a Ruined Cemetery" (Houghton Mifflin, 244 pages, $19.95.)
Set in New Orleans and spanning the years from the '60s until the present, Mr. Brown's first novel is compellingly told in the voices of two white women and a black man.
In the tradition of Faulkner and other Southern writers, the story gradually untangles actions taken years ago, the effects of which have passed affliction down over the years.
Mr. Brown's complicated plot development isn't always mesmerizing, but his writing frequently is.
His words convey years of wonder and the world of hurt that comes with love unanswered.
