The profanity-laden comments of Houston lawyer Joseph Jamail, one of the nation's most successful plaintiffs' attorneys, have landed him in hot water with the Delaware Supreme Court -- and could result in his being barred from practicing in that state.
The Delaware high court, in an unusual step, said Mr. Jamail's "extraordinarily rude, uncivil and vulgar" conduct in a recent deposition could prevent him from being allowed to appear in any Delaware legal proceeding.
In an addendum to a written opinion on Friday, the court lambasted Mr. Jamail for his comments during a pretrial fact-finding interview in connection with litigation in the takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc.
Although Mr. Jamail's actions had no effect on the legal issues before the court, the state's high court said the misconduct warranted a stern response.
The court devoted 16 pages to the matter at the end of a 67-page opinion.
Mr. Jamail is best known for winning a $10.53 billion jury verdict against Texaco Inc. in 1985 on behalf of client Pennzoil Co.
Mr. Jamail's fee in that case was reported to be several hundred million dollars.
In the Paramount matter, the court quoted a transcript of the deposition in which Mr. Jamail refers to another attorney, William Johnston, with a crude anatomical reference and tells him to speed up the questioning of Mr. Jamail's client, L. Hugh Liedtke, a Paramount director and Pennzoil chairman.
Mr. Jamail also told Mr. Johnston, who represents QVC Network Inc., a Paramount suitor, "You could gag a maggot off a meat wagon."
The court said Mr. Jamail's behavior "demonstrates such an astonishing lack of professionalism and civility that it is worthy of special note here as a lesson for the future -- a lesson of conduct not to be tolerated or repeated."
Although a deposition isn't conducted before a judge, such an official, sworn interview prior to a civil trial is considered a court proceeding, and the same rules of courtroom behavior apply.
Specialists in legal ethics say the Delaware ruling comes at a time when many judges around the country have become fed up with a lack of civility among lawyers.
"Civility is seen as a necessary arm of professionalism and of professional ethics," said Michael G. Daigneault, whose Falls Church, Va., firm teaches ethical conduct to law firms and businesses.
While state court systems all have rules requiring civility between courtroom adversaries, the Delaware courts may place a higher premium on good behavior, said Donald Pease, a professor at Widener University School of Law in Wilmington, Del.
"Delaware is very picky about lawyers who act in an uncivil way in litigation.
Civility is certainly emphasized by the Delaware Supreme Court," Prof. Pease said, adding that the court's chief judge gave a speech about this issue to Widener's graduating students last year.
The chief judge also wrote the decision criticizing Mr. Jamail.
Mr. Jamail said he isn't concerned about the ruling by the Delaware judges, whom he referred to as "bureaucrats in robes."
"The judge who wrote this, I guess he thinks he is Emily Post," the Houston attorney said.
Mr. Jamail said that instead of criticizing his lack of manners, the court should have reprimanded the lawyer whom Mr. Jamail insulted.
Mr. Jamail claims that the attorney, Mr. Johnston, was wasting time during the deposition by repeatedly asking questions that Mr. Liedtke couldn't answer.
Mr. Johnston, a Wilmington, Del., attorney, declined to discuss the matter, except to say, "I'm gratified that the court addressed the situation."
(The court, in a footnote, said, "Although the questioning in the Liedtke deposition could have proceeded more crisply, this was not a case where it was the questioner who abused the process.")
Mr. Jamail, who has won more than one hundred multimillion-dollar verdicts and judgments, also said that he has no interest in appearing in Delaware legal matters.
"There's not enough money there for me to go to Delaware," Mr. Jamail said.
The state Supreme Court invited Mr. Jamail to appear before it to explain why he shouldn't be barred from practicing in Delaware.
Because Mr. Liedtke's deposition was conducted in Houston and Mr. Jamail wasn't involved in any other aspects of the litigation, it wasn't required in this case that he be licensed to practice in Delaware.
As a result, the court can't take any action against Mr. Jamail, such as censuring him or ordering him to pay sanctions.
But the court said it would have punished a Delaware lawyer for such conduct.
Each state has its own standards of behavior for lawyers.
In his home state, Mr. Jamail's behavior probably would have violated the Texas Lawyer's Creed, as that state's guidelines are known, said Robert Schuwerk, a professor at the University of Houston Law Center.
Among other things, the creed says that in dealing with other attorneys, "I can disagree without being disagreeable. . . .
I will avoid disparaging personal remarks or acrimony towards opposing counsel."
The creed also says lawyers will refrain from "obnoxious behavior" and "any allusion to personal peculiarities or idiosyncrasies of opposing counsel."
Texas rules, however, don't provide for lawyers to be sanctioned for violating the guidelines.
(Paramount Communications Inc. et al. vs. QVC Network Inc., Supreme Court of the State of Delaware, Nos. 427, 1991 and 428, 1993)
Average libel awards against publishers and broadcasters declined during the past two years, according to the Libel Defense Resource Center.
Also, the annual number of libel cases tried against news organizations dropped to the lowest level since the New York-based information clearinghouse began tracking the data in 1980, and the rate of defense victories rose considerably from previous periods.
It's not clear what the 1992 and 1993 numbers mean, said the group's general counsel, Henry R. Kaufman, adding that it "might or might not be an aberration."
According to the group's report, there were an average of 12 libel trials a year in 1992 and 1993, compared with an average of 17.5 for the two years prior to that -- and more than 25 a year during the decade of the 1980s.
News organizations in 1992 and 1993 won nearly half the trials against them, according to the report, compared with only about 25% during the 1980s.
The average damage award for the 1992-93 period, $1.1 million, was significantly lower than the average for the 1980s, $1.5 million.
Milo Geyelin contributed to this article.
