Japan's massive new economic stimulus package is partly aimed at helping the nation's troubled banks.
The only problem is, they are going to need much more.
New measures, including giving tax breaks and freeing up the banks to raise new capital, are supposed to boost both the banks and Japan's moribund real estate market.
Nonetheless, "It's still going to take the banks five years" to absorb their losses, says Betsy Daniels, financial analyst at Morgan Stanley Japan Ltd.
Japan's banks are already reacting to the new rules, some of which were expected before their inclusion in Tuesday's $140 billion economic stimulus package.
Banks have been selling large amounts of stock to maximize future tax breaks.
On Wednesday, their selling helped shave 409.85 points, or 2%, off the Nikkei Stock Average, which closed at 19841.38.
More than 15% of the stimulus package is aimed at banking and real estate.
The government will use 500 billion yen ($4.6 billion), plus subsidies and no-interest loans, to take excess land off the market.
The land will be "warehoused," says a Finance Ministry official, until demand accelerates.
Local governments will get 1.5 trillion yen to take land off the market, with the aim of increasing the value of land still available.
Banks, meanwhile, will be allowed to set up paper companies to take over their restructured loans, buying them back from those companies at a lower value.
The banks will be able to move nonperforming loans off the books and get tax write-offs on the difference in the loan value.
Mitsubishi Bank Ltd., regarded as one of Japan's healthiest banks, is bringing long-held shares to market in preparation for restructured loan sales.
Company officials say Mitsubishi plans to sell and repurchase more than 40 billion yen of stock, using the paper profits on the sales to write down debts.
The government also plans to let banks shore up their balance sheets with preferred shares and offshore fund-raising.
Japan has already tried to restart its banking system with low interest rates, actively buying up the stock market, and modest tax relief.
But stymied by past lending mistakes, banks have made almost no new loans.
That's holding back the overall economy, Ms. Daniels says.
"People are starting to realize that you have to have a clear balance sheet before the economy turns around," she says.
None of the new measures solves the underlying bad debt problem.
But the hope is that the program may effectively put aside much of the problem until the economy recovers sufficiently for companies to absorb losses without damaging growth.
While it might be faster, and in the long run cheaper, for the government to play a more active role in absorbing the bad debt, Finance Ministry officials say Japanese public opinion makes that impossible.
"There is a feeling that the banks got themselves into their problems," says a senior aide.
"They can get out of their problems with their own earnings."
However, that would mean several years with low bank lending -- too long, as far as the economy is concerned.
What's more likely, analysts say, is that the banks will eventually declare annual losses because of bad loans, or the government will step in directly to bail out the banks.
"The best way," Ms. Daniels says, "would be to use public money to capitalize an organization to take over the bad debts," an entity resembling the Resolution Trust Corp. in the U.S.
Japanese press reports are speculating on the resignations of one or more bank presidents this spring.
The banks deny the talk of resignations, which in Japanese corporate etiquette would be necessary before a bank could declare a loss or the government could step in.
