Equities ended higher Thursday in a volatile Tokyo session with heavy trading.
London's recent bull run ended as stocks were sent lower on profit-taking and corporate developments, though a late recovery helped lift prices from the day's lows.
The German central bank's decision to leave its interest rates unchanged helped push prices down on several European bourses.
Around the Pacific Rim, stocks hit another six-year high in Sydney but fell in Hong Kong for the first time in five sessions, as most Asian exchanges lost ground.
Mexican stocks raced up 2.1% to a record.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 114.38, up 0.17, reflecting higher Asia/Pacific and American markets and lower European markets.
Mining stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 131.27, up 2.73, or 2.1%, with ICA of Mexico posting a 5.8% gain in its local currency.
Casino stocks trailed at 202.59, down 8.26, or 3.9%, with Circus Circus Enterprises of the U.S. sliding 5.8% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rallied 524.85 points Wednesday, gained 144.52 to 19183.92, the highest finish since Nov. 2.
In trading Friday, the Nikkei rose 0.90 point to close the morning session at 19184.82.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 550 million shares, up from 413.3 million shares a day earlier and the most turnover this year.
Gainers topped decliners, 537-486.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which soared 29.76 points Wednesday, added 9.64 to 1550.79.
Stocks were first led higher by gains in Nikkei-index futures, cooled by a bond market rebound, then knocked down by profit-taking in the afternoon, which led Japanese investors to sell both Nikkei 225 and Topix index baskets.
The market was buoyed a bit by a Japanese parliamentary committee's passage Thursday morning of the government's political reform bill.
Public pension funds sold shares in the early afternoon, and Japanese institutions snapped up those stocks, providing momentum for the runup that prompted snagging of profits.
A late burst of buying pushed the Nikkei up about 100 points in the session's final minutes.
The securities sector led the advance, with continuing support from higher trading volume, which reflected optimism that the market's recent bull run will continue.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 5.1 points to 3470.0, after rebounding from a 16.2-point loss.
The FT-30 index rose 5.0 points to 2659.1.
The FT-SE 250 index retreated from record levels, shedding 43.4 points, or 1%, to 4105.4.
Volume was a heavy 1.1 billion shares, compared with 1.32 billion shares a day earlier.
Profit-taking hit early, following the FT 100 gauge's 100-point gain in the past four sessions.
Stocks also were pressured by bearish statements by British companies about their business outlook.
But the market regained some composure late in the session, as the focus returned to the country's economic fundamentals.
In Frankfurt, prices fell in a directionless session.
The DAX 30-stock index lost 17.92 points to 2116.46.
Many investors were on the sidelines and others sold positions at peaks in volatility.
In Paris, stocks lost ground from heavy selling in the media and luxury retailing sectors, which could be affected by repositioning plans and disappointing earnings.
In Amsterdam, shares declined, partly because of a weaker dollar in foreign-exchange dealings; the German decision to maintain current interest-rate levels added to negative sentiment on the Dutch bourse, though a rate cut wasn't widely expected.
In Milan, the broadest measure of shares dropped, attributed to the reticence by both Germany and Italy to reduce rates.
In Madrid, stocks fell because of profit-taking following the recent rally and because sentiment was damped by the German rate inaction.
In Stockholm, prices dropped broadly from record levels as higher Swedish money market rates and unchanged German lending rates sparked a selling wave, despite positive economic indicators.
In Sydney, shares finished with strong gains at their highest level since September 1987 as foreign, especially Asian, investors scrambled to buy, though profit-taking did pull prices down toward the close; the market is up 4.3% this year.
In Hong Kong, shares gave up early gains to finish with deep losses, near the day's lows.
After a 12% total gain in the previous four sessions, the market was considered too high from a technical perspective, which spurred profit-taking.
In Singapore, shares ended sharply lower, with the main index's 1.9% drop exaggerated by thin dealings.
In Kuala Lumpur, prices dived 2.9% in brisk trading, extending the previous day's slide.
In Taipei, equities fell 1.7%, in a continuing broad consolidation.
In Seoul, stocks fell after swinging widely amid unsubstantiated rumors including another South Korean government intervention to curb speculative investment fervor.
And in Bangkok, prices thudded 4.2% in choppy trading.
But in Manila, stocks advanced 1.6%, paced by the telephone sector.
And Wellington shares rallied 1.6%, even after mild profit-taking.
In Mexico City, stocks soared to a new high, as nervousness about fresh rebel attacks in a southern state subsided and hopes for a settlement increased.
Foreign investors poured cash into the market, which some analysts consider a bargain in terms of share prices in relation to estimated 1994 earnings.
Among corporate developments, in Tokyo, Hanwa fell 100 yen, the maximum daily limit, to 677 yen ($6.08).
Shares of the trading company, which specializes in steel products, had been suspended Wednesday, when Hanwa said it would take a special charge for huge speculative trading losses.
In London, Bass slumped 16 pence, or 2.6%, to 592 pence ($8.84) on a downbeat statement at the annual meeting.
The brewer and hotel operator said that Britain's "gentle" economic recovery is providing little benefit for the company, and that it must seek improvements by management action rather than trading conditions.
In Frankfurt, Metallgesellschaft plunged 7.5 marks, or 3.1%, to 237.50 marks ($136.02).
After the session ended, Metallgesellschaft, which was apparently rescued from a bankruptcy-law filing last weekend by a 3.4 billion-mark ($1.9 billion) liquidity package, unveiled a restructuring plan to become a management holding concern with operations in trading, plant construction and chemicals and to shed many activities in Germany and abroad.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
