In a setback to its ambitious plans to lead the cable industry onto the information superhighway, Time Warner Inc. said it will delay the launch of its "full-service network" in Orlando several months because of holdups caused by equipment makers Silicon Graphics Inc. and Scientific-Atlanta Inc.
The delay for the Orlando project, the most aggressive interactive TV trial to date, comes just days after the federal government ordered a new round of cuts in cable rates, and follows the collapse of the merger between Tele-Communications Inc. and Bell Atlantic Corp.
Time Warner now says it will launch the advanced network by the fourth quarter instead of in April as originally scheduled.
But the delay suggests cable and telephone companies will take far longer than expected to complete the staggering hardware buildup necessary for such services.
Time Warner, which controls the nation's second-largest cable system, serving 7.2 million customers, says it still plans to hook up 4,000 customers on the Orlando network by year end.
By then, viewers will have access to video games, interactive shopping and video-on-demand services, which will have VCR-like functions such as pause, rewind and fast forward.
The entertainment giant tried to shed a positive light on the delays, emphasizing the benefit to TV viewers.
"We don't want the development process to be driven by an artificial deadline," said a Time Warner spokesman.
"We want to deliver the best product for customers."
Time Warner said the extra time will "allow additional refinements" of the network's components.
Silicon Graphics, based in Mountain View, Calif., was contracted to design the operating software, which manages and integrates the elements of the network, as well as video servers, which store and deliver digital information.
Silicon Graphics will also make the powerful microprocessor chips to be used in set-top converters built by Scientific-Atlanta for the Orlando system.
Silicon Graphics' problems in meeting deadlines in Orlando had been widely rumored for several weeks, though its executives had repeatedly said the project was progressing as planned.
In particular, Silicon Graphics has little experience in designing the sort of software that will serve as users' navigator through the new programming options.
Edward McCracken, Silicon Graphics' chief executive officer, conceded that his company's biggest problem is designing this interface in a way that is visually striking yet easy to understand and use.
"We want to have something that the consumer really wants," Mr. McCracken said.
Silicon Graphics began work on the project in May 1993 and demonstrated its feasibility in December.
The company has 50 to 100 engineers putting in long hours, Mr. McCracken said.
As the April 1 deadline approached, it became apparent that they needed more time, he said.
Silicon Graphics and Scientific-Atlanta stressed the difficult task of combining computer and cable technologies.
"It's not any one partner having problems," said Bill Luehrs, vice president of subscriber development at Scientific-Atlanta, based in Atlanta.
"It's the process of getting all these pieces integrated.
It's more complex than anything we've ever delivered to customers before.
This is not a trivial process."
Jessica Reif, an analyst with Oppenheimer & Co., said the delay is not surprising "given the magnitude of what they're trying to do."
Ms. Reif predicts such technological delays will continue industrywide and pointed out that such holdups also slow the cash-flow growth expected from new interactive offerings.
Last month, the nation's largest cable operator, Tele-Communications, said its planned purchase of a million advanced set-top converters in early 1994 from General Instrument Corp. would be delayed by nearly a year because industry standards hadn't been completely set.
But General Instrument said after that announcement that the two companies had been operating under the revised schedule since last fall.
