CBS Sports, still smarting from the loss of its 38-year National Football League franchise, is planning to be in perfect form for the Olympics.
The network is fiercely intent on building a "new tradition" of Winter Olympics coverage, according to CBS Inc.'s chairman, Laurence Tisch; CBS has already locked in the rights to the 1998 Winter Games.
With both football and Major League Baseball moving to other networks this year, the Winter Games, which begin Saturday, are the biggest sports events on the CBS roster.
The unfolding scandal surrounding the attack on skater Nancy Kerrigan -- and whether Tonya Harding had a role in it -- has given CBS's coverage of the Games in Lillehammer, Norway, a big boost.
The promotional jolt surpasses even the network's own blizzard of ads, and some predict that the women's figure-skating final on Feb. 25 could set an Olympics viewing record.
The telecast of the women's skating final in 1992 drew 25% of all U.S. homes with TV sets, according to Nielsen Media Research.
This time, says David Poltrack, CBS's senior vice president of research and planning, the night could draw 30%, depending on whether Ms. Kerrigan is in contention for a medal and whether Ms. Harding gets to compete.
Turner Broadcasting System Inc.'s TNT network will air 45 hours of mostly live coverage during weekday afternoons, while CBS's 120 hours will be mostly taped.
CBS, however, holds the right to embargo events, including the women's skating final.
CBS has already raised its internal estimates of how well the Games will do with viewers.
The network guaranteed advertisers an average audience of 18.6% of the nation's 94.2 million television homes, but Mr. Poltrack now projects the Games will draw 19% or more.
That projection is based partly on a recent CBS telephone poll, which found that 37% said they would "definitely" watch the women's figure-skating coverage.
This Olympics is an unusual opportunity for CBS, coming just two years after the Albertville Games, which the network also televised.
The two-year interval is part of the International Olympics Committee's plan to get the Winter and Summer Games on alternating cycles.
CBS based its ambitious 18.6% rating guarantee on the 18.7% average prime-time rating it got for Albertville, when it beat the other networks on 15 of 16 nights, the most ever for a Winter Olympics.
The risk that viewers won't be ready for another marathon viewing event so soon after the last is outweighed, CBS executives argue, by viewers' familiarity with the athletes.
The Lillehammer Games will feature many of the athletes who competed at Albertville, from Ms. Kerrigan to speed skater Bonnie Blair.
The 1992 Games also taught CBS a lot about which events play best with viewers.
Americans, for example, won't get anything close to the 80 hours of cross-country skiing to be aired in Norway, where that sport is a national passion.
Even before the assault on Nancy Kerrigan, CBS, knowing how Americans love figure skating, had already scheduled it on 13 nights, as opposed to 10 during the 1992 Games.
(Tonight, CBS News and the syndicated news show "Inside Edition" will broadcast interviews with Ms. Harding.
"Inside Edition" paid more than $300,000 for its interview, for which it got exclusivity until "Eye to Eye" airs.
CBS News executives say the network didn't pay for its interview.)
Another big question for CBS is how Greg Gumbel will fare as first-time host.
CBS made a switch from its 1992's announcers, Tim McCarver and Paula Zahn, because of lukewarm reviews.
Instead, it is gambling on Mr. Gumbel, who put on a pair of skis for the first time when he posed recently for a magazine photo.
Mr. Gumbel says the fact that he doesn't participate in winter sports (he's never been on ice skates, either) won't hinder his work.
"Flip it around," he says.
"Do the players make the best commentators on the game?
It's the exception rather than the rule."
Olympic hosts tend to be remembered as much for their wardrobes as their intimate knowledge of sports, anyway.
Mr. Gumbel will be outfitted by a French design house called Faconnable.
He'll wear suits and sportcoats with vests, and "a tie is always appropriate," he says.
In addition to the standard coterie of ex-Olympians and sports announcers reporting on individual events, CBS is spicing up its coverage with some unusual guests, such as Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf.
He'll report on such topics as a program in northern Norway to train U.S. armed forces in cold-weather warfare.
Even late-night host David Letterman is pitching in with Olympic coverage reported by his mother.
Despite some unexpectedly high valueadded taxes for services in Norway, the network expects to have little financial risk.
Unlike Albertville, where CBS broke even, Mr. Tisch says the network will make a profit on the Games, for which it paid $295 million in rights fees.
Production costs will be about $60 million, 10% less than in Albertville.
About $25 million was offset by selling weekday afternoon rights to TNT.
In addition, CBS has sold all advertising slots for a total of about $440 million.
As with Albertville, CBS's overall strategy will be to tell stories with its coverage.
But there will be some high-tech event coverage, too.
The hockey games, for example, will be covered with a new "goalie-cam" mounted in the goalie's helmet.
Network executives expect few technical problems.
The well-organized Norwegians were far ahead of their Albertville counterparts in the installation of such items as camera platforms.
And many of the venues were constructed specifically with television in mind: The cross-country ski trails loop in front of the cameras, so viewers can see more than just the traditional crossing of the finish line.
CBS was also able to cut production costs by storing some of its 1992 equipment in Europe.
But that may be just a one-time savings: CBS just paid $375 million for the rights to cover the 1998 Winter Games, which will be held in Nagano, Japan.
