The dollar retreated against the yen yesterday amid fears that a U.S.-Japan trade accord won't be reached in time for the summit between President Clinton and Japan's Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa tomorrow.
The dollar was chopped lower in Asian trading on a statement by Mr. Hosokawa confirming that trade talks had stalled, and raising the specter of more U.S. pressure for a strong yen when the flagging Japanese economy can ill-afford it.
But the slide was reversed late in New York trading on statements by unidentified U.S. Treasury officials, who dismissed suggestions that the U.S. would "talk up" the yen should the trade talks indeed collapse.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7585 marks, down from 1.7640 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 108.35 yen, down from 108.75 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4615, down from $1.4665.
About midday Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.20 yen and at 1.7570 marks.
Traders said the dollar is unlikely to advance against the yen unless Japan shows more willingness to break down trade barriers and stimulate consumer demand.
After the drop following Mr. Hosokawa's comments, the dollar slid further on news that Deputy Prime Minister Tsutomo Hata was being sent to Washington a day early to try to salvage an agreement.
This move was perceived by traders as another sign of desperation.
The Clinton administration said later that, in view of Mr. Hata's visit for direct talks, working-level negotiations were being suspended as being essentially useless.
The dollar reached an intraday low of 107.73 yen based on those reports and it continued to skid just above those lows until the conciliatory remarks were made by the U.S. Treasury officials.
The dollar had retreated since early January on any indication that the U.S. is displeased with Japan's progress in curbing its huge trade surplus.
But with a plethora of often contradictory statements yesterday, dollar-yen movements remained in fairly tight ranges, said Dennis Pettit, foreign-exchange manager of the Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan in New York.
"You get the impression from headlines that the talks aren't going well, but then you have people saying its part of the posturing and bluffing that takes place in all negotiations," Mr. Pettit said.
He noted there are major problems in evaluating dollar-yen movements prior to any definitive outcome in the trade talks.
"The first problem is we aren't sure to what degree there's still posturing and to what degree there is a progress," he said.
"The second problem is that there is absolutely no precedent to imagine the consequences of a failure."
Mr. Pettit said he considered it unlikely that the Clinton administration would put Mr. Hata in an "'untenable position from a negotiating point of view."
But in a news briefing late yesterday, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor held out only moderate hope that a satisfactory agreement will be reached.
"We may or may not reach agreement Friday," he said.
Mr. Kantor reiterated that the U.S. will weigh its options if an agreement isn't reached on U.S. autos and auto parts, access to Japan's insurance market and liberalization of government procurement policies.
Nor did he rule out the possibility of trade sanctions should the Japanese prove intractable.
