George Bush hadn't yet left town last winter when a new advocacy group called Empower America set up shop to house the best and brightest of the conservative cause.
One year and millions of dollars later, the question is: Just who is empowering whom?
With two likely Republican presidential contenders, Jack Kemp and William Bennett, on its board, Empower America's $4 million-plus budget and its supply-side, free-trade, school-choice ideology make it a political force to be reckoned with in 1996.
But its first 12 months are already a cautionary tale of money and ego on the right.
Bankrolled by leveraged-buyout artist Theodore Forstmann, the fledgling organization blends Wall Street money and the grass-roots marketing techniques of Perot-era politics.
From high-rent offices just blocks from the White House, Empower America's fax machines spin out weekly reports for a network of 500 radio talk-show hosts across the country.
Meanwhile, an aggressive mail campaign has yielded a list of more than 100,000 donors, worth millions in future contributions and able to sustain staff and big salaries for the organization's founders.
At center stage is Vin Weber, Empower America's vice chairman and one of three politically minded brothers who have had at least passing association with the advocacy group.
Elected to the House from Minnesota in the Reagan landslide of 1980, the personable Mr. Weber helped engineer the rise of Newt Gingrich, now the House Republican whip, who joined the Empower America board in a shakeup last month.
Mr. Weber ran aground in the House Bank scandal of 1992, and chose not to run for re-election; in private life, he has set out to make money while keeping open the option of a comeback campaign for the Senate in 1996.
Mr. Weber's new Washington consulting firm and his role as a National Public Radio commentator complement his part-time duties at Empower America, where he earns $150,000 a year and stands to reap a small fortune from stock options steered his way by Mr. Forstmann.
Just weeks after the advocacy group was announced last January, the Wall Street financier added Mr. Weber to the board of a Forstmann-controlled company slated to go public months later.
Shares in the company, Department 56 Inc., a maker of collectible porcelain figures, closed yesterday at $27.75 on the Big Board, but according to Securities and Exchange Commission filings, Mr. Weber has the option to buy as many as 30,000 shares at $3.30 apiece -- a difference of nearly $750,000.
"It was very generous," Mr. Weber says.
For their part, Mr. Bennett, the former education secretary, and Orson Swindle, a former Vietnam POW lured from Ross Perot's political camp, are both paid in the same range as Mr. Weber's salary.
And together with the older Heritage Foundation, where former Attorney General Edwin Meese was paid more than $211,000 in 1992, Empower America illustrates how such tax-exempt nonprofits have become safe harbors for elite figures in the conservative movement.
For example, Mr. Bennett's $150,000 salary from Empower America is supplemented by Heritage, which paid him $89,800 in 1992 as a distinguished scholar.
Neither he nor Mr. Kemp will disclose their current salaries from Heritage, but both are paid handsomely while keeping staff at Empower America.
(Heritage's own filings with the Internal Revenue Service show that its president, Edwin Feulner, received pay and bonuses valued at more than $360,000 in 1992 -- significantly more than his counterparts at other Washington nonprofits such as the American Enterprise Institute and Brookings Institution.)
In Empower America's case, it helps to pay for those generous salaries through direct-mail appeals run by a Virginia company called Response Dynamics Inc., or RDI.
The company has a broad corporate clientele but is best-known in the GOP for its involvement in several efforts that have been criticized as antithetical to the very party-building-type ideas Empower America is said to advocate.
In 1988, RDI mailed for the National Security Political Action Committee, whose independent-expenditure "Americans for Bush" organization financed the famous Willie Horton television ads.
In 1992, the company worked for a second independent committee that traded on the Bush name in its fund-raising and was criticized by the official Bush campaign as siphoning off funds and being counterproductive.
In addition, the company until last summer was part of a bizarre challenge to Massachusetts Sen. Edward Kennedy by a native Georgian and obscure Reagan-era Agriculture Department official who raised more than $1.1 million over the 18 months ending last June -- most of which only paid postal costs and fees charged by RDI and its subsidiaries.
David Kunko, one of RDI's founders, casts himself only as a businessman and says that "we put out direct mail for anyone who will pay."
In the case of Empower America's contract, Mr. Weber's brother, James, a Washington consultant who has long had dealings with RDI for business and political clients, was instrumental in seeing that the Virginia company won the work.
But all sides deny that the younger brother benefited financially from his advisory role.
RDI estimates that Empower America could net at least $3 million a year from the donor list already compiled.
This money will be needed, since Mr. Forstmann, who put up $1 million of his own money and helped raise several million more for Empower America last year, has distanced himself a bit from the enterprise and its chief political beneficiary, Mr. Kemp.
Mr. Forstmann, who declined to be interviewed for this article, last month gave up the chairmanship of Empower America.
And he has shown signs of developing more of a relationship with that old supply-side nemesis -- and potential Kemp rival -- Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole.
With the encouragement of Texas deal maker and former Democratic National Chairman Robert Strauss, the two men dined together at Mr. Forstmann's New York residence in July, and the financier separately contributed an estimated $50,000 to Mr. Dole's own fledgling nonprofit organization, the Better America Foundation, in late September.
Meanwhile, Jude Wanniski, the supply-side advocate and former Wall Street Journal editorial writer who is a longtime Forstmann associate, has begun to play an advisory role to Sen. Dole.
A recent memo from Mr. Wanniski to Sen. Dole gushes with a second-hand account that Margaret Thatcher thinks the Kansan "has it all."
And after years of loyalty to Mr. Kemp, Mr. Wanniski speaks like a proud tutor of Mr. Dole's "late conversion" and openness to the idea of eliminating the capital-gains tax.
(A Dole presidency would "cut the capital gains tax . . . or the index at least, or maybe eliminate them altogether," the senator said on NBC's "Meet the Press" last week.)
Mr. Wanniski says that Empower America is "spinning its wheels."
But the shifting alliances are colored by a feud between him and another old Reaganite, former Office of Management and Budget economist Lawrence Kudlow, who has become a major player in the Kemp-Bennett-Weber advocacy group.
Mr. Wanniski denies there is any connection between his feelings about Empower America and his feelings about Mr. Kudlow, but he accuses Mr. Kudlow, now chief economist at Bear Stearns & Co., of going behind his back in 1992 when both were advising the Russians on financial matters.
Mr. Kudlow says it was the Russians who were unhappy with Mr. Wanniski.
Meanwhile, Mr. Forstmann's departure doesn't mean he has severed all ties; he is now "founding chairman," and the group is mailing copies of a recent speech by him to 25,000 select "opinion-maker" members.
But his move has triggered a reshuffle at the top of the organization, with Malcolm S. Forbes Jr., of the magazine family, becoming chairman, Mr. Weber moving from president to vice chairman and Bill Dal Col, a former Kemp aide, becoming president.
Sitting in the group's headquarters, Mr. Dal Col can only laugh about the turmoil around him and try to look ahead.
Sounding more like a marketing manager than a crusading political activist, he happily describes how next week's first of seven "issues" schools planned for candidates this year is sold out.
A microchip-based high-tech "actuality service" is already feeding taped quotes to radio stations, he adds, and there will even be an "800" number where candidates can call in after Labor Day to get advice on Empower America's issues, such as school choice or taxes.
"Six p.m. to midnight, Eastern Standard Time," he says, smiling.
