A new breed of retail pioneer is heading for a promising frontier-downtown.
Having deserted center cities over the past 20 years, retailers are now being drawn back by the same factors that lured them to the suburbs: reasonable real-estate prices and plenty of potential customers.
Moreover, urban developers say, a downtown store these days can give a big retailer a market all to itself.
There is another reason: Virtually all the prime locations in major suburban malls are occupied, says Richard Etchikson, chairman of Retail Consultants Inc., Millburn, N.J.
And rents in unoccupied mall space are very high.
"Many of the retailers who weren't interested in the city five years ago are now attracted to it," Mr. Etchikson says.
In the past three years, Filene's Basement Corp. has opened downtown stores in Washington, New York and Philadelphia.
Kmart Corp. says it's hunting for a location in Detroit.
Though the company's Troy, Mich., headquarters is only eight miles north of Detroit, Kmart hasn't built a new store in the Motor City in more than two decades.
Montgomery Ward & Co. recently opened one of its moderate-priced department stores in downtown Minneapolis.
Toys "R" Us Inc., the toy superstore, says five of the 40 U.S. stores it will open this year will be in urban areas.
Currently, only eight of its 581 U.S. stores are in central cities.
And Target Stores, the big discount division of Dayton Hudson Corp., is preparing for the March 13 opening of a store, its biggest ever, in downtown Pasadena, Calif.
Target also opened a store in central Dallas last October.
Today's urban retail pioneers aren't the same ones that left for the hinterlands.
The exodus from downtown was led by department stores and smaller shops.
The newcomers predominantly are low-priced retailers, many of whom never had a foothold in cities but who now are finding a strong customer base there.
"Our merchandise assortment is in career clothing," says Gary Crittenden, chief financial officer of Filene's Basement.
"Our customers work and live downtown.
So it is a natural place for us to be."
Downtown also is a place to grow.
With its stores already blanketing the suburbs, Toys "R" Us must find new places to build if it wants to continue gaining market share, says Robert Nakasone, vice chairman.
To be sure, opening city stores presents challenges such as crime, tighter confines and different shopping habits.
Montgomery Ward says customers at its new downtown Minneapolis store are more likely to buy clothing, jewelry and office products and less prone to buy big appliances.
As a result, a spokeswoman says, "We're working to make the store's offerings appropriate for that environment."
The new downtown retailers also are scheduling more sales clerks to work during lunch time and at quitting time and are staffing lightly in the evening and on weekends.
"Evenings may be slow," says Toys "R" Us's Mr. Nakasone, "but lunch time downtown every day is like the Christmas shopping season."
Downtown stores' design and logistics can require extra work, often requiring retailers to alter single-level suburbanmall prototypes to fit the space available.
Target's three-story Pasadena store will be its first multilevel outlet.
Target has installed four oversized elevators and escalators with steps deep enough to accommodate shopping carts.
Toys "R" Us's store in downtown Chicago, which also occupies three floors, can accept deliveries only between 6:30 p.m. and 6 a.m. because of traffic restrictions.
The store thus keeps its stockroom open all night to receive inventory.
The fear of urban crime is another challenge.
The developers of Target's downtown Dallas store sought to thwart crime by lighting the parking lot to eight times the industry's standard level.
The developers also were careful not to place public telephones in out-of-the-way places.
These tips came from consultations with the Dallas police department.
At Toys "R" Us's downtown Chicago store, customers heading for the main selling floor must first go up or down an escalator, move through a subsidiary selling floor and take another escalator to the main floor.
A security desk watches over exits from the main floor.
Aside from the added security, Toys "R" Us says this traffic flow forces customers to encounter merchandise in the same order that they would if they were breezing through a suburban store.
Neither Toys "R" Us nor Target has experienced any significant crime in their city stores, officials say.
Paying for these additional design, logistics and security measures is more affordable for urban retailers these days because occupancy costs in many downtowns have declined in the past three years.
For example, the company developing the property where Target has its downtown Dallas store paid $45 million for the property, less than a fifth of what its prior owner paid to assemble the site in the early 1980s.
The cheaper real estate allows the developer, Cityplace Co., to charge Target a rental rate nearly as low as what Target pays in the Dallas suburbs -- between $3 and $10 a square foot per year -- says Neal Sleeper, Cityplace president.
Mr. Sleeper says Cityplace has another attraction for Target.
The store won't have to worry about any of its big-chain competitors showing up soon.
Because surrounding space is occupied, he says, "there's no place for anybody else to come."
Garnering an exclusive franchise locked Kmart and Wal-Mart Stores Inc. in a year-long competition for a parcel in Kansas City, Mo.
The victor, Kmart, will be the only big discounter within five miles of the property, says Stephen G. Block, an executive of the company that is developing the site.
"Assembling this kind of site again in this area is going to be extremely difficult for a retailer," says Mr. Block.
"Kmart kind of has a monopoly here by default."
As retailers rediscover the city, they are helping to revitalize areas that often haven't responded to government-sponsored initiatives.
But it isn't altruism that's at work.
Says a Target spokeswoman: "Bottom line is . . . we felt we could be profitable."
