Indonesia wants to double its electricity output.
China expects 1995 passenger and freight movements to be 47% higher than in 1990.
Thailand hopes new freeways and transit systems will ease the chaos that Bangkok calls traffic.
Vietnam would like telephones that work.
These are bits of a boring concept called infrastructure, but it is exciting stuff to manufacturers around the world.
And nowhere is it more rousing than in East Asia, which claims the world's most boisterous economies.
To maintain their soaring growth rates, those countries must spend vast sums.
A World Bank economist figures infrastructure spending has reached $75 billion a year and soon will be $100 billion.
Such numbers cause great joy in companies that make things like generators, telephone systems and locomotives.
Says an official of ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd., the Swiss-Swedish maker of power plants: "Everyone is there.
This is a bonanza going on out there."
The impact is global.
Not only does this spending let East Asians prolong a boom, it also brings relief to sagging economies elsewhere.
Germany's exports to East Asia, which include large amounts of infrastructure items, are rising at a 10% clip, and have a measurable impact on its recovery.
"This is becoming more and more important to the German economy," says Martin Hufner, chief economist of Munich's Bayerischen Vereinsbank.
The effect on certain companies is greater.
Alcatel-Alsthom's Alcatel NV, the French telecommunications company, has 9% of its sales in Asia but hopes to double this ratio in 10 years.
General Electric Co.'s power systems division expects to get 45% of its new orders from Asia before long.
ABB, expanding from a European base, hopes Asia eventually will provide some 30% of its business.
The largest overseas project in American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s history is in China.
Germany's Siemens AG is competing for railway projects across the region.
Unlike most of Eastern Europe, which also has huge needs, East Asia can afford to buy.
Most nations there have convertible currencies, high savings ratios and great expectations even in the short run; this gives them greater domestic resources plus easier access to outside finance.
Americans often say they have special advantages (though competitors may disagree).
Some, like GE, claim better technology.
Others find buyers like the Chinese tilt toward the U.S. for political reasons at times.
In any case, U.S. multinationals are doing well though many medium-sized companies remain surprisingly reluctant to venture abroad.
Yet it is difficult to predict winners in this global race -- especially at the job -- creation level.
That is because even this oft-unglamorous business reflects the complexities of modern commerce.
Such as:
Despite Asia's wealth, outside financing is often essential for closing deals.
This can give European and Japanese companies a crucial advantage: greater access to official soft loans.
Alcatel, for example, used Belgian and French aid to start big in China, and has used aid from Australia, Norway and Italy for other contracts.
(The goods involved then come from Alcatel factories in those nations, creating jobs there.)
Other business considerations also can determine where products are made.
Westinghouse Electric Corp. sometimes has generators built by its Japanese partner, Mitsubishi, and vice versa.
ABB often exports components from an American subsidiary, Combustion Engineering, while Schneiders SA, another French company, may rely on its U.S. affiliate, Square D. Thus, a contract signed by executives from, say, Stockholm or Orlando doesn't necessarily create work nearby.
Exchange rates.
Japan has dominated the power generation equipment market in Southeast Asia (power generation is the biggest slice of the infrastructure market), and is strong in other fields.
But it is facing a strong-currency problem like that of the U.S. in the mid-80s.
Asian states with dollar incomes and yen debts don't want large new obligations to Japan and are turning elsewhere.
Temporarily, at least, this may hurt companies like Mitsubishi Electric Corp., Hitachi Ltd., and Toshiba Engineering & Construction Co.
For now, though, there is business for almost everyone and more to come.
