Never underestimate the delirium that can nowadays seize college administrators forced to adjudicate the many modern correctnesses, especially "harassment" or "intimidation."
The latest cautionary fiasco comes from prestigious Swarthmore College in Pennsylvania.
Swarthmore now has the distinction of having forced the departure of a male student on no better grounds than the accusation that he caused a young woman to feel "intimidated."
It then offered to pay his tuition and facilitate his entry if he would go to another school.
No one should doubt -- and we don't -- that there were complexities in the case of 18-year-old freshman Ewart Yearwood.
It's clear, too, that a college has the right, and indeed the duty, to enforce a standard of civilized conduct.
The problem is that college administrators' notions of their duty are today so profoundly muddled by the politicized paranoia now reigning on campuses that it has become impossible for some of them to distinguish between a fact and a charge.
The Swarthmore case began in September when freshman Alexis Clinansmith complained to a dean that Mr. Yearwood had harassed and intimidated her by hanging around, leaving a sign telling her she was a beautiful woman, going to her room uninvited, by tossing his lacrosse stick back and forth while he talked to her, which she found alarming.
By the time it ended this month Ewart Yearwood had been forced out and was being portrayed -- by school officials and a public relations team hired by Swarthmore -- as having deep and dangerous psychological problems.
Not surprisingly, some alarmed students at Columbia University -- where Mr. Yearwood hoped to spend the spring semester -- got the idea that someone only slightly less dangerous than an ax murderer could be headed their way.
Columbia has refused to accept him, notwithstanding Swarthmore officials' efforts to get him admitted.
Surely no college head as well-intentioned as Swarthmore President Al Bloom has been represented to be would try to fob off a student to another college if he actually believed that student guilty of a "menacing pattern" of behavior.
School officials now have taken to accusing Mr. Yearwood of publicity mongering and starting a "media blitz."
Now this is an odd charge, considering the way the college's public relations team has been burning up the telephone wires calling the press to spin the picture of Mr. Yearwood as a highly disturbed, threatening figure in deep need of psychological help.
Ewart Yearwood is a muscular Hispanic male brought up in one of New York's roughest neighborhoods, who managed to turn himself into a well-educated student of undeniable intellectual gifts.
He is also a young man not given to smiling much.
When angry, he looks angry.
According to the accusing woman and her friends, there was "something" about Ewart that frightened and intimidated them.
This vague testimony is what the administration cited as proof of the charges against him.
In this age, as we've seen before, it is no longer necessary to provide clear proof of an offense.
The student need only feel intimidated and harassed.
Upon the first complaint that he made Ms. Clinansmith "uncomfortable," Mr. Yearwood was directed to follow a pattern of "active avoidance."
Subsequently the complainant charged Mr. Yearwood at a dance had muttered unpleasant comments to his friends that Ms. Clinansmith overheard and had looked at her during a football game.
He was forced to leave campus for six days till a deans' tribunal could be convened.
The tribunal ultimately found him guilty of the charge that he was insufficiently meticulous in following the active avoidance orders, but it failed to find him guilty of harassment and intimidation.
He was nonetheless to be suspended for the spring semester and instructed, during the current one, to stay 40 feet away from the young woman.
It is noteworthy that these sanctions had fallen on Mr. Yearwood even though he had not been found guilty of harassment and intimidation.
As his pro bono lawyer Harvey Silverglate explains, there are now apparently crimes so terrible that innocence itself is not an adequate defense.
Shortly after the 40-foot order, Dean Ngina Lythcott informed Mr. Yearwood that he was charged with having come within 15 feet of Ms. Clinansmith -- in the dining hall -- and another time, as close as four feet.
Matters went downhill from there.
The young woman who pressed for Mr. Yearwood's removal deserves sympathy if only for the reason that she lives in times so genuinely frightening.
It is a time so shaped by a preoccupation with personal "rights" and the terrors of male sexual aggression that a case of crude amorous persistence can be converted into "criminal stalking."
Once upon a time Lerner and Loewe wrote a musical called "My Fair Lady" in which a rejected suitor called Freddy hung about and sang "On The Street Where You Live."
It was all terribly romantic.
Today a young man hanging around is likely to be charged with intimidation and terrorization.
Once upon a time, too, college administrators who wanted to improve behavior would tell a student to shape up or get out.
Today, at the first complaint, the machinery of tribunals and "witnesses" begin rolling, along with elaborate arrangements about the number of feet the accused is required to put between himself and the accuser.
Some days, the return of reason seems a long way off.
