COMPUTERS ARE pretty good at producing paper copies of documents created electronically.
But reversing the process has been a killer.
Getting paper documents into your computer, turning them into electronic files and then organizing them effectively has been next to impossible for mainstream users.
There are, of course, many scanners designed to convert hard copy to electronic images, and even elaborate document-imaging and management systems.
However, most of these things are too expensive, too bulky or too hard to install and use for nontechnical folks or small companies.
That's a major reason the promise of a "paperless office" has been an empty one.
Now a little startup company, Visioneer Communications of Palo Alto, Calif., (800-787-7007) , has cracked the problem.
It has created a small, simple, inexpensive and elegant scanning system called PaperMax that makes it child's play to load images of paper documents into your computer and organize and manage them.
PaperMax is one of the most impressive office-technology products I've seen in years.
The Visioneer product, which lists for $499, consists of two parts.
First is the hardware.
It's a stationary device that packs most of the functionality of a big, heavy flatbed scanner into a stylish unit that's just three inches deep, less than four inches high, about a foot wide and weighs only 2.5 pounds.
The whole thing is so small that it can be tucked into the space between a keyboard and the computer or monitor, or transported easily for use with a portable computer.
Documents are fed into a slot on the front of the PaperMax and returned through an opening at the top.
It attaches to the computer by simply plugging into a serial port.
There's no need to insert any circuit boards.
The scanner only works with computers running Microsoft's Windows software, but Visioneer promises a version for Apple Macintosh computers this spring.
THE SECOND PART of the system is a beautifully designed software program called MaxMate, which controls the scanner and allows users to organize, view, annotate and transmit the images of documents scanned by PaperMax.
Operating the system couldn't be simpler.
You don't even have to push a button, flip a switch or manually start up the MaxMate program.
At any time, no matter what program you're using, you can pop a piece of paper into the scanner.
It automatically turns on, grabs the paper and scans it very, very quickly.
A window pops up on the screen to show the image as it's being received; then the MaxMate software launches itself so you can work with the new image.
In my tests, the scanner handled everything from business letters to glossy fliers to clippings ripped from this newspaper and a crinkled magazine page with a tear in the edge.
It even straightens out the image if you put the paper in crooked.
The software is versatile.
It presents icons for each scanned document and lets you zoom in on any one.
You can annotate the documents with an electronic yellow highlighter or by placing electronic comments and notations on it.
You also can compile documents into "stacks" by dragging their icons into a pile on the screen.
MaxMate combines the pages into a single file you can flip through page by page.
You can search for documents by file name, date or by words in annotations you've made.
Even better, you can create stacks that combine scanned-in pages and electronic documents you create in word processors, spreadsheets and other programs.
You merely "print" from these other programs to the MaxMate software, and the electronic files appear in MaxMate.
THE SOFTWARE also has plenty of options for re-using or transmitting scanned images.
You can reprint the scanned images or fax them electronically if you have a fax modem and software.
You can send them to other computers via electronic mail or floppy disk.
Visioneer supplies free software that lets users of Macintoshes or IBM-compatibles without Windows view the scanned document images.
So what are the downsides of PaperMax?
It's designed as a single-user business tool to handle a relatively low volume of documents that mainly consist of text and limited graphics.
It accepts just one sheet at a time and isn't meant for high-volume scanning.
While it can scan photographs, it isn't designed to do professional graphical rendering and manipulation.
It also lacks any optical character recognition ability, so it can't translate scanned documents into editable text.
They exist in your computer only as pictures of the paper originals, unless you buy translation software.
What's more, like many other add-on devices, it must compete for a limited number of serial ports on the IBM-compatible PC.
So you may need to reconfigure a mouse or modem.
And one feature -- in which you can combine electronic documents with scanned images -- doesn't work well on computers that use a few models of certain video cards, including those from Orchid and Diamond.
Finally, this breakthrough product is just coming on the market and may be hard to buy in stores unless you ask them to order it.
Visioneer says one mail-order house, Club PC (800-258-2721), stocks the PaperMax.
And the company expects other outlets to do so soon.
If you want to get rid of piles of paper and store documents electronically, it's worth the trouble to track down a PaperMax.
