Transmission from mother to child of the virus that causes AIDS can be significantly reduced by the drug AZT, according to a study sponsored by the National Institutes of Health.
The study, conducted in health centers in the U.S. and France, found that infants born to women infected with the human immunodeficiency virus were only one-third as likely -- 8.3% compared with 25.5% -- to contract the virus if they and their mothers received AZT during and after pregnancy.
Researchers previously hadn't shown convincingly that passage of the AIDS virus from mother to child could be slowed by intervention.
The test results have broad implications in terms of both HIV treatment and testing.
The agency has launched a nationwide effort to inform physicians about the study, and physicians are expected immediately to begin taking the results into account when caring for pregnant women.
In addition, the study results suggest new benefits for HIV testing.
Currently, health agencies and organizations such as the NIH recommend HIV testing for pregnant women in high-risk groups, but there isn't any requirement for such testing.
Begun in April 1991, the NIH study comprised 477 pregnant women infected with HIV.
The women, who were treated at one of 50 clinics in the U.S. and nine in France, received either AZT or a placebo during pregnancy and labor; the children they delivered received the same drug as their mothers for six weeks following birth.
By December 1993, HIV culture tests were available for 364 infants.
Of these, 53 had HIV -- 13 of whom were born to mothers receiving AZT, and 40 to mothers receiving placebo.
"That is a highly significant beneficial effect of AZT," said Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, a unit of the NIH that conducted the study.
Dr. Fauci emphasized that the infants must be studied further to determine whether AZT causes any long-term side effects.
Short-term side effects were limited to mild -- and reversible -- anemia among some of the infants.
Each year in the U.S., an estimated 7,000 HIV-infected women give birth to infants, about 25% of whom are HIV-infected.
AZT, made by Burroughs Wellcome Co., is widely used by AIDS patients and those infected with HIV.
The drug has been shown to prevent or delay many of the conditions brought on by the disease.
But AZT is more effective in the short-term than the long-term, Dr. Fauci said, because the virus tends to develop resistance over time.
"In this situation, you're really asking AZT merely to be effective for a very finite period of time, measured in months," he said.
"And apparently, AZT is capable of having a very positive impact under these circumstances."
Originally, the NIH planned to enroll 748 HIV-infected women in the study.
But the results as of December 1993 were so dramatic, Dr. Fauci said, that the test was terminated and its results released.
