From blackberry jam to vacuum-cleaner bags to smoked salmon and sun-dried tomatoes, private-label products dominate the grocery stores in the United Kingdom.
Unlike their poor cousins in America, they have the choicest spots on the grocery shelf.
Best of all, they are profitable -- so profitable that they are a major reason why British retailers boast operating profit margins as high as 8%, or eight times the profit margins of their U.S. counterparts.
This kind of success has generated lots of interest across the Atlantic.
Already A&P, Safeway and a handful of other U.S. grocers are trying to take a more British approach to their private-label brands, sprucing up both marketing and packaging.
"Retailers in the U.S. are aggressively assuming the posture that you see in the U.K. -- that of product marketers," says Brian Sharoff, president of the New York-based Private Label Manufacturers Association.
And foreign retailers with U.S. grocery interests are also looking at ways to boost private-label sales in the U.S.
"There is tremendous opportunity for private label in America," says David Sainsbury, chairman of J. Sainsbury PLC, Britain's largest grocery chain.
Private labels constitute only about 14% of total grocery sales in the U.S., compared with about 36% in Britain.
The British market has historically been much more conducive to private labels than in the U.S. Because there is less national advertising, brand-name goods never got the same foothold there.
And because the British Broadcasting Corp. has never accepted advertising, television commercials are almost nonexistent.
Today, only two of the country's four major channels carry ads.
Moreover, Britain's grocery industry is much more consolidated.
Its five largest chains do 62% of the country's business, compared with 21% in the U.S., giving them more clout with manufacturers.
In the U.S., grocers "have looked at themselves as landlords of shelf space, not food marketers" says Mark Husson, an analyst at J.P. Morgan Securities Inc.
In the U.K., grocers like Sainsbury are also marketers.
Sainsbury, with some 420 stores throughout the country, avidly develops new products, launching 1,400 to 1,500 new private-label items each year and weeding out hundreds of others that are no longer popular.
The typical Sainsbury store has about 16,000 products, of which 8,000 carry the Sainsbury label.
Currently, Sainsbury is targeting large-volume categories dominated by one or two established brands with big advertising budgets.
In the beverage aisle, Sainsbury has developed its own lemonlime flavored Gio soft drink to compete with 7Up and Coca-Cola's Sprite.
On the candy shelf, its Double Take wafer candy is a direct attack on Nestle's Kit Kat.
Sainsbury launched its own Novon laundry detergent about two years ago.
In its first year, Novon saw sales climb past the competition of Procter & Gamble Co. and Unilever PLC to become the top-selling detergent in Sainsbury stores.
"What this has done is increased their gross margins and increased their terms of trade and bargaining power with these two manufacturers," says Tony MacNeary, director of food-retailing research at NatWest Securities in London.
At a Sainsbury store in the London borough of Islington, the in-store promotions focus almost entirely on Sainsbury brand goods.
Of 25 signs hanging above the aisles promoting specific items, 21 tout Sainsbury goods ranging from rice and pasta to milk and bread.
U.K. grocers keep tight control of their shelf space.
Since their own products are so much more profitable -- with gross margins that are roughly twice those of brand products -- they are choosy about who they let in, lowering the bar for only the biggest name brands.
"Private label in Europe makes the manufacturers think very carefully about what they can do to distinguish their products," says Ron Bottrell, spokesman for Quaker Oats Co.
Actmedia, a U.S. marketing concern, entered the British market in 1990 and quickly encountered problems.
Its British office, which sought to sell in-store ad space to manufacturers and retailers, lasted less than two years.
"We couldn't penetrate either Sainsbury or Tesco," says Wayne LoCurto, president of Actmedia, a unit of Dallas-based Heritage Media Corp.
"They're too much into their own brands."
Recently, a consortium called the British Producers and Brands Owners Group asked the House of Lords to develop legislation that would dissuade makers of private-label products from copying the overall appearance of branded items.
The consortium includes Proctor & Gamble and Unilever, among others.
Meantime, English consumers have become increasingly fascinated by foreign food discounters storming Britain, and the British market is not immune to price wars.
Tesco PLC, the U.K.'s second-largest grocery chain recently introduced a low-priced Tesco Value line to compete against the foreign discounters.
The prices on this line are as much as 50% lower than prices in the Tesco Own Label, a strategy that might undermine the strength of the company's better private-label items.
"They could be degrading the strength of the Tesco name," says Mr. MacNeary, the food retailing analyst.
