Now that Richard Thomas has finished making over First Chicago, he may have his hands full fighting off suitors.
The big Chicago bank, the 11th largest nationwide, is believed to have already rebuffed an overture from BankAmerica, which on Friday disclosed its $1.9 billion proposal to take over Continental Bank, First Chicago's crosstown rival.
Analysts and investment bankers say First Chicago remains one of the most attractive candidates in the market these days for a bank merger or acquisition -- not only because of its vastly improved fundamentals, but also because of its strategic Chicago location.
"Everybody and their brother are trying to get into Chicago," says David Berry, director of research at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods.
First Chicago "would be a very nice fit with a lot of folks, but it has to be someone who has an interest in both retail and wholesale banking."
News of the Continental purchase propelled First Chicago's common stock up 1 3/4 to 46 3/4 on heavy volume Friday, as investors speculated that it could be next.
Yesterday, First Chicago's shares closed at 47, up 1/4.
Mr. Thomas, who took over the helm of First Chicago two years ago, downplays the idea that First Chicago is on the block.
"I wouldn't read anything into our stock," he said in an interview Friday.
"We have our own game plan.
There's no reason to think why this should affect our strategy of remaining independent and headquartered in Chicago."
Takeover fever aside, First Chicago is one of the cheapest bank stocks on the market, analysts say.
At current prices, the stock trades at 8.8 times trailing earnings, half the average multiple for the stock market as a whole.
It looks like an even better bargain based on future earnings, trading at 5.9 times Wall Street's consensus estimate for 1994.
If that weren't enough, it also sports a tempting 3.4% yield.
"It's a very, very cheap bank stock with above-average earnings potential," said value investor David Dreman, whose firm owns more than one million shares of First Chicago.
"It's cleaned up a lot of its problems."
Mr. Thomas gets most of the credit for the makeover, having shed boatloads of problem real estate, built up credit-card operations, and focused the bank more tightly on wholesale businesses, such as corporate lending and custodial services.
First Chicago reported 1993 earnings of $8.78 a share, up sharply from 64 cents a share in 1992, when it incurred a big loss to write down its real-estate portfolio.
From a strategic point of view, First Chicago has a lot to offer both investors and potential partners.
It's the largest bank in the Midwest, sitting in the middle of the industrial heartland of the U.S., an area currently enjoying something of an economic renaissance, compared with the two coasts.
The bank company spans three attractive lines of business -- wholesale banking, credit cards and retail branch banking -- and has been acquiring smaller banks to expand its retail franchise both in Chicago and in the city's affluent suburbs.
Analysts say First Chicago would fit well as a "merger of equals" with another Midwestern or Eastern bank.
The Continental takeover only draws extra attention to the opportunities in Midwest banking, and in the Chicago market in particular.
Indeed, there isn't any dearth of potential suitors for First Chicago, analysts and takeover advisers say.
Says one investment banker of First Chicago, "We could have a nice, '80s style sealed-bid auction and have a real good time."
Keefe Bruyette's Mr. Berry points to NationsBank of Charlotte, N.C., as one possible candidate; a linkup with First Chicago would suit that bank's goals of expanding its activities in credit cards and wholesale banking, he says.
Meanwhile, NationsBank Chairman Hugh McColl recently indicated he'd be interested in diversifying into the Midwest.
State laws that currently restrict NationsBank from buying outside its region could be lifted this year.
Friday, a NationsBank spokeswoman declined comment on its plans.
Other strong regionals such as Banc One of Columbus, Ohio, have already set up shop in Chicago suburbs and are looking at the Windy City itself.
Bank of Montreal, which already owns Chicago-based Harris Bank, says it, too, wants to significantly expand its business.
Norwest, a fast-growing Minneapolis banking company with offices in all 50 states, would "like to be bigger in Illinois, but whether that occurs or not, who knows," says Chief Executive Officer Richard Kovasevich.
"My belief is, if you enter a market, it has to be on a pretty big scale."
For now, "our focus in Illinois is really outside Chicago," he adds.
Among East Coast banks, Mr. Berry says New York-based Bank of New York would be a good fit with First Chicago.
PNC Bank of Pittsburgh might be also interested, investment bankers say.
Representatives of Bank of Montreal, Bank of New York, Banc One and PNC declined comment.
Investors who think First Chicago is ripe for a takeover shouldn't mortgage the house quite yet.
Banks have wide latitude in picking merger candidates, or deciding whether to merge at all, and First Chicago clearly wishes to remain independent.
Its directors, many of whom are Chicago's top corporate VIPs, believe the city should have at least one remaining independent bank, and are opposed to being gobbled up by out-of-towners, First Chicago executives say.
Such provincialism doesn't necessarily thrill the bank's shareholders.
"As a shareholder, of course, we want to maximize shareholder value," says Mr. Dreman.
"If somebody came along with an excellent offer, we'd obviously want the board to look at it."
While retirements can often be the spark for bank mergers, the 63-year-old Mr. Thomas already chose Leo Mullin, a well-respected former McKinsey consultant, as his successor in November.
Mr. Thomas doesn't plan to step down for about another two years, however.
Meanwhile, not all analysts are bullish on First Chicago.
The bank has been recently criticized for paying too much for Chicago's Lake Shore Bancorp, a small community bank which it bought for 2.6 times book value.
The purchase raised questions on Wall Street about whether First Chicago will spend too much to defend itself from strong regional rivals.
"The question is whether their reaching out to broaden their base will be costly to shareholders," says Judah Kraushaar, banking analyst at Merrill Lynch, who has a "hold" recommendation on the bank.
