The accounting firm commissioned in 1992 in an effort to squelch the controversy over the Clintons' Whitewater Development Co. investment refused to vouch for the accuracy of its findings.
What's more, the firm, which depicted the Whitewater real-estate venture as unprofitable, wasn't as independent as the White House has portrayed it.
The report was prepared by Patten, McCarthy & Associates at the request of James Lyons, a Clinton friend and Denver attorney.
It turns out that Mr. Lyons and Leslie Patten, head of the Denver-based accounting firm, have long been friends and business associates.
Among other things, they were the principal owners of two Colorado banks in the early 1980s.
As questions persist over the Whitewater venture, President Clinton said he is reconsidering his opposition to having a special counsel appointed to investigate the matter.
Despite his agreement to turn over documents related to Whitewater, in a CBS News interview last night he said that "people said `That's not enough,' so I think we have to evaluate that and see where we are."
The White House has relied heavily on the so-called Lyons report since early 1992 to rebut political criticism of their business dealings with James McDougal, the Clintons' Whitewater partner and proprietor of the failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan of Little Rock, Ark.
But in a March 1992 letter to Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton, the Patten firm included a disclaimer that its financial findings "shouldn't be construed to represent the results of an attest service or compilation of financial statements, due to the nature of the engagement and incomplete or unavailable records."
The letter was included in the Lyons report but hasn't attracted attention.
According to Douglas Carmichael, professor of accountancy at City University of New York's Baruch College, the disclaimer means that the firm gave no assurances as to the accuracy of the Lyons report.
The firm, instead, was merely functioning in the capacity of financial consultants who have been hired by an attorney, said Mr. Carmichael, former vice president of auditing at the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.
"No one should place any reliance in what they have to say in this report," Mr. Carmichael said.
"The lack of independence would be just another reason not to pay any attention to it."
Last night, Bruce Lindsey, a senior White House official, took sharp issue with Mr. Carmichael's assertions.
"The fact that the accounting firm says it couldn't vouch for the accuracy of the Whitewater information to the same degree they could in an audit isn't surprising," he said.
"We've always said the records were incomplete."
Mr. Patten declined through an attorney to comment about the Whitewater report, citing accountant-client privilege.
Mr. Lyons said that Clinton campaign officials selected the Patten firm for the Whitewater job after considering -- and rejecting -- several other options, including hiring one of the Big Six accounting firms or retaining a retired partner of such a firm.
Mr. Lyons said in an interview yesterday that there was no conflict of interest involved and insisted that his ties to Mr. Patten didn't prejudice the findings in the Lyons report.
The firm had "no relationship to the campaign whatsoever and they had no relationship to me at the time," he said.
He said he disclosed to campaign officials his longtime relationship to Mr. Patten, a certified public accountant.
But some accounting experts question the hiring of the Patten firm to do a financial reconstruction of the Clintons' Whitewater partnership with Mr. McDougal and his former wife, Susan.
"The notion of independence is really sacrosanct for an auditor," said Howard Schilit, associate professor of accounting at American University in Washington.
"I don't think it was good judgment on the part of the campaign to retain the Patten firm.
Whoever had the choice . . . should have done a better due diligence and better fact-finding to determine the relationship of Lyons and Patten."
The Lyons report, which Clinton aides have characterized as "independent," has been criticized for not going into certain significant Whitewater transactions.
Investigators for Republican members of the House Banking Committee intend to scrutinize how the Patten firm reached its key findings, including the conclusion that the Clintons lost $68,900 on their Whitewater investment while the McDougals lost $92,200.
Mr. Lyons said the report wasn't intended to be a full accounting of Whitewater finances.
"Remember, we weren't after an audit, we were after a financial reconstruction," he said.
The objective was to determine whether the Clintons had been exposed to any financial risks and whether they had invested and lost money on Whitewater.
"Those two questions were answered in a thorough and complete fashion," said Mr. Lyons, a partner in the Denver firm Rothgerber Appel Power & Johnson.
Mr. Lyons took issue with Mr. McDougal's recent assertion that he recalls the Clintons' investing only $9,000 in Whitewater.
"Frankly, I think his memory is faulty," he said.
"We stand by our $68,900 estimate."
In the late 1970s, Messrs. Lyons and Patten, along with another Lyons law partner, William P. Johnson, formed a bank holding company and opened two banks -- Greenwood Industrial Bank in Littleton, Colo., in 1980 and Arapahoe Industrial Bank in Englewood, Colo., in 1982, according to state banking records.
Mr. Lyons said they sold out a year or so later to another group of investors, who merged the banks in 1986.
The surviving Arapahoe bank, which had assets of about $15 million, failed in early 1988 and was liquidated by state regulators.
Mr. Clinton's comments on CBS came as some Democratic senators joined the Republican chorus calling on Attorney General Janet Reno to name a special counsel for the Whitewater case.
Democratic Sen. Robert Kerrey of Nebraska yesterday came out in favor of a special counsel, joining suggestions by Sens. Daniel Moynihan of New York, Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Russell Feingold of Wisconsin and Charles Robb of Virginia.
Until the past couple of days, the White House dismissed the talk of a special counsel as partisan posturing.
Last night, however, officials said the appointment of a special counsel was under consideration.
"We continue to believe the standard for an independent prosecutor hasn't been met," said White House adviser George Stephanopoulous.
"No decision has been made."
Separately, eight senior Republican legislators urged Ms. Reno to seek statute-of-limitations waivers from the Clintons in Whitewater-related matters.
A Justice Department spokesman said, however, that any matter concerning its probe of the Clintons' investment in Whitewater and their relationship with Madison Guaranty has a 10-year limitation, which won't expire until 1999.
"There is simply no reason to believe that there is any matter that will shortly be beyond the reach of federal prosecutors," said Carl Stern, Ms. Reno's chief spokesman.
