The proposals by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani include lowering taxes on commercial rents, which have been an especially sore point with small businesses here.
The mayor also seeks to eliminate the city's portion of the sales tax on items of clothing under $100 -- a measure aimed at stimulating retail sales.
Those ideas are only a tiny part of the mayor's newly unveiled financial plan for fiscal years 1994 through 1998.
And they fall short of what many small-business owners want, such as measures to control actual rents.
Still, they may come as pleasant surprises for entrepreneurs, who know the city is struggling to close huge projected budget gaps.
The plan as a whole calls for total expenditures of $32 billion in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1995.
That would be a spending cut of $617 million from fiscal 1994, the lowest projected spending rate since 1975, city officials said.
Some 15,000 municipal jobs would be eliminated by the end of fiscal 1995.
Mr. Giuliani, who assumed office last month, said he aims to cut the city government to an affordable size, strengthen the city's ability to provide essential services and encourage private economic growth.
"One of the reasons New York City's economy has lagged other parts of the U.S. is the high tax burden," the city's Office of Management and Budget said in a document outlining the new financial plan.
If the stimulus package as proposed by the mayor is eventually included in an actual city budget, it will begin with a reduction in the hotel tax to 5%, from 6%, effective Dec. 1.
(Separately, Democratic Gov. Mario Cuomo has proposed repealing the state's extra 5% tax on rooms that rent for more than $100 a night.)
The city hotel-tax cut would save payers of the tax an estimated $7 million in fiscal 1995.
And, city officials hope, the cut would help city hotels attract and retain business.
The portion of businesses exempt from paying commercial-rent taxes -- mainly small companies -- would rise sharply, city officials said.
The city would phase in increases in the threshold (based on rent paid) that determines which concerns must pay the tax.
Eventually, the tax would be eliminated, except in Manhattan south of 96th Street.
By fiscal 1997, annual tax relief from these changes would be $112 million, according to the mayor's plan.
Officials said that eliminating the city portion of the sales tax on items of clothing under $100 would save consumers $218 million annually by fiscal 1997, when the change would be fully effective.
