The U.S. was forced by its major trading partners to scale back a plan to liberalize export controls on computers.
Clinton administration officials said members of the Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls rejected a U.S. proposal that would have eased export restrictions on computers operating up to 500 MTOPS, or million theoretical operations per second, an indicator that measures the speed of a computer.
The controls, which require government approval of certain exports, apply to computer sales to Cocom-proscribed countries, including the former Soviet Union, other former Communist countries and China.
The officials said Cocom countries -- which include Japan, Australia and all members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization except Iceland -- have accepted easing restrictions on computers only up to 260 MTOPS.
Late last year, Cocom members agreed to raise the limit to 67 MTOPS from 12.5.
The 260-MTOP level should include most workstations on the market today, but U.S. computer makers have expressed concern that it wouldn't cover products that will be manufactured over the next couple of years.
"We settled on that because that is as high as we could get as a consensus," a U.S. official said.
"But we haven't given up on 500.
It was viewed by us as an interim measure."
Another U.S. official said the administration is planning to issue details of the new arrangement "soon," probably in the coming days.
The U.S. officials also said Japan has refused to accept a U.S. proposal defining supercomputers as products operating at more than 2,000 MTOPS.
In recent negotiations, the Japanese drew the line at computers operating at more than 1,500 MTOPS.
That would represent a huge boost from the current definition of any computer operating over 194 MTOPS, but it, too, falls short of U.S. corporate demands.
Products defined as supercomputers are subject to tougher export controls.
The Clinton administration laid out the 500-MTOP level as one of its goals last October in a much-ballyhooed report of its inter-agency Trade Promotion Coordination Committee, headed by Commerce Secretary Ron Brown.
Paul Freedenberg, a lawyer for the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association and a Commerce undersecretary in the Reagan administration, said he understands Japan represented the main obstacle to raising the limit to 500 MTOPS.
"They are essentially behind us in technology, and they are suspicious the U.S. is trying to get a competitive advantage," by easing export restrictions, he said.
Richard Barth, assistant director of international trade relations and government relations at Motorola Inc., a Schaumburg, Ill.-based electronics company, said "The computer industry is likely to be disappointed that the administration couldn't deliver on its proposal to decontrol to 500."
Mr. Barth headed a project by the Council on Competitiveness, a Washington business-backed group, that lays out the cost of unilateral export restrictions.
The report is expected to be released tomorrow.
Although Cocom is to be disbanded next month, the limits agreed upon now are considered important because they will basically define computer export controls until a new system is created to set restrictions.
U.S. negotiators are still discussing various proposals with other Cocom members.
The U.S. officials said they are hopeful they can reach the 500-MTOP level even in a post-Cocom system, which is expected to shift its focus to restrict exports to nations such as Iraq, Iran, Libya and North Korea, rather than the former Soviet and communist countries.
The administration was supposed to present proposed legislation covering export control reform today at a Capitol Hill hearing, but that hearing was postponed until next week as the administration still tries to settle on its plan.
The administration is under pressure to liberalize export controls by corporate interests, which argue the restrictions are costly to the U.S. economy.
