The Small Business Administration estimates that federal disaster loans to victims of this week's Los Angeles earthquake will total nearly $600 million, or about the same as the $581 million made after the 1989 San Francisco quake.
In that disaster, the SBA made 15,000 loans.
Recipients in Los Angeles will benefit, however, from a tripling of the maximum amount allowed for SBA loans approved by Congress last summer after flooding in the Midwest.
Homeowners and small businesses can borrow under the program.
The maximum SBA disaster loan for physical damage was raised to $1.5 million from $500,000.
The loans have a below-market, 4% annual interest rate.
Loans for physical damage above $10,000 require some form of collateral, usually a lien on the borrower's home or business real estate.
The SBA began sending disaster-relief personnel to the Los Angeles metropolitan area after the earthquake Monday.
The agency says it expects to have several hundred relief workers in place today working with entrepreneurs and homeowners.
The SBA already had a disaster-aid office open in Arcadia, north of Los Angeles, that was helping people hit by a string of misfortunes.
The area saw floods and a major riot in 1992, and last year there were wildfires and a small earthquake in the mountains east of the city.
Structural damage will be the biggest problem for most small companies as a result of the quake, said Bernard Kulik, the SBA's assistant administrator for disaster relief.
"There's a lot of damage people don't see right away: they begin to notice the cracks in the walls, and there's always a lot of chimney damage.
"Aftershocks are also a big problem: they can cause a lot of new damage, and sometimes they're the straw that breaks the camel's back for damage that was already there," Mr. Kulik said.
Mr. Kulik said he saw a typical example of a small-business problem on television: a small grocery store selling bottled water and batteries from its front door because much of the building's ceiling had collapsed inside.
Business owners also face the danger and expense caused by broken gas and water lines.
Businesses can request SBA disaster aid immediately by calling a toll-free line, 1-800-462-9029, run by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
They also can apply at the SBA's Arcadia office, or wait for the opening of the FEMA disaster assistance centers in the coming days.
Few businesses have earthquake insurance because it is costly, the SBA's Mr. Kulik said.
The SBA provides loans for financial as well as physical losses that result from disasters.
For instance, businesses that can be reached only by a Los Angeles freeway would suffer economically, even if they had no physical damage.
Some owners whose businesses were damaged in the 1992 Los Angeles riot complained about federal disaster aid because they wanted grants or some form of reparation instead of loans.
FEMA, which coordinates immediate disaster relief, is the only source of direct grants, however.
The SBA's disaster-relief efforts was praised by the House Small Business Committee last year.
As one of the main federal agencies responsible for disaster aid, the SBA has been stretched by a string of upheavals starting with Hurricane Hugo in 1989 to the Los Angeles riots and Hurricane Andrew in 1992 to last year's floods.
As a result, the total amount of SBA disaster loans reached a record $1.68 billion in fiscal 1993, exceeding the previous $1.64 billion high set in 1972 after Hurricane Agnes.
