Only a few months after passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Mexican stock market is stumbling amid new questions about whether the nation's economic policies will change after elections in August.
All-star stocks such as retailer Cifra, cement concern Apasco and conglomerate Grupo Carso are down.
The peso has fallen about 5% against the dollar.
So far this year, the Mexican Bolsa de Valores' IPC index is already down 5.2% in dollar terms, closing at 2506.14 yesterday.
Mexico, whose stock market rose 48% last year, has been a bellwether among emerging markets in Latin America, which have taken it on the chin this year.
Investors had expected Nafta, which passed late last year, to strengthen Mexico's economy, supporting a longer-term bull market.
Foreign investors, who poured billions of dollars into Mexico, Argentina and Brazil last year based on their economic reforms and privatization programs, have changed course amid a world-wide reversal of the best-performing stock and bond markets.
In Mexico, investors have grown confused about the country's political future, and analysts forecast further declines and higher volatility.
"There are too many variables that have to be cleared before the market has another rally," says Borja Ussia, president of Grupo Moneda, a research firm based in Mexico City.
Mexican finance officials had hoped to stimulate their weak economy this year with lower interest rates and higher federal spending.
But when the Federal Reserve raised U.S. interest rates last month while Mexican rates were falling, it undercut the peso, inflicting holders of Mexican shares with additional currency losses.
And now Mexican rates are rising again, an event that could brake spending, investment and all kinds of consumption.
Mexican Treasury certificates with 28-day maturities, known as cetes, now yield 9.3%, up from a low of 8.8% this year.
On the fiscal side, investors are uncertain how government spending will develop in a political year that is becoming increasingly complex.
The Jan. 1 rebellion by indigenous Mexicans in the state of Chiapas sent a shock wave through Mexico's political system.
Overnight, the economic successes of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari were tarnished as Chiapas called attention to millions of Mexicans who suffer under feudal land bosses, disease and poverty.
To his credit, President Salinas staved off the hard-liners and sent his former foreign minister, Manuel Camacho Solis, to talk with the rebels, rather than continue a bloody war.
A peace accord was hammered out last week.
Suddenly, Mr. Camacho's stature rose in Mexico and nearly eclipsed that of Luis Donaldo Colosio, Mr. Salinas's hand-picked successor.
Mr. Camacho's presidential ambitions are obvious.
And though he hasn't declared his candidacy, the betting is that he will do so this month.
Such a declaration would push Mexico a step closer to democratic elections.
Unity within the PRI is already fracturing.
Yesterday , Mr. Colosio attacked some of the antipollution reforms implemented by Mr. Camacho when he was mayor of Mexico City.
Also, party members are auditing many of Mr. Camacho's lieutenants, looking for scandals.
All of these events frighten foreign investors who have counted on Mexico's rigid political structure to carry out the economic reforms of the president.
"Until the political calculus is better defined," expect a lot of volatility in the Mexican market, says Jean van de Walle, manager of Latin American equities for Alliance Capital Management.
"The PRI has to reinvent itself if it is going to survive over the next six years."
While that reinvention is under way, he's going to take a cautious approach to Mexican stocks.
Mr. van de Walle says he would purchase some stocks on weakness but trade out of them as the market rallies.
Mexican investors see moves toward more democracy here as positive.
"For us Mexicans, this could be the chance of our lives," says Pablo Mancera, treasurer of investment firm Grupo Santander Mexico and manager of the Emerging Mexico Fund, which trades on the New York Stock Exchange.
"It looks like we could have democracy."
And because of this, he says he's "certain this could be a very good year for the Mexican market."
Even so, Mr. Mancera says the market could tumble further to around 2450 as interest rates drift slightly higher.
Mr. Mancera, the nephew of Mexico's central bank chief of the same name, says he thinks the peso will hit a new equilibrium around 3.20 pesos to the dollar, compared with yesterday's closing rate of 3.27.
He also says he doesn't expect a weaker peso to result in higher inflation because consumer demand for all kinds of goods is weak.
But soft demand is exactly what worries many holders of Mexican stocks.
Alvaro de la Marcorra, head trader at Grupo Financiero Probursa, says the first quarter is almost over, and analysts are starting to lower earnings estimates for companies.
They are also cutting growth estimates for the economy, which expanded only 0.4% in all of 1993.
Though the government is expecting 3% growth this year, partially through the help of higher federal spending, there's little anecdotal evidence of resurgent demand.
"We are almost at the end of the first quarter, and there are almost no signs of reactivation," Mr. Ussia of research firm Grupo Moneda says.
He adds: "Either you have a clear government policy to reactivate the economy, or the stock market is very expensive."
With a battle brewing within the PRI, a clear policy is unlikely.
"You could make a gross domestic product growth forecast of anywhere from 1% to 5% and have a good chance of being right," Mr. Ussia says.
So, given the uncertainty, investors are starting to price stocks on what's certain: 1993 earnings.
And on that score, many shares, such as Cifra, still cost more than 20 times trailing earnings.
As a warning, Mr. Ussia quotes Mr. Colosio, the PRI candidate, as saying: "The only continuity will be change."
Change to what?
Nobody knows, and that's why many investors are selling Mexican stocks.
A late buying burst in Tokyo pushed stocks up 1.3% Thursday.
London prices finished lower, after a late dive from highs in reaction to early weakness on Wall Street.
Frankfurt shares jumped 1.2% as sentiment continued to improve.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.49, up 0.32, reflecting higher European and Asia/Pacific markets and lower American markets.
Precious metals stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 146.25, up 3.72, or 2.6%, with Echo Bay Mines of Canada posting a 6.3% gain in its local currency.
Forest products stocks trailed at 165.91, down 4.04, or 2.4%, with Louisiana-Pacific of the U.S. sliding 5.3% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which dropped 59.21 points Wednesday, climbed 251.53 to 20090.71, near the intraday peak of 20114.41.
In trading Friday, the Nikkei eased 45.41 points to close the morning session at 20045.30.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 400 million shares, up from 332.2 million shares a day earlier.
Advancing issues outnumbered declining issues 649-377.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which fell 10.83 points Wednesday, rose 11.02 to 1616.51.
Large buy orders from Japanese brokerage firms in the final half hour helped push the Nikkei to its first finish above 20000 since March 1.
The surge lifted the index above the strike price of many options contracts ahead of Friday's special quotation for the settlement of Nikkei futures and options, allowing some investors to take profits.
The bourse's earlier strength came from substantial buying by U.S. pension funds, and a pickup in purchases by European investors.
Tokyo sentiment also was buoyed by news of an accord between Motorola of the U.S. and Nippon Idou Tsushin Corp. on opening Japan's cellular phone market to Motorola's systems; investors hoped this could help heal a bilateral trade rift.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 12.8 points to the session's low of 3233.9, after plunging 30.1 points from the day's high in the last two hours.
The FT 30-stock index fell 5.8 points to 2547.2.
Volume was 901.1 million shares, up sharply from 730.2 million shares a day earlier.
Tumbling New York stocks triggered the descent in London.
Some investors sold for tax reasons, as the British government's fiscal year draws to its March 31 close.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index ascended 25.01 points to 2141.10.
Following losses last week linked to downgrades of several issues by German brokerage houses, some optimism returned and the market has gained overall this week.
In Paris, shares fell on selling guided by computer programs, sparked by an erosion in New York stocks and bonds.
In Milan, shares rose, led by telecommunications and industrial issues, amid hopes about an emerging Italian economic recovery.
In Stockholm, shares fell, damped by a wider spread between German and Swedish interest rates and disappointment about Swedish corporate earnings.
In Sydney, stocks rose slightly but trading was subdued, as investors remained preoccupied by concerns about global interest rates.
In Hong Kong, shares fell for the second-consecutive session in thin dealings.
In Singapore, equities slumped 1.3%, partly on weak technical factors.
In Kuala Lumpur, stocks lost about 1% in thin activity, with declines across the board.
In Taipei, the market skidded 1.8% in shrunken volume; while long-term fundamentals for Taiwan's economy remain favorable, investors had doubts about prospects sooner.
In Manila, shares rebounded 1.8% in heavy volume, on bargain-hunting following a recent bearish run.
In Wellington, prices gained 1%, fueled partly by a New Zealand bond-market rally.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
