Hilda, a beautiful woman, was a friend of my mother's.
We met when I was a child living in Montreal during World War II.
She spoke to me as though I were an adult, and I wanted to grow up and be like her.
Some 25 years later, while on holiday in England, I brought my four young American children to have tea with her in her London home.
She was as I remembered her -- still beautiful, her long legs elegantly crossed, her silk stockings shimmering in the pale winter light.
My older daughter's eyes widened as she pressed against me, much as I had stared at Hilda many years before; my infant daughter made little cooing noises.
The boys, ages four and five, were gleefully showing off for Hilda when her son, Colin, walked in.
Maladroit, he stood in the doorway; his melancholy was palpable.
He spoke haltingly, long pauses between words.
My young sons fell silent and stared at him.
A pall fell over all of us.
"Colin, be a good sort," Hilda said.
"Take these Yankee chaps upstairs and show them your miniature car collection."
I must have looked at Hilda quizzically, because she mouthed "Don't worry, everything will be all right."
I was embarrassed that she had seen my consternation.
A friend had written to me that Colin had schizophrenia and implied that Hilda might have contributed to his affliction.
Five years passed and the children and I now lived alone in a small village near Cambridge.
I drove down to London each Monday bringing my younger son, David, now nine, to his piano lessons with a famous teacher at the Royal Academy of Music.
Hilda invited me to lunch; I have some recollection that I talked far too much about myself, but when I paused in my monologue and asked her how Colin was, she answered abruptly that there was nothing to report.
Her mouth became pinched, and her face closed with pain.
We finished our meal in silence.
After lunch we went to pick up David.
When we entered the studio it was obvious that something was amiss.
As soon as his teacher left, David began to weep as though he had been straining to hold back his tears.
Hilda's expression, however, was far more disturbing than David's sobs.
She gathered her coat around her and hissed: "Find him another teacher, before you do him irreparable harm."
She turned, her heels tapping out the rhythm of her warning as she fled down the stairway.
David is 31 now.
He left the famous teacher at the Academy.
He was invited to study at the Yehudi Menuhin School outside of London; later he won a scholarship to the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia.
The piano is now his only consolation.
David suffers from schizophrenia.
In the beginning I did worry that I had somehow caused my son's illness.
When he was diagnosed in 1981, there were persuasive beliefs that mothers could make their children schizophrenic.
But disease definitions change as our knowledge increases; today, though the etiology remains unknown, there is general agreement that the causes of schizophrenia are biological.
In that sense I am lucky, at least luckier than Hilda.
But while I know I didn't make David ill, some believers in the mother as monster remain.
Schizophrenia is a disease that waxes and wanes, and a few months ago, David was admitted to the psychiatric ward of a general hospital.
He lives alone in an apartment and believed that a person living next door to him was a convicted criminal and that this man intended to kill him.
The neighbor was slovenly but harmless.
However, David's delusions were true for him and truly terrifying.
Shortly after his hospital admittance, the attending psychiatrist, a somewhat older man, asked David a few questions.
David said that he was too frightened to stay where he was and that he had to move out.
"Aah," said the physician, nodding his head knowingly, "it may be a good idea to move away from your family.
People often do much better when they no longer live with their mother."
Ms. Backlar is the author of "The Family Face of Schizophrenia" (Tarcher/Putnam).
