But she awoke on Christmas Day to find "the best present I ever got": hers was among the 600 families in the Mare shantytown that had been selected to receive a free crate of food.
Suddenly, she says, "my bare cupboard filled up" with rice, beans, tomato sauce, a can of sardines, a can of sausages, noodles, cookies, crackers and powdered cocoa.
"I believe in Santa Claus again," the 29-year-old Mrs. dos Santos says.
Santa Claus, in this case, isn't round and bearded.
He's a balding imp of a man with piercing blue eyes named Herbert de Souza.
By launching a government-supported campaign whose name is a mouthful -- Action for Citizen's Rights, Against Misery and for Life -- Mr. de Souza has succeeded in filling the bellies of thousands of hungry Brazilians.
And in the process, the frail 58-year-old sociologist, who goes by the nickname Betinho, has given rise to an image of a cynical, selfish nation.
"With his wounded-bird look, he infected people with a crazy idea: If everyone wants to, if you organize without paying attention to the government, you can make things happen," says political scientist Marcio Moreira Alves.
At first glance, Mr. de Souza hardly fits the role of a crusader for hope.
A hemophiliac who caught the HIV virus during a transfusion and who has already lost two brothers to AIDS, he barely weighs 100 pounds and often has to cut his appointment schedule to ward off fever and fatigue.
But working with the urgency of a man living on borrowed time, he has managed to communicate to Brazilians the anguish he feels over Brazil's traditional indifference to misery and to a skewed income distribution in which the richest 5% of the population hold 34.4% of the national wealth, while the poorest 50% hold 12.6%.
"This isn't a poor country," Mr. de Souza says in an interview.
"This is a country with poverty.
And democracy and misery are incompatible."
The message clearly caught on.
Responding to Mr. de Souza's call to stop waiting for government solutions and start doing something about hunger and misery, more than 3,000 volunteer committees have sprung up throughout the country to collect and redistribute donations of food, money and clothing.
Help has come under a variety of forms: Musicians such as Chico Buarque have organized concerts, with non-perishable goods accepted as payment for tickets.
The electric utility in the state of Goias donated 91 hectares (224.8 acres) of land to plant foodstuffs.
State-controlled Banco do Brasil SA seconded people to start up committees.
A barber in Sao Paulo makes clients pay in food once a week.
Even prisoners joined the campaign: Inmates at nine Rio prisons decided to skip a meal on Saturdays and donate the food, generating 2.5 million tons of food.
Mr. de Souza says the campaign's success is chiefly due to its simple message and simple methods.
It's so simple, in fact, that many wonder why it took so long to happen.
"The obvious became a revelation and the common citizen became a hero," Mr. de Souza says.
There is no central organization.
Anyone can form a committee and is then responsible for finding donors and selecting recipients.
There's little bureaucracy either.
"There are no deposits, no warehouses.
It's just-in-time," says Mr. de Souza.
But Mr. de Souza and his followers see the campaign as far more than mere handouts.
To them, it's part of the ethical backlash that began sweeping the country since President Fernando Collor de Mello's 1992 ouster on corruption charges, a sign that Brazilian society is discovering its rights and duties.
"We discovered that lack of ethics isn't just assaulting the public coffers, but also being complacent about thousands of people who are hungry," says Plinio de Arruda Sampaio, one of the campaign's coordinators.
To be sure, the campaign has its detractors.
"It's not with shows by musicians. . .that we will resolve the day-to-day life of millions of chronically empty stomachs," wrote a physician, Everton Marques dos Santos, in the daily Jornal do Brasil.
"This campaign can't sustain itself and have the effect desired by Betinho's good and pure soul."
Others say Mr. de Souza's campaign makes Brazil seem like another Somalia, but the problem isn't starvation, it's malnutrition.
Others still say the campaign addresses a symptom and not its cause, which is uneven income distribution.
Mr. de Souza admits that the campaign won't resolve Brazil's problems.
But, he says, official figures show that 32 million Brazilians -- about 20% of the population -- earn less than what's necessary to feed themselves, and this is an emergency that can't wait for structural solutions.
But aware that food handouts are only a temporary solution, Mr. de Souza wants to focus the campaign this year on jobs, more than food.
It takes only a visit to one of Rio's favelas, or shantytowns, to see there's a need for help.
When 78-year-old Maria Barreto Leite, despite her old age and weak legs, climbed the steep hills of the Babilonia favela, which overlooks the famous Copacabana beach, to distribute the food her committee had collected, she found a long line of people waiting for the handouts.
"Some women even kissed my hands," she says.
On this day, only pensioners are being attended to, but that doesn't stop others from asking for food, too.
"Thank God, I got something for Christmas, but it ran out yesterday," says 32-year-old Marcia Regina dos Santos, who's handicapped and out of work.
"How can I wait till the next handout?"
