As bankers held inconclusive talks about its fate, Euro Disney SCA reported that its net loss for the fiscal first quarter widened by 31% to 553 million francs ($94 million) over the year-earlier quarter.
But in a sign that a new management strategy is starting to bring results, the troubled theme park outside Paris succeeded in pruning its bloated costs.
As a result, its operating loss was unchanged even though revenue fell 12% after the park slashed its admission charge and other prices in a bid to attract more visitors.
The wider net loss largely reflects higher interest expenses.
The results "show some encouraging signs," said Charles Allen, an analyst at brokers Natwest Sellier in London.
"It's more healthy, but it's still not healthy enough."
Euro Disney, which is 49% owned by Walt Disney Co., still faces a survival-threatening problem relating to its debt of about 21 billion francs.
Interest payments on the debt are currently far beyond the resort's financial means, and Walt Disney has said it will continue funding the shortfall only until the end of March.
At a 10-hour meeting in Paris yesterday in a pavilion near the Place de la Concorde, representatives of Euro Disney's 60 creditor banks discussed the resort's perilous financial situation without reaching any conclusions.
Bankers attending the meeting said auditors KPMG Peat Marwick made a preliminary presentation detailing the park's situation and its possible future development.
But it wasn't able to produce a full audit of Euro Disney, as had been expected, and the bankers are due to reconvene in mid-February to receive a more complete report.
Bankers and analysts believe Euro Disney's debt must be cut by at least 50% to ensure the resort's long-term viability.
Walt Disney itself presented a business plan to creditors last October that calls for the debt to be cut by about 11 billion francs, more than half of which would be through an injection of fresh capital.
According to several bankers present at yesterday's creditors' meeting, KPMG's initial findings largely mesh with Disney's own calculations.
"There was no bombshell," said one British banker present.
With both sides apparently sharing a similar analysis of the problems, the key issue remaining to be resolved is who will pay how much to bail out Euro Disney.
The banks are insisting that Walt Disney take a disproportionate share of the restructuring burden, even though the U.S. company is legally only a minority shareholder.
The banks' reasoning is that the park is a Walt Disney creation and responsibility, even if the U.S. company managed to shield itself through a complex financial and legal structure.
With time for a restructuring running out, some creditors are unhappy at the slow pace of the talks and critical of the lead French banks involved, Banque Nationale de Paris and Banque Indosuez.
One Japanese banker emerging from the meeting said he was "disappointed" that the lead banks weren't able to provide more detailed answers at the meeting.
A brief communique issued at the end of the talks said that a steering committee of some of the main banks had asked for a mandate to open discussions with Walt Disney and Euro Disney on a restructuring.
But, oddly, the statement didn't say whether the meeting had agreed to do so.
The bankers also discussed Euro Disney's results for the fiscal first period, ended Dec. 31, 1993.
The company said operating earnings fell to 828 million francs from 944 million francs, "reflecting the product repositioning and pricing initiatives taken by the Euro Disney management."
In addition to lower admission charges for off-peak seasons, hotel and restaurant prices at the park have been reduced and some staff have been laid off.
Company officials said attendance at the park was stable, although they didn't give details.
The net loss of 553 million francs compares with a loss of 423 million francs for the year-earlier period.
On the Paris stock market, Euro Disney closed at 36.20 francs yesterday, down from 37.75 francs.
