Alfred Kingsley, a New York investor and a former adviser to Carl Icahn, is pushing a proposal that retailer U.S. Shoe Corp. be broken up into three separate companies.
Greenway Partners L.P., the money-management firm run by Mr. Kingsley, has recently contacted more than two dozen institutional investors to drum up support for the proposal.
The Greenway firm owns two million U.S. Shoe shares, or 4.3% of outstanding common stock.
The move is one of the first by a private money-mangement firm under revised proxy rules that give investors greater power to seek reform at poorly performing companies.
The rules give Mr. Kingsley a low-budget way to challenge corporate management, unlike the costly battles Mr. Icahn occasionally waged in the 1980s.
The proposal calls for the board of Cincinnati-based U.S. Shoe to split the company into optical retailing, footwear, and women's apparel businesses -- each with separate listings on the New York Stock Exchange.
"There's no synergy" currently between the company's flagship Casual Corner women's apparel chain, its Lenscrafters Inc. eyewear retailer and its footwear division, said Mr. Kingsley in an interview.
At Mr. Kingsley's behest, the breakup proposal was submitted to the company by two private investors who own a combined 2,000 shares.
Under Securities and Exchange Commission rules, Mr. Kingsley hasn't owned his shares long enough to file a proposal.
A U.S. Shoe spokesman said the proposal will appear on the company's 1994 proxy statement, and the company is still preparing a response to appear with it.
If approved, the proposal wouldn't force the actual breakup of the company.
The proposal is advisory, which means that it asks the directors simply to study the issue.
U.S. Shoe's shares closed yesterday at $16.50, up 87.5 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
In recent years, U.S. Shoe has seen its performance lag as more focused retailing companies have eaten into market share.
While U.S. Shoe's cost-cutting and management shifts have won favor with some analysts, others have called for more.
"I think U.S. Shoe could take the necessary steps to realize greater value for shareholders by spinning off its businesses," said David Diamond, manager of a value-oriented, institutional portfolio at the Boston Co.
"If management is not going to take notice of shareholder discontent, the institutions will force them to."
Mark Boyar, head of Boyar Asset Management, said he vigorously supports the Kingsley proposal.
"We look at U.S. Shoe exactly the way we looked at {Sears Roebuck & Co.} a number of years ago," he said.
"There was strong reluctance on the part of management to do anything to enhance shareholder value.
It took a lot of prodding."
But the California Public Employees Retirement System, which is gearing up for a proxy fight this spring at U.S. Shoe over elimination of staggered board terms, hasn't decided how to cast its ballot on Mr. Kingsley's proposal.
Mr. Kingsley is taking advantage of the SEC's relaxation in late 1992 of shareholder-communication rules.
Under the old rules, any communication involving more than 10 shareholders was subject to regulatory oversight, a process that often necessitated hiring a professional proxy solicitor.
Nowadays, shareholders simply file a copy of their communication with the SEC, and fax or call as many investors as desired.
Robert Monks, a longtime investor activist, called Mr. Kingsley "experienced in the use of ownership rights," praising his use of the revised rules.
"This is a very good use of the shareholder franchise," Mr. Monks said.
