Washington, D.C. -- Letitia Baldrige was teaching me some manners.
"Now, you're taking me to lunch, right?" she asked.
"Then you should have offered it to me first."
Ms. Baldrige took the object in question -- a dish of herbed spread -- and dug in with her bread knife.
We were lunching at the Hay Adams Hotel, where I had invited her to buff my rough edges.
Now 67, Ms. Baldrige is the nation's closest thing to an etiquette czar.
In books such as her Complete Guide to the New Manners for the '90s and "R.S.V.P.," her syndicated manners column, she has tried to teach Americans how to behave.
Her latest effort, Letitia Baldrige's New Complete Guide to Executive Manners (Rawson Associates, 590 pages, $35), pronounces on everything from corporate-jet etiquette to door-holding in the office.
So redoubtable is her reputation that Martin Scorcese appealed to her for tips in filming his excruciatingly mannered movie "The Age of Innocence."
So I was on my best behavior.
I had placed my napkin in my lap.
I had torn my bread, not cut it with a knife.
I was speaking in a low voice.
That morning, I had double-checked my manicure and donned a conservative suit.
None of this was lost on Ms. Baldrige, who arrived for our lunch in an irreproachable black dress and pearls, an imposing figure at 6-foot-1.
Although the capital's streets were covered in ice, she was wearing high heels.
"I almost fell on my keister," she confided, in elegantly rounded tones.
Once we were seated in the plush dining room, she sipped her red wine and reflected on what defines good manners.
"It's consideration and kindness and thinking about somebody other than oneself," she said.
"Mind you, there's a difference between a greasy, obsequious, slathering fool who thinks he's got good manners and . . . somebody who's naturally, easily good-mannered -- like George Washington."
The waiter arrived.
I gave my order.
As he headed for the kitchen, Ms. Baldrige gently chided me.
"You should have said to him, `She will have the paillard of beef,' first.
I'm the guest," she continued.
"I as the guest must never speak to the waiter."
However, she as the guest would tell me if I spilled soup on my blouse: That's good manners.
It's also good manners to suggest ordering club soda to blot it out.
If I had spinach wedged between my teeth, she would point discreetly at her mouth.
She would even suggest that a man check his trousers, if necessary: "You laugh and just simply say, `Look south' or `Something needs to be zipped.'"
Ms. Baldrige pulled an embroidered handkerchief from her purse.
"Well, now I'm going to do something you're not supposed to do.
I'm going to blow," she said, and gave a delicate honk.
"You can do it that way.
If you're going to do lots of blowing and sneezing you have to excuse yourself."
Ms. Baldrige learned to mind her manners early in life.
Her father, a Republican congressman from Nebraska, didn't take any guff at the dinner table.
When Tish and her two brothers acted up, the congressman imposed a strict 10 minutes of silence.
The Baldrige children wrote thank-you notes and condolence letters by the volume, overseen by Mrs. Baldrige, who would walk them to the corner mailbox and declare, "Now, doesn't that feel good?" as the letters fell down the slot.
"They should have been preserved in formaldehyde or something and put up in the Smithsonian as two absolutely remarkable people," Ms. Baldrige sighed.
Her upbringing served her well when, at the tender age of 21, she was hired as social secretary for David and Evangeline Bruce at the U.S. Embassy in Paris.
There, Ms. Baldrige learned the intricacies of protocol, defusing such social land mines as: "You have a French cardinal and the foreign minister of Ethiopia and the mayor of Lille all coming to lunch -- who outranks whom?"
Small wonder that after four years with the Bruces, Ms. Baldrige was ready for a two-year stint in the early '50s with the Central Intelligence Agency, as a "psychological-warfare officer" -- or propaganda specialist.
She's still tight-lipped about her CIA work, but says it included some undercover assignments.
On one foray into a part of Austria then under Soviet control, she was picked up by the Soviet police.
"My manners didn't help much with the Soviets," she said.
Fortunately, "I was so ditzy . . . they realized I was obviously not capable of being involved in strategic-warfare planning."
Ms. Baldrige soon returned to strategic planning of a more familiar sort, taking a job as special assistant to Ambassador Clare Boothe Luce in Rome.
Her skills were well-polished by the time her old pal Jackie Kennedy called in 1960.
"She said, `Will you come with us if Jack gets elected?' " Ms. Baldrige recalled.
"Of course I knew the Kennedys.
Jackie's parents were good friends of my parents in Washington. . . .
She came to Paris two years behind me when I was working for the Bruces and I got beaux for her, and we all went out and had a good time."
Ms. Baldrige became Mrs. Kennedy's chief of staff, and social secretary to the White House.
But even the best-bred protocol chief can slip up.
Ms. Baldrige still shudders at the memory of the time she introduced the wife of a prominent Democratic contributor to the president -- by the name of the contributor's mistress.
"He gave me a look that would incinerate anyone, the president did," she said.
"I made a judgment call: Do I apologize and perhaps make matters worse, or do I just ignore my horrible error. . . .
I went up to the couple and said, `Listen, what I did was unpardonable, inexcusable, and I think I'm going to kill myself.'
And they laughed and patted me and said, `It's all right.'"
Ms. Baldrige took a sip of wine.
"I have told students in the corporations where I lecture over and over again, never pass the buck.
Always take the buck.
Be the one who says mea culpa, mea culpa," she said.
The waiter came to clear the table.
Following Ms. Baldrige's lead, I had moved my fork and knife to the right side of my plate.
I suggested that we order dessert, so Ms. Baldrige could see if I knew how to eat it properly.
"You must have one; I really can't," she said.
"I'll tell you what I will do.
I will lean over and take a bite of yours, which is perfectly all right to do as long as your spoon is pristine clear and pure."
As I ate my apple crisp -- after Ms. Baldrige had taken her tiny, hygienic taste -- she coached me, urging: "Spear it with the fork, cut it with the fork, and eat it with the spoon."
She refused coffee until after dessert, declaring, "Coffee is a digestif."
At last, I called for the bill.
Under Ms. Baldrige's supervision, I calculated a 20% tip: It would have been bad manners to give any less.
"I'm so embarrassed when that happens, so humiliated, I send money," she said.
"I think, what a jerk, to be so mean with somebody who has tried so hard and waited so beautifully."
Lunch was over, and I was relieved.
I hadn't spilled anything or gotten anything stuck between my teeth, to my knowledge.
We rose from the table.
Then disaster struck.
When we reached the cloakroom, Ms. Baldrige fished in her purse and announced that she couldn't find her coat check.
She described her coat to the attendant, then stepped into the closet and looked herself.
The etiquette czar began to fume.
"It's not here," she declared.
Minutes passed while the attendant searched both cloakrooms.
Coats were pulled out for Ms. Baldrige's inspection.
"No, that's not it; that's a man's chesterfield," she said, a little angrily.
After complaining to the concierge, Ms. Baldrige finally went through her purse and found her ticket.
The attendant quickly located her coat, which she had overlooked in the closet.
"It was right here, madame," he said reproachfully, handing it over.
After the briefest of mea culpas to the attendant, she swept out of the hotel.
"Well, it was my fault," she confided, serenity restored.
"He was justified in being annoyed."
