First City Bancorp. of Texas Inc. said the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. agreed to make an initial distribution of $200 million in cash and assets to the company as part of a settlement of litigation over the seizure of its banks.
First City estimated that it will receive from the FDIC an additional amount bringing the total paid to between $275 million and $375 million -- an estimate the FDIC wouldn't confirm.
The final amount will depend on how much the remaining First City assets sell for and the FDIC's expenses in selling them.
The company said the $200 million initial payment will be $107 million in cash and $93 million in property and notes receivable, and will more than cover the $80 million to $120 million it needs to fully repay creditors and emerge from bankruptcy-law protection.
First City sued the FDIC in September, alleging that federal regulators unjustly seized the firm's 20 banks in 1992 while it was trying to recapitalize itself with private funds.
Bondholders forced First City into bankruptcy-law proceedings a few days after the seizure.
At the time, the FDIC estimated First City would cost its insurance fund $500 million.
But after selling the banks and some other assets, the FDIC estimated it would be left with a $60 million surplus, to be returned to the company.
First City, on the other hand, said its estimates of the surplus owed were much higher -- between $450 million and $500 million.
The disparity largely revolved around prices that assets in receivership will eventually bring.
Traders in First City's thinly traded stock and debt said the market valued the anticipated settlement at about $300 million.
Last month, First City and the FDIC agreed to an outline of the settlement, including the two-stage distribution plan.
No estimates of the size of distributions were made then, except that both sides agreed all depositors and creditors would be repaid in full, and that the Bank Insurance Fund would suffer no loss.
First City said a term sheet of the settlement has been approved by its board and the FDIC board.
A final settlement is still subject to due diligence, negotiating and signing a definitive agreement, as well as bankruptcy-court approval.
Robert Brown, First City president, said a rejuvenated First City is likely to become a financial-services company and is considering all options for business, including banking.
