The chief of the Securities and Exchange Commission urged mutual-fund directors to tighten the reins on funds they oversee and to scrutinize fund managers' personal trading.
SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt told a mutual-fund industry conference here that directors (sometimes called trustees) of each fund ought to look especially hard at fund-manager personal trades involving initial public offerings, or IPOs.
"If I were a director, I would have reservations about trading by managers and would be greatly troubled by their buying and selling IPOs," Mr. Levitt said in a speech to the Mutual Funds Investment Management Conference sponsored by the Federal Bar Association and CCH Inc., a publisher of tax and business-law information.
Mutual-fund boards generally aren't thought of in the industry as aggressive overseers.
But Mr. Levitt said they should be asking "hard and sometimes impolite questions" about personal trading, such as whether it should be barred or allowed only with limitations.
The SEC is examining personal trading by portfolio managers, as previously reported.
Mr. Levitt declined to comment on that inquiry.
Last month, the SEC asked 30 fund groups for detailed information on personal trading by their portfolio managers.
"As I look at the issues, as I study the news reports and answer the questions, I know that this issue goes beyond the trading activities of a few fund personnel," he said.
Although the mutual-fund industry has been "relatively" free of major scandal, he added, "what we must avoid is a cloud on its horizon -- in the form of millions of new customers raising questions we should be asking ourselves about the potential appearance of impropriety."
The SEC chairman also called for directors to take a larger role in governing portfolio managers' investment practices for their companies' funds.
He said directors should ask about the use of derivative products in mutual funds and make sure that any uses of them are in keeping with a fund's policies.
Directors should "review pricing issues, trading strategies, accounting questions and internal controls" as well.
"I am not suggesting that directors immerse themselves in the minutiae of individual derivatives transactions, but I am suggesting that they exercise meaningful oversight," Mr. Levitt said.
He said liquidity issues surrounding complex investments -- that is, how easily they can be sold -- should also be carefully watched by directors, especially of funds that invest in securities in emerging markets.
Mutual-fund directors should also examine their companies' roles as shareholder activists in areas such as anti-takeover measures, proxy fights for control of a portfolio company, elections and even executive-compensation proposals where appropriate.
"Some might think the role I've outlined for directors is overambitious, or even unnecessary," Mr. Levitt said.
"But directors who do their job well can give enhanced confidence to the investors on whom your industry -- and its credibility -- depend."
"I think he is right on target and we've been talking about this a lot," said Leo Bailey, an independent director of some of the mutual funds of Baltimore-based T. Rowe Price Associates Inc.
"Directors pay attention to fees, performance and cost of operations, and this will be a whole new element for some other fund groups."
Another hot topic at the conference is the proposal for "off-the-page" mutual fund investing, in which investors could read about a fund in a newspaper or magazine advertisement and immediately invest without having to receive the entire standard "prospectus" document personally.
Barry Barbash, director of the SEC's Division of Investment Management, said in a speech that the SEC is conducting consumer tests with various forms of a shortened prospectus and could have a decision early this summer.
"We endorse the shorter prospectus, but whether it will be in an ad form or look more like a page in a prospectus hasn't yet been decided," he said.
