The prices consumers paid for goods and services increased 0.3% in February, the Labor Department said, a relatively low rate but enough to make some economists search for hints of inflation.
A separate report from the Commerce Department said that housing starts last month climbed 4.1% after plummeting 22% in January.
Consumer prices had been unchanged in January.
The core inflation rate, which excludes the volatile food and energy numbers, was also up 0.3%, after a more moderate 0.1% rise the month before.
The increase was fueled by an increase in housing costs, a major component in the index but one that sometimes jumps around -- up one month, down the next.
Excluding housing, prices increased only 0.1% in February.
Donald Ratajczak, chief of the economic forecasting center at Georgia State University, found the report "slightly disturbing."
Rents increased last month, he noted, because few apartments have been built in the past few years.
New car and financing prices are up because of strong demand.
These are the beginnings of creeping inflation, Dr. Ratajczak concluded.
But Gordon Richards, an economist with the National Association of Manufacturers, said, "fears of rising inflation have escalated to the level of paranoia . . . these fears are groundless."
He said that soft labor markets will keep wages low, and economic malaise in Europe and Japan is keeping prices of exports and imports flat.
Despite their differences over January's figures, most economists agree that worries of rampant inflation are misguided.
Most of those who predict inflation look for only slight price increases.
Wall Street analysts said this week's reports on consumer and producer prices will ease the pressure on the Federal Reserve to increase short-term interest rates when Fed policy makers meet next week.
But the Fed is likely to boost short-term rates in coming months and is now confronting a tactical issue of how to do that without provoking another runup in long-term interest rates in the bond market.
"While there is little visible evidence of an inflation upturn, the early warning signals -- rising capacity use, falling unemployment rates, rising commodity prices -- support the need for the Fed to stay ahead of the curve," economists at UBS Securities in New York said.
They predict that in April or May the Fed will move up the federal-funds interest rate, at which banks lend to each other overnight, to 3.5% from the current 3.25%.
Separately, the Commerce Department said housing starts climbed to an annual rate of 1,309,000 last month from January's revised 1,258,000 rate.
This comes on the heels of January's 22% plummet from December's revised record of 1,612,000.
Economists say they believe winter storms checked housing starts in the first two months of this year.
Building permits, often considered an indicator of construction, were down 8.1% in February to an annual rate of 1,251,000.
But David Seiders, chief economist of the National Association of Home Builders, argued that "sometimes permits don't reflect future construction.
A backlog of unused permits has been building up . . . because the bad weather has kept builders from using permits for starts."
Regionally, in the Northeast, which has born the brunt of this winter's cold, starts were strongest, shooting up 51%.
They were up in the South and down in the Midwest and West where builders have focused on repairing existing houses damaged in the floods or earthquake.
All numbers are adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here are the price indexes (1982-1984=100) and percentage change for the components of the Labor Department's consumer price index for all urban consumers for February.
The percentage changes from the previous month are seasonally adjusted.
