A government report found widespread use of unapproved or counterfeit parts in an investigation of 14 airplane-repair stations in the U.S. and Europe.
The report, by the Transportation Department's inspector general's office, faulted the Federal Aviation Administration for not adequately policing the nation's 4,499 repair stations and the 344 overseas stations that handle U.S. aircraft.
The FAA says it has already taken steps to improve its inspection of repair stations, which are generally operated by private concerns that aren't affiliated with airlines.
But the report shows how difficult it is to stamp out bogus parts, which have been blamed for several small-plane crashes but no crashes of scheduled passenger planes.
The report didn't address the issue of aircraft safety.
At the 14 repair stations inspectors visited, almost half of all the parts they examined showed no "reasonable evidence" that they met FAA requirements or industry specifications, the report said.
And only 5% of the parts purchased from distributors or brokers had proper documentation.
Some repair stations were using outdated maintenance manuals or outdated parts, the report said.
Airplane parts that lack the proper paperwork aren't necessarily counterfeit.
Still, the report found evidence of bogus parts, including engine pins with part numbers etched into them by hand and counterfeit engine bushings that Pratt & Whitney had already issued warnings about.
Two bushings had already been installed in an engine; the repair station had them removed, according to the report.
Pratt & Whitney is a unit of United Technologies Corp.
The investigation is likely to produce further indictments of parts distributors; already 40 people have been convicted of selling bogus parts.
Mary Schiavo, the inspector general, said in an interview that substandard parts pose more of a safety problem for small planes than for passenger jets, which typically have backup systems in case parts fail.
She said even if repair-station owners demanded better documentation, brokers could still foist bad parts upon them.
"Those that are unscrupulous will counterfeit the paperwork," she said, adding that inspectors have encountered bogus FAA tags.
The report recommends that the FAA start regulating the 15,000 aircraft-parts distributors in the U.S.
A move to require the FAA to do so died last year in the Senate.
The FAA said it is instead trying to help set up a system for distributors to be accredited by a third party.
The agency also rejected a recommendation for independent testing of parts used by repair stations, saying it would "require a rather involved change to the existing regulations and policies."
The 14 stations inspected were in North Carolina, Florida, Ireland, the Netherlands, Germany, England and Scotland.
