The dollar slipped against most major currencies yesterday, dropping briefly to a two-month low against the mark on indications the U.S. Federal Reserve won't be raising interest rates any time soon.
The U.S. currency reacted to the latest incidence of hostilities in Bosnia by rising to an intraday high on news that U.S. fighter jets shot down four Bosnian Serb aircraft in the first military action by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to enforce a no-fly zone declared in October 1992.
Traders said the dollar's attraction as a "safe haven" currency quickly dissipated in the face of growing skepticism that another U.S. rate increase was imminent.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7041 marks, down from 1.7100 marks late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 104.50 yen, down from 104.85 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4855, down from $1.4880.
About noon Tuesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 104.55 yen and at 1.7046 marks.
The dollar hit an intraday high of 1.7182 marks on the Bosnia reports that two U.S. F-16s shot down four Bosnian Serb planes that had attacked a Bosnian government munitions factory in violation of the U.N.'s no-fly zone.
While the threat of an escalating conflict in Bosnia sent the market rushing to buy dollars, the currency encountered heavy resistance around the 1.7180 mark level.
"There was a bit of reaction to Bosnia in the beginning," said Charles Cossentino, assistant vice president of Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank in New York.
But he added that "with no threat of the conflict spreading further" the market quickly turned its attention elsewhere.
It moved to test the dollar's downside, with the currency falling briefly through the psychologically important 1.7000-mark support level, after Fed Governor Lawrence Lindsey said that low inflation makes the Fed less likely to raise short-term interest rates soon.
The combination of Mr. Lindsey's comments about rates and jitters over U.S. economic data helped push the dollar to an intraday low of 1.6999 marks in the middle of the North American trading day.
It was the first time the dollar had dropped below 1.7000 marks since Dec. 29, when it touched 1.6990 marks.
The Fed nudged up short-term rates to 3.25% from 3% on Feb. 4, and Mr. Lindsey said that move "may make it more likely that any elevation in rates will be lower and shorter than they otherwise would have been."
Mr. Lindsey's comments were the main reason behind the dollar's retreat against the mark, Mr. Cossentino said.
He noted that Mr. Lindsey -- who has a reputation as a mild inflation hawk -- helped to cool recent speculation that the Fed was bracing for another so-called pre-emptive strike against inflation.
Traders also noted that Fed rate-increase speculation was further damped by release of the Purchasing Management Association of Chicago's index of area business activity.
The association said area business activity rose to 60.3% in February from an unrevised 59.6% in January.
But a closely watched sub-index on the prices paid by manufacturers for materials fell to 56.7% in February from 59.3% in January.
The market interpreted that decline as one further sign that there is little to pressure the Fed toward another boost in short-term interest rates, traders said.
The data also were seen as offering important clues to the more important National Association of Production Manufacturers index to be released today.
The market appeared satisfied to trade in rather narrow ranges on skittishness over the more significant data to come out yesterday, said Angelo Evangelista, vice president, corporate foreign exchange, at the Bank of Boston.
That data also include revisions to the U.S. fixed weight deflator for the fourth quarter and U.S. fourth-quarter gross domestic product data, or GDP, the total value of all goods and services.
