Aetna Life & Casualty Co. said its losses from the Los Angeles earthquake and winter storms would total $120 million, or well above analysts' expectations, suggesting the insurance industry is sustaining heavier losses on this year's disasters than first projected.
Most other major companies have already given initial estimates of earthquake losses, and a trade group, the American Insurance Services Group, has put the industry total at about $2.5 billion.
But the expected loss at Aetna, which has a relatively small share of the California market, indicates the industry could end up with more than $3 billion in losses.
Weston Hicks, a stock analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., said other insurers might revise their numbers upward as they get more information on their claims.
State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. and Farmers Insurance Group, a unit of B.A.TT Industries PLC., have reported the highest number of claims from the earthquake, with each expecting $600 million in losses.
Mr. Hicks said winter-storm losses could also rise in the weeks ahead.
The insurance industry so far has lost $825 million on the storms, according to the trade group.
Aetna, which hadn't given any estimates before, said the company will incur an $80 million loss from the earthquake and a $40 million loss from winter storms.
Mr. Hicks, for one, had estimated Aetna's total losses from the disasters at $60 million, or half of what Aetna is now predicting.
Aetna's combined losses will reduce first-quarter net income by $120 million, or $1.07 a share.
By comparison, Aetna earned $166 million, or $1.51 a share, in last year's first quarter.
Aetna's chairman, Ronald Compton, said losses from the earthquake and storms would reduce the company's 1994 operating earnings 13%, to $5.65 from the $6.50 a share he forecast two weeks ago.
Last year, Aetna posted a loss of $6.07 a share.
"Our 1994 earnings forecast did not contemplate losses of this magnitude within the first two months of the year," Mr. Compton said.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Aetna fell $2.125, or 3.4%, to $60 a share.
Stocks of other property and casualty insurers were down slightly.
Bad Timing for Aetna The increased losses come at a particularly bad time for Aetna, which is still struggling to turn itself around.
The insurer recently announced plans to lay off 4,000 workers and get out of two pension-related businesses.
The restructuring was accompanied by a $1.28 billion charge at year end.
Aetna's losses show how insurance companies are more exposed to catastrophes than they were when Hurricane Andrew hit in August 1992.
That disaster, which cost the insurance industry $16.5 billion, drove up rates for reinsurance, which is how insurers spread their risks among each other.
The higher rates forced many insurers to reduce the amount of reinsurance they carried, leaving them more vulnerable to losses.
"The industry is much more exposed nowadays," Mr. Hicks said.
Mr. Hicks said the industry could lose a record $5 billion on catastrophes in the first quarter.
He said the losses, coupled with rising interest rates, could prompt higher insurance premiums.
The price of commercial coverage has been falling for seven years in intense competition, which in turn has led to sluggish profits for the insurance industry.
