In Winston-Salem, N.C., the 700 or so workers in the headquarters of RJR Nabisco Inc. are pondering a new irony: If the federal government gets its way, the cigarette maker's employees no longer will have the freedom to smoke at work.
"Obviously, it seems strange," says David Fischel, a spokesman for the unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.
"We're the owner of a building . . . and we're living in America, and now we have people telling us what to do with our own property.
Let's face it: I don't think anybody would be working in this building if they had a problem with tobacco smoke."
Since Friday, when the Clinton administration announced a sweeping proposal for restricting tobacco smoke at work, business owners and others have begun mulling how the new rule would affect them.
Owners of restaurants and bars, who probably have the most at stake, worry that customers will simply stay home.
Managers of office buildings, meanwhile, see little more than a continued racheting up of antismoking steps, and many won't have to change policies at all.
And for the 26% of Americans who are smokers, well, they mostly grumbled and planned to head outdoors, where (for now at least) smoking will remain untouched.
The administration's proposal would block smoking from six million indoor work sites -- except those with designated smoking rooms vented to the outside and into which employees needn't go to work.
The rule isn't likely to go into effect until 1996, and not before an extensive comment period that would allow for changes.
But if it becomes law as written, the proposal would drastically alter everyday business settings.
A boss's office couldn't be a smoking zone, unless no co-workers ever were required to go in.
Corporate dining rooms would have to be smoke-free.
Company cafeterias, in order to be authorized as smoking areas, would be forced to have separate venting and no cleanup service.
And business travelers accustomed to lighting up in hotel lobbies would have to find another site -- possibly their rooms.
For the tobacco industry, the move is another broadside.
"This would be a substantial blow to the industry," said A. Blake Brown, a North Carolina State University economics professor, who follows the tobacco business.
Cigarette companies, for their part, cite studies that say most Americans don't want an outright ban of smoking at work and will argue, likely in court, that the federal government can't prove scientifically that tobacco smoke in the air is a health hazard.
Smokers, already ostracized by the nonsmoking public, are girding for more time and more company on the sidewalk in front of their offices.
"It really gets cold standing outside in the winter," laments Marlene Cerina, a smoker for 40 years and an employee of Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
Joseph Dear, the Clinton administration's chief of occupational safety and health, called the proposal "one of the most extensive ever proposed" by his agency.
The smoking ban is part of a broader set of indoor-air quality regulations that the agency will formally propose today.
The broader proposal, which would focus on so-called sick buildings, would require employers to shield workers from a variety of air contaminants by more closely maintaining heating and air-conditioning systems, training workers how to improve indoor air quality and keeping records of worker complaints about health issues.
The public will have three months to comment on the rule.
The administration is likely to make changes and repropose the regulation, Mr. Dear said.
A final rule isn't expected for a year or so, he estimated, after which companies would have a year to comply.
Violators would be subject to the standard health and safety penalties: a $70,000 maximum fine for each willful violation and $7,000 for a lesser misstep.
Business owners scrambled to figure out how the new rule would change the way they operate.
Already, many corporations across the country have actively banned smoking in offices and most community spaces such as cafeterias.
For instance, Hallmark Cards Inc., of Kansas City, Mo., restricted smoking to separate smoking lounges in 1990 after an employee survey found that 80% of its workers didn't smoke.
And in January, Deere & Co. of Moline, Ill., banned smoking completely in its offices and company cars.
Most of the companies that have taken such steps have offered employees programs to help them stop smoking.
But many owners of bars and restaurants -- and the people who like to smoke in them -- shudder at the changes the new rule would bring to their businesses.
The vast majority of restaurants nationwide already have set up smoking and non-smoking areas.
But under the proposed rule, employees at those establishments would receive the same protections as workers at other sites.
In short, restaurants or bars would have to set aside rooms with no food or drink service to accommodate smokers.
Employees couldn't be asked to go in.
Those businesses would be in the position of having to create a nonrevenue-producing part of their establishments.
That's a problem.
"It's not likely we'll build literal smoking tanks without the opportunity to generate revenue," says Cari Pirello, director of marketing at Innovative Restaurants Concepts, an Atlanta-based owner of 15 Southwestern-themed and seafood eateries.
"Every square foot of our restaurants is designed to generate revenues."
At St. Elmo's Steak House in Indianapolis, owner Jeff Dunaway says he would "hate to think" how much business he would lose as a result of a nationwide smoking ban.
His restaurant, which had $3.2 million in sales last year, doesn't have a no-smoking section.
He recently limited cigar-smoking to the bar of his restaurant, but he says a complete smoking ban could cut the bar's nightly sales of $3,000 by a third.
"It would depend on how you handled it," says Mr. Dunaway, who started with the restaurant in 1976 as a waiter.
"A loyal customer could come in and say, `Surely, you'll let ME smoke.'
If you're not diplomatic about it, you could lose that customer forever."
Owners of full-service restaurants say smokers make up over a quarter of their customer base, and smoking sections often cover half of their available seating.
For bars, smokers are even more crucial: Some bar owners contend that 80% of their customers light up.
Several restaurant owners actually see that as a blessing.
A national ban, they contend, would let them appear less arbitrary and face less pressure from smokers.
"If they can't go across the street, they'll just have to conform," says Aine O'Brien, manager of the Avenue Cafe and Restaurant in Chicago's Allerton Hotel.
Restaurant industry officials say they haven't yet decided how to react to the administration's proposal.
But Jeff Prince, an official at the National Restaurant Association, says the concept "may be a bit of Occupational Safety and Health Administration overkill."
Indeed, the reaction of restaurants and bars appears deeply divided.
"Food and smoke don't really fit," says Otto Svensson, vice president of food and beverage for Ritz-Carlton Hotel Co., a unit of W.B. Johnson Property Inc., Atlanta.
"But when you get into a bar-type situation, the proposal makes less sense to me."
Some who work at bars agree.
"Nobody who goes into a bar to drink goes in without their cigarettes," says 28-year-old Susan Lichliter, a waitress at McGuire's Manhattan Grill in Arden Hills, Minn.
"I mean, it's a bar, you know?"
Insurance adjuster Judy Bennett of Atlanta offers the kind of analysis sure to bring widespread protest from bars and other places that make much of their money from alcohol sales.
Smokers, she argues, will have to start drinking at home or outside.
It's all part of the trend smokers will have to accept, she says.
"We've adapted so far," she shrugs, standing outside her office building smoking.
At Houston's Restaurants Inc., the company's Dallas, Atlanta and Memphis restaurants have smoke-free dining rooms but allow smoking at the bars.
Company officials are annoyed that the government would determine where employees work.
"If an employee didn't want to work in a section where there was smoking, we wouldn't put them there," says Glenn Viers, vice president and general counsel.
"I just think that type of flexibility in those type of decisions are best made by the businesses themselves as opposed to government fiat."
That type of mandate already has transformed the business environment in many cities, such as San Francisco, that have barred smoking in workplaces.
That California city will extend its work-site ban to restaurants without bars next year.
The purge of smoking hasn't caused many problems, city officials say, partly because San Francisco's Tobacco Free Project, which enforces the law, uses an anonymous hot line to encourage workers to report violations.
The hot line averages eight calls a day, mostly from people who work in law offices, says project director Alyonik Hrushow.
The expansion of San Francisco's law to restaurants will make for a test case certain to be watched by federal officials.
An estimated 10% to 20% of San Francisco's full-service restaurants already are smoke-free, estimates the Golden Gate Restaurant Association.
And the group expects the changeover to go easily.
"This is one that's working itself out" without city intervention, says spokeswoman Kathleen Harrington.
