In an opinion for a unanimous court, Chief Justice William Rehnquist last week held in NOW v.
Scheidler that the sanctions of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, known as RICO, can be applied against antiabortion protesters.
In Scheidler, the National Organization for Women and abortion clinics sued the Pro-Life Action Network and several individuals alleging that pro-life demonstrators had violated federal and state law in their attempts to close down the clinics.
The RICO claim alleged that the defendants committed two or more acts of interstate extortion by using "force, violence or fear" to induce the clinics to give up their right to operate.
The defendants argued that RICO should not apply to an essentially political struggle, but should be limited to crimes with a profit-generating motive.
The court held, however, that there is no RICO requirement of economic motive.
As a matter of simple statutory interpretation, the opinion was overly broad.
The court had previously held (in 1961 and 1965) that the Sherman Antitrust Act does not apply to efforts to change law, even if done by conspiracy and with an anticompetitive motive.
A similar approach should have been used to limit RICO in this case.
But the most serious failure in the opinion was the justices' inability to appreciate the positive role that illegal, but essentially peaceful, protest has played in American history.
Implicit in the lead opinion, but made quite explicit in the concurrence by Justices David Souter and Anthony Kennedy, is the view that social protest can be divided into two types: that protected by the First Amendment, which cannot be made illegal at all, and that not protected by the First Amendment, which can be punished quite severely.
A moment's reflection shows that in fact social protest has never limited itself to legal forms.
In the early 20th century, labor unions occupied factories and refused to move.
At around the same time, women's-rights advocates chained themselves to fences at the White House.
Later, civil-rights and student protesters routinely invaded business and school premises in massive sit-ins.
And today a wide variety of protesters routinely climb fences and break down doors to try to stop power plants, incinerators and so forth.
None of these activities have ever been protected by the First Amendment.
Obviously no society could tolerate unrestricted forceful entry and trespass.
But just as obviously these illegal, but essentially peaceful, forms of protest have served a very important role in U.S. history by dramatizing opposition to the status quo.
Illegal protest has also channeled alienated communities away from violence and into the stylized actions of civil disobedience and the sit-in.
These forms of illegal protests have been managed by an unstated but clear social convention that the crimes committed are not that serious.
In practice, the protesters are forcibly removed, spend some time in jail and the charges are (in most cases) later dropped.
If the protests continue, actual jail sentences are served, but these sentences usually amount to only a few days.
Prosecutors and state judges understand that their role is to minimize and control the disruptions, not to end the protests and not to destroy the protesting organization.
The court's Scheidler decision puts an end to this accommodation.
Under the court's opinion, two acts of forceful entry intended to interfere with the rights of business can be considered extortion for purposes of the RICO act, even if the context is obviously one of political struggle rather than economically motivated criminal activity.
Thus, if abortion demonstrators twice push their way into a clinic's waiting room, occupy it, block the hallways and refuse to move, the demonstrators are all subject to RICO.
They may be jailed for up to 20 years.
They can be made to pay treble damages and/or punitive damages.
The organization that sponsored them and anyone who encouraged them are subject to the same severe penalties.
It is clear that under these circumstances, only the hardiest souls will engage in sit-ins.
Organizations like Greenpeace that routinely engage in such activity are no doubt seriously reconsidering their tactics.
It is true that even under the Scheidler opinion the protester will eventually be able to argue to a civil or criminal jury that the protest activity did not amount to extortion because there was insufficient force or because others present at the protest were not reasonably put in fear by the protest.
Sometimes they will win such arguments.
But the protection of the jury, though important, does not lessen Scheidler's threat to the sit-in.
If the realistic potential punishment for a sit-in is a day or two in jail, many people will engage in the practice.
If the stakes are instead a jury trial, a substantial fine, 20 years in jail and civil damages, few people will sit in.
It is also true that concurring Justices Souter and Kennedy are aware that the Scheidler decision threatens social protest.
Justice Souter invoked a 1982 case, NAACP v.
Claiborne Hardware Co., to remind lower court judges to be sensitive to free-speech values in trying RICO cases.
Claiborne held that the NAACP could not be liable for organizing a civil-rights boycott of local businesses even though boycotts by economic competitors are actionable.
Unfortunately, as Justice Souter notes, cases like Claiborne protect social protest only to the extent that the actions taken "turn out to be fully protected First Amendment activity."
The sit-in is not protected by the First Amendment, nor should it be.
People cannot be allowed freely to invade the property of others.
That does not mean, however, that we should try to stamp out sit-ins completely.
The sit-in should be discouraged by the law of trespass; it should not be subject to felony and treble-damage treatment, as RICO would allow.
No doubt there are many who applaud the court's decision in Scheidler.
Some do so because they support abortion rights and consider antiabortion protesters to be terrorists.
Some do so because they support property rights and see no reason why the law should ever be violated.
These views are short-sighted.
RICO was never needed to combat truly violent protest.
Murder, assault and arson already carry severe state and federal penalties.
RICO lawsuits will not be aimed at them.
Rather, they will be aimed at illegal but essentially peaceful protest.
First abortion clinics will use RICO to defend themselves against protest.
Eventually, powerful economic interests may do so.
Protest will not end, but it will become less open and more secretive, less peaceful and more violent, less hopeful and more bitter.
Mr. Ledewitz is a professor of law at Duquesne University in Pittsburgh.
