The Securities and Exchange Commission, the New York Stock Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange launched investigations into heavy share and options trading ahead of Monday's announcement of Martin Marietta Corp.'s $1.9 billion tender offer for Grumman Corp.
SEC officials declined to comment about any specifics related to the inquiry.
When asked about the Grumman trading, William McLucas, director of SEC enforcement, said that, in general, "where there are price and volume movements that are of the magnitude that we've seen in recent deals, those are situations that we would take a pretty hard look at."
Concern among regulators that insider information may have been acted upon ahead of Martin Marietta's $55-a-share deal centers on both an 8.5% jump in Grumman's shares in heavy volume Friday on the Big Board and a huge spike in options volume at the CBOE late last week, government and exchange officials said.
Options give investors the right, but not the obligation, to purchase or sell shares at a later date.
Both Martin Marietta and Grumman said they were cooperating fully with the investigations by the SEC and the exchanges.
They noted again, as they did Monday, that the merger talks were accelerated when they saw the Grumman stock price spike on Friday and worried there had been a leak.
Officials at the CBOE were focusing on reports that large numbers of call-option contracts -- or bets that the underlying stock price would rise -- were purchased Wednesday, Thursday and Friday through brokers Charles Schwab Corp. and Prudential Securities Inc., a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
The option contracts -- giving the buyer the right to buy Grumman shares at the price of $45 a share by April 15 -- were priced as low as 25 cents per share when they were bought late last week.
One contract covers 100 shares.
After the $55-a-share takeover news was disclosed and sent Grumman's shares soaring 36% to $54.125 a share, the price of the call-option contract skyrocketed to over $9 a share -- yielding big profits to those who bought cheaply last week.
Hugo Quackenbush, a spokesman for Schwab in San Francisco, said that Schwab floor traders at the CBOE were involved in trading Grumman options late last week.
"We did have a fair amount of activity in Gruman during the period.
I can't comment on specifics," he said.
"If something improper occurred, it will be fully investigated," he added, stressing that Schwab does not trade for its own account but simply executes orders for individual investors.
He said the company maintains strict confidentiality about identification of clients.
"Our clients are investing on their own.
We don't take any positions at Schwab, and we don't make any option recommendations," Mr. Quackenbush said.
Sally Cates, a spokeswoman for Prudential Securities in New York, said the trades executed by the firm weren't "huge trades and were primarily trades for our customer accounts."
She said there were no proprietary trades executed by the firm.
Stephen Taylor, a CBOE market maker in Grumman options who filed a complaint yesterday with the exchange about "unusual activity" in the call contracts, said that "investigators may want to look at the single largest and most profitable purchase" of April call contracts "during the whole episode," last week.
On Wednesday, he said, "A customer of Schwab placed an order through the broker to buy 250 contracts of the April $45 calls for 25 cents a share.
He was able to buy 250 contracts that day, and made around $900 profit per contract.
In all, he made $225,000 profit on those 250 contracts."
The following day, Mr. Taylor said, Schwab brokers came back in with orders to buy April call-option contracts at the then-prevailing higher prices of around 44 cents a share.
He said he could not be sure whether the orders were for the same customer, but he said he suspected that was the case.
"I believe same customer came back through Schwab -- if it were the same customer, he may have made up to $400,000 in profit by the time," the deal was announced.
Mr. Taylor said that Goldman, Sachs & Co. traders were also active buyers of the Grumman call-option contracts, but in much smaller quantities.
He said the firm bought at least 30 contracts last week, but he emphasized that he didn't think the securities firm bought the contracts for its own account.
Goldman Sachs is the investment-banking firm representing Grumman in the tender offer.
A Goldman spokesman said the investment bank would have no comment.
Officials of Bear Stearns Cos.'
Bear, Stearns & Co. unit, the financial adviser to Martin Marietta and dealer manager for the tender offer, said they were unaware of any inquiry into the Grumman trading.
The chairmen of the two companies -- Martin Marietta's Norman Augustine and Grumman's Renso Caporali -- had flirted for months with the notion of combining the two companies.
But movement toward a deal picked up speed at a dinner in early February at the Garden City Hotel on Long Island, New York, where the two executives met with several other advisers, including David Baum, a senior manager with Goldman Sachs.
Two weeks later, Martin Marietta produced its $55-a-share offer.
By last Friday, 90% of the details were wrapped up, according to Mr. Augustine, and the deal was scheduled to be announced around the middle of this week.
But the executives became concerned when Grumman's shares spiked $3.125 a share Friday, people close to the companies said.
The executives feared that word of the talks was leaking, but the basis for the rise might have been a positive report on Grumman issued on Thursday by a Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst, the people said.
However, the Merrill Lynch analyst, Byron Callan, said that he doesn't think his report -- which also made positive comments about four other defense companies (whose stocks didn't subsequently rise) -- had much to do with the sharp price and volume increases last week in Grumman stock.
The takeover deal was approved by both boards of directors Sunday evening.
Shortly after the Big Board was informed Monday morning, the companies started notifying members of Congress and "the customer" -- in this case, the Pentagon, according to a Martin Marietta spokesman.
The merger news "came as a total surprise" to Rep. George Hochbrueckner, a Democratic member of the House Armed Services Committee whose New York district includes Grumman's Long Island headquarters.
Mr. Hochbrueckner said he first learned of the merger from the radio Monday morning but later received a telephone call from Grumman's Mr. Caporali.
"He apologized for not giving me a heads-up," Mr. Hochbrueckner said.
In the wake of the activity in Grumman stock, he added, "I'm glad he didn't tell me."
