Lotus Development Corp. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co. are negotiating a joint venture to bring communications services based on Lotus software to a mass market, industry insiders said.
The proposed venture could make online computer services such as electronic newsletter publishing or real-estate listings easier to run and more widely available to both companies and consumers, analysts said.
It would be based on Lotus's Notes software, running on computers in the AT&T communications network.
Most people using Notes today are instead linked to office-computer networks.
An analyst's report of the discussions yesterday sent Lotus stock soaring nearly 11% on more than eight million shares traded, closing at $66.50, up $6.50, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
"This could be a tremendously significant event for people who want to get or share information or transact business electronically," says David Marshak of Seybold Group, a market-research firm in Boston.
"You can do all these things today without Notes," he adds.
But making Notes widely available to companies and consumers on the AT&T network "takes away the need to do the plumbing yourself."
Terence M. Quinn, an analyst at Furman Selz who disclosed what he said were proposed terms, said that "financial implications of this venture to Lotus are substantial."
New revenue would flow in from the use of Notes software in the network and from the sale of inexpensive desktop Notes packages designed to link with the new services, he said.
He raised his 1995 profit estimate for Lotus by 10% to $3.05 a share.
A spokeswoman for Lotus, based in Cambridge, Mass., wouldn't comment on Mr. Quinn's assertions, but cautioned that extrapolating the financial impact of any such pact would be "extremely risky."
In New York, an AT&T spokesman also declined to comment.
And the industry insiders, including people close to both sides of the discussion, emphasized that no agreement has yet been signed.
The new services, which would be offered over phone lines, hand-held wireless devices or the vast Internet network, would be built around Notes software.
Notes is a shared communications and database program that lets users send and receive messages, carry on discussions across a computer network or get access to frequently changing information such as custom-tailored newswires or classified advertising, complete with color pictures or even short video clips.
The AT&T-Lotus venture, if it materializes, would likely be used by businesses initially.
A company could use the service to keep a far-flung sales force up-to-date with information from its headquarters, for example, while another company could offer an on-line catalog it would make available to outsiders who dialed in with home computers.
The talks were first reported in the Feb. 14 issue of InfoWorld, a trade weekly, which said an agreement could be announced by the two companies within as little as a month.
What apparently sparked the runup in Lotus shares yesterday was Mr. Quinn's report on the financial implications of a possible venture, including the notion that it could be structured so that Lotus gets a per-transaction or traffic-based royalty.
In this formula, Lotus might get a fraction of the revenue from traffic generated by a mail-order firm using the AT&T-Notes service to provide electronic catalogs to customers, and conduct business with them on-line.
Other analysts viewed the possible transaction as extremely positive for Lotus.
Rick Sherlund of Goldman, Sachs & Co. said that it is "premature to assess the earnings implications of a deal that hasn't been reached and terms that haven't been made public."
He also said that if Lotus is "paid by the drink instead of upfront, that would provide a nice revenue stream, but it also implies that the revenues from such an agreement would ramp up slowly in the first year or two" as the services got under way.
David Readerman, an analyst with Lehman Brothers, said that Lotus chief executive Jim P. Manzi "has always wanted to build a recurring revenue stream" in addition to traditional software licensing revenue.
"If he can deliver a recurring revenue stream on the information highway, it will completely change the way Wall Street looks at and values Lotus."
Until terms of the transaction are disclosed, he said, "that's the big what-if.
If this turns out to be a software-licensing deal, that's still great for Lotus.
But recurring revenue would be a big win."
