When Charles Osterholm and his stepfather bid $89.90 for the contents of a locker at a Seattle-area self-storage warehouse, they hoped to strike gold.
They knew from operating a thrift shop that lockers under lease for a long time, like this one, could harbor something of real value.
What they bought, however, were the rather drab belongings of a Federal Way, Wash., household, enough furniture, clothing and other possessions to fill a small truck twice.
The men were perplexed.
"We didn't understand why someone had spent that much money for that many years storing that much garbage," Mr. Osterholm says.
The reason soon became clear.
Buried under piles of clothing, they found the wife and two sons of car salesman Mark J. Bender, all killed with a hatchet.
The youngest boy had been wrapped in his bedding, his head still nestled against his Snoopy pillow.
Suddenly, Mr. Osterholm says, "everything made sense."
It was the kind of situation that lately has become an acute embarrassment to the self-storage industry.
Criminals have discovered that self-storage units -- those garage-like structures outside nearly every city in America -- can be terrific places to store bombs, drugs and bodies, and to dump toxic chemicals too difficult to dispose of legally.
The annals of storage abuse include such well-publicized crimes as the World Trade Center bombing (investigators found suspicious chemicals, possibly bomb ingredients, in a locker allegedly rented by a suspect) and the 1992 kidnapping and murder of Exxon Corp. executive Sidney Reso (who died in a storage unit where he had been held captive).
No one knows what else or who else may be stored in America's 918 million square feet of self-storage space.
"If you were Superman and you tried out your X-ray vision on these things, you'd certainly be shocked," says James Neilson, a bomb technician with the Austin, Texas, police.
His squad gets summoned to storage units "four or five times" a year, he says; last July it removed seven bombs and incendiary booby traps from one storage unit.
Companies protest that the vast majority of self-storage customers are law-abiding citizens.
"We rent probably 300,000 units a year," says Michael Rowe, president of Shurgard Storage Centers, which owns the complex where the Bender family was found.
"The problems we've had you could probably describe on one hand -- or less than two."
The appeal of self-storage to crooks, however, should come as no surprise.
Unlike operators of traditional warehouses, who accept legal responsibility for the things they house, self-storage companies long ago joined together to craft model legislation, adopted by most states, that eliminates any legal liability for a customer's possessions.
Even members of the industry concede that some of its common practices may invite criminal misuse.
Self-storage became a hot business in the 1970s as investors discovered that these vast complexes, many with 300 or more storage spaces, could be built on cheap land and run at pretax profit margins approaching 70%.
Security is minimal.
According to an industry survey, only 22% of the nation's self-storage facilities have any kind of camera or video surveillance.
To keep costs down, critics say, companies pay their managers poorly, giving them little incentive to monitor incoming materials.
Says Bob Winet, a Santa Monica, Calif., storage-unit operator critical of how companies pay their on-site managers: "Our industry has gotten away with murder."
As the industry grew, some markets became saturated, as in the South and West.
Insiders fear that aggressive marketing tactics, in particular the dollar-a-month promotions of Public Storage Inc. of Glendale, Calif., the largest self-storage company, make rental rates irresistible to criminals.
"When you cheapen what you have to a point where it becomes just totally accessible, you're inviting problems," says Ronald Boorstein, a past president of the Self Storage Association.
Harvey Lenkin, chairman of Public Storage Management Inc., which manages all the company's facilities, disagrees.
"If people want to dump stuff," he says, "they're going to dump stuff whether you charge $1 a month or $50 a month."
He says criminal misuse of Public Storage units is "infinitesimal."
Still, police have found explosives, stolen goods and the body of a murder victim in Public Storage facilities.
Last July, customers of a Public Storage complex in Hollywood complained of an unpleasant odor seeping from an adjacent locker.
Inside police found a cement-filled freezer that contained the body of Charles DeDavies, a 29-year-old man strangled a week earlier in Scottsdale, Ariz.
The killers had needed 15 men, most of them day-laborers from the surrounding neighborhood, to move the heavy freezer from their truck into the locker, according to one suspect.
In some cases, self-storage units have served for years as the base of operations for thriving criminal enterprises.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation in 1992 exposed an extensive fraud run largely from storage units in Long Island, N.Y. Medicaid recipients acquired expensive prescription drugs at no charge, then resold them into a black-market network of buyers and distributors.
These distributors in turn sold the drugs at deep discount to crooked pharmacists, who resold them to consumers at full price -- pocketing the difference.
This was big business: One suspect was arrested with $500,000 and drugs valued at $1 million.
The newest brand of criminal misuse, toxic dumping, may at last have begun to erode the industry's laissez-faire attitude.
Operators have found that even the industry's own laws can't deflect liability from such crimes.
Under federal Superfund legislation, the owner of a property on which pollutants are dumped is just as liable for the costs of any cleanup as the dumper himself.
Such costs can be high.
In one recent case, a Shurgard complex outside San Francisco paid $200,000 -- the equivalent of more than 5,000 months of rent on a standard 5-by-10 chamber -- to clean up a cache of 1,000 chemicals left by a tenant.
The fear of such outlays has driven companies to step up security.
Management Co. of Little Ferry, N.J., had to pay $39,000 to clean up chemicals left by two different tenants, says Kenneth Cooley, president.
Now, in a departure from industry practice, Access reserves the right to inspect units, and insists renters provide a copy of the keys to their padlocks (self-storage renters typically supply their own locks).
The company also installed dual-exposure cameras that simultaneously photograph the renter and a portion of the lease.
Often, however, there is little a company can do to keep criminals from misusing its storage chambers.
Shurgard, for example, inherited the Bender locker when it acquired another company's complex.
The bodies came to light in 1992 when Mr. Bender's second wife, angry at writing a monthly check to store what she believed were his ex-wife's belongings, stopped payment without telling him.
When Seattle detectives caught up with him, Mr. Bender -- by then a used-car salesman at Happy Days Ford in Nampa, Idaho -- was stunned, and soon confessed to the murders.
"I thought the storage unit was paid for," he said.
The family had been there for 12 years.
