After suffering its sharpest decline since World War II, the European auto industry is confronting the same ugly equation that faced Detroit's Big Three not long ago: winning means sharply increasing productivity and cutting jobs.
As the heads of Europe's auto industry gather for the annual Geneva Auto Show, which opened this week, a survey of the winners and losers in the European auto wars shows that those companies that are aggressively following the U.S. model -- cutting costs and trimming work forces -- are the ones that are currently profitable: General Motors Corp.'s European unit, Bayerische Motoren Werke AG and Renault SA.
Meanwhile, companies such as Volkswagen AG and Fiat SpA, which have tried to delay massive job cuts, are drowning in red ink.
Ford Motor Co.'s European operations are somewhere in between, having made significant cutbacks but continuing to lose money.
Thus, there remain questions over whether Europe's sick auto industry can heal itself.
Last year, European car sales plunged by more than two million units, to 11.3 million vehicles, and the outlook for this year is for sales to stay roughly flat.
European government officials and union leaders, who wield considerable clout in corporate boardrooms, are battling the industry's efforts to cut jobs and costs.
The result may be the opposite of what governments and unions intend: Prolonged pain, more lost sales and more lost jobs.
"What's emerging in Europe is a supercompetitive environment for companies that are used to being protected in their home markets," says Garel Rhys, a professor of motor industry economics at the University of Wales.
The structural transformation sweeping the European auto industry could hardly come at a worse time for Europe's governments.
With job creation at the top of the agenda for politicians across the Continent, a strategic slimming-down of the auto industry -- traditionally the single largest industrial employer -- is a political nightmare.
Auto industry leaders acknowledge that as Europe follows the U.S. and moves toward Japanese-style "lean" production systems, most of the jobs lost in this recession won't come back even when the market rebounds.
"It's a real mess.
We need some big mergers and streamlining in the industry, but it doesn't look like the will is there to make it happen," says Karl Ludvigsen, managing director of Ludvigsen Associates, a Britain-based consulting firm to the auto industry.
Fiat, for example, had to fight the Italian government to get approval for 15,000 layoffs over the next several years.
Pressure from German politicians and union leaders led VW to turn to a four-day work week and an effective 10% rise in hourly wages instead of cutting some 30,000 jobs.
BMW's deal to acquire Rover Cars of the U.K. marked a step toward a consolidation in the European industry.
But the collapse of the much bigger marriage planned between Renault and Volvo suggests that complex nationalistic issues could hamper further consolidation.
The irony for European governments is that their efforts to protect jobs at their "national" companies have given the edge to foreign-owned companies and independent-minded manufacturers such as BMW.
"As soon as we saw in the fall of 1992 that demand wasn't going to rebound . . . we aggressively encouraged employees to go into early retirement and took steps to reduce our employment by 7% -- roughly 7,000 people -- in 1993," says Louis R. Hughes, president of GM Europe.
Consequently, GM's European car and truck operations earned $605 million last year -- making it the most profitable car company in Europe for the fourth year in a row.
If not for an $800 million extraordinary charge to cover work-force reduction programs and currency swings, results would have been even better, Mr. Hughes says.
But Mr. Hughes says GM Europe isn't finished cutting.
With no significant sales rebound in sight, he says, "we are definitely going to reduce our employment further this year to maintain our competitiveness."
Ford of Europe hasn't been as successful, finishing 1993 with about $370 million in losses.
But the strategy is similar.
Ford slashed 10,000 jobs last year, bringing total employment to 83,000, and that was a major factor in helping the company to drastically narrow its losses, says Jacques Nasser, Ford of Europe chairman.
Even Jacques Calvet, chairman of PSA Peugeot Citroen SA who is one of the industry's most vocal advocates of strict trade barriers against Japanese and Korean imports, is well versed in the idea of continuous labor reduction.
He says Peugeot has cut 5% to 7% of its staff in each of the past few years, and expects to take another 5% cut this year, trimming 8,000 jobs from a work force of 144,000.
Still, Mr. Calvet complains, "even though we are a private company and I am fully independent to do what I want, do you know how difficult it is to tell the French government I want to reduce the work force?"
The government of Edouard Balladur has tried to provide its own domestic answer to the problem, introducing a series of measures to give the French auto industry -- and hence French employment -- a shot in the arm.
These include such steps as offering a $860 check from the government to anyone who turns in a car at least 10 years old to buy a new car.
Analysts, however, worry that such measures are bad medicine.
Instead, industry officials and analysts say, Europe's auto makers must come out from behind their protective barriers and prepare to compete on the global stage -- just as U.S. auto makers were forced to do in the 1980s by Japanese rivals.
"It will clearly be a challenge to the Europeans for the rest of the decade," says John Lawson, research director at DRI/McGraw-Hill in London, "because the European industry is not yet very globally oriented."
But global reach alone isn't enough.
VW sells cars in all the major markets of the world, including key growth markets such as China, Eastern Europe and Latin America.
Still, VW racked up losses estimated at 2.3 billion marks ($1.34 billion) for 1993, largely because it is saddled with high-cost German operations.
Even when the European car market starts recovering, the pressure to cut back won't necessarily stop, because it will be the companies that make the biggest productivity advances that will be in the best position to seize market share.
"Clearly, car makers in the future will have to be able to find a way to make profits offering better cars cheaper," says Peter Schmidt of Automotive Industry Data Ltd., a British consulting group.
"If you don't move now, you die."
