Directors of Grumman Corp., after reviewing competing takeover bids, authorized the defense-electronics company's management to enter into limited discussions with Northrop Corp., which made a hostile offer earlier this month.
While the Grumman board seemed to be warming a bit to Northrop's advances, the newly authorized talks seek only to clarify the Northrop offer, stopping short of merger negotiations.
However, more substantive Grumman views of the competing buyout offers are likely to come today.
Under securities regulations, Bethpage, N.Y.-based Grumman owes Northrop a formal response to its offer by the end of the day.
Northrop, meanwhile, indicated that it might be prepared to increase its bid for Grumman if competing suitor Martin Marietta Corp. should raise its offer.
Northrop, based in Los Angeles, made its surprise move to buy Grumman for $60 a share, or $2.04 billion, only days after Grumman agreed to be purchased by Martin Marietta for $55 a share, or $1.93 billion.
Some investment bankers and others familiar with the situation cautioned against reading too much into Grumman's willingness to explore Northrop's offer, since directors have a duty to do so, given the offer's $5 premium over Martin Marietta's bid.
These people added that what's more important is Grumman's impending decision to reject or accept each offer; remain neutral on both offers; or lay out bidding rules for any buyer.
"It looks like Grumman is doing the exact right thing to maximize shareholder value," said one trader.
"They're basically saying it's open season.
The ball is in Martin Marietta's court because, clearly, $60 a share is better than $55."
Said another trader: "My feeling is Grumman is doing everything to conduct an auction here.
They are doing nothing to impede an auction.
There's no sign of entrenchment here.
Now it's all a matter of what Martin Marietta does."
Officials of Martin Marietta, based in Bethesda, Md., didn't have any immediate comment.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Grumman closed at $63, down 37.5 cents; Northrop closed at $45.375, up $1.25; and Martin Marietta shares closed at $45, down 37.5.
One adviser to trustees of Grumman's employee-investment plan, which owns nearly 33% of Grumman stock, applauded the Grumman board's approach.
"This is a very positive development," said Wilbur Ross, the adviser.
Martin Marietta has insisted that Grumman hold Northrop to a "standstill" agreement it signed during the year that Northrop quietly pursued some sort of combination with Grumman, but Grumman has demurred.
Mr. Ross said that "the issue here should be decided on an economic basis rather than who made what contract when."
The latest moves in the battle for Grumman were detailed in an exchange of letters between the chief financial officers of Northrop and Grumman.
They were filed late yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission, after the market closed.
Grumman directors met yesterday into the evening, hashing over their choices, but a Grumman spokeman had no comment on their discussions.
Shareholders' Interests In his letter to Grumman two days ago, Richard B. Waugh Jr., Northrop's finance chief, said that the company has no knowledge whether Martin Marietta is considering raising its offer price.
But in such an event, he said that Northrop would strenuously object to any amendment of the existing Grumman-Martin Marietta acquisition agreement "that would have the effect of erecting still further barriers" to "free and open competitive bidding opportunity for Northrop."
Under the existing agreement, Grumman has agreed to pay Martin Marietta $50 million if the acquisition isn't completed.
In response, Mr. Waugh's counterpart at Grumman, J.R. Anderson, said Grumman would only take actions that benefit shareholders.
Mr. Anderson also said that pursuant to a clause in the agreement with Martin Marietta, Grumman directors had authorized "entering into discussions with Northrop."
Grumman later issued a statement clarifying the limitations on those talks.
A spokesman for Northrop said managers there are "pleased" with the Grumman decision and "look forward to further discussions."
Some analysts and others had expected Martin Marietta to top Northrop's offer by now.
But others says that Martin Marietta could decide to walk away from a bidding war for Grumman, and choose instead to wait until well after Northrop has swallowed Grumman before deciding whether to try a takeover of the combined companies.
The offer from Martin Marietta expires April 4, while the tender offer from Northrop expires April 8.
The defense industry faces more such efforts at mergers and consolidation because of shrinking budgets.
The resulting cutbacks also have forced the industry to cut 440,000 jobs during the last four years.
Northrop Chairman Kent Kresa said in the company's annual report, released yesterday, that continuing structural problems in the aerospace industry will require the company to cut about 3,000 more jobs this year from its work force of about 30,000 people.
Employment at Northrop, the maker of the B-2 bomber and commercialjetliner components, peaked in early 1988 at about 48,200 jobs.
Grumman, which employed 33,700 people at the end of 1987, employs just under 17,900 workers and had said it expected well over 1,000 jobs to be eliminated this year.
An acquisition would probably lead to the elimination of even more jobs.
