Andreas Papandreou, Greece's septuagenarian prime minister, has a knack for beating the odds.
He twice was imprisoned and exiled before serving two terms as Greece's only Socialist prime minister.
Scandal, record inflation, and a massive budget deficit led to a humiliating defeat in 1989.
Still, Mr. Papandreou beat charges that he accepted bribes.
He survived triple bypass heart surgery and married a woman half his age.
Last fall, he staged a stunning political comeback.
The question now is: Can Mr. Papandreou manage his nation's troubles as handily as he triumphed over his own?
Or, more bluntly, can one of Europe's frailest leaders nurse one of the European Union's weakest countries back to health?
Not only European and American leaders, but investors around the world are watching, and wondering.
If Mr. Papandreou and his Panhellenic Socialist Movement, or Pasok, undo the pro-business, pro-privatization programs of the Conservative government ousted last October, it will thwart urgent economic reforms.
But progress requires selling inefficient state-owned companies -- from shipyards and casinos to the national airline and telephone company -- and ridding them of thousands of workers, many of them Pasok supporters.
"We have a reality where there is very little room for error," acknowledges Theodoros Pangalos, Greece's minister for European affairs, a key Papandreou adviser.
Moreover, Greece's constant bickering with neighboring Macedonia, Albania, and its longtime enemy, Turkey, threatens to widen the turmoil in the Balkan region.
Mr. Papandreou's biggest challenge isn't abroad, however, but at home.
Mr. Papandreou, now 75, is far from vigorous.
He is nothing like the fist-pounding speaker who in the early 1980s threatened to kick out U.S. military bases and to withdraw Greece from NATO.
The man who once gave two-hour extemporaneous speeches sounds now as though he is about to run out of breath any minute.
He made only three speeches during the 25-day campaign last fall, and since he took office, he has joined debates in Parliament only four times.
The last time, after returning from a NATO summit in Brussels, aides held his arms as if to support him when he entered the chamber.
Half the ministers in Mr. Papandreou's government are over 60 years old.
Most served in his previous administrations.
Two have cancer.
But not all his staff is old.
In one of his first official acts, Mr. Papandreou named as his appointments secretary his second wife, Dimitra, 39, a former Olympic airline flight attendant with whom he conducted a public affair before divorcing his wife of 36 years and remarrying in 1989.
The new Mrs. Papandreou has caused a stir in Greece's male-dominated society.
With a staff of 200, she stays clear of policy making, aides insist -- but she oversees her husband's schedule and can veto appointments to see him.
The prime minister and his wife declined to be interviewed.
Mr. Papandreou's supporters say he is healthy.
They point to his schedule at the two-day Brussels summit, where he gave a keynote speech, hosted a working dinner for foreign leaders and met twice with President Clinton.
"I call him at 1 a.m. and he's still awake," says the prime minister's son, George Papandreou, a deputy foreign minister.
And even his adversaries don't count him out.
"He is a very clever, sick man," says Nikolaos Katsaros, opposition leader in Parliament.
Mr. Papandreou's aides insist that Pasok is far more moderate now, chastened by the economic problems that occurred during its reign in the 1980s.
The man who, a decade ago, roamed Greece's countryside in shirtsleeves advocating profit ceilings, sounds downright Reaganite at times.
He told the Greek Parliament after his election: "All the complex and time-consuming administrative procedures that make life difficult for the citizen must be simplified."
The words "competitiveness" and "productivity" pepper his public statements.
"Being a socialist doesn't mean not facing reality," says Mr. Pangalos, the government minister.
Adds culture minister Melina Mercouri, "This is socialism with a new face."
And, indeed, Greece is an intriguing market for foreign investors.
Though the poorest of the 12 EU countries by some measures -- its official average income is about $7,200 a year -- it has a large underground economy estimated at 40% of gross domestic product.
Some 70% of the population own their own home.
"You have a well-educated population and a strong private sector.
The problem is, the man on the street shows more leadership than the men in the ministries," says Prof. Thanos Veremis, a Greek who teaches European affairs at Oxford University.
Many critics say Mr. Papandreou's actions haven't caught up with his freemarket rhetoric.
As a result, the initial economic progress made by the previous government is endangered, they say.
The stock market took off in 1990.
Where there once were three wooden trading rims on the Athens Stock Exchange floor, more than 114 computerized terminals now handle the trading volume.
But government has put "under review" plans to sell off more than $3 billion in state-owned enterprises to reduce the deficit, and to build a state-of-the-art international airport outside Athens with $2.9 billion in private and EU funds.
Already, investors are nervous.
Most worrisome to potential investors is the about-face on the privatization of Hellenic Telecommunications Organization, the national phone company, known as OTE.
Not only is it the biggest state-owned company, but it is a symbol of the overall privatization program.
The previous government planned to sell a 35% stake in the OTE to a strategic investor.
The most likely candidate was a foreign telecommunications company that would have helped to overhaul and manage the system.
Now, Pasok plans to sell 13% and, perhaps eventually, up to 30% of the shares in a public offering.
As for plans to privatize Greece's power plants, "It is not in our policy," National Economy Minister Yiannis Papantoniou says flatly.
Small businesses are waiting to see what Mr. Papandreou decides in the end.
Harry G. David, who owns Pitta Pan, a fast-food souvlaki restaurant, wants to expand his business into a national chain.
But he fears Pasok might increase taxes, or reintroduce price controls.
"Each time a new government comes in, it discredits everything the previous government has done," Mr. David adds.
If there are continuing doubts about Mr. Papandreou's economic agenda, he has largely defused worries about foreign policy.
Pasok did cause a flap back in December when Mr. Pangalos called Germany "a giant with bestial force and a child's brain," and had to apologize.
But diplomats now compliment Mr. Papandreou for his handling so far of the European Union's rotating six-month presidency.
Mr. Papandreou also has moved to repair relations with the U.S.
His meeting with President Clinton in Brussels last month was a success: The president told Mr. Papandreou he had read the papers the prime minister wrote in the 1960s as an economics professor at the University of California at Berkeley.
Says a senior U.S. diplomat here: "We used to have to call the prime minister's office 10, 15 times in the '80s before we got an answer.
Now it's, `What can we do for you?' "
