Ah, the life of an Olympic skier.
Alpine chalets.
Jet-set travel.
Beautiful people.
Apres ski.
It is a merciless pressure that measures a skier's worth in fractions of a second, a mere blink of the eye being the difference between legend and louse; a blinding pressure that forces skiers to block out the dangers of hurtling down icy, twisting slopes at speeds that can hit 80 miles per hour; a challenging pressure that prodded Austrian Ulrike Maier, mother of a four-year-old daughter, to take one last run at the elusive Olympic gold before retiring.
She didn't make it, dying in a horrendous crash on a downhill course in Germany two weeks ago.
This a story about that pressure, and how it has propelled and haunted the careers of two Olympic skiers.
One, Austria's Petra Kronberger, who walked away from the sport at the age of 23 after a fabulously successful career; the other, Germany's Katja Seizinger, who at 21 is pushing to reach the top.
Ms. Kronberger was the radiant star of the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, capturing gold medals in the slalom and the Alpine combined.
Her exuberantly smiling face, for a rare moment relieved of the pressure, leapt from the cover of Time magazine.
"When I won the slalom, it was like a big stone fell from my shoulders," she remembers.
"I couldn't imagine a more wonderful day in my skiing career."
With the next Winter Olympics only two years away, everyone in the ski world assumed Ms. Kronberger would triumphantly arrive in Lillehammer determined to defend her medals and add to her legend.
Instead, in early 1993, she pulled a Michael Jordan, leaving her sport while at the pinnacle of success.
Once the stone was off her shoulders, she couldn't bring herself to lift it back up again.
She tried, competing in the opening races of the 1993 World Cup season -- and finished in the middle of the pack.
"The strangest thing was that I thought I could ski without pressure," she says, reflecting on the final days of her career.
"But I couldn't.
Then came the fear of serious injury, a fear that I always had but was able to repress because I pushed toward my goals of winning.
I reached those goals and I found I couldn't repress the fear any longer."
Suddenly, she was like any other person staring at the downhill slope from the starting gate, quaking at the dangers lurking below.
Thus, instead of going for gold in Lillehammer, Ms. Kronberger is diligently studying such things as math and biology in a Salzburg high school, and, the pressure-packed blinders removed, clearly dissecting the "ski circus" that left little room for anything but skiing.
"You know," she says wistfully, "I always wanted to be an au pair girl."
But always, there were races to be won.
"When you are in a high-performance sport, you live in a land of extremes.
It is an imaginary world, not the world where most people live.
The line between success and failure is so thin.
When you are on top, you're the ski queen.
If you are 0.02 of a second slower, you're a failure," Ms. Kronberger says.
"The goal is to stand on the top of the medals platform.
The others are forgotten."
For athletes who train from dawn to dusk 11 months of the year since they became teenagers, failure and ignominy are terrifying prospects.
"You feel the pressure from all sides," explains Ms. Kronberger -- from a ski-crazy public, from the corporate sponsors, from the press and, above all, from yourself.
A skier's precious leisure moments, she notes, are clouded with thoughts of the next race.
Even in sleep come visions of snaking through the slalom gates.
"You have this ambition to succeed," she says.
And one success just increases the pressure for more.
"I never had an `off' season when I didn't win and nobody cared about me.
On one hand I say, `Thank God.'
But on the other hand, I could have profited from that," she says.
"It would have given me time to think, time to appreciate my success."
Now, Petra Kronberger, an Olympic spectator, finally has the time.
The pressure is off.
But it still haunts her.
Ten days ago, in an Alpine valley, she laid her former teammate Ulrike Maier to rest.
Ms. Seizinger, a downhill specialist, had little time to mourn.
There were the final World Cup races as tuneups for the Olympics.
She couldn't let up, for she arrives in Lillehammer bearing a mountain of expectations from a sports-mad nation craving global acclaim.
At Albertville, she was unified Germany's main hope for Alpine glory.
Every run, practice or real, seemed to merit a bulletin in the German media.
When she managed just the bronze in the Super G and finished a heartbreaking fourth in the downhill, she was buried beneath an avalanche of cross-examination by her countrymen -- all 80 million of them, it seemed.
"It's not easy when you have a disappointment.
The camera is right there and they want an analysis and every detail and sometimes they just start making accusations," says Ms. Seizinger.
"In Germany, you're overpraised one day and they run you down the next if you're not on top."
Since Albertville, training and competing almost nonstop, her pursuit of victory has been single-minded.
She has won back-to-back World Cup downhill crowns as well as last year's Super G title (and barely missed the overall championship).
And with recent triumphs in this season's World Cup campaign, she is the favorite in the speed races at Lillehammer.
But so much success is heavy baggage for the best skier ever to emerge from the flatlands of central Germany.
Growing up near Heidelberg, far from the Alps, she was driven by her father to a Black Forest hillock about a thousand feet high.
Now, while others ferry his daughter from mountain to mountain, her father sifts the 10 or 20 interview requests that arrive daily for Katja.
In Germany, where a carnivorous press virtually devours sports heroes (tennis stars Boris Becker and Steffi Graf have sought refuge in Monaco and New York, respectively), Ms. Seizinger's World Cup results are even front-page news in the stuffy Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung.
The newspaper's magazine has profiled her at length and even coined an adjective to describe her -- "mittermaierisch" -- after Rosi Mittermaier, the Olympic and World Cup winner of the 1970s and the most successful woman skier Germany has produced.
So far, Ms. Seizinger has been able to deflect some of this attention with a winsome interview technique: "I always say that sports is one of the most beautiful sidelights in life, and that its importance shouldn't be overdone."
But the Olympics specializes in overkill.
As does the demanding German public.
"They expect miracles," Ms. Seizinger says.
She resignedly shrugs her shoulders.
But the pressure doesn't budge.
