Japan's Morihiro Hosokawa may be sublimely popular at home, but his visit to Washington tomorrow has been preceded by a great deal of unfriendly bluster from the White House.
Yes, everybody agrees that it would be a good thing if Japan were more open to imports.
Not the least of the beneficiaries would be Japan's own consumers.
But Mr. Hosokawa is attacking this problem at its roots with his radical reform of Japan's one-party technocracy.
Why do the Clintonites seem so determined to screw things up?
Like an intruder at a family quarrel, the Clinton Administration has jumped into Tokyo's domestic fray and tried to pressure Mr. Hosokawa into endorsing "numerical targets."
These would require Japan to buy fixed amounts of products from favored U.S. industries, whether Japanese consumers want them or not.
Rising up to repel this nonsense is the Ministry of Finance, the same mandarins and technocrats who've been stonewalling Mr. Hosokawa's efforts to cut taxes and deregulate Japan's economy.
Hard to believe, but Washington has created an opening for the bureaucracy to pose as champions of free trade and consumer sovereignty.
That used to be America's job, though now Washington sounds like it wants to resurrect Comecon, the old and hapless quota-based Soviet trading system.
With the political stakes in Tokyo so high, it would be good to have some clarity about the difference between the good guys and the bad guys.
On whose myopic advice have the Clintonites been wading around and muddying up the battle lines?
Walter Mondale, the U.S. ambassador, has been providing sage guidance from Tokyo on the significance of the changes there.
But his voice doesn't carry far enough to drown out Commerce Secretary Ron Brown and Trade Representative Mickey Kantor, who are apparently calling the shots.
They're a couple of career Washington fixers, and it shows.
The "numerical targets" they've been advocating amount to little more than a mechanism for funneling Japanese pork to their future lobbying clients, particularly Silicon Valley and the big U.S. construction companies.
At this point, can these people even distinguish between what they did before as lobbyists and what they're supposed to do now as policy makers?
Mr. Clinton campaigned on the theme that George Bush took too many trips, as if foreign policy were an effete pastime of the overbred.
Left to follow its own instincts, the Clinton machine still treats foreign policy as an appendage of domestic constituency politics.
Policy toward Japan has been following the rails laid down during the campaign, when the idea was to rouse voters in the Midwest with a lot of jabber about "getting tough."
One of the world's premier economic relationships deserves better, and we hope Mr. Clinton will use the summit to set a new course.
Once engaged, his instincts often are good.
He came belatedly to the North American Free Trade Agreement fight, won an important symbolic victory, and now preaches free trade for the Western Hemisphere.
Next month he plans to invite all the emerging democracies of Latin America into the Nafta club.
In his own way, Mr. Hosokawa is part of the global move toward more freedom and democracy.
No doubt that's why his popularity ratings are off the chart.
Of course, Japan is no Chile or Argentina, and even the Clinton Administration's clumsy meddling probably can't knock this bullet train off the track.
But in the battle for Japan's future, Washington ought to be standing squarely with Mr. Hosokawa instead of trying to shake him down for pipsqueak trade concessions.
