Allied-Lyons PLC agreed to acquire control of Spain's Pedro Domecq Group in a transaction valued at as much as #739 million ($1.11 billion), creating the world's second-largest spirits maker, after Grand Metropolitan PLC.
The purchase of closely held Domecq will make Allied the leading producer of brandy and the second-largest Tequila producer, and give the British company top market shares in Spain and Mexico.
The combined company also should be able to take advantage of the North American Free Trade Agreement to build its U.S. business.
Currently the fifth-largest distiller, Allied owns Kahlua, Beefeater gin, Courvoisier cognac and Hiram Walker cordials.
Domecq, No. 8 in the world, produces Presidente brandy and Sauza tequila.
The combined company would have revenue of about 6 billion.
Allied, which already owns 5% of Pedro Domecq and controls an additional 27% through its Hiram Walker Europa joint venture, will buy another 41% of the company for #459 million.
Pedro Domecq Managing Director Ramon Mora-Figueroa and his family, who control the other 27% of the Spanish company, have a six-year option to sell their stake to Allied for an additional #280 million.
David Thompson, an analyst with Kleinwort Benson Securities in London, called the purchase a "good move strategically," and said the price was fair, with a price-to-earnings ratio of 15.1 to 1.
The transaction also renewed speculation that Allied would seek to unload its food operations, which include Tetley tea and various bakery products.
Allied Chairman Michael Jackaman said that the company would continue an "active disposal program" outside its core spirits and retail businesses.
As part of the Spanish purchase, Allied-Lyons will change its name to Allied Domecq, dropping the food business from its corporate name.
Highly leveraged Allied will fund the purchase through a public offering of 137 million shares, expected to raise #651 million.
It has 890 million shares outstanding now.
The company also forecast pretax profits of "not less than" #604 million for the year ended March 5, lower than analysts had expected.
The year-earlier pretax profit was #505 million.
Allied-Lyons, which had a partnership with Domecq for a quarter century, said the acquisition would give it more control over its distribution and boost efficiency, without much job loss.
The company expects restructuring costs of #75 million, but said Domecq would improve earnings per share in its first year.
Allied expects prompt approval of the transaction from the European Union.
