Adding to a recent string of embarrassing quality glitches, Chrysler Corp. will announce today a recall of its 1994 LH and LHS sedans to repair faulty electrical wires, company employees working with the product said.
The recall comes one week after Chrysler announced that it is recalling all of its 15,000 Neon cars built so far.
But it is the fifth Chrysler recall in the last few weeks.
The string of recalls could undermine Chrysler's claim that it is closing the gap between the quality of its products and that of the best Japanese auto makers.
The latest recall is to correct a flaw in a network of electrical wires, called a wiring harness, that could short circuit and affect the automatic transmissions of the Dodge Intrepid, Chrysler Concorde and Chrysler New Yorker and LHS.
Details of the recall hadn't been fully worked out last week, and a company spokesman said Chrysler will announce them today.
It is unclear whether all the 1994 LHs and their stretched cousins, the LHS, and the New Yorker, will be recalled.
Roughly 100,000 of the vehicles have been built so far.
No accidents or injuries have occurred as a result of the problem, which only occurs after extended wear, according to the Chrysler employees.
Chrysler has been experimenting with different approaches to recalls -- including giving customers free transportation or small gifts in some cases -- and Chrysler officials said the company will make sure LH customers aren't inconvenienced.
Some analysts said recalls handled quickly and properly usually don't hurt a company.
"Unless the company stonewalls or unless `60 Minutes' has shots of the car going up in flames, the consumer usually just shrugs his shoulders," said Ronald Glantz, Dean Witter's auto analyst.
However, the recent string of recalls, coupled with the fact that, by some measures, Chrysler products have the worst quality record of all Big Three vehicles, is a major embarrassment, company insiders said.
Chrysler is aiming the Neon at import buyers who haven't considered buying a Big Three vehicle.
Now, with the LH and LHS recall, each one of Chrysler's vaunted recent products has been recalled in the past few weeks, some for the second or third time.
The LH cars had already been recalled twice since their launch in 1992.
