"`Clea my dear,' I said . . .
`I have been actually meditating a book of criticism.'
"'Criticism!' she echoed sharply, as if the word were an insult.
And she smacked me full across the mouth -- a stinging blow which brought tears to my eyes and cut the inside of my lip against my teeth."
The lot of the critic has always been tough.
It takes years of discipline and training to build the right kind of calluses.
You have to know how to sit real still for a long time, and how to duck the occasional roundhouse.
And after all the bruises, every once in a while, a work comes along that adds insult to injury, a work like "The Critic" (ABC, Wednesdays, 8:30-9 p.m. EST).
An animated series from James L. Brooks and the producers of "The Simpsons," Al Jean and Mike Reiss, "The Critic" is the story of Jay Sherman (voiced by "Saturday Night Live's" Master Thespian Jon Lovitz).
Balder than Siskel, paunchier than Ebert, Jay is 36, divorced and lonely.
His hair comes out of a spray can, and as even his sister notes, "His butt sticks out like an air conditioner."
Who is this schlemiel?
Why, the star of his own syndicated movie-review show, "Coming Attractions."
When he's not blasting films like "Home Alone 5" on his rating scale, the "Shermometer," or lunching with various stars at "L'Ane Riche," Jay is looking for love.
He thinks he finds it when a beautiful young starlet comes on his program and announces that although she was a model, a beauty queen and used to date Donald Trump, she finds dumpy little smart men sexiest, especially Jay.
Of course, it may not hurt that he's about to review her new film.
When his 11-year-old son, Marty, bursts in on the two of them, Jay sits the boy down for a man-to-man chat.
"Now son, you may just have noticed a beautiful woman in my bed," he says.
"I won't tell anyone," Marty promises.
"Actually," says Jay, "I wish you'd tell everyone, particularly your mother, and her personal trainer, Alberto."
This week's show offers more male bonding, as Jay visits his son's private school for career day.
Although the foreign students don't know what to make of him ("he bears a strange resemblance to . . . our god of flatulence"), Jay soon convinces them that being a critic is a great job: "I get to eat popcorn all day and watch movies. . . .
Plus I get to think of new ways to criticize things.
Like, you might say that your teacher is wearing an ugly red dress.
I say, she's a walking blood clot."
"The Critic" is a clever show, at its cleverest in the details, the marginalia, like the snippets of films that Jay reviews each week.
There's Spike Lee's Latest, "F" (the story of Malcolm . . .
Forbes), and Arnold Schwarzenegger in "Rabbi, P.I." -- a Chicago policeman who goes undercover as a Hasidic Jew.
"Eat lead, rabbi," says a crook.
"Sorry, that's not kosher," says Arnold, pulling out his shotgun to blow the bad guy away.
"Hava Nagila, baby."
This series is packed with all sorts of sly tidbits that spoof the media.
There's "The Michael Jackson News Network -- with bureaus in Bangkok, London and Disneyland," and a video game called "Escape From New York," where the prime nemesis is an electronic Al Sharpton, who talks players to death: "blah blah blah."
Tonally, "The Critic" is sharp, cutting.
Like its hero, it's always ready to fling a juicy insult in any direction, from Woody Allen to JFK, from Richard Nixon to Sally Struthers: "Attention students from underdeveloped countries, Sally Struthers is here to see you, and she's brought 500 sandwiches.
Whatever she can't eat is yours."
If "The Critic" sneers equally at just about everyone, it sneers most at our hero, Jay.
His boss humiliates him, his ex-wife hates him, his adoptive parents barely remember he's alive, and his public -- his public can't stand his snooty pretensions.
"I have no fans," he admits.
"Most of my viewers are drunken frat boys."
Strip all the movie trappings away, and what you've got is a half-hour program about a loser, a Homer Simpson show without a Bart.
In fact, there's not a single likable character in "The Critic," which for all the acerbic wit makes this series a little off-putting, a little triste.
Beating up on Jay with a string of meanspirited fat and lonely jokes, the show seems like a half-hour of picking on the dumpy kid at the playground.
If only Jay were lovable enough to make you want to spring to his defense, or tough enough to fight back himself.
For me, "The Critic" is captured in the moment when the starlet storms out on Jay.
"You're short, you're fat, and even for a film critic, you're ugly," she snarls.
"I see you want me to beg," says Jay.
"Well, there's one thing you didn't count on.
I have no pride."
Ultimately, "The Critic" is a show about put-downs -- of films, of media figures and of its own characters -- in short, a real Don Rickles of a show.
There's no question that it has some of the wittiest, wickedest writing on prime-time TV.
And perhaps this animated series will turn into some kind of cult hit.
But it's too adult for kids, too inside-Hollywood for most adults and its tone is not just snide, it's depressing.
Above all, "The Critic" makes one big mistake: It portrays critics as losers, which clearly isn't funny at all.
There is a rumor going around that ABC has another show in the works about a television reviewer, starring Daniel Day-Lewis, or perhaps Sean Connery.
Not much happens, but the hero sure looks good as he struggles manfully for that perfect adjective.
Now there's a program worth watching.
