A major credit-rating agency gave an unfavorable review to a planned $185 million private-placement of Sullivan Communications Inc., to be managed by Morgan Stanley Group Inc.
Standard & Poor's Corp. assigned a single-B-minus rating to $135 million of senior notes due 2004 to be issued by Sullivan Graphics Inc.
S&P also assigned a triple-C rating to $50 million of senior discount debentures due 2006 by the holding company, Sullivan Communications.
Both ratings are below investment-grade.
Moreover, S&P branded the rating outlook for the Brentwood, Tenn., printing concern as "negative."
In a statement, S&P said: "The company will be challenged to fund cash-flow shortfalls over the intermediate term if business conditions do not improve."
Sullivan couldn't be reached for comment.
The bleak assessment comes as Morgan prepares to price the company's junkbond deal in the next few days.
As previously reported, analysts have said Sullivan has virtually no cash flow to pay the debt's interest and that losses from its coupon-booklet business appear to be mounting.
One of Sullivan's major business lines -- printing the coupon booklets that are tucked into newspapers each week around the country -- is especially weak and shows no signs of improving, analysts say.
Morgan declined to comment on the offering or the S&P ratings.
But people familiar with the matter say the big investment bank plans to push forward with the deal despite the controversy surrounding it.
In a news release, S&P said the ratings "reflect the company's aggressive expansion plans in the face of negative cash flow and a protracted price war in the free-standing insert newspaper coupon business.
"The company also has accumulated a large debt burden and has exhibited marginal cash-flow coverage of interest," S&P said.
Sullivan's total indebtedness is about $300 million, while its shareholder equity is just $2.8 million.
The credit-rating concern noted that Sullivan's operating performance has deteriorated since 1989, stemming from weak commercial-printing industry conditions, reduced market share, and price-cutting.
"Additionally, the firm has incurred large losses in its attempt to gain market share in the free-standing insert business due to low market share and aggressively low pricing," S&P said.
"The company's ability to become profitable in this sector is highly uncertain as its competitors are larger and have flexibility to support a price war for the foreseeable future."
Sullivan is currently embroiled in litigation with its two major competitors, Valassis Communications Inc. and News Corp.'s News America FSI unit.
