Burbank, Calif. -- Greg Kinnear doesn't take over Bob Costas's chair on NBC's "Later" until Valentine's Day (to be technical, 1:35 a.m. EST, Feb. 15), but one thing is certain: His first guest on the half-hour show will not be a crossdresser, a sideshow performer or Toby the Neuter.
You see, Mr. Kinnear (pronounced kin-NEAR) sees enough of them on his day job, and he's not giving that one up anytime soon.
As the talking head and host of the E! Entertainment channel's "Talk Soup," the handsome 30-year-old provides the spice that seasons the daily digest of the most outrageous clips from the daytime-talkshow subculture.
(Twenty-six million cable households now receive E!, which runs "Talk Soup" several times each day.)
"When I started on the show, I didn't know what a hermaphrodite was, or a crossdresser, and this transsexual business I wasn't aware of.
In the first couple of months I was just stunned and amazed.
I'll come to the office now and our producer will say, `OK, we're going to lead off the show today with a clip of a crossdressing hermaphrodite with one wooden leg who juggles fireballs while singing "Phantom of the Opera,'" and I'll be like, `That's it?
We need something big!'" says Mr. Kinnear, who pairs facial gymnastics that would make "Sunset Boulevard's" Norma Desmond proud with a playful voice that seems bioengineered for radio.
What still shocks Mr. Kinnear?
"Joan Rivers had circus sideshow performers on a couple of weeks ago and featured a gentleman by the name of Mr. Lifto, who had 200 tattoos on his body."
Mr. Lifto hoisted cinder blocks with chains looped through his nipples.
When I mention my own "favorite," a guest who claimed to be born with no sexual organs, and said he was shunned by a truly sexist society, Mr. Kinnear knows just who I mean.
"Ah, Toby the Neuter.
Yes, yes, yes.
Oh, yes.
Toby the Neuter has done countless shows.
I've probably seen him on a dozen appearances over the last couple of years."
Toby isn't the only professional guest, Mr. Kinnear says.
"And I'll say that a couple actually redefine what their problem is from show to show.
They have this problem, but since the producer has already heard of that, the problem has since evolved into something with a slightly different twist."
"Talk Soup," too, has changed since its debut in December 1991.
At first, Mr. Kinnear was just a slightly subversive anchor, contributing a funny face or a wryly inflected comment to bridge the space between talk-show snippets.
For the past several months, though, he has been involving the crew on camera in sketches, playing with the clips through special effects, and generally putting more emphasis on the connective material.
"In the last six months, that side of the show definitely has evolved more than anything.
I just like doing it.
It just makes what I think could otherwise be a somewhat boring show a little more spontaneous.
I think it's a hell of a lot more interesting to come up with a few more bells and whistles than to just sit up there and do it straight."
Most of the daytime hosts enjoy, or at least tolerate, the ribbing.
Jerry Springer and Mo Gaffney have even pinch-hit for Mr. Kinnear.
But "`Oprah' and `Donahue' we've never really had," Mr. Kinnear says.
(The shows must grant permission for their clips to be used.)
"Talk Soup" ran "Geraldo" nuggets for about a year and a half, and "just out of nowhere this summer, about the time he had the fatty tissue from his buttocks put into his forehead to relieve wrinkles, Geraldo Rivera decided to stop sharing his stuff with the award-winning `Talk Soup.'"
(The Homeric epithet "award-winning `Talk Soup'" is declaimed frequently on the program, but just what award was won is a mystery.)
"I go out to one of my rare dinners last night, at a restaurant, and the waiter is reciting the 20 or 30 goat-cheese pizzas, and I'm right here, right here at this table, and -- BOOM -- plops down Geraldo at the next one.
We never make eye contact -- and I really don't know what I'm going to say or do if I do make eye contact.
You see, I had tried to find out what the problem was, if it was something I had done" that made him pull his show from "Talk Soup."
"Last night, before I had the chance to take any sort of position or devise a strategy, the hostess came back to the booth and moved him to another table.
I'm still wondering whether he moved because I was sitting there or if he just wanted a better table.
But I honestly don't know what the problem was, or why, because I think he has a good show.
It was a real shame to lose him."
This last comment is made in a tone of utmost sincerity.
It is here and in his professions of admiration for the other daytime hosts that Mr. Kinnear shows he is truly the son of a U.S. diplomat.
(His family was in Beirut when war broke out in 1975; he spent his high-school years in Athens.)
As for his comedic forebears, Mr. Kinnear has been called a Letterman baby, but he frowns at the linkage.
"It's always hard to know who influences you and what events or people are responsible for the characteristics that are in you from a comedy or performance standpoint, but I've always liked Johnny Carson; I like Robin Williams and Steve Martin.
There's a whole slew of performers I can relate to.
When it comes to who is responsible for the monster that is Greg Kinnear, I don't know who to blame."
The "monster" has his fans, and if the computer bulletin boards devoted to him on the Prodigy and America Online computer networks are any guide, most of these admirers are female and the attraction is not entirely intellectual.
A representative paean to the unmarried Mr. Kinnear's wit and naughty-choirboy good looks is headlined "GREG IS A GOD!!!!"
"Gorgeous hunk of a man" is the more earthbound characterization of another admirer.
These devoted followers are oiling their VCRs and readying valentines for Mr. Kinnear's debut on "Later."
And what will they, along with garden-variety insomniacs and shift workers, find in the wee hours of Feb. 15?
"I know I'll be hosting, as opposed to Bob Costas.
I've thought about that for weeks.
That's pretty much what I've been doing since Thanksgiving, when I got the job," Mr. Kinnear says during our interview, held early this month.
"We are also going to have a live studio audience, which instantly changes the tone of the show."
While the new "Later" will still devote its entire half-hour to a single guest, the program, unlike the Costas version, will be taped only a few hours before it airs.
Any dream guests?
"I would like to get Johnny Carson for the premiere show, but I hear he's tougher to get than the pope.
So I'm talking to the pope.
And I hear he's tougher to get than -- Gary Coleman.
You know, I think there's a lot of people I'd like to talk to.
Steve Martin; I've heard that Barry Goldwater is a great guest; the guy, Mike Levey, who does `Amazing Discoveries'; maybe Ron Popeil, who has come up with the spray-paint hair for men.
I don't know.
The list of guests is something I haven't at this stage given a great deal of time to."
At what stage is he?
"The panic stage."
Ms. Phillips is a Journal assistant editorial features editor.
