Poland's two-party coalition has been plunged into crisis with the resignation of Finance Minister Marek Borowski in a power struggle with Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak.
Mr. Borowski, who is a member of the Democratic Left Alliance, the party of the former Communists, offered his resignation Friday, saying the prime minister was not letting him control economic issues as spelled out in the two parties' coalition agreement of October.
The fight began on Jan. 29, when Mr. Pawlak dismissed Deputy Finance Minister Stefan Kawalec over Mr. Borowski's objections.
Mr. Pawlak, who heads the Peasant Party, the junior partner in the three-month-old, left-wing coalition, so far hasn't accepted Mr. Borowski's resignation.
If Mr. Pawlak backs down and does not accept Mr. Borowski's resignation, the move will likely be interpreted as a sign that the Peasant Party has been put in its place as the junior coalition partner.
Mr. Pawlak's moves are a sign that the Peasant Party is attempting to step out from under Democratic Left Alliance domination and show its supporters that it won't allow the Democratic Left Alliance to control all key economic decisions.
While Mr. Borowski's actual resignation would indicate open conflict between the two parties, if he stays, it will probably mean the Democratic Left Alliance has prevailed.
Mr. Borowski's move could hardly have come at a worse time for Poland.
As government economic chief, Mr. Borowski has spent the past month pushing an austere and unpopular 1994 national budget through parliamentary committees.
The budget, which meets the approval of key international assistance organizations such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, is set to reach the floor of parliament later this month.
Without Mr. Borowski at the helm, the budget's fate is highly uncertain.
Members of parliament who have seen their party leadership backtrack on election promises of greater spending may seize the opportunity to increase the state deficit from the 4.1% of gross domestic product envisaged by Mr. Borowski.
Should deficit rise, or if the budget gets bogged down, an IMF delegation now in Poland would likely withhold approval of the country's economic plans.
This would cause the suspension of a year-old standby agreement, set to be renewed in March.
Not only does IMF approval open the way to IMF funds, other aid and government organizations look to IMF opinions to shape their own policies.
On April 1 a second round of debt relief, valued at over $20 billion, from Poland's Western government creditors, the "Paris Club," is planned to take effect.
If the IMF withdraws approval, the Paris Club will probably postpone action.
IMF hesitation would also scuttle recently accelerating talks between Poland and the "London Club" of Western commercial bank creditors on over $12 billion in debt.
Without a London-Club deal, foreign banks and investors will continue their reluctance to fund large operations in Poland, and Poland will remain locked out of international financial markets.
Mr. Borowski's resignation brings to a head a simmering conflict between two parties joined in a marriage of convenience.
In forming this government, the Democratic Left Alliance, which won 173 parliamentary seats in September's election, offered Mr. Pawlak and the 128-seat Peasant Party the position of Premier and several other key posts in return for Democratic Left Alliance control of finance, privatization and other key economic-policy-making positions.
Since accepting the deal, the Peasant Party has proven uncooperative and obstructionist in areas such as the budget, trade policy and privatization, according to sources within the government.
High officials of the Democratic Left Alliance have accused Mr. Pawlak of violating the coalition agreement by dismissing Mr. Kawalec, a nonparty technocrat handling financial-sector reform who has worked in the ministry since Polish reforms began in 1989.
Prime Minster Pawlak's Peasant Party was reportedly upset by Mr. Kawalec's unwillingness to refinance the heavily indebted Bank for Food Economy, or BGZ, an agriculturally-oriented bank which has headquarters in the same building as the Peasant Party.
Mr. Kawalec also controlled the strategic and potentially lucrative positions of directors on Poland's soon-to-be-privatized state banks, and both coalition parties have been aiming to place their own designates on these boards.
Compounding the fight over policy formulation is a battle to install regional leaders in Poland's 49 districts.
As Warsaw's link to local areas, these positions are a key spoil in controlling Poland's still-centralized government administration.
The Democratic Left Alliance is complaining that the Peasant Party is replacing too many of these positions with its own officials, without consulting their senior coalition partner.
Shares on the Warsaw Stock Exchange will probably not take the weekend's political developments well.
Last week the market lost almost 20% of its value after politicians' comments that the exchange's fast-rising price levels had created "a bubble" about to burst.
It was only after last year's austere budget passed through parliament and the current IMF deal was signed that Poland's bourse began its meteoric rise.
