Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan warned Congress that the Fed would boost short-term interest rates "at some point," but he refused to speculate about when it might do so.
"Short-term interest rates are currently abnormally low in real terms," he said.
"At some point, absent an unexpected and prolonged weakening of economic activity, we will need to move them to a more neutral stance."
Appearing before Congress's Joint Economic Committee, an upbeat Mr. Greenspan described a robust U.S. economy, saying the "foundations of economic expansion are looking increasingly well-entrenched."
Progress in reducing the federal budget deficit along with corporate and private debt have helped pave the way for stronger growth, higher employment and more aggressive consumer spending and business investment, he said.
Mr. Greenspan also said inflation is likely to remain tame in 1994, noting that in the fourth quarter one key measure of inflation -- the "core" consumer price index, which excludes volatile food and energy prices -- fell to the lowest level in two decades.
"I have said on many occasions, I thought that we are not that far from price stability," he said.
"We aren't there yet, clearly, but we have made considerable progress in that direction."
He cautioned that, by the time inflation becomes evident, it's too late to moderate it without harsh interest-rate increases.
President Clinton, as well as members of the committee, appealed to the Fed to resist raising rates when the central bank's Open Market Committee meets this week to discuss interest-rate policy.
"We want the economy to grow in a very stable, solid way," President Clinton told reporters yesterday.
"And obviously, low interest rates are critical to that."
At the hearing, Sen. Paul Sarbanes (D., Md.) reminded Mr. Greenspan that much of the current economic kick is coming from interest-sensitive industries, such as home building.
Higher interest rates could diminish such growth, the senator warned.
"I want to stay the course here," he said.
Mr. Greenspan said that raising shortterm rates would provide price stability necessary for further economic growth.
"Such an action would not be taken in order to cut off or limit the economic expansion," he said, "but rather to sustain and enhance it."
Last July, Mr. Greenspan issued similar warnings that the Fed was bracing itself for further signs of inflation to assess whether to increase short-term rates.
The last time the Fed moved interest rates was a reduction in September 1992.
It hasn't acted to increase rates in five years.
Citing a few economic dark spots, the Fed chairman pointed to some weakness in parts of the labor market.
Some industries have improved productivity by doing more with fewer employees.
Industries dependent on military spending are expected to remain anemic, and weakness of some major trading partners -- particularly Japan and Europe -- continues to hurt demand for U.S. exports.
Interpreting economic data will be more difficult in the coming months, Mr. Greenspan said, due to changes in how some statistics are being gathered and extraordinary events such as the Los Angeles earthquake and the recent severe East Coast cold snap.
Nonetheless, he predicted that real growth of gross domestic product, the measure of the country's output of goods and services, will "almost surely slow appreciably" from the rapid, 5.9% annual rate posted in the fourth quarter, but he predicted "further solid gains" in the coming quarters.
