On Inauguration Eve, as her home-state Ohio University marching band performed at the Hyatt Regency on Capitol Hill, C.J. Prentiss waited in line at the women's room.
And waited.
Ms. Prentiss, an Ohio state representative from Cleveland, missed the entire show.
But she remembered a vow she had made to herself many years earlier: "The first time I stood in line as a young woman, or even as a girl, I thought, `If I have the power in my life to change something, it'll be to make sure we have enough bathrooms for women.'"
Now she gets her chance.
Rep. Prentiss recently introduced legislation that would require big public spaces such as theaters, stadiums and convention halls to provide twice as many toilets for women as for men.
If her bill becomes law, it will add Ohio to the growing list of states -- 10 at least -- that now mandate "potty parity."
Delaware and Georgia also have potty bills pending.
The trend is partly a fringe benefit of women's growing strength in state capitols: 20.5% of legislators now are women, up from 13.4% a decade ago.
But men also have a stake in potty peace.
California state Sen. Art Torres apparently was the first sponsor of such legislation, which he introduced in 1987 after his wife and daughter endured a lengthy bathroom wait at a Tchaikovsky concert at the Hollywood Bowl.
The bill became law that year.
In Texas, an aide to state Sen. Gonzalo Barrientos thought it was ridiculous to spend a third of his evening at a festival just keeping his girlfriend company in a 45-minute line.
Texas declared potty parity last spring.
"The overwhelming support from the men in the legislature -- that's been interesting," Rep. Prentiss reports from Ohio.
"They're coming up to me and saying, `C.J., my wife says she is going to kill me if I don't vote for this bill.'"
Pro-parity legislators also have been able to tap into a wellspring of academic research that supports their views.
A significant contribution to the field was made at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, where researchers stood outside public restrooms in 1987 and 1988 and discreetly timed how long people were inside.
As men and women emerged, they were asked to fill out a survey, and most complied.
The findings: Women needed about twice as much time in restrooms as men.
In sports arenas, for instance, women took almost three minutes, while men needed a mere 83.6 seconds.
The key factor was not that women did significantly more primping, as some had speculated.
Rather, researchers believed that the time difference was linked to women's need to contend with more layers of clothes, as well as to anatomical differences.
Women also apparently were slowed by having children in tow, says study co-author Savannah S. Day, who decided to conduct the research after she missed a flight while waiting in a restroom line at an airport.
Denise Wells, another important spokeswoman for restroom equality, earned her credentials outside academia.
In 1990, the Houston legal secretary was arrested for using the men's room at a concert.
She was tried in municipal court in Houston on charges of violating a city ordinance.
During cross-examination, a police officer testified that 20 people were waiting to enter the women's room in a line that spilled into a hallway, while the men's-room line didn't extend past the restroom door.
She was found not guilty after a jury of two men and four women deliberated for just 23 minutes.
Ms. Wells, now a first-year law student, urges women to push potty parity into new frontiers: "The new laws that passed were great, but they only applied to new buildings or major renovations in older buildings," she says.
"Businesses need to feel the pressure to change other buildings."
As a practical matter, even legislators who advocate fairness aren't certain how to achieve it.
Recent laws in Maryland and New York demand equal numbers of toilets for men and women.
But most states with loo laws require more toilets for women in an effort to equalize waiting-line lengths; California, in fact, mandates a 4-1 ratio in some buildings.
To be sure, there are naysayers.
One men's-rights advocate asks whether it is fair to concentrate on women's restrooms when some men's rooms still lack doors on the stalls.
"We should really bring men's restrooms up to the current standards of women's before we start addressing any alleged defects in women's restrooms," says Hugh Nations, a board member of the National Coalition of Free Men.
Mr. Nations likes to slap gold "Men Deserve Stall Doors, Too" stickers in offending johns.
Courts haven't addressed the stall-door question -- at least not yet -- but they have explored the constitutional dimensions of restroom equality.
A New York state court in 1976 ruled that pay toilets are unfair to women because men can avoid paying by using urinals.
In another court case, a federal appeals court in Cincinnati sided with a female construction worker who was fired after using an indoor restroom that was off-limits to construction workers.
The court overturned a lower-court decision that found the firing justified, even though the workplace's portable toilets were splattered with sewage.
The problem with potty parity, of course, is that it can be costly.
Indeed, a Texas manufacturer is pleading economic hardship in a pending sex-discrimination lawsuit involving toilets.
In the case, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has accused Pro-Line Cap Co. of firing 30 women rather than adding a toilet.
Franklin Sears, an attorney for the baseball-cap maker, declined to comment on the case, although the company previously said that it fired men as well.
These days, though, some businesses are falling on the other end of the spectrum, offering up a plethora of potties.
For Denver's new Colorado Convention Center, for example, architect Curt Fentress separated men's and women's rooms with a movable wall.
When the mostly female Intravenous Nurses Society hits town in April, the convention center can produce women's rooms that are three times bigger than the men's.
For a predominately male American Association of Petroleum Geologists meeting a few months later, the center will reverse the ratio.
A panel of the American Institute of Architects, meanwhile, is brainstorming about designs for better bathrooms.
Some proposals call for unisex hand-washing areas or unisex restrooms -- some European countries have had them for decades.
Other ideas include separate lounges where women can smoke, put on makeup and change diapers.
Rep. Prentiss, who ultimately got a video copy of the Ohio University marching band's inaugural performance, can take solace in the fact that her proposed law easily passed a committee vote and is scheduled to go before the full House next month.
The proposed law is viewed largely as "comic relief" even within her own office, she admits.
But she adds: "We're very serious about this.
This is an equity issue for women."
