Rogers Communications Inc. and Maclean Hunter Ltd. continued to bicker over the conditions under which Rogers will proceed with its proposed multibillion-dollar bid to acquire Maclean Hunter, a broadcasting, publishing and printing concern based here.
Rogers, a Toronto telecommunications concern, said it asked the Ontario Securities Commission to rule that it doesn't have to offer to buy a block of 36.3 million Maclean Hunter shares controlled by the target company.
Maclean Hunter's shareholders-rights plan requires any bidder to offer to acquire all shares of the company, which would include the 36.3 million-share block.
Rogers said that the acquisition of this block would force the company to shell out millions of dollars in capital-gains tax, making the transaction much less attractive.
But Ronald Osborne, president and chief executive of Maclean Hunter, said that Rogers appears to be seeking a way to "bypass" Maclean Hunter's shareholders-rights plan, with its requirement to leave a bid open for 120 days in order to allow the target company's board to seek alternative offers.
Maclean Hunter said it wouldn't tender the block of shares to a so-called permitted bid by Rogers or any other bidder, or to a bid approved by Maclean Hunter's board.
A permitted bid is one that meets the conditions of a shareholders-rights plan, which include the 120-day waiting period and the calling of a shareholders' meeting to approve the transaction.
But Graham Savage, chief financial officer of Rogers, said the company doesn't want Maclean Hunter to impose restrictions on the type of offer Rogers can make.
"They're forcing us into a narrow set of rules," Mr. Savage said.
He added that Rogers isn't comfortable with the time-consuming procedures provided for in the rights plan.
He declined to say whether Rogers will seek to overturn the plan.
While anything other than a permitted bid could result in the issuance under the shareholders-rights plan of millions of additional Maclean Hunter shares at a 50% discount to market value, few analysts believe that this will happen.
"It's difficult not to see all this as a delaying tactic" by Rogers, said Andrew McCreath, an analyst at Gordon Capital Corp. in Toronto.
"This is a legitimate issue, and they may well be looking for an OSC view on it. . . .
But one can only suspect that they're trying to buy a little time here."
Rogers has yet to make a formal offer for the Maclean Hunter shares, despite indicating its plan to do so last week.
Mr. Osborne said he has proposed to Rogers executives that they submit an offer to shareholders for consideration with whatever conditions Rogers feels are necessary, including a favorable judgement from the OSC.
"We can't react to a bid we haven't seen yet," he said.
"The market's been waiting for this for nearly a week."
Mr. Osborne declined to say how Rogers executives responded to the request.
Some speculation centers on whether Rogers has been able to arrange financing for the full cash portion of what is expected to be a cash and stock offer.
Rogers told analysts last week it has a bank bridge loan of two billion Canadian dollars (US$1.48 billion) in place to fund the acquisition of Maclean Hunter.
The telecommunications concern also has about C$700 million in cash on its books, much of which has been raised over the past 12 months through debt issues.
The acquisition of Maclean Hunter could cost Rogers C$2.89 billion, based on the current market value of the former's shares.
In trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday, the value of Maclean Hunter's shares fell to C$16.75 a share, off 75 Canadian cents, on the news that Rogers is holding off from making an offer.
Speculation had driven Maclean Hunter's stock price to a 52-week high of C$18.75 a share in intraday trading Friday.
Some analysts said Rogers could be stalling to push out market arbitragers, who have been heavy players in Maclean Hunter stock.
The stock had been trading at around C$13.75 prior to emergence of Rogers as a potential bidder.
But Gordon Capital's Mr. McCreath said he believes that since Maclean Hunter has been put in play, an acquirer likely will end up paying C$18.50 to C$20 a share.
Maclean Hunter itself has acknowledged it is seeking alternatives to the unsolicited expressions of interest by Rogers.
It said alternatives being studied include a recapitalization of Maclean Hunter, the spinoff or sale of its Canadian cable assets, or some alliance with a third party.
The company also said it is in "active discussions" with a number of parties interested in its U.S. cable-television assets.
Last fall, it retained Goldman, Sachs & Co. to advise it on the future of those assets, and Mr. Osborne said detailed discussions with interested parties began about three weeks ago.
Rogers, in a letter to Mr. Osborne, asked Maclean Hunter to refrain from entering "any agreement or understanding relating to its businesses or assets at this time."
It also is seeking equal access to information provided to third parties about the U.S. and Canadian cable assets.
Mr. Osborne said Maclean Hunter will provide information to Rogers, but won't negotiate exclusively with the telecommunications concern.
He declined to give his response to the request to leave assets untouched.
