FACTIONS JOCKEY in the White House for Clinton's attention.
With no one in charge of coordinating the overall strategy, each issue has its own champion battling for time.
Among the top aides, Stephanopoulos focuses on health; Gergen takes on crime and, to a rising degree, welfare.
Endless meetings are under way to parse the best "sequencing" and presidential time allocation.
Health-care people expect the president to do one or two health events each week through March; Mrs. Clinton also will travel widely to stump for the plan.
But the president also shows a rising interest in crime as a political issue.
And with the additional need to fashion a welfare proposal, starting next month, expect other issues -- most notably Gore's reinventing-government initiative -- to fall from view.
The White House also will tread lightly on foreign affairs -- due in part to the disarray in the foreign-policy team.
CLINTON'S AGENDA poses logistical problems for finance and tax committees.
After pressuring Clinton to move faster on welfare, Senate Finance Chairman Moynihan schedules health hearings that could run into late April.
Despite Clinton's promise of a welfare proposal this spring, Moynihan "is hugely skeptical the administration is going to send him a bill," says GOP Sen. Wallop.
Moynihan himself privately reminds members of Gore's remark that "spring" technically runs to mid-June.
Meanwhile, with health care first priority for the House leadership, the White House considers pushing portions of the welfare bill through the panels that act early on health, particularly the House Labor Committee.
SUPPLY-SIDERS SCRAMBLE to explain away the economy's strength.
Predictions that Clinton's tax increases would strangle the recovery in its cradle seem unfounded; mainstream economists issue increasingly optimistic forecasts.
But supply-siders insist Clinton has just been lucky so far and that doom is just around the corner, perhaps as soon as later this year.
Clinton's tax increase is "a corrosive, longer-term effect on investment and production," says former Reagan economist Lawrence Kudlow.
"We will see over time a wet blanket over the supply side of the economy."
The Hudson Institute's Alan Reynolds says declines in long-term interest rates are buoying the economy -- but he credits weak economies abroad, not Clinton's deficit-reduction effort.
Supply-side proselytizer Jude Wanniski has a new villain: If Clinton's tax increases don't choke off growth, he says, the health plan will.
AT THE FED, where even offhand comments can move markets, some officials are edgy because likely nominee George Perry's wife Dina is a portfolio manager for three stock mutual funds.
Even some in the administration are concerned, but the White House concludes there are no legal problems and, pending an interview with Clinton himself, the nomination is still on track.
No current Fed governor has a working spouse.
CLINTON TRIES to sound tightfisted while also touting increases for his "investments" as budget day nears.
Labor Secretary Reich says the Feb. 7 budget will propose spending cuts to finance Clinton's "re-employment" training and job-search initiative; when fully phased in, it will cost about $3 billion a year.
Another big winner: aid to inner-city schools.
SUPERFUND SNAG: The Justice Department raises constitutional objections to cleanup-arbitration provisions in the administration's rewrite of the 1980 toxic-waste law.
But the administration still expects to finish the proposal within two weeks, and for fine-tuning consults with GE, Arco and the American Insurance Association.
CHINA HAND?
Look for Defense Secretary-designate Perry to take a bigger role in China policy.
One possibility: a Sino-American commission on defense conversion that would learn from the Chinese experience, apply it to other nations -- and get a better handle on the inner workings of the semiautonomous Chinese arms industry.
REPUBLICANS FLINCH from a fight over financing earthquake aid.
Though some conservatives want the administration to come up with offsetting budget cuts, most Republicans decide it isn't worth the political trouble to fight for them.
House GOP Leader Bob Michel hasn't endorsed offsetting cuts, and Senate Republicans haven't rallied behind Dole's initial noises in that direction.
Finding cuts to offset $7 billion in earthquake aid with just eight months left in the fiscal year would be a painful process.
Beyond that, with a shaky Gov. Wilson seeking re-election and Rep. Huffington challenging Sen. Feinstein, Republicans can't afford to be seen as an obstacle to relief.
One object lesson: Iowa GOP Rep. Nussle, who pushed for cuts to offset Midwest flood aid, now appears to be in deep political trouble back home.
MINOR MEMOS: But seriously, folks: The Pentagon announces a new line of ships, the "Bob Hope class" line of medium-speed Navy cargo vessels. . . .
"I've been disappointed in the number of disasters over the last few years, frankly," White House budget director Panetta says. . . .
Rumors of a pending Bentsen speech on the yen send currency traders into a frenzy.
But the speaker turns out to be Fred Bergsten of the Institute for International Economics.
