There is a great scene in Alfred Hitchcock's movie "The Lady Vanishes," in which the professor's solution to the case is convincingly refuted.
It does not bother him in the slightest.
"My theory is perfectly correct," he huffs.
"It is the facts that are misleading."
Your Jan. 3 editorial, "A Therapeutic State?," raises important issues about mental illness.
It appropriately raises concerns about the way services may be overused if their cost to the patient becomes minimal and whether social or biological factors lead to mental illness.
But your underlying premise is based on a view of mental illness and substance abuse that obscures the truth.
It can only be believed if, like Hitchcock's professor, one doesn't let facts get in the way.
To begin with, you imply the Clinton administration failed to take into account the concern for containing costs and protecting against abuse of benefits, and worry that we might provide coverage for those "who are simply dissatisfied with their personalities and desire a surer ticket to happiness and social success."
In fact, under the president's plan, individuals will be eligible for mental health/substance abuse services only if they have a medically diagnosable mental or substance abuse disorder and are at significant risk of functional impairment.
Furthermore, cost consciousness is supported under the plan by favoring the most effective treatment in the least costly, most appropriate setting.
For example, in order to avoid unnecessary hospitalization, the plan promotes a shift toward outpatient, community-based care.
But most troubling is that your argument is based on outdated stereotypes long discredited by scientific and fiscal realities.
First, you imply that many mental health and substance abuse disorders are inconsequential when in fact most are serious, costly and potentially deadly.
A recent review of all suicide studies conducted by the New England Journal of Medicine concluded that 90% of suicides were related to depressive illness.
Further, according to a recent Massachusetts Institute of Technology study, mental illness and substance abuse disorders cost the country more each year in terms of employee productivity and absenteeism than cancer, coronary heart disease, chronic lung disease or AIDS.
Specifically, the MIT study reveals depression alone costs society $43.7 billion annually, over one-half of which is paid directly by American businesses.
The Health Security Act does not confuse the trivial complaints of daily living with carefully diagnosed mental disorders.
Schizophrenia, major depression, manic-depression -- as well as serious anxiety conditions such as panic disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder -- take a serious human and economic toll.
Second, you imply that coverage of mental illness and substance abuse is not cost-effective, when in fact, nearly all medium and large firms include mental illness and substance abuse coverage in their health insurance plans and see it as essential.
The Journal itself reported in November 1992 on First Chicago Corp. that "It reviews each patient's mental health treatment case by case but doesn't impose any across-the-board limits -- even on psychotherapy.
The total cost: less than $300 per employee."
I wonder: does The Wall Street Journal practice what it preaches and exclude mental illness and substance abuse coverage for its own employees?
Or, like most employers, does it provide coverage for mental illness and substance abuse not very different from that initially proposed by the administration?
Third, you belittle decades of progress in psychopharmacology in your reference to the "Prozac craze."
Abuses of prescription drugs occur all too often, no matter what they treat.
But "wide use" by itself does not imply a "craze."
If it did, you also would have to bemoan the continuing "penicillin craze."
The fact is, psychiatric medications, including antidepressants such as Prozac, have been developed for the treatment of diagnosable mental illnesses -- not the casual pursuit of "happiness."
Moreover, the positive impact of psychopharmacology is real and measurable.
For instance, thanks to relatively new medications, the efficacy rate for the treatment of acute episodes of schizophrenia is now 60% (compared with say, 41% for angioplasty, or 52% for atherectomy).
Lithium, used for the treatment of manic-depression, has saved the economy billions of dollars over the past two decades, and clozapine now allows many of the most seriously ill to live their lives productively outside the restrictive and expensive settings of a hospital.
Finally, you express the fear that in providing such coverage, there never will be limits for "tax-paid treatments."
Let me assure you, that question was a matter of intense concern and debate for all of us who contributed to the president's plan -- and the plan covers this concern.
In fact, the failure to provide mental illness and substance abuse coverage would result in false savings.
Recent studies have proven that providing treatment for these disorders helps decrease use of general health care services.
Can government do everything?
Of course not, nor should it.
And I could not help but nod my head in agreement as I read your call for a "stabilized social order" that "starts with having a parent tend to a child, with having a father stay with a mother."
Absolutely right.
But for millions of individuals, attentive and loving families cannot be a substitute for medically necessary treatment for mental illnesses or substance abuse disorders.
We do not live in a world where people can will themselves well, so we must create a system that provides care while controlling costs.
Our current health care system does not meet these goals.
It insures the healthy but -- too often -- avoids the sick.
Allowing this system to continue to spiral out of control makes no common or fiscal sense, and ignores the facts.
