Sun Microsystems Inc., moving to fend off an impending assault by increasingly powerful personal computers, slashed prices as much as 50% on a new line of workstations with midrange models starting below $4,000.
Previously, Sun's least-expensive low-end workstation, the SPARCclassic, was priced at $3,995, with a midrange version priced at about $8,000 and high-end models around $17,000.
Sun dropped the SPARCclassic to $2,995, while introducing the new midrange SPARCstation 5 beginning at $3,995 and the high-end SPARCstation 20 starting at $12,195.
All models come fully loaded with monitor, hard drive and other essentials.
The action by the Mountain View, Calif., company puts additional pricing pressure on such workstation competitors as Hewlett-Packard Co., which in January followed Sun by introducing a low-end workstation at $3,995.
Analysts say it also should help Sun temporarily fend off encroachments into its domain from new PCs equipped with microprocessors that rival overall performance of Sun workstations at a far lower price.
"They've put themselves in a nice, aggressive position," said Laura Conigliaro, computer analyst for Prudential Securities Inc.
Down the road, though, Sun and other workstation makers like H-P and Digital Equipment Corp. face a real threat of the lower-cost PCs stealing away market share.
New PC chips like Intel Corp.'s Pentium and the PowerPC developed by Apple Computer Inc., International Business Machines Corp. and Motorola Inc. can run certain program applications as fast or faster than the $12,195 Sun workstation, but cost only about $4,500 for a top of the line model.
With these new PCs also capable of running operating systems that were once the domain of workstations, "the workstation market could begin to implode," Linley Gwennap, editor of Microprocessor Report, writes in this week's issue.
Intelbased PCs can run versions of Unix, the operating system prevalent among workstations, as well as a Sun version of Unix called Solaris.
As PCs infiltrate the workstation market, which many analysts expect will happen soon, workstation vendors will have a tough time competing against volume manufacturers like Compaq Computer Corp., which shipped 3.1 million personal computers last year.
Workstation leader Sun shipped about 240,000 units last year.
Workstation shipments in all totaled about 620,000 in 1993, vs. 39 million for PCs, according to Dataquest Inc.
Sun officials acknowledge they are in a tough market, but insist they are up to the challenge from PC makers.
"We are not a target sitting in one spot," said a Sun spokesman.
"Sun is prepared to compete."
Workstations still maintain certain advantages over PCs, such as superior ability to be networked together as well as the capability for a user to run several different programs on the same screen.
The biggest advantage, analysts say, is that some of the most complex software programs, such as for a chip design, are now written to run only on workstations.
But Michael Slater, publisher of the Microprocessor Report, said that barrier to PCs will dissipate as developers of those programs begin rewriting for Pentium and PowerPC.
