Competing in the cutthroat U.S. tire business is tough, even for the world's tire-making giants.
For midsize producers it can be downright agonizing, as Germany's Continental AG and Italy's Pirelli SpA are discovering.
Pushing to become global players, both acquired U.S. tire makers in the late 1980s, and both have sunk into repeated, expensive restructuring.
Continental, the world's fourth-largest tire maker, bought what is now General Tire Inc. for $628 million.
It has since pumped an additional $750 million into its U.S. prize.
Pirelli, No. 5 in the world, acquired Armstrong Tire Corp. for $196 million and has injected an extra $120 million.
Both U.S. subsidiaries continue to lose money.
Continental now says its "prime goal" world-wide is to reform its U.S. unit, the fourth-largest U.S. producer.
Some analysts and General's own president, Alan Ockene, think they know how to help both companies: Form an alliance between General and the smaller Pirelli unit, known as Pirelli Armstrong Tire Corp.
But that idea -- which the two groups have discussed at least twice, most recently a year ago -- isn't one that the two European parents are ready to discuss again.
General's Mr. Ockene says an alliance also could include Toyo Tire & Rubber Co. and Yokohama Rubber Co. of Japan, with which General has a joint-venture truck tire plant in Illinois.
"I've always felt that if you put those elements together, you get a company that becomes a big-four company," says Mr. Ockene.
But he says there isn't any hurry and adds: "That is a very personal view.
Nothing is going on.
There aren't any discussions about this on the Continental board."
A big impediment is the bitter memory of Pirelli's failed, unfriendly 1990 bid for Continental, which led to management shakeups at both companies.
Pirelli's world-wide tire business fell into repeated annual losses -- every year beginning in 1991.
(Continental, on the other hand, has remained profitable world-wide except for 1991.)
Giuseppe Bencini, head of Pirelli's tire business, now says "Pirelli has got a more than sufficient critical mass," and no longer seeks rapid growth.
In a written response to questions, he won't discuss Continental and doesn't rule out targeted alliances or acquisitions.
But he says, "The key strategic issue for an industrial player isn't the search for size for itself, but the search for profitability."
Tire industry analysts in the U.S. and Europe say that leaves both General and Pirelli Armstrong with a problem.
Put simply, both are trying to compete across the board in the U.S. -- from high-performance, name-brand tires to the low-cost private-label ones that stores sell under their own brand names.
They are getting hammered by big rivals that can better withstand slim profit margins, and by big chain stores that dominate sales and squeeze smaller producers on price.
"Continental hasn't got critical mass in the U.S.," says Philip Ayton, motor industry analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the securities arm of London's Barclays Bank.
"They are too small compared to Michelin and Goodyear," adds Lothar Lubinetzki of Trinkaus & Burkhardt AG, a German securities concern that belongs to London's Midland Bank.
He says Continental and Pirelli one day "will have to talk merger again."
Efforts to cut costs and boost quality at both U.S. units have yielded slow results.
Mr. Bencini says that Pirelli Armstrong has been restructuring since 1988, a process "that has been intensified in the last two years."
Pirelli won't release U.S. results, but says Pirelli Armstrong posted losses last year and expects to do so again this year.
It now is focusing on high-performance, high-margin Pirelli tires, made in the U.S.
It has closed its U.S. truck tire business, but still makes Armstrong, private-label and farm tires.
General is more forthcoming about its U.S. troubles, and they show the ravages of the U.S. market.
Mr. Ockene is the third U.S. president since the 1987 acquisition, and all three have had trouble meeting goals.
Since August, the company has replaced or eliminated eight of its 19 vice presidents and reorganized sales and management.
The flux helped depress sales, forcing temporary production shutdowns that cost $15 million to $20 million late last year.
Following General's repeated losses, Continental late last year injected $100 million in fresh capital.
This year, Continental sought more control.
It sent a German executive, Bernd Frangenberg, to run General's loss-plagued core business, passenger- and light-truck tires.
Mr. Ockene insists he encouraged the choice and says Mr. Frangenberg may succeed him after his planned 1996 retirement.
Some industry insiders say they expect the Germans to further cut U.S. headquarters staff and take more control.
"We have had a communication problem," says Thomas Aurich, a spokesman for Continental's tire operations at its Hannover, Germany, headquarters.
"People don't feel they are working together.
They need to feel they are part of one group."
Continental's strategy for General has flip-flopped since 1987.
In 1988 it pushed General away from private-label production, but later reversed course.
Now, Mr. Frangenberg again wants to make and sell more Continental-brand tires in the U.S.
An internal argument about whether Continental was investing enough in General, and whether General was performing properly, helped provoke some of last year's staff departures.
Mr. Ockene says the company will save more than $20 million a year after negotiating new labor terms last year.
He also saved money by canceling plans for a $12 million technical center in Charlotte, N.C.
He says new, self-managed work groups have boosted efficiency and morale, and that the quality problem is licked.
But, the poor image takes time to shake, he says, and keeps General from commanding adequate sales margins.
Quality complaints provoked Big O Tires Inc., a big store chain, to fire General this year as the main producer of its private label, Big O brand tires.
Big O sells heavily in the Southwest, where hot roads destroy tires; that, together with a strong Big O warranty, pushed up tire returns by customers there, General says.
Big O says General's quality was improving -- but too late to save the relationship.
After projecting a return to break-even last year and missing the mark, Mr. Ockene is projecting it again this year.
Analysts say he probably is doing the right things, but they project more losses.
Andreas Neubauer, a tire analyst at Deutsche Bank's DB Research, says Continental needs to choose, world-wide, between becoming a market giant, through merger, or shrinking to become a niche player.
"I think a decision on strategy will come in the next year or two," he adds.
