Municipal sanitation chiefs across the country face a frightening prospect: a Supreme Court decision expected soon that could strip away their control over trash, threatening billions of dollars of public investment in dumps and incinerators.
The legal challenge doesn't come from a national waste-control company but from two local garbage haulers who are hoping for sweet revenge.
For 15 years, state and local officials have tried to run Salvatore and Carmine Franco out of the garbage business in part because, they allege, the Francos have Mafia ties.
New Jersey wants to bar the two brothers' grown children, too.
And authorities in the state are preparing a sweeping criminal case, hoping to seize much of the family's wealth and send the elder Francos to jail.
The Supreme Court case runs along a separate legal path and can't stop the anticipated indictments, but it does give the Francos a chance to get even.
It also underscores the increasingly rancorous battles between municipalities and haulers for control of the $25 billion-a-year trash industry.
At stake are many municipal budgets, more than $10 billion in bonds issued to finance waste facilities and, ultimately, the garbage fees paid by millions of households and businesses.
"The satisfaction I'm going to get," Sal Franco, the more diplomatic of the brothers, says of the possibility of a high court decision in his favor, "is that I kicked their a p -- ."
The surprising story stretches from three unsolved murders to a trash-strewn expressway to the halls of Congress.
A municipal role in trash initially made sense.
Many places had been gouged by private haulers found to have engaged in collusive price-fixing and bid-rigging schemes during the 1970s and 1980s.
Public officials were further alarmed by the tendency of some privately operated dumps to turn into toxic sewers.
But many cities and counties may have gone too far.
They invested heavily in dumps, incinerators and garbage-transfer stations and then legislated "flow control," which allows them to commandeer all the trash within their borders and direct it to a favored disposal site.
Once wielding monopoly power, many municipalities jacked up their dumping fees to pay for other services, such as recycling, cleaning up old dumps and salaries for sanitation officials.
Haulers fumed.
Then, although officials had predicted a shortage of dump space, a glut developed.
And market forces began eroding public control.
Haulers cheated on flow control, sneaking trash off to cheaper private outlets.
And some, like the Francos, sued.
Their case, C&A Carbone Inc. (named for some partners) vs. Clarkstown, N.Y., involves a transfer station just over the New Jersey border into New York, where trucks were unloaded and waste was repacked into big rigs for trips to dumps in Pennsylvania and beyond.
Authorities in New Jersey and New York, suspecting that the Francos were diverting trash from municipalities in both states in violation of flow-control laws, mounted an impressive investigation: helicopter surveillance, troopers pulling over big rigs on interstate highways and an armed raid by more than 30 law-enforcement officials in June 1991 to seize records.
Officials may now wish they hadn't bothered.
Many experts expect the Supreme Court to rule for the Francos, holding that flow control illegally interferes with interstate commerce.
If so, municipal sites could get too little trash and disposal prices could plunge in some areas.
That could trigger a price war among haulers, to the benefit of businesses and consumers.
Most vulnerable is the Francos' home turf; New Jersey has nearly $2 billion invested in public trash facilities.
Some counties charge $100 a ton and more to dump, while $50-a-ton disposal abounds across the Delaware River in Pennsylvania.
Fearing defeat, local-government groups already are lobbying Congress to preserve some sort of flow control and protect public-sector investments and bondholders.
The Francos, acknowledged as talented entrepreneurs even by some government critics, would probably prosper in noholds-barred competition.
With additional transfer stations here in Bergen County, N.J., and in Philadelphia, and a sizable hauling operation, the family business has annual revenue of $50 million to $100 million.
It is one of the largest haulers in New Jersey, a state with a fragmented market that WMX Technologies Inc. and Browning-Ferris Industries Inc., which operate nationally, have yet to dominate.
Entering the New Jersey hauling business in 1963, the Francos showed an early flair for organization.
In 1976, Carmine Franco became president of a haulers' group, the Trade Waste Association, that law-enforcement officials have frequently alleged brought to New Jersey a New York City-style price-fixing system.
What set that scheme in motion, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities concluded after hearings, was Mr. Franco's bold move in setting July 1, 1977, as the cutoff date for competition; customers swiped from other haulers before then could be kept but, after that date, a hauler's accounts couldn't be touched.
After official meetings of the trade group, Carmine Franco would adjourn to a restaurant to settle grievances among haulers.
Sal Franco says his brother's edicts weren't binding, that haulers were "free to tell Carmine . . .
'I'm not giving the customer back.' "
Subduing competitive instincts proved difficult.
Alfred DiNardi, a New Jersey hauler who took customers from rivals, was shot to death in a New York City parking garage in June 1976.
Gabriel San Felice, another hauler who bid on and took a rival's account, was shot dead in May 1978 while dropping a load of garbage at a dump.
And Crescent Roselle , a hauler who had lost business to both victims, was himself murdered in December 1980 outside his office.
All three killings remain unsolved.
Another hauler, Eugene Sorgine, underbid the Francos in the 1970s on a job to operate a dump.
He later sold his business to them.
About the same time, a fire broke out at his house.
No one has been charged.
"So his house burns," Sal Franco says, denying any involvement.
"We get blamed for it.
Three guys get killed.
Police tried like hell to attribute that to us."
During a daylong interview while touring the trash facilities of Bergen County and Clarkstown in his Mercedes sedan, the 55-year-old Mr. Franco says he and his brother aren't Mafia-connected, though he acknowledges they know a few mobsters socially.
Tino Fiumara, identified by law-enforcement officials as a Genovese crimefamily soldier, "was a friend of ours," Sal Franco says.
Mr. Fiumara was released in early February after 14 years in prison on racketeering and extortion convictions.
Sal Franco says he has also socialized with Salvatore Avellino, the Long Island trash chief for the Lucchese crime family.
Mr. Avellino pleaded guilty in mid-February to racketeering charges that include extortion and conspiracy in the murder of two haulers who defied Mafia price fixing.
Carmine Franco himself, now 58, pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor in the 1983 Trade Waste Association price-fixing case, in which New Jersey charges against organized-crime figures, including Mr. Fiumara, were dropped.
The judge who in 1983 sentenced Mr. Franco -- to 180 days, served on work release -- said evidence of his mob ties "is almost solely by way of innuendo, hearsay and triple hearsay."
While the Francos have never been accused of a violent crime or extortion, the mob tag-asserted by New Jersey and other states' law-enforcement officials and widely publicized -- has stuck.
"The newspapers do a hell of a job," Sal Franco says.
"My customers don't want to leave -- they're afraid.
Even our lawyers think, well maybe. . . ."
After Carmine Franco's guilty plea, the Francos and New Jersey officials settled into trench warfare.
The state bumped a $4,000 fine up to $2.2 million, though a state appellate court reversed that.
The state litigated until 1987 and finally succeeded in ousting Carmine Franco from the New Jersey trash business.
(He now runs the Philadelphia operation.)
Along the way, the Francos frustrated public officials' broader goal of controlling trash and thus established themselves as a defiant presence.
In the late 1980s, Bergen County, for instance, built the nation's biggest transfer station, about four times the size of a football field and capable of handling all the county's trash.
That ignored, however, the fact that private transfer stations, including one owned by the Francos, already had ample capacity.
The county tried using flow control to force trash into its facility, but, in a test of wills with haulers, lost.
One morning, Sal Franco drops by the county plant and finds it quiet.
A trickle of no more than 400 tons of trash a day arrives at the facility, though it is designed for up to 3,750 tons daily.
Albert Adcock, security chief for the county utilities authority, welcomes Mr. Franco, and the two men commiserate over the recent demise of a favorite Hackensack saloon.
Nature calls, Mr. Adcock offers his washroom to Mr. Franco, and -- alone with a reporter -- volunteers: "All that stuff you hear about Sal, it's bull s -- ."
In the background, a bulldozer slowly pushes a trash pile around the plant floor.
In contrast, the Francos' Sal-Car Transfer plant in Hillsdale is a model of efficiency, with trucks lined up to empty trash onto a tiny tipping floor where a giant compactor immediately reloads the waste into big rigs.
Indeed, state and local officials charge that the site has been too busy, exceeding its daily permitted limit and, in effect, spreading to adjoining Franco property that lacks a proper permit.
The state has also gone after the Francos for having too many hauling permits, which makes it difficult to put them out of business; if one hauling permit were revoked, state officials complain, the Francos could shift customers to another hauler.
Sal Franco was banned from the industry in New Jersey administrative proceedings involving multiple hauling permits, and the state later charged him with contempt for allegedly continuing to run the business.
The state has also sought to bar six grown sons and daughters of Carmine and Sal Franco who, according to the Francos, now run the business.
Nearly all these disputes, in which the state seeks millions of dollars in penalties, have been appealed by the Francos from administrative proceedings to state courts.
The Francos deny wrongdoing.
Steven J. Madonna, the state environmental prosecutor who has overseen much of the civil litigation, says he wants the Francos out of the trash business.
"We're working toward ending their involvement," he says.
Of their alleged business ties with the mob, Mr. Madonna says, "I don't think anybody cannot take into account that reality."
He mentions murder, violence and arson.
"I'm not making a leap that that is the Francos.
But it would be unreasonable to disregard that."
In recent months, meanwhile, Sal and Carmine Franco and some of their grown sons have received so-called target letters from the state attorney general saying they could soon be indicted on criminal charges.
A state official confirms that an indictment is expected soon, but won't discuss the charges.
Sal Franco says the charges would include theft for diverting trash from Bergen County's flow-control system and contempt for his staying in the business.
He expects the state to seek prison terms for him and Carmine and financial penalties as high as $20 million.
"They're going to come up with a big one.
I guarantee you."
The increasing nastiness with New Jersey officials followed the Francos to their New York state operation, where Sal is an owner but Carmine never was (though he helped in the business).
Clarkstown also has flow control, requiring haulers to dump at a town transfer station for $81 a ton.
The Francos were doing business nearby at $70.
Clarkstown, losing volume, went looking for the reason.
The town's police staked out the Francos' business, first trying to hide beside the Deer Head Inn, a tavern up the road.
"We thought it was a speed trap," says the bar's owner, Ken Brennan, who sent a bartender out to ask the police if they wanted anything.
Police switched to helicopter flyovers.
"Real cloak-and-dagger stuff," Sal Franco says.
The break in the case came in March 1991, when an Indiana trucker, Carl E. Drake, loaded up with trash at the Franco site, got lost and turned onto the Palisades Interstate Parkway, which bars trucks.
His trailer rammed the first bridge it came to, spilling the trash.
On the bridge overhead, Carmine Franco was soon spotted trying to direct a hurried cleanup, according to Paul D'Alessandro, a Clarkstown detective.
Troopers and police started pawing through the mess and say they found what they were looking for, Clarkstown trash, by looking at addresses on the junk mail.
The Francos say that the trash was from elsewhere and that local stuff must have got mixed in when police impounded the load and took it back to the Clarkstown transfer station for a closer look.
In the following weeks, police pulled over and checked the loads of more truckers leaving the Franco operation.
Then, in June 1991, police, prosecutors and environmental regulators from New York and New Jersey, guns drawn, descended on the site.
"They opened the door and pointed their guns into the office," says Linda Franco, Sal's daughter, who was working there at the time.
She was frightened.
For that, Mr. Franco says Clarkstown can expect an especially spirited competitive effort from the Francos should the Supreme Court toss out flow control.
"I'll never forgive what they did to my daughter," he adds.
The Francos haven't fought this battle entirely on their own.
More than 100 New Jersey and New York haulers paid $1,000 apiece last fall to attend a legal-defense fund-raiser in Manhattan.
And the Franco case has become a darling of the free-enterprise set.
Friend-of-the-court arguments poured in from, among others, Detroit's Big Three auto makers, the National Association of Manufacturers and the Chemical Manufacturers Association; big business also doesn't like to be told where and at what price to dump its trash.
"Hell no, we won't flow," says Bruce Parker, a Washington lawyer for a haulers' group.
On the other side, municipal governments weighed in, warning about bond defaults and environmental risks if haulers prevail.
"We're talking disaster," says H. Lanier Hickman, head of a municipal trash officials' group.
After oral arguments before the Supreme Court last December, Detective D'Alessandro walked up to Sal Franco and asked, "Who would've thought it would wind up here?"
The hauler replied: "You underestimated the Francos."
