Concerns about Chernobyl are being revived as reports continue to surface about the Ukraine nuclear-power station, the site of the world's worst nuclear accident.
The apprehension is building on the heels of a recent decision by Parliament to reverse a 1991 decree that would have closed Chernobyl by the end of last year.
Citing the country's severe energy crisis, lawmakers also lifted a moratorium on the construction of new nuclear-power stations.
Antinuclear advocates warn that if Chernobyl isn't shut down, the risks of accidents, near-accidents and safety-related problems remain substantial.
"From the point of view of safety, the decision to keep Chernobyl running is not a correct one," says Environment Minister Yuriy Kostenko.
This week Interfax Ukraine reported that in January, 21 "incidents" were recorded at nuclear-power stations in Ukraine.
An official at the State Committee on Energy Use said the incidents "didn't cause any danger to personnel and the surrounding area," the independent news agency reported.
But it cited officials who said they had to shut down reactors in three of the incidents and shut off power in about 15 of them.
The April 26, 1986, accident at Chernobyl occurred when plant operators turned off the safety system on Block 4 to carry out a belated electrical test.
The reactor went out of control, blew off the roof and spewed its radioactive contents across a wide swath of northern Europe.
The reactor subsequently was encased in a huge block of cement to entomb the remaining radioactive material.
But the sarcophagus, designed to last 30 years, was hastily constructed.
Now, almost eight years after the accident, officials admit they don't know if the encasing will last that long.
"Right now, the sarcophagus and radiation dust are the biggest danger for us," says Vasyl Kovalchuk, spokesman of the ministry charged with dealing with the aftereffects of the Chernobyl accident.
He says video cameras inside the sarcophagus show the appearance of small cracks.
Minute amounts of radioactive dust are being discharged through the cracks, while small amounts of water are leaking into the reactor.
Some, like Mr. Kovalchuk, fear the mixture of water and radioactive dust that has accumulated over the years could begin a nuclear chain reaction, which could trigger another explosion.
Nikolai Steinberg, head of the State Committee for Nuclear and Radioactive Safety, denies another Chernobyl-like accident is possible, but admits, "We really don't know the state Block 4 is in."
To make matters worse, Mr. Kovalchuk says Chernobyl was constructed in an earthquake area.
"The roof is standing vertically.
God forbid there should be some tremors," which could dislodge the roof, causing it to come crashing though the walls of the sarcophagus.
In an attempt to solve the Chernobyl problem, the Ukrainians announced in February 1992 an international competition for the design of a new sarcophagus.
Out of 394 proposals, no first prize was awarded, but officials did honor a French consortium, led by civil engineer Campenon Bernard, with second place.
But that doesn't mean the French proposal will be built, Mr. Kovalchuk says.
The idea behind the competition was to provide feasible solutions to the Chernobyl problem, he says.
With a number of solutions now available, work is moving toward some sort of implementation, he says, although it isn't yet clear what the result will be.
The cost of building a new encasing is formidable for cash-starved Ukraine.
Estimates range from $300 million to $500 million.
That's on top of the 15% the government already spends from its yearly budget, which is allocated to cleanup efforts.
Safety concerns don't stop at Block 4, however.
Ukrainian television recently reported that the threat of fire is a constant concern.
Refuting rumors that the second block, which was badly damaged by a fire in October 1991, could be restarted, Mr. Steinberg says it is impossible to bring that reactor up to world standards.
Moreover, Russia has refused to accept any more spent nuclear fuel for disposal, leaving Ukraine with the problem of how to get rid of it safely.
Mr. Kovalchuk notes that so far about 800 sites within a 30-kilometer zone around Chernobyl contain nuclear waste.
Environmental groups and Ukrainian officials worry that radioactive material at the sites could leak into the groundwater, eventually ending up in the Dnipro, Ukraine's major river, which runs into the Black Sea.
Adding to environmental concerns are findings, recently made public, about the presence of plutonium and americium, highly radioactive substances, in the area around Chernobyl.
Although radiation levels are normal in Kiev, childhood thyroid cancer has risen since the 1986 accident, Mr. Kovalchuk says.
Of the 180,000 "liquidators" sent to Chernobyl to help with the cleanup after the accident, 2,500 have died and 5,288 have become invalids.
He added, "We can say that 600,000 people are considered to be adversely affected by the accident."
