What does a Southern California insurance company do when an earthquake cripples its home office but doesn't stop nearby policyholders from knocking on the door for money?
For 20th Century Industries this week, the answer was to capitalize on perfect weather: It set up tents and tables in the parking lot.
Its ad hoc claims office was assembled hours after Monday morning's quake to help the needy customers who began showing up in cars and on foot.
The temblor, centered just eight miles northeast of the insurance holding company's high-rise headquarters in a suburban office park here, knocked out its computer systems along with all power and water.
While there wasn't any major structural damage to the office tower, smashed window glass and toppled file cabinets littered the building's interior.
"Even though our phones were rerouted to remote locations, some people couldn't access them, so they took the route of walking in their claims," says Rick Dinon, senior vice president.
"Fax machines and manual files were brought down" to aid claims processing.
"We borrowed a tent from one of our employees to keep people out of the sun."
Some policyholders lucky enough to have earthquake insurance -- but unlucky enough to have sustained the catastrophic damage needed to trigger coverage -- are walking away from the parking lot with checks in hand, Mr. Dinon said.
"Some customers have brought water and refreshments to our employees," he added.
So far, hundreds of 20th Century customers -- who normally take up most claims business with the insurer by telephone -- have taken advantage of the special parking-lot claims office.
Mr. Dinon wouldn't estimate the total number of claims his company is expecting from the earthquake, or their dollar value, except in the broadest sense.
"It is likely the loss will be over $10 million, but within our reinsurance limit of $100 million," he said.
Under its reinsurance arrangements, 20th Century will recover 75% of payments between $10 million and $100 million, he said.
Subsidiaries of 20th Century insure about 200,000 homes and condominiums in California, of which 100,000 to 150,000 are in the general quake area, Mr. Dinon said.
Of those, he estimates that 40% have earthquake insurance.
Many policyholders with earthquake coverage won't receive benefits, however, because such policies carry a deductible of 10% of the policy amount.
Coverage for personal property also has a 10% deductible, based on 70% of the policy amount.
For example, a home insured for $100,000 would have to sustain damage of more than $10,000 for a policy to pay out any benefits for damage to the structure.
Personal property losses would have to exceed 10% of $70,000, or $7,000.
Mr. Dinon said.
