One by one, the first graders recite the characters the teacher has drawn on the board.
Only it's not the ABCs that these six- and seven-year-olds are rattling off but the hiragana characters of the Japanese language.
The students in this inner-city public school classroom have no Japanese heritage.
In fact, almost all of them are African-American.
But all day long, they hear only Japanese from their teachers.
They recite their math problems in Japanese.
Their language readers open from left to right as in Japan.
When the teacher asks in Japanese, "Do you understand?" the children chirp, "Hai."
This is Detroit's Foreign Language Immersion and Cultural Studies School, one of about 150 public elementary schools nationwide whose curricula are taught in a foreign tongue.
The so-called immersion programs, which begin in kindergarten or first grade, are offered primarily in French or Spanish, though Cantonese is taught in San Francisco, German in Milwaukee and Hawaiian in Honolulu.
The programs sharply depart from traditional language instruction: Rather than devoting just a small portion of the school day to language instruction, some or all subjects are taught in the second tongue.
The U.S., long a foreign-language laggard, can no longer afford to be so.
Teaching children to speak other languages not only enhances cognitive skills and cultural appreciation, it is also becoming an economic necessity as trade barriers crumble and businesses turn to foreign markets for expansion.
"You can buy in any language; but to sell, you need to know the language of your customer," says Paul Simon, the Democratic senator from Illinois and author of "The Tongue-Tied American."
Immersion programs aren't easy to operate.
Finding teachers who are bilingual is a problem.
So is attrition, as children leave the programs because their families move or for other reasons.
The attrition rate in the Detroit immersion school, which also offers French and Spanish programs, is about 10% a year.
That parents of 126 students in Detroit have chosen to enroll their children in Japanese is testament to their faith that proficiency in the language will enhance their children's future job prospects.
"I chose the immersion program for economic reasons: I see that the Japanese companies are becoming part of America," says Margaret Clay, mother of fourth grader Aaranisa, who's been speaking Japanese since kindergarten.
Fifth grader Cleogher Dixon -- whose father works for Chrysler -- is more blunt.
"My dad told me that one day the Japanese are going to take over everything."
Most linguists agree that foreign languages are easiest to master at a young age, when children have no fear of their difficulty, aren't embarrassed about pronunciation and actually consider them fun.
"We like speaking Japanese at home: My brother helps me," says Geoffrey Stephens, seven years old, whose third-grade brother and kindergarten sister are also studying Japanese in Detroit.
Moreover, the process of learning how to learn a second language -- be it Spanish or Urdu -- can instill in young children special learning skills as well as sensitivity to other cultures.
"Teaching a language is teaching a child to put on a perspective -- the lenses of another culture," says Paul Garcia, language director in Kansas City, Mo., which offers French, German and Spanish immersion programs.
Indeed, America lags far behind not only its industrialized counterparts but also the less developed world in the ability of its students to speak other languages.
India and France, for example, require students to study two foreign languages in high school; in Japan, students begin studying English in seventh grade.
But only about one-third of all American secondary-school students take a language, while a mere 2% to 3% of children study at the primary-school level.
Enrollment in immersion programs is generally voluntary and no aptitude tests are given prior to admission.
And despite the intensity of the language instruction, linguists and teachers believe such programs aren't any more stressful than traditional school for the children.
The immersion-program students "are all in the same boat," says Nancy Rhodes, associate director at the Center for Applied Linguistics in Washington, D.C.
"They can always communicate with each other.
In the beginning, they won't understand the teacher, but the teacher will understand everything they say."
Still, some parents often hesitate to enroll their children in such programs.
"Do you know what it's like to try to help your kids with their homework when you can't read directions or even look a word up?" asks Sari Kaye, a language-curriculum director in the Fairfax County, Va., school district, which offers a Japanese partial-immersion program.
Parents also worry that their children's English skills will be neglected.
However, standardized tests show that children taught in another language actually do as well or better in English grammar, reading comprehension and vocabulary.
Immersion programs first sprouted in Quebec in the mid-1960s, when a group of English-speaking parents realized their children were far from bilingual, even after taking French one period a day over several years.
They instituted a plan in which kindergarten and first-grade courses would be taught in French, with English gradually introduced in each of the next several grades.
By fourth grade, the instruction would be about 50% English.
"Those students developed confidence and proficiency far greater than their peers," says Richard Tucker, then a professor at McGill University, which monitored the students' progress over several years.
Culver City, Calif., was the first U.S. school district to adopt the model in 1971 for teaching Spanish.
In languages with the same alphabet as English, such as French and Spanish, children are fairly conversant by fourth or fifth grade.
In Japanese, it takes more time.
In Detroit, Kaori Ohgata, a Japanese native, says of her charges: "Their hearing is pretty good by fourth and fifth grades . . . as for their writing, we are still working on it."
Gripes fifth grader Sika Fox, "It's hard, plain hard."
Still, the students would be able to hold a simple conversation with their peers in Japan, says Ms. Ohgata.
Even when fluent, however, the elementary students still will not sound like natives, as they might if "immersed" in another country.
In some cases, they develop a classroom dialect, all making the same mistakes.
Teachers have a hard time getting the students to use the first person, since the teacher is always referring to students as "you."
At the Detroit immersion school, Ineala Chambers, the principal, spends much of her time trying to recruit teachers and get visas for many who are foreign-born.
The teachers at the school, which enrolls another 400 children in French and Spanish immersion programs, could form a mini-United Nations, hailing from Japan, China, Benin, Lebanon, Venezuela, Mexico, Belgium, and Argentina.
Of the Japanese teachers, two are Japanese nationals (one the wife of an executive transferred to Detroit), one is Chinese and spent several years in Japan, and one is an African-American who studied in Japan in college and stayed on for a few years.
Parents of those in the Detroit program have formed a Japanese club that takes the children on excursions to enhance their awareness of the culture.
They have traveled to a Japanese garden, a Saturday school for children of Japanese executives stationed in the Detroit area and a Japanese restaurant.
Now they are working on real immersion: a trip to Japan in 1996.
