Business failures fell to a three-year low in December, reinforcing a year-long trend that is expected to continue in 1994, Dun & Bradstreet Corp. reported.
The improving survival rate of small business is good news for the economy, which some authorities say will rely heavily on such firms to create jobs.
It is even better news for business owners who during the recession and ensuing weak recovery feared for their businesses' lives.
Only 5,784 businesses failed in December, a 16% drop from a year earlier and the lowest monthly total since December 1990, according to Dun & Bradstreet.
The business-information concern says 85,983 firms failed in 1993, an 11% decline from 1992.
The improvement was even starker by another measure: The value of liabilities related to failures in December fell 70% from a year earlier, to $2.55 billion, and declined 49% in 1993 compared with 1992, to $45.4 billion, Dun & Bradstreet said.
"Every one of the companies I'm dealing with is experiencing revenue growth," says Kevin Busch, president of Infinity Delta Group, a Buffalo Grove, Ill., firm that provides interim-management services to troubled small companies.
"There's still some tightness in profit margins from pricing pressure, but they're all optimistic about 1994."
Consider Auto Maintenance Men, an auto-repair shop in San Antonio, Texas.
A year ago, the company was nearly a goner, says owner Marvin Baker.
It was losing so much money that he had to lay off two of his seven employees and borrow $12,000 with personal credit cards, he says.
But sales improved steadily in 1993, Mr. Baker says, partly because of increased orders from large commercial accounts, such as a local used-car dealership.
A move to a more visible location and a new direct-mail marketing effort also helped, Mr. Baker says.
Sales for all of 1993 rose 25%, to $250,000, and the company in January made a small profit, he says.
"I'm optimistic about my business," Mr. Baker says, noting that he hopes to pay off his debts by this summer and invest $10,000 in new equipment.
Unlike the sputtering minirecoveries of recent years, this economic upturn has staying power, Dun & Bradstreet's chief economist Joseph Duncan says.
"The current strength of the economy should reinforce this trend in 1994," Mr. Duncan says.
"What's most impressive about the year-end figures is the improvement we are seeing from regions and industry sectors that have been struggling in the past."
For instance, while the retail and services sectors "have taken the toughest hits" over the past year, both reported fewer failures in 1993 as a result of strengthening in the fourth quarter, Mr. Duncan says.
Retail- and service-sector failures declined 18%, to 2,282, and 9.4%, to 24,311, respectively, according to Dun & Bradstreet.
The situation improved in every geographic region, including such severely depressed areas as New England and the Pacific states, Mr. Duncan says.
Failures in New England dropped 14%, to 5,330, while the Pacific states reported a modest 1.4% decline.
In California failures fell only 0.5%, to 19,695.
While rising demand and more favorable lending conditions account for some of the decline in business casualties, specialists say business owners who weathered the slump have emerged as more astute managers.
"You've got some real survivors here," says Dan Sautner, chairman of Padgett Business Services USA Inc., an Athens, Ga., franchiser of accounting and tax services for small businesses.
At Window Box Inc., a Cheshire, Conn., florist, owner Sylvia Nichols says 1993 sales grew 20%, to $400,000, while sales so far this year are up 30% over the comparable period in 1993.
Ms. Nichols says last year's gain offset a 20% sales decline in 1992 when she was forced to renegotiate her lease and reduce by 10% the hours of her eight employees.
Ms. Nichols says her customers are spending an average of 10% more with each purchase.
At the same time, as a result of the measures Window Box took to weather the recession, "We've become better business people," she says.
The company last fall began a direct-mail marketing effort.
To improve customer service, she says, each employee also now spends a day a week calling personally on existing and prospective clients.
Ms. Nichols says she's optimistic about 1994.
"We expect to continue growing at least at this level for the rest of the year," she says.
Robert Sommers, owner of Toslo Printing in Portland, Ore., says he too is now better prepared to survive the next business slump.
In 1989, at the same time that Toslo was moving to a larger location, it lost a customer that accounted for a third of his commercial-printing company's sales, Mr. Sommers says.
To cope, he had to borrow $300,000 from his mother.
Toslo's 1993 sales grew 25%, to $380,000, and in January increased another 15% over year-earlier levels, Mr. Sommers says.
But this time around he says he isn't relying so heavily on any single customer; his largest account currently makes up only 15% of Toslo's total sales.
The improved business acumen of Mr. Sommers and his peers bodes well for their firms' survival and, presumably, job creation.
The National Federation of Independent Business reported this week that 19% of its members expected to increase employment in the next six months -- a three-percentage-point improvement over a year ago and the most-bullish first-quarter hiring forecast since 1990.
Paradoxically, small-business owners' sharpened business skills could act as a slight drag on the economy, specialists say.
To conserve capital and increase productivity, many of them are putting off hiring.
Toslo Printing, which employs six, is focusing on brokering printing jobs rather than doing the work itself to hold down labor costs, Mr. Sommers says.
At Window Box, Ms. Nichols says her hiring plans are limited to converting some parttime workers to full-time employees.
At Auto Maintenance Men, Mr. Baker says, he too has no plan to replace the two workers he laid off in early 1993.
To accommodate recent sales growth, he says, "We're working longer and harder.
I left here last night at 8 o'clock."
