Hewlett-Packard Co. is adding a wireless voice-mail feature to its line of so-called "palmtop" computers, strengthening its position in the emerging industry for handheld electronic communicators.
The Palo Alto, Calif.-based computer maker is to announce Monday its feature called HP StarLink, a wireless-messaging service that transmits voice and data messages as well as news, sports and financial updates to Hewlett's line of 100LX palmtop personal computers.
The service is expected to be available April 4, with a price of $229 for a required plug-in wireless card from Motorola Inc. and monthly subscriptions ranging from $19.95 for local coverage to $62.95 for nationwide.
News, sports and other additional services will cost more.
Analysts say StarLink provides an all-important communications link for businesspeople on the go and, therefore, positions it well against competing products such as Apple Computer Inc.'s Newton MessagePad.
While MessagePad has a similar messaging system, analysts say the 100LX competes better on price.
MessagePads are currently selling for as low as $570, while comparable 100LXs are selling below $500 in some stores.
Other recent handheld entrants include the Zoomer, a personal organizer from Casio Computer Co. and Tandy Corp., and BellSouth Corp.'s Simon, a cellular phone that is designed to store files as well as send faxes and electronic mail.
The competition will intensify this year, as Motorola is about to unveil Envoy, a handheld computer which is expected to incorporate a powerful program by General Magic Inc. called Magic Cap, which simplifies many communications tasks.
Sony Corp. also will be coming out with a handheld computer soon.
With StarLink, a person in, say, San Francisco, can dial up a toll-free number, and ask an operator at a central dispatch center to leave a message for a person on the opposite coast.
The operator transcribes the message into a computer, and it is sent wirelessly to the recipient's palmtop, which alerts the user with a beeping noise.
This entire process takes between two and three minutes, which gives StarLink very nearly the speed of a pager with the added benefit of much longer messages.
Messages can also be sent via computer transmissions to the dispatch center.
Unlike pagers, which can only record short messages, StarLink can handle up to two paragraphs.
Adding further to convenience, Hewlett officials say StarLink messages can be automatically entered onto an electronic calendar in the palmtop.
