"HONEST STOCKBROKER," it says, followed by a phone number.
That's all there is to the tiny advertisement that has run for the past four months in New York Press, a weekly newspaper.
But apparently, that's all that's needed.
"I wanted something that attracted attention," says Michael Bertan of Advest Group Inc.
Mr. Bertan says that for the few hundred dollars he has spent, the ads have generated several responses a week and at least four customers.
"Just last week, I got a phone call from a lady looking for $100,000 of government bonds," says Mr. Bertan, 30 years old.
"This worked for me.
Is it going to work for someone in Idaho?
I don't know."
Mr. Bertan did get some crank calls.
Someone claimed he was a movie producer with $35 million to invest, but never showed up for a scheduled meeting.
A psychic offered his stock-picking services.
Other newspapers called, wanting Mr. Bertan to advertise with them, too.
And rival stockbrokers call "all the time," says Mr. Bertan.
They accuse him of implying that everyone else is dishonest.
But you can't beat the ad's directness.
"It has a certain appeal," agrees Benjamin Edwards, chairman of the highly regarded A.G. Edwards Inc. in St. Louis.
Still, Mr. Edwards wouldn't recommend that any of his own brokers place similar ads.
"If someone had to tell me he's honest, I'd worry."
(For the record, Mr. Bertan's file with securities regulators shows no disciplinary cases in his short history as a broker.)
You would think that Advest officials would publicly applaud Mr. Bertan's ingenuity.
But his supervisor who approved the ad, David Saalfrank, said last week that he wished this story wouldn't be published because "we kind of like to keep the ad a secret weapon."
More important, said Mr. Saalfrank, he doesn't know whether the New York Stock Exchange, which polices brokerage firms, would approve of the ad.
He may be right.
Yesterday, a Big Board spokesman said that while he can't address Mr. Bertan's ad specifically, "In general, blind ads are not permissible" for attracting investors.
If the ad gets pulled, it may soon be impossible to find an Honest Stockbroker, at least in the newspaper ads.
