They obviously weren't part of the Old Ebbitt Grill's usual suit-and-tie, power-dining crowd.
They trailed into the famed eatery across from the White House in a nervous line.
They wore bright red T-shirts decorated with clenched fists holding upraised brooms, and their pockets bulged mysteriously.
They ordered coffee and sodas.
Later, walking out of the restaurant, their leader gave a signal and they suddenly drew Coke cans filled with ball bearings, which they shook violently, setting off a deafening clatter.
"Justice!" they yelled.
"Justice for janitors!"
Stunned diners stared.
A furious hostess sprinted toward the group.
"We have a business to run," she sputtered.
A security guard threatened arrests.
The group tumbled out onto the sidewalk and belted out another chorus: "Justice for janitors!"
The Old Ebbitt Grill had just got a taste of a new thrust in American labor tactics.
Although the restaurant doesn't employ any janitors, it is a tenant in a building cleaned by U.S. Service Industries Inc., a nonunion janitorial company.
And with this odd dinner-time performance last fall and other, similar stunts, the Service Employees International Union is trying to harass USSI into going union.
At a time when traditional U.S. labor unions' influence continues to fade, the decidedly unconventional SEIU is flourishing, thanks largely to a combination of zany, obnoxious and occasionally illegal techniques that seem born more of the burlesque hall than the union hall.
Instead of directly targeting employers with strikes or boycotts, the SEIU goes after the employers' employers -- mainly commercial landlords -- and their tenants.
The basic idea: to shame, pester and push tenants and landlords into forcing their janitorial contractors to unionize.
So far, the SEIU has been cleaning up.
While most unions have lost members steadily, SEIU has added 30,000 janitors since 1986 when it began a campaign to revitalize its moribund janitors division.
The division now has 200,000 members -- a fifth of U.S. custodians.
The union says its tactics have proved so effective in Silicon Valley that it is launching an effort with the Teamsters and the Hotel and Restaurant Employees Union to humiliate other contractors into organizing the workers who serve food and trim flowers at high-tech concerns.
"It's some of the most innovative and successful organizing that's been done by any union," says Andy Stern, assistant to the president for organizing at SEIU.
Allison Porter, a recruiting director at the AFL-CIO, calls it "an incredible success," adding that "it's certainly worth trying" in other industries.
Even the U.S. Department of Labor has taken a page from the Justice for Janitors' playbook by going straight to high-tech companies in Silicon Valley and threatening, under the "hot goods" provision of the Fair Labor Standards Act, to seize their products if their custodial contractors don't pay legal wages.
Targets of SEIU's Justice for Janitors campaign have filed dozens of complaints with the National Labor Relations Board and various courts, accusing the union of labor-law violations.
In some cases, courts or the NLRB have ruled that the union has indeed broken the law.
To date, the union, through appeals or settlements, has sidestepped any significant fines or penalties, but it has piled up many enemies.
"I don't cotton to blackmail," growled George Vallen, owner of Advance Building Maintenance in Los Angeles, a prime target of SEIU, in an interview last summer.
"I'll fight as long as I can."
The SEIU and its Justice for Janitors campaigners seem happy to oblige.
Consider last summer's drive against San Jose-based Service by Medallion Inc., a janitorial contractor to several Silicon Valley stars, such as huge database maker Oracle Corp.
Typically, the union concentrated its fire not on Service by Medallion but on Oracle and its landlord, developer William Wilson & Associates.
The opening salvo was an amphibious assault.
During a picnic Mr. Wilson threw for the company at Oracle headquarters in Redwood City, Calif., three union organizers in sailor suits clambered aboard a rickety skiff, hoisted a flag bearing the insignia "SS Justice" and set sail across a lake in front of Oracle's offices.
The sailors made it to shore, where a scuffle broke out with security guards as surprised Oracle employees looked on.
Justice for Janitors also infiltrated Oracle's internal electronic-mail system, imploring workers to send messages of protest to top management.
Some did.
One told the company that rather than spend money on employee picnics, it should pay janitors better.
The debate even spread to outside computer bulletin boards: One professor from Buffalo wrote Oracle, "Are very low-paid janitors so very threatening to your corporation's survival?"
While Oracle took the brunt of the union's assault, organizers also were quietly collecting grievances from janitors and sending them to the Labor Department.
Last June, the department found that Medallion had stiffed 199 employees for $78,273.89 over 18 months.
Medallion had been investigated in 1990 and was discovered to have owed 109 employees $34,909.46 in unpaid overtime.
The department fined Medallion almost $50,000 in the most recent case for being a repeat offender, and ordered it to pay back wages.
Roland Phillips, the company's president, concedes that some of his janitors didn't get full pay but blames record-keeping snafus.
He says union shops routinely break the same laws his company was found to have violated, but escape punishment because labor tipsters don't blow the whistle on unionized outfits.
In the Oracle case, after two months of union heat on the database maker and on Mr. Wilson, Medallion gave in, settling with the union.
Wages went from as little as $5 an hour with no benefits to $6 an hour with benefits, although the increase is phased in over two years.
"It wasn't worth the effort to fight them anymore," Mr. Phillips says.
He says he feared losing the Oracle contract -- half his company's business.
And though Oracle and Mr. Wilson deny that Justice for Janitors' antics led them to pressure Medallion to settle, Mr. Phillips views it otherwise.
"The companies didn't want to be involved," he says.
"They will quite conservatively and honestly tell you to clean up the mess because they don't want the limelight."
John Sculley was the reluctant star of one of the SEIU's most successful productions.
The erstwhile computer visionary and Apple Computer Inc. chieftain found himself trailed virtually everywhere by organizers in the late 1980s.
The union's real quarry was Shine Building Maintenance Inc., which cleans Apple's offices, but organizers serenaded Mr. Sculley at his home, berated him when he showed up at the symphony and confronted him at the company's MacWorld exhibitions.
One organizer crashed Apple's shareholder meeting in 1991, shouting out questions about the company's treatment of janitors.
Flummoxed, Mr. Sculley could only stammer: "This is a dispute that has nothing to do with Apple."
The union picketed computer stores in two dozen U.S. cities, called for an international boycott and tried to persuade schools -- a market Apple cherishes -- to ban its machines.
Five janitors fasted for six days on the steps of Apple headquarters in Cupertino, Calif.
"The organizers did everything to make it appear that the problem was with Apple, not the janitorial service company," Mr. Sculley recalls.
He says Apple never leaned on Shine, but in 1992 Shine went union.
John Krause, Shine's general manager, concedes that Justice for Janitors' tactics cost him clients and wore him down.
"We weren't the vampires they portrayed us as," he says.
"But we didn't believe they were ever going to go away."
For some years, in fact, the SEIU janitors division did look as if it might fade away.
It has been organizing janitors since the turn of the century, and by World War II claimed a hold on most major cities.
But by the late 1970s, it was on the skids: Its ranks thinned as companies switched to cleaning contractors and full-time jobs mutated into part-time ones.
Wages fell and benefits disappeared.
When building owners in Pittsburgh demanded that janitors take a pay cut in 1985, the union dug in its heels and won, the first victory in what became the Justice campaign.
Around that time, Stephen Lerner was named director of organizing for the building services division, charged with reviving it.
He brainstormed with other organizers for the most theatrical tactics.
It isn't cheap.
Organizing eats up 25% of the SEIU's budget vs. 5% at most unions.
Tenacity has been a hallmark of Justice for Janitors.
Six years ago, the union embarked on a campaign to organize the 5,000 private office cleaners in Washington, D.C.; at the time, fewer than 1% of them were in unions.
Organizers periodically clogged K Street traffic with pot-banging marchers and chained themselves to doors at office towers cleaned by nonunion janitors.
They donned Santa Claus suits every Christmas season, assembled in front of nonunion buildings and belted out renditions of customized carols such as "The Twelve Days of Injustice."
Last fall, the union signed a deal with several large Washington-area cleaning contractors, adding 1,000 janitors to SEIU rolls and lifting its representation in the district to 30%.
Among the holdouts is United Services, whose 1,500 nonunion janitors clean the building housing the Old Ebbitt Grill and about 100 others.
"If you sign a union contract with a gun to your head, how do you negotiate?" asks James Matthews, president of United Services.
Janitors hold the opposite view: Without the union, they are the ones with no recourse.
Guillermo Barroso, a 37-year-old janitor who cleans buildings at Hewlett-Packard Co., says that in the 15 months he has worked for a union contractor, his hourly wage has jumped to $6.50 from $5.50; he also now gets medical and dental benefits.
He sends most of the extra cash to his family in Mexico, about $500 to $600 every couple of months -- $200 more than before he joined the union.
Just as important, he says, is the sense that he can speak up in the workplace without fear of losing his job.
Before joining the union, he says, "If we had even opened our mouths, we would have been out in the street."
As it is, janitors spend considerable time in the street anyway -- protesting.
In Los Angeles, one of their chief targets for three years has been Mr. Vallen.
Among Mr. Vallen's biggest clients is Toyota Motor Corp., which hired his Advanced Building Maintenance to clean Toyota Motor's U.S. headquarters in nearby Torrance.
One evening last year, Yukiyasu Togo, then head of Toyota's U.S. operations, discovered a dozen union janitors and their children camped outside the electric gate at Mr. Togo's Pacific Palisades home.
They chanted "Janitors don't love what Toyota does for them," a takeoff on the car maker's slogan.
The union turned up the heat by making Toyota and another of Mr. Vallen's big customers, Mattel Inc., a focus of last year's annual Justice for Janitors day -- a nationwide guerrilla-theater assault in 30 U.S. cities every June 15.
In New York, organizers handed out fliers in front of FAO Schwarz to badger the toy store for doing business with Mattel.
At Mattel headquarters in El Segundo, Calif., janitors performed a skit in which their caped superhero, Mop Man, wooed Barbie away from Ken by telling her of the shabby treatment custodians have to endure.
Such tactics sometimes backfire.
The janitors' campaign flamed out in Atlanta when it took on mega-developer John Portman.
During the 1988 Democratic convention, SEIU called for an international boycott of Portman properties and picketed dozens of his Atlanta holdings; "Good Morning America" canceled a feed from one of Mr. Portman's hotels rather than cross picket lines.
The union passed out bars of soaps to guests at Portman hotels: "Wash up America: Clean your hands of John Portman," read the labels.
But Mr. Portman sued for $435,000 in damages in federal court, alleging violations of the National Labor Relations Act, which prohibits "secondary boycotts" -- picketing of companies not directly involved in a labor dispute.
(Nevertheless, the union often gets around the restriction by fine-tuning its actions.
For example, it sometimes distributes fliers instead of picketing or has protesters stand in a public park near the targeted building rather than on the company's sidewalk.)
In 1990, the SEIU settled with Mr. Portman and called off the boycott.
Eventually, the union abandoned its effort in Atlanta.
Union lawyer Larry Engelstein says the union hasn't paid any damages as a result of the suit; Mr. Portman won't comment.
That defeat seems to have been only a temporary setback, however.
In Los Angeles, the union claims its three-year campaign has lifted union representation to nearly 90% of the janitors in the downtown area from 30%; in the nearby high-rise mecca of Century City, union representation is close to 100%.
Wages in the Los Angeles area have increased to about $6.25 an hour, plus insurance and pensions, from $4.25 an hour with no benefits.
In Silicon Valley, the union claims its membership is up to 65%, double where it was when its campaign began three years ago.
In Denver, Pittsburgh and a dozen other battlegrounds, the union claims to have doubled or tripled janitor representation.
And a big victory came recently when Mattel awarded its contract to a union outfit.
"We were tired of the nuisance . . . the false impression they created about Mattel not being a company that cares about its workers," says Donna Gibbs, a Mattel spokeswoman.
"We wanted to put it behind us."
So who is Mattel's new unionized cleaning company?
None other than Mr. Vallen's Advanced.
In October, facing union lawsuits over his alleged firing of striking workers and his wage practices as well as a continuing onslaught of stunt protests, Mr. Vallen threw in the towel.
Advanced is now an SEIU shop.
"People were afraid to hire us because as soon as they'd sign the contract, they'd have the union at their door," grumbles Mr. Vallen.
He was losing customers, and fighting SEIU's Justice for Janitors organizers left him nearly broke, he says.
"There was no way of making them go away."
