ANOTHER LIVING, breathing figure in our daily lives may soon be gone: the checkout person at the grocery store.
Shoppers already are becoming familiar with the pistol-shaped devices that many checkers use to scan the bar codes on groceries.
Now, at least three companies have developed self-scanning devices that shoppers themselves can use.
Self-scanning is supposed to mean, for customers, a faster check-out and more confidence in the accuracy of the bill.
For grocers, it may mean more customers, labor savings and less employee theft.
Farthest along this road to do-it-yourself is Uniquest of Jacksonville, Fla.
Some 20 stores in the Northeast are trying the company's automated checkout machine.
A shopper brings groceries to an ACM counter, where he scans and bags them and receives a printed bill.
He then takes the bill to a cashier's station to pay.
To guard against theft, the company says, its scanner can catch an attempt to pass off peas for steak.
Pathmark Stores has installed the device at three locations, and six more will get them soon.
"It lets customers take control of both the scanning and the bagging, and gives them the perception that they're moving faster," says John Polidore, a Pathmark director of operations.
Optimal Robotics, Toronto, has put four self-scanning stations at a Price Chopper supermarket in Clifton Park, N.Y.
A shopper scans, bags and pays for his purchases all at one place.
The company with the boldest approach is Symbol Technologies, Bohemia, N.Y.
It lets each shopper roam about with a portable, handheld scanner, recording each item as it comes off the shelf.
The shopper can check how much he has spent as he goes along; for a bill printout, he returns the device to a scanner station.
So far, the system is at work only in an Albert Heijn supermarket in Geldermalsen, a village in the Netherlands.
Heijn and Symbol developed the system with TNO Product Centre, a Dutch design firm.
PEOPLE NEVER seem to tire of finding new uses for old-tread rubber.
Yaacov Nagler takes three tire sidewalls, bolts them together and sells the layered rubber ring to road builders who drop it over a highway safety cone.
Made by Yanco, Bethesda, Md., Mr. Nagler's SafetyRings are meant to give cones enough weight and diameter to resist being blown into the path of oncoming traffic.
SafetyRing joins a long list of products made from old tires: running tracks, shingles, tugboat bumpers, hoses, cow beds, shoe soles, flower planters, mud flaps, wheel chocks, livestock feeders, ballpoint pens, garbage pails, car mats, speed bumps, swings and artificial fish reefs, to name some.
But all these products use only a few of the 240 million tires scrapped in the U.S. each year.
Two-thirds of scrap tires end up in landfills or stockpiles or illegal dumps.
Most of the rest are burned for fuel.
Some are ground up and added to asphalt.
Reviews of SafetyRing are mixed.
Lee McCoubrey, traffic manager at Cianbro Construction, Pittsfield, Maine, says he has been testing 15 of the rings on a freeway in Washington, D.C.
With a diameter of 18 to 24 inches, he says, SafetyRing is "probably OK for wide lanes but bulky for narrow lanes."
John Sandy, traffic manager at National Capital Industries, a Bladensburg, Md., construction supply house, calls SafetyRing "a little more stable" than competing products.
But the rings "don't stack well," says Mr. Sandy, and some customers are "picky" about SafetyRing's used-tire look.
IT'S GETTING easier to pump gas while keeping the air clean.
Service-station owners have begun installing a new smog-fighting pump with a nozzle that's faster and friendlier than the previous generation.
By the end of 1995, roughly 40% of self-service stations will be required to have pumps that capture gasoline vapors escaping from a vehicle's fill pipe and return them to the station's underground storage tank.
The "balance system," which has been around since the 1970s, uses the pressure difference between the two tanks to passively move the vapors.
It has a nozzle that resembles an elephant's trunk or a bellows, which must be compressed to make a seal.
The new "vacuum assist" system has an extra little pump that pulls vapors out of the car.
Its nozzle, designed by OPW Fueling Components, Cincinnati, closely resembles a conventional nozzle.
The vacuum assist delivers gas faster than the balance system, and its nozzle is easier to use.
Exxon is changing many of its pumps to vacuum assist because it is "more customer-friendly" than the balance system, says a spokesman.
But vacuum assist is more complex, harder to maintain and costs more to install.
Superior Equipment, St. Louis, reports that one customer, with 17 stations, decided to stick with the balance because of the expense of the vacuum assist.
