Hosiery marketers call them Sheer Indulgence and Sheer Caress.
But to many women, pantyhose are a sheer nuisance.
After years of tugging on and complaining about pantyhose, more women have begun wearing tights, socks, pants -- or simply going barelegged.
Data gathered from supermarkets, drugstores and mass-merchandise outlets by Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service tell the story: In 1993, unit sales of pantyhose fell 7.5% to 514.5 million units, while dollar sales fell 6.8% to $1.2 billion.
Sales of Sara Lee Corp.'s popular L'eggs brand, which has 42% of the market in mass outlets, fell 5.1% in 1993 to 216.3 million units, according to InfoScan.
"Wearing hosiery is like paying taxes," says Kari Blake, senior editor of Hosiery & Underwear, a trade publication.
Whenever the subject comes up, "women will start comparing horror stories."
Betty Howser, a Dallas market researcher, is one.
"Pantyhose drive me crazy," she says.
Because her sheer hose was so often ruined by the sharp-edged furniture at her office, she started wearing tights.
"They cost more but are less expensive in the long run," she says.
Most hosiery marketers agree the drop in pantyhose sales reflects a fundamental shift in the way women dress.
"The need to be comfortable for most women is overwhelming the market," says Dorothy Rainey, women's hosiery buyer for J.C. Penney Co.'s 1,200 stores.
"I don't think the hosiery business will ever be the same as it was even two years ago."
Generations of women have taken their hosiery very seriously.
After World War II, when the U.S. goverment lifted restrictions on nylon, 10,000 women caused a near riot in San Francisco the day the first shipments of nylon stockings arrived.
When the miniskirt took off in the 1960s, women got hooked on the newly invented pantyhose.
But to make pantyhose last longer than one or two wearings, women found themselves doing bizarre things like soaking them in vinegar or storing them in the freezer.
"You pay $5 to spend the day sausaged in pantyhose that never fit right," snaps Wanda Sherlee, an Atlanta bank teller.
"And then you have to throw them out, just because you've got a run in one leg."
Despite all the complaints, the National Association of Hosiery Manufacturers says women spend more than $2.4 billion a year on pantyhose in mass-market outlets, department stores and specialty shops, and the average women buys about 17 pairs a year.
Businesswomen are the heaviest users -- and the most exasperated.
"They're a total rip-off," says Nicole Reilly, a Chicago public-relations manager who runs through a couple of pairs of $6.50 hosiery every week.
To try to assuage this growing disgust, hosiery makers have been developing new products.
Hosiery makers say today's pantyhose are already more durable because stretchy spandex fiber is now blended with nylon.
But the biggest breakthrough of the 1990s -- which may well be the salvation for the hosiery industry -- was the introduction of "body shapers" and "body toners" -- hosiery euphemisms for fortified pantyhose that work like a girdle and are aimed at women over 30.
The designer Donna Karan was the first on the market with her body toners, which are made by Hanes and priced from $12.50 to $18.50.
They have amassed $5 million in sales since they were introduced in 1991.
"They give . . . the illusion of an aerobics body without having to go to the gym," Ms. Karan says.
Today, hosiery "has to be use-specific rather than for general purpose," says Keith Alm, senior vice president, personal products, of Sara Lee, which sells more than $1 billion of hosiery each year through its L'eggs and Hanes divisions.
Wolford, a brand imported from Austria, sells what some women consider one of the finest, longest-lasting brands of sheer hose on the market.
Wolford maintains that its sheerest styles last 15 or 20 wearings.
"The Wolfords are almost bulletproof," says Linda Wells, editor of Allure magazine.
But durability is expensive: Wolford pantyhose cost an average of $40 a pair.
Hosiery makers say women can't have it both ways -- to be durable, hose must have thicker yarns.
"It's not like someone is sitting on a secret," says Susan Danish, vice president, general manager of the Calvin Klein hosiery division of Kayser-Roth Corp.
The sheerest pantyhose are made from thinner fibers and are "fragile and snag on things."
A new brand, Brooke Shields Forever Sheer, introduced this year at supermarkets and mass-merchandise chains and drugstores for about $3.50 a pair, offers an unconditional guarantee against runs, but not holes.
"The technology is here, you can get a high-tech knitting machine to do whatever you want," says Steve Riley, national sales manager of International Pantyhose Inc., maker of Forever Sheer, which uses what he calls a "catch stitch knit" that resists runs.
Forever Sheer has already won over an important advocate, Lydia Justice Edwards, the state treasurer of Idaho, who has become a sort of Ralph Nader for the pantyhose crowd.
After protesting to hosiery manufacturers that pantyhose are a waste of money because they run and tear easily, she was invited to appear on the Phil Donohue and Maury Povich talk shows last year.
Since then she has been bombarded with samples, and she has tried several brands.
Her favorite so far is Forever Sheer.
All these new styles both tempt and confuse women.
For example, Hanes's popular Silk Reflections line offers 447 different styles and colors a year, including sheer sandalfoot, control top, reinforced toe, knee highs, light support, thigh highs and shapers -- all in different colors with different nylon and spandex combinations.
Some women think that it may just be easier to stick with their old favorites.
Ms. Reilly, the Chicago public-relations manager, says she's worn Kayser-Roth's Calvin Klein brand for years.
But finding the right shade in another brand -- sand dune, sea shell and pebble look almost the same in the package -- is daunting.
"I would like to switch brands," she says, "but I know that I'd have to keep throwing them in the trash because the sizes are wrong or the colors are heinous."
On the morning of Feb. 17, Roger Ball committed what may turn out to be career suicide.
The 54-year-old executive with Fleet Financial Group Inc., New England's largest bank holding company, walked into its two-story boardroom at 10:45 that day.
Five men were there waiting for him: Chairman Terrence Murray, three vice chairmen and the chief financial officer.
Within minutes, Mr. Ball recommended that his department be merged into another, a move that would eliminate 10 jobs and jeopardize his own.
After a 15-minute discussion, the senior executives heartily approved the recommendation, thanked Mr. Ball and excused him.
As soon as he had left, they decided neither he nor the other department head was a likely candidate to manage the combined group.
Then they summoned the next executive for the next cost-cutting idea.
So it goes in the downsizing slaughterhouse, where the knife meets the payroll.
Today, according to the company, Mr. Murray will announce that by the end of the 1995 first quarter, Fleet's cost-reduction program will shrink its 21,000-bank-employee roster by 5,500 positions, largely through 3,000 layoffs.
(Fleet's 5,000 non-bank employees aren't affected.)
Its annual operating expenses will fall by $300 million, and the bank expects revenue to increase $50 million.
Because the savings would almost equal Fleet's record 1993 profit of $488 million, stockholders can hope for substantial gains in its earnings and, presumably, the price of its stock.
A behind-the-scenes look at what Fleet is pushing itself through illuminates what is going on all over Corporate America.
Competition spurs some companies to trim down, and that's one reason Fleet decided to "tear up the bank," as Mr. Murray puts it.
Fleet and other banks are beginning to face up to the fact that nonbank providers of financial services can do just about everything banks can, more cheaply.
In addition, Fleet is concerned about surviving the banking industry's rapid consolidation.
To remain independent, Fleet must increase its profitability and its stock price.
"We want to play in the game," says Jay Sarles, one of Fleet's vice chairmen, "but we want to do it from a position of strength, so we're not gobbled up ourselves."
Fleet has expressed an interest in a possible merger of equals with another major bank.
In any event, an earlier acquisition binge was largely responsible for bloating Fleet's expenses.
The company acquired 49 banks in the 1980s, when cost controls were considered less important than growth.
As a result, its average cost of generating a dollar of revenue ballooned to 67 cents last year from 59 cents in 1986.
Yet downsizing can be risky, too.
Bharat Bhatt, chief financial officer at Shawmut National Corp., of Hartford, Conn., a Fleet competitor that has already gone through such a program, warns that a company can lose out if it reduces its staff too much and the economy takes off.
Many of the cost-saving ideas that Fleet will implement are simple.
But the process that produced them is complicated and harrowing, both for those who will lose their jobs and for the executives who now must evaluate themselves partly by how many jobs they eliminate.
"I am a tough and opportunistic businessman, but I never want to go through this again," says Vice Chairman Michael Zucchini.
"It's exhausting -- physically, intellectually and emotionally."
And no less so for Fleet's employees.
They have been on tenterhooks ever since last July, when Mr. Murray sent all of them a letter announcing the project and the inevitability of layoffs.
"I'm apprehensive," says Ronald Ohsberg , a real-estate vice president.
"Everyone here is.
Every job at the company is up for grabs.
They could easily eliminate your position."
Even after today's announcement, he and most employees won't know their fates.
Mr. Murray promises the details by April 15.
"Your life is on hold until they make decisions," says Cris Saccoccio , an administrative assistant in Providence who has delayed moving to a better neighborhood.
Fleet isn't taking any chances on adverse reactions.
It recently installed electronically operated glass doors at the entrance of its executive suite.
Opposite the doors sits a security guard.
Though the project, "Fleet Focus '94," began last summer, the seed was planted earlier in the year by a partner at Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., which became Fleet's largest shareholder after helping finance Fleet's biggest acquisition, Bank of New England Corp.
The KKR man, Michael Tokarz, advised Mr. Murray to meet with Chandrika Tandon, who heads her own consulting firm and had helped two troubled banks, Midlantic Corp. and Riggs National, slash operating costs.
Talking to Ms. Tandon, Mr. Murray agreed with almost everything the 39-year-old native of India said.
"The big question was, Could our people psychologically take it?"
Mr. Murray wondered.
"We had been through some rough times, and here people thought the crisis was over."
Eventually, he recalls, "I decided that we really didn't have a choice."
Ms. Tandon imposed some unusual conditions.
She insisted that she get an office adjacent to Mr. Murray's and that he devote at least half his time to the eight-month project.
She also wanted to "deputize" 200 senior executives; 50 would work full-time on the project, and 150 would spend at least half their time on it.
Ms. Tandon and bank officials won't disclose her compensation.
Industry sources say she will get a percentage of the savings realized.
She moved into an apartment near the bank's headquarters, works 14-hour days and sees her husband and young daughter only on weekends.
Ms. Tandon and her seven full-time employees oversaw the project but stayed in the background to let Fleet employees play the leading roles in finding costs to cut.
The Tandon people "brought the process; they didn't do it to us," says Dennis Murphy, one of the 150 "part-time" executives.
Ms. Tandon had nothing but praise for the way the bank implemented her program.
The bank's top five officers became the project's steering committee and picked 50 promising executives as the full-time consultants.
These executives, soon known as the Nifty Fifty, left their usual jobs in August to study parts of the bank they knew nothing about.
Working out of rented offices at 40 Westminster St., across an intersection from bank headquarters, they were joined in early September by the 150 managers, who represented all of the major operating groups.
The consultants spent September cloistered in 40 Westminster, studying various bank operations and their budgets.
In October, they fanned out to conduct more than 600 brainstorming sessions with about 6,500 employees.
Asking participants what they disliked about their jobs, they sought specific ideas for reducing waste, improving service and increasing revenue.
Under the ground rules, any investments, such as in equipment, had to pay for themselves within one year.
The process turned up a lot of surprises.
For example, Fleet pays $380 apiece for some of its annual subscriptions to the American Banker, a trade newspaper, and as much as $700 for others.
It spends $500,000 a year to provide employees with free coffee (plus $400,000 for the cups).
The trust department charges anywhere from $3,500 to $45,000 to manage similar-sized accounts.
Branch officers, seeking to mollify customers, waive $10 million of bounced-check fees a year.
"It makes you wonder how we ever made a profit," Mr. Murray says.
Though morale had plummeted in the wake of the chairman's letter, employees embraced the opportunity to talk about their jobs and to suggest how the company could become more efficient.
"We got a chance to put a lot of things on the table and to complain about a lot of things that are really senseless," says Derek Wilson, an account-services representative in Providence.
After two hours of brainstorming, he says, "we felt like we had had a chance to change the bank."
Mr. Wilson says everyone at the meeting knew that their jobs could be eliminated, perhaps as a consequence of their own recommendations.
"They told us not to worry about it, that it would not happen for a while," he adds.
Even so, some employees, to the astonishment of the Nifty Fifty, seemed to disregard their self-interest.
"We watched the head of the appraisal department suggest that we outsource appraisals" of property that the bank was considering as collateral for loans, says Stephen Pollack, a Nifty Fifty member who conducted several brainstorming sessions.
The people there knew that appraisal skills aren't readily transferable to other bank jobs.
"There were a couple of seconds of silence and then that kind-of-nervous laughter," he recalls.
The nervousness was justified: The appraisers will be cut to 48 from 97.
The process inevitably led to a bit of posturing.
Robert Burns, one of seven regional controllers and a part-time consultant, appeared magnanimous in telling his team that controllers' jobs were unnecessary.
"Bob is a guy who suggested eliminating his own job," says Gene McQuade, the chief financial officer.
Mr. Burns, however, says he was only being realistic: "I knew that if I didn't do it they would think I wasn't the right guy to have around."
In November, the teams retreated to 40 Westminster with almost 20,000 ideas.
They threw out the nonstarters (someone proposed a central collection point for used rubber bands), those reflecting simmering bitterness (several people suggested that executives should no longer play golf on company time) and the merely redundant.
After that, 7,000 suggestions were left.
The teams began to estimate the potential savings as well as the risks and winnowed the list to 5,200 ideas.
Inevitably, many of the ideas would lead to layoffs.
The cost-cutting teams tried to think about positions rather than individuals, but the ultimate human toll gradually became less and less abstract.
"It's always been in the back of my mind," Joanna Robbins, another of the Nifty Fifty, says, even though "I tried to look at it from the company's point of view."
Bob Twomey, who worked part time on the project, says, "I woke up in the middle of the night thinking about it."
Adds Brian Moynihan: "We all agree it has to be done, but that doesn't make it any easier."
Though the five executives on the steering committee were fully briefed along the way, no formal decisions were made until the sessions in the boardroom.
Over nine days, from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., 104 team leaders came, one after another, to offer recommendations.
One executive said the bank could eliminate 154 of its 5,000 tellers, and $2.9 million in salaries, if it let them make more decisions.
By allowing them to do such things as cash checks for up to $2,500 without seeking a manager's approval, instead of the current $1,000 limit, tellers would save an average 30 minutes a day, he contended.
Done, the committee said.
The boardroom is formal, but the atmosphere surrounding the extraordinary process was informal, perhaps deceptively so.
"We've tried to make it as collegial as possible," Mr. McQuade, the chief financial officer, whispered during the proceedings.
"If we made it too structured, people would jump out of their skins."
They also might quake if they knew what happened after they left the room.
Seconds after Roger Ball made his perhaps-suicidal recommendation, Mr. Murray was wondering aloud who would head the combined group.
"It's a big business," he said.
"There's obviously going to be a lot of pressure to use the bodies we have so that we can eliminate severances -- and that's fine -- but we should also look outside."
A spokesman says he doesn't know whether Mr. Ball would have a job in the restructured Fleet.
Earlier on the same morning that Mr. Ball went to the boardroom, Marshall Raucci proposed that 11 institutional-sales managers who report to him be laid off.
While Mr. Murray shifted his gaze between his subordinates and a 700-page notebook -- one of 19 describing the cost-savings ideas -- Mr. Raucci explained how only three sales managers could do the work now being done by 14.
After being told that the move would save $791,000 in salaries without reducing the number of salespeople actually calling on customers, Vice Chairman Sarles blurted: "Good."
Mr. Raucci didn't get this approval on his first visit to the boardroom a few days earlier.
In that session, he did not recommend eliminating the 11 positions.
Mr. Murray, convinced that Mr. Raucci's team could do better, instructed Mr. Sarles to pass the word.
"They were the only group that did not embrace the process," the chairman says.
"I sent the word down that they either had to get on the train or it was going to leave without them."
On Mr. Raucci's return visit, his recommendations yielded almost double the savings.
Mr. McQuade, the finance chief, observes: "We've beat these guys up pretty good."
Mr. Murray admits he was amazed by the estimated savings the project produced.
In fact, he said in a recent interview, the estimates are "so big we may scare ourselves" into reducing them.
A few minutes later, though, he added in a noticeably harder tone: "I don't think we'll do that.
We are going take every dollar.
We're not going to go through all this and not get everything we can out of it."
On Monday, Mr. Murray convened Fleet's board for a three-day meeting to brief directors on Fleet Focus '94.
But the venue for the meeting -- The Breakers hotel in Palm Beach, where the least expensive rooms are quoted at $285 a night -- suggests that Fleet still has priorities other than cost-cutting.
Some executives were sensitive to the board discussing massive layoffs in posh surroundings, but Fleet said it decided to maintain the tradition of holding its March board meeting in Florida.
