The New York Stock Exchange listed seven initial public offerings as follows: Emphesys Financial Group Inc., DePere, Wis., a provider of managed care medical group insurance products and other services, under EFG; EOTT Energy Partners LP, Houston, EOT, a newly formed limited partnership formed to acquire and operate the assets of EOTT Energy Corp., a crude oil gatherer and marketer; Emerging Markets Floating Rate Fund Inc., New York, EFL, a closed-end fund; Executive Risk Inc., Simsbury, Conn., ER, a specialty insurance holding company; Fidelity Advisor Emerging Asia Fund Inc., Boston, FAE, a closed end fund; RCM Strategic Global Government Fund Inc., San Francisco, RCS, a closed-end fund; Storage USA Inc., Columbia, Md., SUS, a real estate investment trust.
The Nasdaq stock market added the following eight initial offerings: Ciber Inc., Denver, CIBR, a provider of computer-related information technology services; Copart Inc., Vallejo, Calif., CPRT, a salvage vehicle services company; Minnesota Educational Computing Corp., Minneapolis, MEKK, a developer of educational software for children; NN Ball & Roller Inc., Erwin, Tenn., NNBR, a maker of precision steel balls and rollers; Northwest Airlines Corp., Eagan, Minn., NWAC, the passenger airline; Prime Retail Inc., Baltimore, Md., PRME, and preferred stock, PRMEP, a real estate investment trust specializing in factory outlet centers; Texas Regional Bancshares Inc., McAllen, Texas, TRBS, a bank holding company, and Triple S Plastics Inc., Vicksburg, Miss., TSSS, a maker of highly engineered thermoplastic components.
Nasdaq also began trading Encore Computer Corp., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., ENCC, a developer of computer open systems.
The American Stock Exchange added dollar/yen warrants issued by Morgan Stanley Group Inc. under DYP.WS.; the initial offering of Jalate Ltd., Los Angeles, JLT, a marketer of moderately priced women's wear; and REFAC Technology Development Corp., New York, previously traded over the counter.
REFAC is a licensing and technology transfer company.
Amex began trading options on over-the-counter stock of Maxicare Health Plans Inc.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange on March 21 will begin trading options on Aldila Inc. and on Grupo Televisa SA global depositary shares; and on March 17 began trading options on Eastman Chemical Co. and Grupo Mexicano de Desarrollo SA.
The CBOE will also list long-term equity anticipation securities (LEAPS) on Snapple Beverage Corp., Monday, March 21.
