Irving, Texas -- Jimmy Johnson, who coaches the Dallas Cowboys, likes to talk about his team as a series of pieces that, when assembled, complete a "puzzle."
The burden of solving it, however, is not his but others'.
There's the guy who can throw -- quarterback Troy Aikman -- and the guys who can catch, Michael Irvin and Alvin Harper.
There's Emmitt Smith, who can run, and some very big guys to block for him.
When the other team has the ball, there are the guys who chase and tackle.
But to have watched the 'Boys 38-24 defeat of the San Francisco 49ers here Sunday in a Super Bowl semifinal, a k a the National Conference championship game, was to understand how neatly even their side pieces fit.
Tucked away there, for instance, was Darryl Johnston, the fullback who usually serves as an anonymous sort of behind-the-line offensive lineman, blocking for those swifter than he.
Yet in the second quarter, while the issue in the soon-to-be-one-sided contest still was in doubt, there was Darryl, slipping up the middle for four yards to score a touchdown, making a nice little run for a first down on his team's next TD drive, and catching a pass and carrying for another first down on the next.
"Doing that offensive stuff was special, because they don't let me have the ball all that much," said the 28-year-old, who graduated first among 290 in his high-school class in Youngstown, N.Y. "Being in the same lineup with Emmitt, Michael and Alvin gives me a chance to fool 'em sometimes.
They can't exactly set their defenses for me, can they?"
The next team to try to solve the Cowboys conundrum will be the Buffalo Bills, in the SB proper on Sunday next in Atlanta.
They qualified earlier in the day by beating Joe Montana and the Kansas City Chiefs, 30-13, on their home grounds in Orchard Park, N.Y.
You may recall that the Bills have bowled it before -- the past three years to be exact -- and have been bowled over as often, by margins of 1, 13 and 35 points.
The Cowboys did it to 'em last year, 52-17, and off their Sunday effort will be favored to do it again.
If you want to back the Bills, insist on some points.
Thirty or so seems about right.
Yes, the Bills' Sunday win was impressive, but the Cowboys' was more so.
The 49ers came here boasting the National Football League's best regular-season offense and most-one-sided postseason win, a 44-3 slaughter of the New York Giants the week before.
They, too, were well-stocked with speedy/slippery/rough/tough types, the speediest/slipperiest being Jerry Rice, the best wide receiver ever.
But this one was over a good bit before it was over; by halftime, really, when Dallas led, 28-7, after scoring touchdowns on four of its five ball possessions while its cornerbacks, Kevin Smith and Larry Brown, were containing Rice.
The 'Boys would win it even though quarterback Aikman would leave the game for good early in the third quarter after being kneed in the head by 49er lineman Dennis Brown, and Emmitt Smith, the league's and game's leading rusher, would be relieved with most of the last quarter remaining to protect an iffy shoulder.
"I don't think anybody in a million years thought it would be this type of ballgame.
They executed against us both offensively and defensively," said George Seifert, the San Francisco coach.
I guess when you've been executed, you know it.
The primary offensive axemen, albeit during abbreviated stints, were Aikman and Emmitt Smith.
Aikman ranked second statistically to 49er QB Steve Young during the regular campaign, but he was the more accurate on Sunday, completing 14 of 18 for 177 yards and two touchdowns with no interceptions to the busier Young's 27 of 45 for 287, one interception and a TD.
The shifty Smith has been mostly a runner in his brief but glittering pro career, but on this day his pass-receiving output (85 yards) was just short of his ball carrying (88).
Smith's best play was a reception, an 11-yarder that scored the touchdown that put his team ahead 21-7 in quarter two; he slipped out of the backfield, caught Aikman's pass over the middle and went in untouched.
"They forget about me, I guess," he later smiled.
Busy watching Darryl Johnston, probably.
Aikman went down, and out, with his team leading 28-7.
The 49ers quickly cut the margin to two touchdowns, 28-14, and stirred a bit of apprehension among the Texas Stadium full house by holding the home team, now quarterbacked by the storky veteran Bernie Kosar, to but a yard on its first two plays on the Dallas 19-yard line on its next possession.
But Kosar got a first down with a 12-yard completion to Irvin, and four plays later hit the leaping Harper with a short pass to which the latter added a long run for a 42-yard touchdown, and that was that.
At age 30, Kosar will be making his first Super Bowl trip after twice bowing out in the semis with his former teammates in Cleveland.
Just about everybody, probably including Bernie, would be happiest if Aikman were hale for the Buffalo game.
That seemed likely on Sunday even though Aikman was to spend Sunday night in a hospital for observation for a concussion.
He'll probably have a headache for the first few days this week, and get another one thereafter from answering, several thousand times between tomorrow and Sunday, the question from the press about how his head feels.
So lopsided was the Dallas triumph that most postgame questioning centered not on this play or that, but on Coach Johnson's silly midweek statement, to a local radio call-in show, guaranteeing a Cowboys win.
Johnson said he did it to "loosen up" his players, whom he perceived as a bit tight early in the week.
But various Cowboys said the declaration mainly amused them.
If you saw us last week, you'd have thought it was a kindergarten class," laughed Emmitt Smith.
A very big/fast/rough/tough kindergarten class.
