The idea was to do it fast, to do it cheap, to make it pay and to make it stick.
Designed and underwritten in the West, the restoration of capitalism in Eastern Europe would be, in 1990 rhetoric, the task and the triumph of the century.
Businesspeople were going to put the victims of communism back into business.
People like Barbara Lundberg.
She was 36 in 1989, a Wharton M.B.A. and a former vice president at Kidder, Peabody & Co.
Now she's at work in the old Central Committee Building of Poland's Communist Party, running the U.S. government's fund for reinventing the enterprise culture.
"I knew nothing about Poland," she says.
"I wanted to get back into venture capital."
Barbara Lundberg is no aid worker, but when the West recruited an army to mop up after the Cold War, it didn't want aid workers.
It wanted a corps of corporate role models -- consultants, bankers and entrepreneurs -- to clinch a friendly takeover.
With no new enemy shaking its missiles at Europe, Western leaders were convinced that business would soon boom and prosperity bloom; the Communists would never be seen again.
By early 1993, the 24 richest nations of the West had made paper pledges of $70 billion to East European countries from Estonia to Albania.
Poland alone got a chit for $25 billion.
What happened to it?
Fair question, given that the West now must decide whether to toss billions more into Russia's maelstrom.
The answer is discouraging: Aid has been fired like scattershot at a flitting bird.
Replacing communism with capitalism has been far trickier than the bricks-and-mortar salvaging of postwar Europe.
Many aid dollars benefit donors more than donees.
And many, laden with conditions, sit unused.
Skimpier in quantity and quality than it appears, Western aid hasn't done enough to promote mass enterprise or allay mass poverty.
The market machinery it is helping to install in many countries hasn't provided the political breathing space to prevent the rise of a nationalist right or a socialist left.
Poland ought to be aid's showcase.
First to revolt, this country got more care and was promised more cash than any other place in the old East Bloc besides Russia itself.
By early 1990, it had gladly met the brutal economic austerity that Russia still resists.
Poland freed prices, checked inflation, beat recession.
Yet the West, reluctant to give handouts or take big risks, has withheld largescale aid to the small businesses that are fueling Poland's transformation; millions go it alone.
Nor did the West channel aid to make life any easier for millions more as unemployment shot up to 16%, welfare crumpled and living standards collapsed.
The bottom line: The West has been stingy.
Strip out canceled debt, plus loans and grants that go undispersed, and pure gifts to Poland come to under 10% of the $25 billion total.
When a highway costs $4 billion and cleaning the air $50 billion, Poles can feel rooked.
The impact came clear last September.
Three months before the Russians gave a shocking election victory to the far right, the Poles voted in the old left.
Former Communists run the government today, and hold as many seats in Parliament as they did after the rigged 1989 election.
Not every Western cent has gone for naught, of course.
Plenty of Polish businesses and bureaucracies have gained from it.
While acknowledging this, though, many Poles have come to feel that aid has played only a bit part in their escape to capitalism.
"With or without assistance, we would have been able to start reforms and reach the point we're at now," says Pawel Samecki, who runs Poland's office for tracking Western grants.
"It's an illusion that foreign aid is changing the economic situation in the East."
The illusion had a joyous birth.
On Nov. 15, 1989, Lech Walesa, not yet Poland's president, was the first private citizen to address a joint session of the U.S. Congress in 165 years.
Recalling Stalin's refusal to let Poland take part in the Marshall Plan, he said, "Now is the moment when Eastern Europe awaits an investment of this kind . . . an investment adequate to the greatness of the American nation."
Cheers and applause stopped him 24 times.
Congress swiftly voted Poland and Hungary four times what President George Bush had asked.
"We all started with tremendous optimism," says a manager at one aid agency.
Thrilled by the potency of Poland's 1990 price shock, Western governments expected a torrent of private capital to wash away communism's slops.
Nobody knew that the whole system, from courts to banks, had to be scrubbed out before this tidal wave rose.
Nobody knew much of anything.
Because they assumed the market would do the work, the industrialized world's donor nations and aid institutions never set up a think tank or command center to coordinate aid to the East.
Their purpose was in part political: to put on an extravagant show, and buy a quick fix.
"Aid agencies were out to produce a laissez-faire economy at great speed," says a Western consultant.
Breathless promises, however, produced winded deliveries.
Aid was not only poorly thought through, there was less of it than the Poles were led to believe, and it took forever to get here.
Even loans arrive by slow boat.
The European Bank has dispensed just 15% of $600 million it pledged to Polish ventures.
The World Bank and others have committed themselves to lending $8.5 billion for telephones and gas fields and railroads; the Poles estimate that $1 billion of it has budged.
Under conditions attached by donors, more than half the country's potential credits must be spent on Western exports -- from corn to economists -- a practice called "tied aid" long frowned on in the Third World.
The West's more generous grants don't come any faster.
Of $1 billion promised by the European Union (the former European Community), 30% has arrived.
Another $8.5 billion isn't fresh money at all; it cancels debt that Western banks pumped into Poland 20 years ago.
An unused $1 billion fund meant to steady the zloty is still in limbo instead of being distributed as agreed to Poland's banks.
Excuses for the delays abound on both sides.
Paperwork holds up everything, due as much to rusty Communist laws as to Western fears of real or imagined fraud.
The World Bank makes credits conditional on progress in reforms.
Polish state companies decline loans they dearly need but fear they can't handle.
But if there is one thing the West has delivered quickly and in abundance, it's advice.
Revolution was still rolling across Eastern Europe when the West's advisers began pouring into Warsaw.
They entered a world none of them knew, and took on jobs no one could tell them how to do.
In hindsight, much of their work seems naive.
When their advice was on target, Poles numbed by communism often didn't take it.
But nothing has stopped the advisers from charging their usual fees, paid for by Western aid, and helping themselves at least as much as they have helped Poland.
Steve Buckley was in the San Francisco office of Bain & Co., a consulting firm, when the wall fell in Berlin.
At 34, he had a Harvard M.B.A. and a yuppie's salary.
"I'd have had a hard time finding Poland on the map," he says.
"But when the wall came down, I said, `Gee . . . .'"
He quit his job and flew to Warsaw in May 1990, found some British and American aid money, and started riding the rails.
"Nobody had seen the inside of a Polish factory before," he says, or at least not many like him.
He visited 350, and soon won an aid contract to "stop the bleeding" at 20 of them.
He asked factory managers, "What do you need?"
The reply: "You tell us."
A year later, Mr. Buckley and two partners opened a consulting firm, Company Assistance Ltd., with an Irish office to tap the vein of grants from the European Union.
CAL hired 35 staffers, mostly Americans between college and business school.
They piled file boxes into the top floor of a student residence and got down to scrambling for work against an armada of advice-spouters from the rest.
The tide washed in 143 U.S. agencies: the Department of Labor, the Securities and Exchange Commission, Fannie Mae.
Aid-paid advisers from the U.S. and the EU tell Poles how to grade meat, tax power, burn biobriquettes, plug into e-mail.
They explain how to confront xenophobia, standardize measurements, run parliaments.
Packing 500 Poles into a room for a slide show in English on garment-industry macroeconomics is one way to scatter advice.
Another way is to write a report, advancing the transition from Communist doubletalk to capitalist techno-speak.
The names of EU advisory programs read like a list of late-model cars: Tempus, Fiesta, Sierra.
Their jargon-laden reports favor things like restructuring sectoral component systems with market-oriented financing mechanisms in horizontal institutional frameworks of competitive structural solutions.
"Many times," Mr. Buckley recalls, "people said, `What do we know about this?'
I said, `What's the alternative?'"
Ignorance was no obstacle to consultants hired to rescue and sell state industry.
An EU adviser can make $1,200 a day.
Brussels awarded 546 contracts worth $286 million in 1991; Polish consultants got half a percent of that.
Yet, a London adviser figures 80% of his firm's Eastern revenue comes from aid agencies.
Along with every other firm working in Poland, CAL first expected to parlay the aid money it got for reviving state companies into success fees for flushing out Westerners to buy them.
But rivals plucked plums like the soap-powder industry, with its ready-made domestic market.
For the 28 machine-tool and 35 shoe companies that CAL has tried to flog in endless calls to the West, not a single bid has come in.
"Nobody here understood the unattractiveness of Polish assets," Mr. Buckley says.
"After five minutes on the phone, either you have a compelling story or it's `click.'"
To compound his frustrations, many an unattractive Polish company has slammed the receiver on his consultants.
CAL, for example, wrote a report for Hydomat, one of its less-hopeless machine-tool clients.
The report was full of ideas to clear the way for privatization.
Whether or not the advice was good became a moot point.
Along with many another consultant's report in Poland, this one never found a reader.
The ground floor of Hydomat's sullen office on Warsaw's edge displays a small sign of CAL's inspiration: A trader has rented it as a showroom for German desks and executive chairs.
Upstairs, though, the furniture is strictly Stalinist.
The new go-getter Mr. Buckley thought he was working with is gone.
Miroslaw Paduch, in the old guard's name, has retaken the director's office.
"The workers' council fired the previous management," he says.
Doesn't this affect his relationship with CAL?
Mr. Paduch's face darkens.
"They don't work for us now," he says.
"They gave us a report.
These materials don't fit Polish reality."
Mr. Paduch won't be taking Hydomat private for now.
"There's no need," he says, "for drastic steps like selling state wealth."
Just as aid for Western advice has mostly aided Western advisers, Western business has been the biggest gainer from the West's business loans.
Aid agencies have a pronounced preference for safe bets.
The money they are supposed to lend to inspire enterprise in the East often goes to Westerners, or it goes nowhere at all.
At his office window, Adam de Sola Pool takes in a vista of steeples and warehouses.
He says, "This makes me think of Poland," but his view is of London's East End, seen from the headquarters of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Mr. Pool is 36, and got his M.B.A. at MIT.
Two years ago, he was at Salomon Brothers in New York, a private banker with profits in mind.
In London, he is a public banker with Polish profits in mind.
"Most of my clients are foreign companies interested in investing in Poland," he says, pouring a glass of spring water.
"You'd be surprised how many pass through Heathrow."
A taste for Carrara marble that adorns the bank's halls drove his bank's president, Jacques Attali, to quit last June; in its three years of existence, the EBRD had spent more on constructing lavish headquarters than it had dispensed in loans.
A new president and a new organization chart are sorting things out, but the critics won't stay mute.
They say the premier institution created to speed the advent of capitalism still does more for the West than the East.
The EBRD's record in Poland makes it look that way.
The bank has wrapped up 26 deals.
Government borrowers and one chicken processor aside, the rest have Western partners, and borrow on hard terms, as they would from any commercial bank.
Some Westerners in Poland wonder how this pattern fits the definition of aid.
The EBRD, they say, should be lending to Poles, not to foreigners who can get their money elsewhere.
"How can anybody there say they won't bank on Polish companies?" says one Western consultant.
Adds another: "They were supposed to blaze trails, but they do joint ventures with Westerners.
Because it's safe."
Mr. Pool sips his spring water.
"I don't think we do very safe projects," he says.
"Any project in Eastern Europe has risk.
I will do a deal for any company that demonstrates competence to run a business and repay a loan.
It happens that to date most of those companies have been Western."
The EBRD sees itself as a beacon in the void.
Western banks are still leery of the East, notes Mr. Pool.
Only the EBRD, say its bankers, lends to vital Western investors.
Otherwise, some wouldn't come at all.
Yet many do.
At least 90 big foreign companies have invested $2 billion in Poland without the EBRD.
Its bankers assume, for instance, that Britain's Pilkington would never have floated its float-glass plant without their $50 million.
Pilkington assumes it would.
"Probably yes," says its spokesman, Tony Cove.
"We wanted to get into Poland anyway.
Poor old EBRD.
It's had a bit of a knocking. . . .
They were good to us."
But who is good to the ordinary Poles?
Not the EBRD, or any of the West's other big public benefactors.
Two million businesses have started here since 1989.
They employ half the work force and turn out half the national product.
Small entrepreneurs are laying the concrete of the moderate, stable democracy the West wants here.
Yet, because they are considered high risk, most of them can't get a dime of Western credit.
Direct loans from the EBRD are out of the question.
"It's very difficult for us to make individual loans," says Yves Fortin, the bank's administrator in Warsaw.
"We'd lose our shirt."
But the EBRD's attempts to deal through middlemen don't work; they won't stick their necks out, either.
The $100 million it handed commercial banks has never been passed on to private business.
The EU tried, too.
It asked Polish banks to distribute $60 million.
They didn't.
The World Bank also gave those banks $700 million, and also flopped.
Who is to blame?
Westerners say the Poles won't take chances.
The Poles say Westerners won't share the risk.
Both may be right.
"They shifted responsibility for the poor use of their money onto us," says the credit chief of Poland's development bank, Maciej Stanczuk.
His bank would have to pay back the aid-givers if small borrowers defaulted.
That's why it has lent just 5% of a $55 million World Bank credit.
That bank, Mr. Stanczuk says, "creates illusions" that Western money is available for the mass of Poles.
"Our procedures aren't the issue," replies Ian Hume, who heads the World Bank in Warsaw.
"If we disburse funds in Africa, we can damn sure do it in Poland."
Polish banks, he contends, scare off borrowers by demanding collateral worth twice the amount of a small-business loan.
The Poles, says Mr. Hume, need "greater courage" to take on new customers denied a track record by 45 years of history.
So the aid-givers and Polish bankers bicker on.
Meantime, one tiny minority of new entrepreneurs has at last found some cash on the way to the free market.
The newly designed pocket it comes out of belongs to Uncle Sam.
When the Bush White House set out to deliver aid to the East, it wanted to promote enterprise in an enterprising way.
Its new idea was the Polish-American Enterprise Fund, invented to finance small business while maximizing profit for itself and its own managers.
But is maximizing an aid-vehicle's profit the way to help the maximum number of Polish entrepreneurs?
The answer, it seems, is no.
In the eyes of the West's other aid givers, at least, the fund has worked wonders.
"It's the most successful effort in Poland," says Mr. Hume of the World Bank.
Against his own small-loan record, the Enterprise Fund's numbers shine.
Of the $240 million bestowed by Congress, it has sprinkled $164 million among 2,510 companies.
But those numbers don't tell the full story.
"Three years ago, enterprise funds were a silly American idea," says Ms. Lundberg, the fund's general director.
"Nobody imagined we'd make money."
Making money, however, is what the Enterprise Fund is about, and not just for Poles.
The silly idea was to hire real capitalists to make smart investments.
Once they paid off, the U.S. taxpayer could disengage, and the real capitalists would get real money.
Congress had the impression that a salary ceiling of $150,000 a year would duly "incentivize" its M.B.A. aid workers.
Not quite.
The managers in Poland have found a way to enhance their rewards still further without offending anyone in Washington.
After consulting with Congress, they created an Enterprise Fund clone, the Polish Private Equity Fund.
This fund raised $51 million from private investors, took $50 million of U.S. money from the original Enterprise Fund and got $50 million more from an admiring EBRD.
To run the new private fund, a management firm was formed.
Its officers are the same people who manage the Enterprise Fund.
They make the same investments for both funds.
If the private fund makes good money, though, the officers get a piece of the profits.
The Washington aid establishment wasn't convinced this was entirely ethical.
"If you try to explain it, a lot of the time they don't understand," Ms. Lundberg says.
"We had discussions with enormous sensitivity to the conflict-of-interest possibilities."
Washington did understand, though, that the setup would help ease the U.S. out of spending much more on Polish free enterprise.
If the funds prosper, they sustain themselves.
If the managers prosper, they won't rush back to Wall Street.
Once it was convinced that no one was siphoning off money, Congress was happy.
But how many Poles would be happy, too?
Not many.
The Enterprise Fund's boast of staking 2,510 companies with $164 million turns out to be a tad misleading; in fact, just 43 companies got $120 million.
These tenderly nurtured investments range from $15 million for a Polish-American printer down to $199,000 for a boat builder.
The other 2,467 companies got their loans, averaging $24,000, from a much smaller Enterprise Fund spinoff, the Enterprise Credit Corp.
What may be the prickliest job -- and the greatest success -- of the whole $25 billion aid effort falls to the young Polish bankers who do the credit corporation's scut work.
Jerzy Gliniecky and Slawomir Wasowski pass their days driving from copy shop to dentist to bakery.
Now they are showing off a place on Chlodna Street that fixes flats.
The owner borrowed $50,000 from the Credit Corp. for a computerized German leak detector.
"From a sophisticated flat fixer, we're turning into a more sophisticated flat fixer," the owner says.
Across the street, in a rival repair shop, Halina Wisniewska watches skeptically.
"Americans lending money?" she says.
"That's good, but I'd be afraid.
You take it and you don't sleep at night."
Poles are as suspicious of banks as Polish banks are of them.
The Credit Corp. sent its flier to every laundry in Warsaw.
All but three ignored it.
They didn't know its bankers make house calls.
"Laundries always pay well," says Mr. Wasowski, pushing open the door of Stefania Nocun's sunny shop.
She washes sheets now, and wants $10,000 for a drycleaning machine.
The bankers sit her down and grill her for 45 minutes.
All she can show is a scribbled cash book.
She has no collateral.
She finagles her taxes.
And she gets her loan.
"Strong cash flow, experienced owner," Mr. Wasowski says on his way out.
"She has good contacts.
Probably, she bribes.
We have no problems with such a business."
The Credit Corp. approves 100 loans a month this way, steering more money to ordinary Poles than any other aid giver.
It would lend more if it had more to lend.
But its parent, the Enterprise Fund, gave it just $28 million, plus $20 million in loans that can be re-lent to Poles.
And the fund's new partner, the Private Equity Fund, won't give it anything.
The reason is that labor-intensive lending at the grass roots of Poland's restoration-a service no Polish bank can affordwon't make the kind of money that the Enterprise Fund's venture capitalists believe they need to make their operation self-sustaining in this extremely risky frontier of capitalism.
"They're looking for a 20% return," says Marek Kulczynski, the Credit Corp's Polish president, "and from us they can't expect more than 4%.
Don't forget, microlending isn't very profitable.
We consider ourselves a development institution.
Our objective isn't to earn money."
As the West enters its fifth year of tutoring Eastern Europe in the ways of capitalism, it may finally be learning one lesson: Recognizing that a good chunk of aid is going to be dissipated on Western consultants with no measurable results, perhaps it's better to let the Poles spend it, for better or worse, on themselves.
In January 1990, Hubert Szlaszewski sat at an empty desk in a bare state office.
A 32-year-old lawyer raised in the West, he had returned to pitch in as Poland tried to cope with the West's sudden benevolence.
"We need all kinds of assistance," he said then.
"All of it is welcome.
The delicate part is making sure it is well spent."
Mr. Szlaszewski has a desk piled with paper today.
Guiding a batch of aid activities, he still tries to see that the money is well spent -- and that still is the delicate part.
"You have to be reasonable," he says, but donors often aren't.
"Poles should be in charge," he says, but donors usually are.
Poland's bureaucrats are no longer unschooled in the ways of foreign aid.
Yet the West won't allow them a major say in the way aid is used.
Poles wait months for the EU to clear ideas they approve.
Their sole brush with the U.S. aid program consists of dropping by the embassy to pick up annual reports.
The Poles have borrowed a wad of money and listened to a load of lectures as the West has directed them toward capitalism.
In hindsight, they and many Westerners also now accept that despite the success of some individual aid efforts, something meatier -- more direct grants, in particular -- might have saved Poland's poor and jobless much grief, given growing room to their fish farmers and software writers, and helped avoid the four years of political slapstick that finally brought the Communists back.
Today, Poles have stopped waiting for Western aid to match the rhetoric of generosity that greeted their revolution.
They would simply prefer more trade and fewer loans, more investment and less advice.
Experts still fly in to improve Polish cherries, while Western duties kill Polish cherry exports.
The Poles politely wonder if a tariff cut wouldn't lessen the absurdity.
If a small loan finds no takers, they ask, why not sugar it with a grant to the jobless coal miner who wants to open a car wash?
Two years ago, Poland asked the EU to think over such things.
Cherries seem to have no hope, but the car wash finally does: $90 million in grants are slowly rising from the Brussels bureaucracy.
It makes Mr. Szlaszewski feel as cordially grateful today as he did in 1990 for whatever goodwill the West has to offer.
But he is 36 now, and four years the wiser.
"Foreign assistance isn't a panacea," he says.
"Here and there, it helps.
I hate judging it by how many millions are spent.
It's much better to think, `Does this make sense?'"
TOTAL $70.4
