Earlier in the week we commended L.J. Davis's New Republic cover story on Whitewater and the culture of Arkansas.
But Mr. Davis modestly omitted a fascinating part of the tale, namely his personal misfortunes in reporting his article.
The omission reflects a curious dichotomy in Whitewater press coverage.
A lot of the news has been broken by publications willing to report what they learn even at the risk that now and then some of it may be overtaken by other facts -- The Washington Times, the New York tabloids, the American Spectator and the British press.
The mainstream American press has come in for some derision overseas; the Economist likened Whitewater to the 1936 episode in which the American press was reporting and the British press covering up the romance leading to the abdication of Edward VIII.
This is not quite fair.
Since the story came back to life in December, the American press has mostly done a commendable job of plumbing the finances of Arkansas and the Clintons and kibitzing every move in Washington's procedural chess.
For better or worse, however, the respectable press has shown little-to-no appetite for publishing anything about sex and violence.
Stories on these subjects of course circulate constantly among reporters, and shape understanding of events within the press corps, if not among its readers.
Somehow we think that readers ought to know the following account from Mr. Davis, a contributing editor to Harper's magazine since 1978: He was returning to his room at Little Rock's Legacy Hotel about 6:30 after an interview on the evening of Feb. 13.
The last thing he remembers is putting his key in the door, and the next thing he remembers is waking up face down on the floor, with his arm twisted under his body and a big lump on his head above his left ear.
The room door was shut and locked.
Nothing was missing except four "significant" pages of his notebook that included a list of his sources in Little Rock.
He didn't file a police report, saying he wanted to get out of town and wasn't sure what had happened to him.
"I thought I was walking on a trampoline for three days," he told us, and then consulted his physician.
Mr. Davis says his doctor found his injury inconsistent with a fall, and that he'd been "struck a massive blow above the left ear with a blunt object."
He suffered both a concussion and an "amnesiac episode" from the blow.
With Mr. Davis's permission, Dr. Richard Wagman has confirmed this diagnosis to us.
Along similar lines, throughout the world except in the United States, Sally Perdue is a household name.
She's a former Miss Arkansas and TV reporter who went on one talk show, "Sally Jessy Raphael," during the 1992 campaign to say she had an affair with Bill Clinton in 1983.
This was only briefly noted, though the Washington Post did report that Jack Palladino, a San Francisco private investigator hired by the Clinton campaign to squelch "bimbo eruptions," called estranged relatives for damaging comments about Ms. Perdue.
Like all the other bimbo eruptions, this one has been "spiked," subjected to a universal news blackout in the U.S.
But the Sally Perdue story took a different turn.
Last January, Ms. Perdue told Ambrose Evans-Pritchard of the Sunday Telegraph that she'd been threatened with violence if she continued to talk.
She named a name, Ron Tucker, who she said claimed to represent the Democratic Party.
She says Mr. Tucker first offered her a federal job in exchange for silence, and added, "if I didn't take the offer, then they knew that I went jogging by myself and he couldn't guarantee what would happen to my pretty little legs."
Afterward, Ms. Perdue says she received threatening phone calls and letters, one of which she made available to the Telegraph.
She says she found an unspent shotgun shell on the seat of her jeep, and that later the back window was shattered.
She reported this to the FBI, which told the Telegraph there was an ongoing investigation.
Mr. Tucker's employer at the time, John Newcomb of Marion Mining, added the confirmation that Mr. Tucker told him he had been asked "to get to this woman and get her to shut up."
In an interview with us this week, Mr. Tucker responded, "Sally Perdue is a flake, stirring up a hornet's nest.
I only met with her for 10 to 15 minutes once.
I'm not a political animal," and then degenerated into a series of threats and obscenities.
Editors and reporters have to grapple with a flood of stories, charges and rumors of violence and even deaths in Arkansas.
The state seems to be a congenitally violent place, and full of colorful characters with stories to tell, axes to grind and secrets of their own to protect.
We believe Mr. Davis.
The Telegraph story included a lot of corroboration, though of course no evidence that anyone ordered Mr. Tucker to say what Ms. Perdue charges he said.
Yet as the story develops, we're increasingly coming to the conclusion that the respectable press is spending too much time adjudicating what the reader has a right to know, and too little time with the old spirit of "stop the presses."
