Alberto Fujimori's unlikely political odyssey began a decade ago when a fortuneteller helped convince the then-obscure university professor that he possessed exceptional qualities of leadership.
But not even the savviest seer might have foreseen Mr. Fujimori's success at transforming Peru from a Latin American Lebanon into an emerging economic star.
When Mr. Fujimori took office as Peru's president in 1990 he inherited a crippling war with a Maoist guerrilla group, known as the Shining Path, that had cost 20,000 lives and $20 billion.
Peru's economy had contracted a startling 20% during the prior two years and inflation had topped 7,000%.
A U.S. risk-analysis firm rated Peru the most dangerous place in the world to do business.
Whether through skill, ruthlessness or good fortune, Mr. Fujimori has triumphed over extraordinary odds.
His government has so pummeled the Shining Path that thousands of displaced Peruvians, and even some tourists, are returning to former war zones.
His freemarket program has tamed inflation and turned Peru's economy into the fastest growing one in the Americas.
Peru's stock market has been heaving with new capital.
All of Mr. Fujimori's accomplishments, however, haven't earned him one crucial victory: acceptance from the U.S. government.
For some U.S. officials, Mr. Fujimori's achievements may always be tainted by the strong-arm tactics he used to engineer the turnaround.
"Original sin does not exist," remarks Peru's foreign minister, Efrain Goldenberg.
At 10:30 on the night of April 5, 1992, President Fujimori interrupted regular programming on Peruvian television to announce that he was dissolving Congress, suspending the constitution and personally assuming almost complete control of the country.
He said the seizure of nearly absolute power, which came to be known as "el autogolpe," or the self-coup, was the only way to stop the ferocious Shining Path from taking over Peru.
Wearied by a dozen years of ineffectual antiterrorist strategies and inept economic management, Peruvians cheered as Mr. Fujimori cracked down on the guerrillas and rammed through his market reforms.
The U.S. and most of the international community, however, condemned the move.
The U.S. has suspended most economic aid ever since, even though Mr. Fujimori has made good on a pledge to hold elections for a new Congress and a new constitution.
Leaders in the U.S. Congress say that unless he takes further steps to strengthen democratic processes and improve Peru's sorry human-rights record, renewing economic aid might encourage the emergence of other authoritarian leaders in Latin America.
Not long after Mr. Fujimori's power grab, the president of Guatemala attempted a self-coup, though the move backfired when a popular outcry forced him from office.
The possibility of autogolpes has also been discussed openly by leaders in Brazil and Venezuela.
Mr. Fujimori's defenders argue that the Clinton administration doesn't make democracy such a priority in dealing with countries that are more strategically important.
They note that Washington gave strong support to Boris Yeltsin when he suspended the Russian Parliament last year.
There is no doubt where Mr. Yeltsin got his inspiration, Mr. Fujimori says: Russian intelligence consulted with its Peruvian counterpart before Mr. Yeltsin's move.
"I can't explain why American foreign policy is discriminatory," says Mr. Fujimori, sitting in a chamber of the baroque National Palace that is decorated with a samurai costume given to him on a visit to his ancestral home of Japan.
The State Department maintains that the administration backed Mr. Yeltsin because the Russian Parliament had been convened under the old Soviet constitution, which didn't provide for what the U.S. considered free and fair elections.
Peru's Congress, on the other hand, had been democratically elected.
Mr. Fujimori now is appealing directly to private U.S. investors, with what is probably the most sweeping privatization program in Latin America.
"Investors have an appraisal that's different from that of government functionaries," he observes.
He says U.S. companies are looking favorably on Peru's economic performance last year, when output grew 6.8%, inflation slowed to under 40% and the stock market soared 90%.
If the sale of the state-owned companies is successful, Peru can use the proceeds to sharply increase social spending.
That would give Mr. Fujimori a leg up in next year's presidential election.
"With a couple of billion dollars in privatization revenue and continued economic growth, Fujimori could be around for a long time," says Felipe Ortiz de Zevallos, a political analyst.
"He's the politician for people who normally hate politicians."
At a time when frustration with politicians is a global trend, Peru under Mr. Fujimori is an object lesson showing where impatience with the governing process can lead.
The son of Japanese immigrants, Mr. Fujimori, now 55, spent nearly three decades laboring in anonymity as a college mathematics professor.
He was running in an election for dean of his department in 1984 when a fortuneteller helped persuade him to aim higher and run for university president.
He did and he won.
In 1990 he aimed higher still, seeking Peru's highest office as a political independent.
Mr. Fujimori, who didn't talk like a politician, capitalized on widespread discontent with Peru's governing elite and its candidate, the novelist Mario Vargas Llosa.
When asked by the Peruvian media what book he would take with him on a desert island, Mr. Fujimori ignored a question he thought frivolous, and responded that he would pack a machete and fish hooks.
His governing philosophy was to have no governing philosophy.
He promised: "Not heterodoxy nor orthodoxy, not liberalism nor communism, nor populism -- only pragmatism."
When Mr. Fujimori took office, with the treasury empty and tens of thousands of Peruvians fleeing abroad, it seemed that Peru didn't need a pragmatist so much as a miracle worker.
Mr. Fujimori contended that the country's problems were rooted in the failure of the judicial and legislative branches to squarely confront terrorism.
Since the Shining Path began its struggle in 1980, fully 95% of suspects arrested on terrorism charges had been released without coming to trial by judges who either sympathized with the terrorists or were intimidated by them.
As for the Peruvian Congress, Mr. Fujimori asserts, "All it wanted to do was manage terrorism."
While he enjoyed some early success in getting legislators to back his program of tough antiterrorist measures and freemarket economic reform, it didn't take long for frictions to develop.
As an independent, Mr. Fujimori had few sympathizers in the Congress.
And his manner was often imperious.
"He would shut the door when Congress wanted to talk," says Guido Pennano, his former minister of industry.
Soon, his program ground to a halt.
In late 1991, the Peruvian Congress blocked many of the more than 100 emergency decrees he had issued to expand military authority over the judiciary and to promote free enterprise.
Early in 1992, the Supreme Court, trying the ruthless leader of the Shining Path, Abimael Guzman, in absentia, inexplicably dropped charges against him.
Only a couple of weeks later, Mr. Fujimori took the law into his own hands.
The stroke was planned meticulously, as were subsequent counterterrorism measures.
Military computers even began tracking sales of a chemical fertilizer used to make Shining Path car bombs.
Throughout the summer of 1992, a virtual all-out war raged between the guerrillas and the army.
The terrorists moved out of Andean bases and began attacking the city of Lima itself.
By the fall, just when it seemed the tide was turning against Mr. Fujimori, police captured Mr. Guzman in a hideout located above a Lima dance studio.
Notebooks seized on the premises led to the subsequent arrest of nearly a score of his top lieutenants.
Rebel morale took a further beating last fall when a humbled Mr. Guzman, serving a life sentence in an underground prison on a Pacific island naval base, wrote to Mr. Fujimori suggesting that the fighting stop.
While many Shining Path operatives remain in the field, murders and economic damage caused by the group plummeted last year to about half of the 1992 level.
Most analysts see Shining Path becoming an increasingly marginal force.
Mr. Fujimori says he himself didn't realize how thoroughly Shining Path had been reduced until last year when he paid a visit to the Andean village of Ayacucho.
The birthplace of Shining Path, Ayacucho had been controlled so completely by guerrillas that outsiders seldom ventured there.
On his trip, Mr. Fujimori led thousands of Roman Catholic worshipers on a nighttime candlelight procession, an ancient tradition being renewed after a decade's hiatus.
"For 10 years, people in Ayacucho had been afraid to go out at night," Mr. Fujimori says.
Was seizing dictatorial powers the only way he could have throttled the Shining Path?
His critics say no.
They point out that the antiterrorist unit that caught Mr. Guzman had been set up before Mr. Fujimori took office.
Critics add that the victory came at a steep price: hundreds of summary arrests or executions of suspected terrorists, many of whom might have been innocent.
Still, it is hard to convince most Peruvians that anything would have improved without the self-coup.
"After 12 years in which terrorists ran wild, a president with guts cleaned up this country in just a few months," says Marco Morales, owner of a small construction company.
As if to symbolize the change, Mr. Morales is shifting away from construction of the high-security fences and doors that were once his major line and is emphasizing a new niche: building factories.
The reduction in terrorism -- along with voter approval of a new constitution that eases investment restrictions and curbs labor privileges -- has set off an effervescence in the business community.
"A year ago, it would have been suicide to have done business in this car, in this part of Lima," says industrialist Ricardo Marquez, riding in the back seat of his Mercedes through what used to be a "red zone" -- a neighborhood controlled by the Shining Path.
Mr. Marquez's clothing manufacturing plant had its best year ever last year, increasing productivity 20%.
While crediting Mr. Fujimori for the turnaround, Mr. Marquez, who heads Peru's largest manufacturers' association, says the president remains an enigma.
"He knows we love him, but even when he comes to our meetings he brings his own orange juice," the industrialist says.
Even in details as minute as his beverage intake -- there's always the risk of poisoning -- Mr. Fujimori remains a man who likes control.
The new constitution concentrates power in the executive branch and, in a rarity for Latin America, allows a sitting president to seek re-election.
Most of those elected to the reconstituted legislature are Fujimori loyalists.
With the aid of an ever-present Toshiba 4400 laptop computer, Mr. Fujimori personally tends to affairs of state as small as the breakdown of a tiny Andean electrical station, which will cost $10,000 to repair.
"Without this," he says, hoisting the laptop, "Peru doesn't move."
If only it were so easy for Mr. Fujimori to program his relationship with the U.S.
Just when the Peruvian leader was beginning to win international recognition for last fall's referendum on the new constitution, he has once again become a target of criticism over his handling of a humanrights case.
The Peruvian Congress, with Mr. Fujimori's backing, rammed through legislation this month that will allow a military court, rather than a civilian one, to try several military officers accused in the killing of nine university students and a professor suspected of terrorist activities.
The U.S. State Department criticized the move as a disruption of due process.
Mr. Fujimori's bow to military authority has also been unpopular with many Peruvians.
Mr. Fujimori's prime minister, who had been a strong defender of the self-coup, resigned in protest.
Reforming the military-dominated courts and punishing officers suspected of human-rights abuses were two of several conditions that U.S. congressional leaders had imposed before backing the release of $105 million in aid appropriated for Peru.
Mr. Fujimori had planned on using the U.S. money to leverage another $500 million or so in economic assistance from other Western nations.
With the U.S. government unlikely to resume aid anytime soon, Mr. Fujimori is counting on private U.S. investors to pick up the slack.
And they are responding.
U.S. mining companies are burrowing all over Peru.
"You can't get up on some of these hills any more, there are so many geologists around," says Charles Preble, president of the Southern Peru Copper Corp.
A host of international telephone companies, including American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and GTE Corp., are bidding this month for Peru's state-controlled phone network.
Coming privatizations of electric companies, hotels and cement makers are also attracting international interest.
Buoyed by the response of foreign capitalists, Mr. Fujimori says he has no regrets about any of his actions in office.
"I'm a decisive man," the president says, unplugging his Toshiba and standing up to leave.
"I want solutions."
