Japan's economic downturn is leading an increasing number of companies to consider action considered radical by the nation's business establishment: merger.
In recent months, several high-profile corporate combinations have grabbed headlines in Japan as companies ally themselves to increase their size and marketing power to boost sagging profits.
Moreover, Japan's bureaucrats now are working both publicly and privately to make mergers easier.
They see mergers as part of a broad restructuring to make Japan's corporate sector more competitive, at home and abroad.
In the latest sign of tacit government backing for such corporate restructuring, Japan's Fair Trade Commission on Tuesday released specific measures, effective Feb. 1, to cut red tape and administrative hurdles to corporate combinations.
In the past, even mergers by small companies in Japan required elaborate and costly paperwork and procedures.
The FTC is eliminating most of the administrative headache for mergers valued at as much as 10 billion yen ($89 million), up from an earlier threshold of five billion yen.
The move is aimed at helping the agency, Japan's antitrust watchdog, to handle the relatively high number of merger applications thus far this decade.
Annual merger filings with Japan's FTC have doubled in the past decade to more than 2,000 in 1992, the latest year for which figures are available.
And within the past couple of months, two giant mergers have been announced.
Mitsubishi Kaisei Corp. is merging with Mitsubishi Petrochemical Co. in a transaction that will create Japan's biggest chemicals company, with a market capitalization of 140 billion yen.
And Onoda Cement Co. is combining with Chichibu Cement Co. to become Japan's largest cement maker, with a market capitalization of 34.7 billion yen.
Officials at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry welcome such combinations, which they believe will create stronger national champions in key industries.
"Amid the broader need to restructure over the coming years, mergers are going to be one large option," a ministry official said.
However, regulators and businessmen alike warn that Japan has a long way to go before mergers provide the quick boost to the bottom line that they often provide in other countries.
That's because in Japan, it's more time-consuming and often more difficult to cut jobs and gain other efficiencies from mergers than in other countries.
Most Japanese mergers still are friendly affairs, often within a single keiretsu group of associated companies.
Outside of that, the whole concept of transferring ownership of a corporation has often been viewed with disdain.
In the Japanese language, the two words most often used to describe corporate acquisitions can also mean "highjack" and "bribe."
Combining two Japanese companies is like "taking two families that have nothing to do with each other or were formerly competitors and asking them to live in peace in the same house," says Ken Moroi, Chichibu Cement's chairman.
Managing such a company poses challenges.
In the banking business, which has seen several huge mergers in recent years, some of the combined banks have kept three personnel departments, one from each original bank and one for the combined group.
The merging cement companies will try to reduce staff using the traditional Japanese approach: hiring cutbacks and voluntary retirements.
Through such measures, the combined company hopes to trim 1,000 of its current 4,000 workers within three years.
Mr. Moroi said his new company will promote employees only on the basis of their contribution to the company, rather than on seniority, marking a major break with tradition.
And Mr. Moroi believes other managers are going to have to face similarly tough decisions in the months and years to come.
Mergers, he said, are going to be an increasingly large part of the Japanese economic landscape.
Unless they find merger partners, he said, "many companies may have a tough time surviving."
