Your page-one article ("Barney & Friends: Public TV Prepares for Image Transplant To Justify Existence," Jan. 13) reported that cable channels such as Bravo, Discovery and Arts & Entertainment have encroached on public TV's "distinctive choice" by routinely offering cable subscribers "the sort of cultural fare and documentaries that once were the sole province of PBS."
But the article, which suggests that the answer to public TV's monetary crisis could be in developing education programming, implies that there's an unmet need for education programming -- and overlooks the significant accomplishments the cable industry has achieved in increasing universal access to education.
Private initiatives such as Cable in the Classroom, a consortium of educational programs provided by cable programmers, and Mind Extension University, the 24-hour cable education network, have been offering cable subscribers a choice of high-school courses, college- and graduate-degree programs, and noncredit courses for personal growth and professional development for many years.
When created 25 years ago, the Public Broadcasting System filled a need that was unmet by any other source.
Now, in an age of 500 channels, privately held cable networks offer the range and quality of programming once the exclusive purview of PBS, without the allocations of public funds -- as much as $275 million last year.
Gregory J. Liptak
Englewood, Colo.
You repeat incoming PBS President Ervin Duggan's unsupported charge that "12 years of tightfisted Republican administrations in Washington" were responsible for the network's financial woes.
To the contrary, PBS was not "forced to take in laundry" and there wasn't any "penny-pinching."
In fact, annual appropriations to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting have increased from about $140 million in 1983 to some $312 million for 1996, about doubling during the Reagan-Bush years.
Indeed, President Clinton promised to freeze federal spending on public broadcasting during the 1992 campaign.
He told Brian Lamb on a July 26, 1992, C-SPAN broadcast: "I don't know that we have to spend more money on it now, we have a pretty vital network of public television.
And in the next few years we have to focus most of our increased investment on investment, on just that, on those things which will generate more wealth for the United States."
