In a case that could revive trans-Atlantic tensions over the film industry, the European Union's culture commissioner said he will oppose extension of an EU antitrust exemption granted to U.S. film distributor United International Pictures.
United International, a jointly owned subsidiary of the U.S. film studios Paramount Communications Inc., the Universal Pictures unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s MCA Inc., and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc., reacted angrily to the remarks by Joao de Deus Pinheiro, the EU culture commissioner.
In London, United International Senior Vice President Brian Reilly said the commissioner's comments were based on "numerous gross distortions of fact" and reflect an "unfortunate vestige of the emotionalism" of last year's world trade talks.
The film distribution company was exempted from key provisions of EU competition law in 1988, and seeks a five-year renewal.
The exemption expired in July, but United International enjoys de facto protection pending the commission's renewal decision.
Under EU law, agreements that restrict or distort competition are generally not allowed.
But the commission can grant exemptions for agreements that contribute to the production or distribution of goods "while allowing consumers a fair share of the resulting benefits."
The key issue in the United International case is whether the exemption is providing such benefits to EU moviegoers in terms of greater selection and lower costs.
Eurocinema, a lobbying group for European filmmakers, has strongly opposed extension of the United International exemption.
The group argues that the exemption has contributed to the domination of European movie screens by Hollywood blockbusters, and has in fact restricted the choice available in Europe.
United International disputes such claims, arguing that the commission granted its exemption after a seven-year examination found "significant benefits to the public."
"I would say flatly no" to extending the exemption, Mr. Pinheiro told a group of journalists.
The commissioner said that United International had not yet asked for renewal of the exemption, a statement that astonished United International officials.
They said the renewal request was filed in June, and has for months been the subject of high-level discussions at the commission.
Mr. Pinheiro said United International controls 80% of U.S. film distribution in the EU, a figure described by United International as "completely incorrect" because of the stiff competition from Time Warner Inc., Walt Disney Co. and other companies.
In 1992, the last year for which full figures are available, the company said its average overall EU market share was 18%.
The European Parliament called last November for the United International exemption not to be renewed, saying it had led to the demise of some European distributors.
In a statement, United International responded that the Strasbourg-based assembly sought to "attribute unwarranted responsibility to United International for the difficulties experienced by certain elements of the industry."
A decision on renewing United International's antitrust exemption will be taken by a majority of the 17 EU commissioners, under the primary responsibility of the competition commissioner, Karel Van Miert.
