Several giant food companies are betting they can lay to rest the belief that the Chinese don't like cheese and other dairy products.
This week, Nestle SA announced plans for a joint venture to build two dairies in the northern port city of Qingdao to make ice cream and yogurt.
The Swiss food company already operates one dairy in northern China that produces powdered milk, and a plant in Guangdong province that makes coffee and nondairy coffee creamers.
Unilever Group, the Anglo-Dutch consumer-products company, last year announced plans to build a factory in Beijing to make Wall's ice cream, and Kraft General Foods Inc., a division of Philip Morris Cos., opened a joint-venture dairy in Beijing last year.
Kraft products already sold in China include individually wrapped cheese slices and Miracle Whip salad dressing.
Snow Brand Milk Products Co., Japan's largest dairy-products maker, announced it will open an office in Shanghai as part of its strategy to expand its global operations.
The new office, Snow Brand's first foothold in China, will be set up in April to conduct market research.
Kate Cleve Newman, who tracks retail and beverage companies at Kleinwort Benson Securities (Asia) Ltd. in Hong Kong, says Asians tend to prefer bland or sweet-tasting dairy products, such as ice cream, rather than bitter ones, such as sharp cheese.
Yogurt, for example, is a popular snack in Singapore, but only found its market once makers added fruit to block out the naturally sour taste.
In some rural areas of Asia, sales of dairy products long were held back by lack of refrigeration and poor roads, which make it difficult to deliver fresh food.
That's one reason powdered and condensed milks were among the first big dairy sellers in the region.
Nestle's Nespray powdered milk is positioned as a health food in China.
Nespray's China ads, developed by J. Walter Thompson Co., feature a young couple teaching its only child to ride a bike.
The market for ice cream, cheese and yogurt is more developed in northern and northeastern China, where the cooler climate helps keep dairy products fresher longer.
A Kraft executive says cheese also has tradition behind it in northern China: It was a favorite food of a Ming dynasty empress.
In southern China, increasing wealth and the influence of Hong Kong media are helping develop a market for dairy products.
Two weeks ago, PepsiCo Inc.'s Pizza Hut International division, which operates four restaurants in Beijing, opened its seventh outlet in Guangzhou.
Pizza Hut executives say China and India are major targets of their international expansion.
One factor that bodes well for pizza sales in China: The mild-tasting mozzarella cheese normally used on pizza suits Chinese tastes -- as does the bland cheese used on McDonald's hamburgers.
