Investment professionals scored a decisive victory in this column's latest stock-picking contest, but a random throw of darts didn't do too badly, either.
Led by Edward C. "Ted" Rorer, founder and chief investment officer of Rorer Asset Management in Philadelphia, four pros chalked up a 27.8% average gain in the contest that ran from Aug. 16 through Jan. 31.
The whims of chance, represented by four Wall Street Journal staffers flinging darts at the stock listings, posted an 18.5% average gain.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average showed a gain of 11.2% during the period.
The latest results bring the tally of pro wins against the darts to 26 to 18 in this series of overlapping six-month contests that began in 1990.
Against the industrial average, however, the pros eked out a much narrower lead of 23 wins to 21.
The pros look better measured by the actual performance of their selections.
For all 44 six-month contests, the average gain for the pros is 8.3%, compared with an average 3.8% for the darts and 4.5% for the Dow industrials.
This time around, each of the pros' four picks beat the industrial average.
The top performer, Mr. Rorer's choice of Santa Fe Pacific Corp., the Schaumburg, Ill., railroad company, rose a resounding 40.7%.
It was followed by a 29.6% gain for Philip Morris Cos., the New York tobacco and food giant, selected by Michael Metz, chief investment strategist for Oppenheimer & Co. in New York.
As is customary, the top two finishers have been invited back for another skirmish.
It will be Mr. Metz's third time as a contestant.
He placed first in the competition that ran from February through July of last year, when his choice of Homestake Mining soared 80%.
Mr. Rorer is betting on a commodity play to repeat his first-place finish in the current contest.
His stock pick for the coming six months is IMC Fertilizer Group Inc. of Northbrook, Ill., which mines phosphate and makes diammonium phosphate, a fertilizer known as DAP.
"Their key to profitability is the price of DAP," Mr. Rorer says.
Prices fell to a 20-year low last year, as world-wide supply exceeded demand and subsidies for foreign producers squeezed U.S. exporters.
Reviving demand plus the scrapping of some subsidies has buoyed prices this year, although Mr. Rorer notes that they're still below their 10-year average and well below the 1988 peak.
IMC stock traded late yesterday on the Big Board at $45, up from a low of $24.375 last year, but still lower than the $68 a share it fetched in 1992.
The company resolved some pending problems in 1993 by settling a lawsuit related to a 1991 explosion at a plant it operated for Alberta Natural Gas Co.'s Angus Chemical unit and by restructuring its debt, Mr. Rorer says.
IMC also cut phosphate production costs through a joint venture with a limited partnership that is 51.3%-owned by Freeport McMoRan Inc.
Looking forward, Mr. Rorer adds, fertilizer demand should get a boost from growth in the world's population, since more people will have to be fed with crops grown on a fixed amount of land.
The U.S. market looks good, he says, because corn production plummeted 31% last year and inventories have to be replenished.
Meanwhile, Oppenheimer's Mr. Metz is putting his chips on gold to win the current challenge.
His choice is Horsham Corp., a Toronto holding company, which controls 20% of American Barrick Resources Corp., a Toronto gold mining concern.
Mr. Metz says gold prices could rise to $500 an ounce this year, from about $385 currently.
Horsham also owns Clark Refining & Marketing Inc. of St. Louis and has real-estate interests in Germany.
Mr. Metz notes that the company has an $800 million cash horde to use for acquisitions, including $550 million from a debenture offering at 3 1/4%.
"It's cheap money, I think they will put it to good use," he says.
The debentures are convertible into American Barrick shares, at Horsham's option.
Horsham officials have said they've ruled out acquiring another gold mining concern, but otherwise their possibilities aren't limited by geography or industry.
"It's partly a gold play, partly an entrepreneurial play," Mr. Metz says about his choice.
"The company has strong entrepreneurial management."
The stock traded at $14.625 late yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mr. Metz thinks the price could rise as much as 50% during the course of the contest.
Joining Mr. Rorer and Mr. Metz in the current competition, which runs through July 31, are Theresa Hamacher and Ben Zacks.
Ms. Hamacher is managing director of Prudential Investment Advisors, the Newark, N.J., unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America that manages the Prudential Mutual Funds.
Mr. Zacks is executive vice president of Zacks Investment Research Inc. in Chicago.
Ms. Hamacher's choice is USX-U.S. Steel Group, the steelmaking unit of the Pittsburgh-based USX Corp. that trades as a separate company.
"The entire steel industry has undergone a massive restructuring," she says, and stands to "benefit from the economic recovery, particularly the strong auto cycle that we're seeing."
U.S. Steel has reduced costs substantially, cutting capacity to a third of what it was in 1980, Ms. Hamacher says.
Plant modernization costs are behind the company now, and its pension plan is overfunded, she adds.
Cost reductions and a weak dollar put U.S. Steel in a strong competitive position internationally and it also stands to benefit from capacity reductions overseas, Ms. Hamacher says.
She says the stock price could go to $60 or $65 in the next six months; it traded on the New York Stock Exchange late yesterday at $42.50.
Mr. Zacks, for his part, likes UAL Corp., the Chicago-based parent of United Airlines.
Assuming that the company's proposed employee-led buyout is approved by shareholders this spring, he expects earnings estimates to rise, pushing up the stock price.
"The two largest cost items in the airline business are labor and fuel and both appear to be coming down dramatically," Mr. Zacks says.
He also thinks the airline's routes to the Far East will generate increased revenue and profits.
"I don't think any of this is reflected in the stock price," he says.
Under terms of the buyout proposal, which has been approved by the airline's pilots and machinists, employees would exchange wage and work-rule concessions for an initial 53% stake in UAL.
The plan also would permit United to set up a separate low-fare, short-route carrier with lower labor costs, making it a stronger competitor against no-frills carriers.
UAL traded late yesterday at $146 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The pros' stock selections will be up against a dartboard portfolio consisting of BancFirst Corp. of Oklahoma, Campbell Soup Co., CareNetwork Inc. and Northern Border Partners L.P.
WIN THIS CONTEST a couple of times and people will beat a path to your picks.
A study by Scott Smart and Jason Greene of Indiana University finds that the average stock featured in the Investment Dartboard column rises 1.6% on publication day, with an 87% increase in trading volume.
But stocks favored by contestants who have previously done well in the contest (finishing first or second at least twice) rise 5.4% on average, with an increase in trading volume of 234%.
Readers who hope to profit by jumping on the bandwagon may well miss out, however.
The Indiana researchers say most of the price jump occurs during the first half-hour of trading.
Services/Tradeline Lakeshore Bancorp, up 31.9%; General Electric, up 10.2%; Capital American Financial, down 2.2%.
