Computer Associates International Inc.'s stock fell 7.9%, despite a better-than-expected 55% increase in fiscal third-quarter earnings.
In addition to the earnings announcement, the No. 2 software company after Microsoft named Sanjay Kumar, 31 years old, to the new post of president and chief operating officer.
Mr. Kumar had been executive vice president, operations.
In response to the stock drop, Charles B. Wang, chairman and chief executive officer, said in an interview: "I'm no expert on the stock market; I'll just listen to what analysts are saying, that a lot of people are short-term profit takers."
Mr. Wang said the company was "very happy" with the company's results, which exceeded analysts' estimates of 62 cents to 65 cents a share.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Computer Associates fell $3.50, to close at $41.
For the quarter ended Dec. 31, Computer Associates reported net rose to $124.2 million, or 72 cents a share, from $80.2 million, or 48 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 15% to $574.4 million.
"It was a good, solid quarter, but most of the upside was on the margin side," said Tim McCollum, who follows software companies for Dean Witter Reynolds.
He said the quarter's revenue didn't significantly exceed analysts' estimates.
But he said that, despite the stock's drop yesterday, Computer Associates shares are still near a record high.
Investors "deserved a little profit-taking," he said.
Rick Sherlund, a software analyst at Goldman Sachs, cited several reasons for the stock's drop.
"It's puzzling to me that Computer Associates' relatively mature mainframe software-product portfolio can sustain close to 20% license revenue growth and that maintenance revenues are flat year over year."
He said those concerns caused profit-taking.
In addition, Mr. Sherlund said the latest-quarter performance "wasn't the big blowout we saw last quarter relative to expectations."
The company posted an 86% rise in second-quarter net.
But Mr. Wang, who spoke to analysts earlier yesterday, said, "In general, the business is strong and the outlook is strong."
He said he is comfortable with analysts' estimates that the company will earn $2.20 a share, or about $378.4 million, for the year ending March 31.
He also said he is comfortable with estimates that revenue for the year will total $2.1 billion to $2.2 billion.
A year earlier, Computer Associates earned $245.5 million, or $1.44 a share, on revenue of $1.84 billion.
For the nine months, Computer Associates reported net income of $242.5 million, or $1.41 a share, up 66% from $146.4 million, or 86 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 16% to $1.51 billion.
Computer Associates' new president, Mr. Kumar, was also named to the board, as was Richard P. Grasso, who is executive vice chairman, president and chief operating officer of the New York Stock Exchange.
The additions increase the board to eight directors.
Mr. Wang said Mr. Kumar's appointment was "a recognition or formalization of a role he's had."
Mr. Kumar joined Computer Associates with its acquisition of Uccel Corp. in August 1987, where he was a director of software development.
He has held various positions at Computer Associates in the development, planning and operations area.
He was named executive vice president, operations, a year ago.
