Congress has its best chance ever to pass legislation phasing in interstate banking and branching.
In recent weeks, a key House subcommittee and the full Senate Banking Committee have voted unanimously in favor of this legislation, which also has the support of the Clinton administration.
This show of strong support would usually mean that a bill is well on its way to the president's desk.
However, there is a long history of important banking bills becoming magnets for extraneous amendments from various interest groups -- amendments that ultimately sink the whole package.
(This happened most recently in 1991.)
With the full House Banking Committee facing a critical vote on the bill today, the real question is: Will Congress permit these extraneous measures to once again sink reforms needed to bring our financial system into the modern world?
There seems to be a strong consensus in Congress that interstate banking legislation should be enacted.
Leaders of this congressional effort have pointed to three positive results.
First, interstate banking will be good for consumers and businesses.
Interstate banks will pass on cost savings from more efficient operations in the form of lower interest rates on loans.
Consumers and businesses will also benefit from the availability of new services, such as more flexible mortgage loans for homeowners and advanced cash-management systems for businesses.
In addition, consumers who travel or commute across state lines and businesses that operate in more than one state will see added convenience.
The second benefit of interstate banking legislation is that it will strengthen the banking industry, by giving individual institutions more geographic diversification in their portfolios.
And it will allow banks to compete on a level playing field with other players in the financial services industry -- such as securities firms and insurance companies -- which are already permitted to operate across state lines.
Finally, the legislation will lessen regional economic downturns, such as the one that hit New England several years ago.
It is clear that in New England the downturn was made much worse because weakened banks were forced to shrink their loan portfolios as their capital levels fell because of losses.
Interstate banking, it is now recognized, would have enabled banks to better withstand regional loan losses and to continue providing credit to job-creating businesses in New England.
Both the House and Senate bills, which are very similar, strike a balance in preserving the competitiveness of banks of all sizes, from small community outfits to giant money centers.
The bills also protect the rights of states by enabling them to opt out of the interstate branching system.
This careful balance is important not only substantively but also politically.
It ensures that the bill will be supported by banks of all sizes and from all states.
In the past, interstate banking legislation has been highly controversial, but the industry has now come together to support this approach.
This is a major accomplishment and one that is critical to the future survival of the banking industry.
But this careful balance could quickly fall apart if the bill becomes a vehicle for amendments from various interest groups.
Elements of the insurance industry have already tried to add restrictions on bank insurance sales, although that danger seems to have receded, at least in the Senate.
The biggest threat in the House comes from community and consumer groups that will reportedly seek amendments requiring banks to provide low-cost services and additional loans in low-income areas.
These groups could more productively use their energies to expand the scope of the Community Reinvestment Act -- the 1977 law that requires banks to help meet the credit needs of all communities in which they take deposits -- to cover all financial service providers, not just banks.
If the community-lending amendments are added to the interstate banking bill, they will be self-defeating.
For they will almost certainly consign this bill to the same fate as all recent attempts to modernize our banking system -- the legislation will die.
Because most banks, with no interest in branching across state lines, would receive no direct benefits from this legislation.
They would surely lobby to kill any bill that imposes new burdens in the form of "community lending" requirements.
The American Bankers Association and state associations have said they will oppose an interstate bill with such amendments.
It would be a shame if these amendments kill an opportunity to strengthen American banking.
One can only hope that Congress seizes the opportunity to pass a "clean" version of the interstate banking and branching legislation.
Mr. McCoy is chairman and chief executive of Banc One Corp. in Columbus, Ohio.
