New York -- In so far as the art scene has become a racket for the marketing of inane fads and political correctness, it has naturally attracted the attention of satirists and pointers-with-alarm.
Witness Morley Safer's recent mild whistle-blowing on "60 Minutes" about such phenomena as the rage for graffiti art, and the howls about philistinism and censorship that the program evoked.
John Guare's 1991 play "Six Degrees of Separation" used aspects of the New York art world for background.
Now comes the New York production, at the Manhattan Theatre Club, of another 1991 play, Timberlake Wertenbaker's "Three Birds Alighting on a Field," set in the London gallery scene.
Ms. Wertenbaker, an American dramatist resident in London, was most recently represented here in 1990 by "Our Country's Good," a clumsy and obvious play about Australian convicts putting on a play.
This time out, the playwright's command of her scene seems more relaxed and deft.
A shiny gallery, all chrome and glass, is the setting of a lot of the art-babble as twit director Jeremy (in yet another perfectly judged performance by the underrated Daniel Gerroll) struggles to bamboozle his gaggle of suckers.
The market is dead, and he's trying to move such works as an empty piece of air surrounded by a frame.
"This is a difficult work, a slow work," he purrs to a hesitating buyer, who opines, "I find it very interesting, the emptiness."
A woman critic in leather drops by and words like "schnabelize" -- after the painter Julian Schnabel and meaning, roughly, "commercialize" -- fly about.
Some ladies who lunch form a committee to rescue ruined Romanian churches but are put off when the only actual Romanian around is too poor to provide them with pretty slides of the churches; this guy's subsequent angry denunciation of the belated -- and still half-baked -- anticommunism of the London intelligentsia is a high point of the play, although the audience I saw it with, unaccustomed to that sort of truth, received it in the same embarrassed silence as the characters on stage.
A bit later, a brassy new-rich Texas woman returns to Jeremy some Basquiat-like graffiti she'd bought on the grounds that she does not intend to live with fragments of the artless squalor she came from.
Our sympathies are, finally, with this woman, although she is much too broadly caricatured in the writing and acting.
(Does Ms. Wertenbaker actually know any contemporary Texans, or did she just rent "Giant"?)
In these moments the play is on target.
Under Max Strafford-Clark's breathless direction it moves like blackout sketches, with scene switching from gallery to Glyndebourne to Harrod's, and with actors toting the elegantly minimalist props on and off Sally Jacob's clever sets.
But intersecting this almost generic art-world satire is the narrative of Biddy, a society ditz who's been instructed by her rich Greek husband, Yoyo, to make herself knowledgeable about art in order to get him status as a collector and an invitation to join a first-rate club.
Yoyo, a builder of huge apartment buildings that have earned Prince Charles's sneers, is a social failure in London despite a million-pound gift to the opera.
Biddy was an earlier English acquisition of Yoyo's; she's a daffy aristo who artlessly puts her ignorances and insecurities and vulnerabilities on display in dialogue and monologue.
Harriet Walter plays her sublimely, with just the right comic exaggeration, all elbows and loose hair and lovable foolishness.
It's like watching Joyce Grenfell as a wacky Nancy Mitford heroine.
(Ms. Walter is probably best known here as Harriet Vane, Peter Wimsey's partner and inamorata in the PBS Dorothy Sayers dramatizations.)
But, as Ms. Wertenbaker hints very early on, Biddy's function in the scheme of things is to be redeemed from enslavement to a flawed husband and to false art by contact with the real thing.
Enter Stephen, a scruffy, bearded, grouchy, flannel-wearing, country-dwelling painter -- a D.H. Lawrence kind of guy, crossed with the Alan Bates fantasy dude in "An Unmarried Woman."
Jeremy had bumped Stephen from the gallery a while back for being unfashionable, and he had gone off in socialist dudgeon to work on a new genre of painting he calls "abstract landscape" (we get to see one; it looks like a Bloomsbury painter's idea of Cezanne).
Biddy is drawn, by a deep wild instinct, to Stephen and is soon asking him if he'd do her portrait.
"I'd have to find," he explains, "your significant form."
"Significant form" is a bit of jargon coined by Bloomsbury aesthete Clive Bell in 1914.
Indeed, Stephen and his canvas and his patter all seem worked up from old books and novelettes.
And by the play's final scene, Biddy is boldly baring her breasts for Stephen to paint and caress.
Poor Yoyo has meanwhile died of . . . well, of shame at being caught shoplifting in Harrod's, it seems; the playwright decided to suddenly enlarge Yoyo into a figure worthy of tragic sympathy, but it is too little and too late and sits ill with everything else in the play.
Ms. Wertenbaker is adept in this play at catching the silly surface of a social scene.
She has a gift that might be called Cowardian.
But she slips, and clumsily, into the cliches of romantic melodrama when she tries to go from problem to solution.
Oddly, "Six Degrees" had a somewhat similar ailment, for it asked us to believe that the empty life of a glibly arty socialite could be filled by the pathetic ambitiousness of an exotic con man.
In Guare, as in Wertenbaker, the remedy for gleefully depicted phoniness was, unintentionally, as phony as the malady.
Mr. Lyons is the theater critic for The New Criterion.
