President Clinton's probable nominee for vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, White House economist Alan Blinder, won't be joining the Fed's "zero inflation" caucus if he gets the job.
In contrast to the dwindling number of inflation hawks at the Fed who argue that the board's overriding goal ought to be reducing the inflation rate below current levels, Mr. Blinder has written that the cost of such a policy -- in terms of added unemployment -- probably exceeds the benefits.
Although Mr. Clinton hasn't made a final decision, his economic advisers are recommending that he nominate Mr. Blinder to succeed David Mullins, who resigned earlier this month.
A trenchant writer who once described himself in print as an "inflation dove," Mr. Blinder has asserted that "inflation's most devout enemies exhibit verbal hysteria."
In his Business Week column in 1990, he wrote, "A nation is better off without inflation, just as an individual is better off without a headache.
But, if it is painful to reduce inflation (as it surely is), then a rational society may be loath to take drastic anti-inflation medicine, just as a rational individual may reject brain surgery to cure a headache."
And in a 1987 book, he concluded that "the costs that attend the low and moderate inflation rates experienced in the United States and in other industrial countries appear to be quite modest -- more like a bad cold than a cancer on society."
Extending that metaphor in an interview last week, Mr. Blinder said: "If you don't have a cold, you certainly don't want to contract one.
That's the Fed's current job."
Some at the Fed see things similarly, but rarely acknowledge as much in public, partly for fear that tolerating a little inflation inevitably leads to more.
"The trouble with a modest rate of inflation . . . is that there is a tendency if it goes on indefinitely to tend to accelerate," Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan told a congressional hearing last week, a view Mr. Blinder has challenged.
"There is no downside to low inflation so far as long-term growth is concerned," Mr. Greenspan also said.
He didn't address the possible short-run pain that might be required to reduce inflation.
Although some outspoken Fed officials -- including former member Wayne Angell, the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank President Jerry Jordan and his predecessor Lee Hoskins -- have preached the wisdom of cutting the inflation rate to zero, Fed policy hasn't been aimed at that goal.
In congressional testimony, Mr. Greenspan last week vowed to head off an increase in inflation, but made no promises about reducing it.
He has said that the Fed's goal is "price stability" -- a state where inflation no longer is a factor in economic decisions -- and has suggested that the U.S. isn't far from that point.
The Fed expects the government's measure of consumer prices to increase about 3% this year, and Mr. Greenspan said that gauge overstates the true inflation rate between 1/2 and 1 1/2 percentage points.
Trying to predict a Fed nominee's votes on interest rates from past writings can be hazardous; the Fed and its staff tend to shape the thinking of those who are appointed to the board.
"I know someone whom I thought was soft on inflation.
When they got on the board, they turned out to be very hard on inflation.
You can't tell what someone's going to do," said Steven Axilrod, a former top Fed staffer who's now vice chairman of Nikko Securities Co.
Moreover, Mr. Blinder has consistently praised the policies of the Greenspan Fed in his Business Week column.
Prominent in academic circles, Mr. Blinder isn't well known in financial markets.
"He isn't a household name to the market as a whole," said Darwin Beck, who tracks the Fed for CS First Boston Inc.
A liberal allied with the Keynesian school of economists, Mr. Blinder, 48 years old, has a doctorate from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He is on leave from Princeton University to serve on Mr. Clinton's three-member Council of Economic Advisers.
If nominated and confirmed by the Senate, Mr. Blinder would fill a term that expires in January 1996, administration officials say.
Mr. Greenspan's term as Fed chairman expires in March 1996.
Although Mr. Blinder could be a contender for the top post, his lack of financial-market experience would be a handicap.
At this point, administration insiders consider Robert Rubin, the former investment banker who heads Mr. Clinton's National Economic Council, as the most likely successor to Mr. Greenspan, if he isn't reappointed.
Other contenders include Lawrence Summers, now undersecretary of the Treasury for international matters, and Gerald Corrigan, former president of the New York Fed.
The other vacancy on the seven-member Fed board is for a full 14-year term to succeed Mr. Angell.
Brookings Institution economist George Perry had been the leading candidate for that spot until the surprise resignation of Mr. Mullins altered administration thinking.
If he doesn't get the nod, the White House hopes to find a woman or minority candidate.
