George Bush spent $216,000 for public-opinion polls in 1989 and 1990, according to his own pollster.
Last year, Bill Clinton spent $1,986,410.
All of President Clinton's polling money, paid out of the Democratic National Committee treasury, went to Stanley Greenberg, proprietor of Greenberg Research, the exclusive poll-taking firm for the White House and the Democratic National Committee.
"Boy, I wouldn't mind having that contract," says Ed Goeas, a leading Republican pollster.
"Two million dollars is an incredible amount of money in our business."
Mr. Goeas and his two partners expect to collect $4 million this year -- from 80 clients.
No White House in history has been so awash in data as this one.
More than any other president, Mr. Clinton, the first baby boomer president, relies on polls and focus groups in helping to determine what he needs to be saying and how he should be saying it.
"Stan Greenberg scares the hell out of me," says Republican and former Ross Perot pollster Frank Luntz.
"He just doesn't have a finger on the people's pulse; he's got an IV injected into it.
He's the best."
The result of the collaboration between the 48-year-old Mr. Greenberg and the 47-year-old president is obvious to specialists in mass communications.
"You can hear it in the rhetoric," says Mr. Luntz.
"The words he uses come right out of Stan Greenberg's focus groups.
Greenberg literally pulls the words out of the mouths of ordinary Americans and puts them in the mouth of the president.
The result is, Bill Clinton speaks like real Americans speak.
I wish we had a Stan Greenberg."
Rival pollsters point to Mr. Clinton's health-care address to Congress on Sept. 22 as a striking example of his collaboration with Mr. Greenberg.
In that widely praised speech, Mr. Clinton laid down six basic principles for reforming America's health-care system: "security, simplicity, savings, choice, quality and responsibility."
"I was doing focus groups at the same time," says Mr. Luntz.
"Those were the exact words I was hearing, too."
(In such focus group sessions, small groups of people led by a professional communications expert are paid to participate in discussions of major, and sometimes minor, policy issues; the sessions are normally recorded by microphones and hidden cameras.)
Of course Mr. Greenberg can't solve all of the problems lurking inside the Clinton White House.
Rhetoric, even if it has that down-home feeling, isn't the same as policy.
Flawed policy is still harder to defend than sound policy.
And polls and focus groups can't do much about ineptitude in handling such matters as the investigations surrounding Whitewater Development Co.
But when Mr. Clinton is on a high -- and he's the kind of president who goes through extraordinary ups and downs -- it's usually because he and Mr. Greenberg are working together as a team, telling Americans, in familiar language, what they want to hear.
Not everyone thinks what they're doing is such a great idea.
"They seem to be checking people's reactions to the news every day," says Robert Teeter, President Bush's pollster and now one of the pollsters for The Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll.
But "when you collect this much data, you get into the old problem of not being able to tell the trees from the forest."
Mr. Greenberg won't talk about what's in his presidential polls or what he's been telling the president, with whom he meets about once a week.
But he says Mr. Clinton is a good client.
"He worries about losing touch," Mr. Greenberg says.
"That's how he puts it, over and over again -- `losing touch.'
It goes back to Arkansas.
He thinks he lost his first bid for re-election because he had lost touch with the voters."
Records on file at the Federal Election Commission underline just how busy Mr. Greenberg is.
Most months, in addition to his $50,000 consulting fee, he's paid for three or four polls for the White House, running from $10,000 to $40,000 apiece, and maybe three or four focus groups, which appear to vary from $3,000 to $5,000.
Mr. Greenberg also does some polling for the party itself -- more of it this year than last -- but neither he nor the party will give a breakdown.
He also polls for a handful of old clients, predating his involvement with Mr. Clinton.
They include Sen. Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut and Rep. Bob Carr of Michigan, who is running for the Senate.
He also maintains a longtime commitment as an adviser to Nelson Mandela and his African National Congress.
Heavy strategic polling for incumbent presidents is a fairly recent phenomenon, going back not much further than Patrick Caddell, who served as Jimmy Carter's White House pollster.
It was Mr. Caddell who convinced Mr. Carter the nation was going through some kind of "malaise," though Mr. Carter never actually used that word himself.
Most voters, it turned out, didn't care to be told they were to blame for the country's ills.
The Republican Party paid pollster Richard Wirthlin as much as $1 million in at least one of the years in which Ronald Reagan was president.
Mr. Wirthlin met with the president irregularly to talk about his poll results.
But Mr. Reagan was never as interested in polling data as the man in the White House now.
Mr. Greenberg's poll results and focus-group findings are closely held.
That's nothing new; presidential polls have never been made public.
Not one of them has ever found its way into the Roper Center for Public Opinion archives at the University of Connecticut, the repository for polling data, even though the center has tried from time to time to collect some of the material.
Celinda Lake, who was Mr. Greenberg's partner during the election last year, says there's no reason for presidential polls to cover the same ground as the public polls sponsored by several newspapers and TV networks.
So she suspects that Mr. Greenberg's polls try to anticipate how the voters might react to a policy initiative.
What would voters say, for example, if U.S. troops were sent to Bosnia?
"They know what they're thinking of doing," says Ms. Lake, who parted with Mr. Greenberg regretfully, and now works with Democratic pollsters Mark Mellman and Ed Lazarus.
"We don't.
We can only measure public opinion on whether it was a good or a bad idea after it's happened."
"They do test things prospectively," says Robert Blendon, who tracks public opinion on health-care issues at the Harvard University School of Public Health.
"Maybe they'll measure something they're thinking about with the president's name on it; maybe they'll try it without the president's name.
Then they'll go to the focus groups to get more complex responses."
Ms. Lake, along with many of her Democratic colleagues, wishes Mr. Greenberg, the White House and the Democratic National Committee would be more generous in sharing their data.
"There's a lot of what they do that would be very helpful," she says.
But surely some of the data is too personal to be shared.
GOP pollster Luntz says, "I can promise you Greenberg is doing serious polling right now into what people think about Hillary Clinton.
They're not likely to give many people those results."
