Wake up, all you people stampeding into emerging-markets stock funds.
"Don't expect this crazy, wild 70%" to continue, says J. Mark Mobius, who runs several of Franklin Resources Inc.'s Templeton mutual funds and is widely regarded as an emerging-markets guru.
His biggest portfolio is Templeton Developing Markets Trust, up 74.5% including dividends last year and up 2.3% since then.
"When you have these big run-ups, you also get . . . corrections," Mr. Mobius warns.
"Those corrections don't often go back to the same level, but they can be very fierce."
Though he won't predict the timing, he thinks a drop of 20% to 40% in some countries' markets is "quite possible" this year.
Some Asian markets already have been hit hard.
"We are already in a highly dangerous period," he says in an interview on a visit to New York.
In one cautionary sign, Mr. Mobius holds a 30% cash position in the $1.4 billion Templeton Developing Markets Trust.
Mutual funds usually are considered fully invested when they have 5% of their assets in cash.
Investors are shoveling money into Mr. Mobius's fund, and "we're not investing that immediately.
We're being very careful in view that so many things have run up" in price, he says.
"You see a lot of newcomers managers of new funds without a lot of experience rushing in," says Mr. Mobius, whose funds belong to the Templeton subsidiary of Franklin, of San Francisco.
The flood of money "is pushing up prices of stocks in some emerging markets to ridiculous levels."
To be sure, Mr. Mobius, whose offices are in Hong Kong, is extremely bullish in the long term for emerging markets, the stock markets of fast-growing developing nations.
All this money, and the hot returns in the market last year, are "waking the world up to the tremendous potential we see in emerging markets," he says.
Education and advances in technology are allowing whole nations to "leapfrog" whole stages of economic development through which the U.S., United Kingdom and Japan had to trudge.
And Mr. Mobius's current caution isn't stopping Templeton from bringing out more funds to invest in emerging markets.
Templeton filed last week to bring out a "closed end" fund investing in both stocks and bonds of emerging markets, according to Mutual Fund Advance, a unit of Dow Jones & Co.'s Federal Filings subsidiary.
Closed-end funds differ from mutual funds in that their shares are traded on an exchange.
Templeton is seeking new money from investors for emerging-markets funds in the U.K. as well.
Another sign of emerging-markets mania: Morgan Stanley & Co. filed recently for a closed-end fund to invest in European emerging markets such as Eastern Europe, Russia and Turkey.
All told, Mr. Mobius and the Templeton team he oversees manage "20-odd portfolios and funds" investing in emerging markets, including two mutual funds and two publicly traded closed-end funds in the U.S.
His group gets $50 million to $100 million a week from investors.
The total assets he manages has grown to $5 billion from $3 billion in a year.
Mr. Mobius has traveled around the globe twice in the first two months this year searching for stocks.
Templeton Developing Markets holds shares of companies from 24 different countries, including United Plantations Africa Ltd., a citrusfruit company operating in Swaziland.
The fund is currently weighted about 19% in Hong Kong, and its holdings in emerging markets include 11% in Brazil, 10% in Turkey, and 9% in the Philippines.
There are also significant holdings from Greece, Mexico and Malaysia.
The stocks come largely from the banking, telecommunications and real-estate industries.
He is starting to buy more stocks in Malaysia and Thailand, saying the sharp declines in these markets have provided some opportunities.
But lately, he has been doing more selling than buying in Hong Kong and in emerging markets such as Brazil, Colombia, Singapore, Indonesia, Taiwan and, to a lesser extent, Mexico.
Mr. Mobius picks a stock by looking at a company's price-to-earnings ratio.
He checks to see if the stock is cheap compared with its history of earnings growth, and compared with other companies in the same market and industry.
Many other people are hunting, too.
During the past six months, 48 new funds to invest in emerging markets have filed offering forms with the Securities and Exchange Commission, according to Mutual Fund Advance.
Emerging markets also are being fueled by money from broadly diversified international-stock funds shifting into these countries.
Mr. Mobius says all of this cash also is propelling a number of new public companies.
He says an owner of a closely held Venezuelan company that manufactures stationery equipment recently told him that he "can't believe what people are willing to pay" for his company.
Mr. Mobius says the Venezuelan company (whose name he won't reveal) would have fetched only $10 million in the market a few years ago but could probably get $100 million in a public offering today.
Mr. Mobius is a living legend among emerging-markets investors.
In 1987 he launched the Templeton Emerging Markets Fund, which trades on the New York Stock Exchange.
From its inception through Jan. 31 this year, Emerging Markets has had an average annual total return of 31.14%, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
That fund's current stock price of $28 is a hefty 18% premium to its net asset value a share on Friday.
Templeton Developing Markets, an open-end fund, levies a sales charge of as much as 5.75%.
Mr. Mobius, who is 57 years old, has spent his working life overseas.
In college, he signed up to spend his senior year in Japan, even though "I would have had difficulty locating Japan on a map," he says.
After a year there, "that was it for me. . . .
I vowed I would return."
He never quite got back to Japan.
After a subsequent Ph.D. at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the economics of "underdeveloped nations," Mr. Mobius went on to a succession of jobs in other Asian countries.
He studied the tensions between U.S. troops and the Korean and Thai populations.
He also worked on a soybean drink for Monsanto in Hong Kong that failed, in "a beautiful example of cultural differences."
Monsanto's Midwestern technicians didn't want the drink to smell like soybeans.
But the resulting sweetened concoction tasted horrible, and "quite a few people got sick" drinking it.
Mr. Mobius set up a consulting firm in Hong Kong during the Cultural Revolution in China, and had to weather "bombs in the streets."
He started managing money in 1980, joining Templeton in 1987.
The life of an emerging-markets mutual-fund manager is a lot zippier than that of a U.S.-fund manager.
Mr. Mobius woke at the Mandarin Hotel in Manila in 1989 to the sound of gunfire from an attempted coup against Philippine President Corazon Aquino.
He got into a Jeep and drove out to watch airplanes bombing a nearby military base.
Then, with gunfire still ringing, he went on to interview Philippine companies, as planned.
Despite the bombing, "the general trend of events looked good," he says.
"We take it all in stride."
