A new report by the Congressional Budget Office may boost the Clinton administration's efforts to get Congress to rewrite the Superfund pollution-cleanup law.
According to the report, litigation and negotiation are the main factors delaying Superfund cleanup at 30% of the slowest-to-restore hazardous-waste sites.
The finding appears to support President Clinton's contention that the existing Superfund program promotes litigation at the expense of cleanup.
Under the Clinton plan, individual companies would be assigned liability for hazardous-waste cleanup through a new allocation process intended to bypass the courts.
A new tax on insurers would be used to create a fund to settle Superfund-related lawsuits between polluting businesses and their insurers.
The CBO study surveyed Environmental Protection Agency officials about the 273 Superfund sites where cleanup has been slowest.
The most frequent reasons for delay were site-specific problems such as complexity of the job or size of the site, which was found to be the main reason for delay at 39% of the sites.
Litigation and negotiation were next.
The most frequent issue in delay-causing litigation or negotiation was wrangling between the EPA and the polluting business over who should perform the cleanup, the survey found.
Although Clinton administration officials say lawsuits involving insurers are a major contributor to litigation costs, they weren't cited in the survey as a main reason for delay.
Of the total 1,249 Superfund sites, cleanup takes an average of 12 to 15 years, the survey found.
But it said the 60% of Superfund sites listed since 1983 "will be completed much more quickly" than those listed between 1981 and 1983.
Business has been cautiously supportive of the Clinton plan, but environmentalists, concerned that the bill may weaken cleanup standards and the "polluter pays" principle, are increasingly critical.
"Superfund legislation will probably have to be killed," wrote Natural Resources Defense Council Erik Olson in a March 5 memo to environmental groups that was leaked to members of Congress last week.
Mr. Olson said his memo was "sent around as a proposal for people to discuss," and didn't represent official policy.
