President Clinton attempted to stanch the political and legal damage from the Whitewater imbroglio by naming Washington insider Lloyd Cutler as the White House's special counsel.
Mr. Cutler, 76, took the job on an interim basis only, until a permanent replacement can be found for Bernard Nussbaum, the White House counsel who resigned under pressure last weekend.
Mr. Cutler is a consummate Washington establishment figure who was also called in to serve as President Jimmy Carter's counsel when his White House became mired in ethical problems.
At a news conference, President Clinton called Mr. Cutler, who was admitted to the bar six years before Mr. Clinton's birth, "a man of seasoned judgment and the highest ethical standards."
The hurried appointment of Mr. Cutler almost seemed an act of desperation to restore credibility to the embattled Clinton White House.
Before he agreed to accept the appointment, Mr. Cutler said he negotiated for a limited, 130-day appointment because of his age and the rigors of the job.
Since he will be working at the White House for such a short time, Mr. Cutler's is as much a symbolic act to reassure the public and the media about the ethical conduct of the White House as it is an addition of a significant White House team player.
In his first call as counsel, Mr. Cutler said he would probably advise White House staffers and other administration officials to testify before congressional panels that may hold hearings on the Whitewater affair.
He stated, "It would be my advice that they cooperate," even though Robert Fiske, the independent counsel conducting a Whitewater inquiry, has said he opposes such hearings.
White House officials also said yesterday that there have been conversations in addition to the three controversial meetings between White House and Treasury officials.
But they contended that the conversations didn't deal with substantive matters.
Mr. Clinton said that any such contacts were "incidental . . . followup conversations."
Yesterday, Rep. James Leach (R., Iowa), a House banking panel member who has aggressively pursued the Whitewater matter, released a seven-page letter that included a list of administration figures he would like to question at a hearing later this month.
In a separate letter, Rep. Leach told Mr. Fiske that his request that the House Banking Committee refrain from holding hearings "would have a chilling effect on the role of congressional oversight."
Mr. Fiske plans to go to the Capitol today to meet with the Senate Banking Committee's ranking Republican, Alfonse D'Amato of New York, in an attempt to discourage him from moving forward with hearings.
Sen. D'Amato isn't expected to back down, either.
Who's on Leach's List Rep. Leach's witness list contained 40 figures who have cropped up in various Whitewater-related stories and events.
The list includes administration officials such as White House Chief of Staff Mack McLarty and his deputy Harold Ickes.
It also lists top Treasury officials, including Deputy Secretary Roger Altman, who participated in one of the White House meetings about the Resolution Trust Corp.'s investigation of a failed Arkansas savings-and-loan institution.
The RTC eventually asked the Justice Department to investigate whether the thrift, Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan of Little Rock, may have improperly diverted funds to Mr. Clinton's gubernatorial campaigns and Whitewater Development Co.
The owner of Madison, James McDougal, also was a partner of the Clintons in Whitewater, an Arkansas real estate venture.
Rep. Leach's list also included lawyers from Rose Law Firm, where Hillary Rodham Clinton was a partner.
Rep. Leach would also like to call Mr. McDougal and David Hale, another Arkansas political figure who is about to go on trial and is accused of making an improper business loan to Mr. McDougal's wife.
However, the questioning could be hampered by the committee's chairman, Rep. Henry Gonzalez.
In a March 7 letter to Mr. Fiske, the Texas Democrat suggested "since these actions may be inconsistent with your responsibilities, you may wish to advise all parties of your views on whether they should respond to such inquiries."
Rep. Gonzalez added that "while I cannot prevent members from propounding questions, it is within the province of the Chair to rule on the relevance of questions."
Amid this partisan parrying, Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole of Kansas increased the pressure on his Democratic colleagues to abandon their stance against congressional hearings.
Sen. Dole said he may offer a resolution to force Democratic senators to take a formal public stand on the issue.
If that doesn't work, Mr. Dole said Republicans will try to get the party's Senate challengers to begin raising the issue against Democratic incumbents up for election this November.
Clintons Swing Back President Clinton, in turn, accused the Republicans of making "political hay" out of Whitewater.
At his news conference, Mr. Clinton strongly defended himself and said, "I revere the responsibility I have been given and I am not going to abuse it."
Responding to a question, he said that his aide Bruce Lindsey "probably" told him about the RTC's criminal referral before the action was made public.
On Monday, Mr. Clinton said he didn't remember who had told him about the referral.
Separately, Mrs. Clinton was also swinging back.
In an intervew conducted last Friday with Elle magazine, she said, "I know nothing bad happened -- and that's what everybody's going to know, as they should know now -- since they have yet to come forward with anything other than the wildest kind of paranoid conspiracies.
You just don't pay attention to it."
While the congressional hearings into the Whitewater affair are on the horizon, a separate investigation was called off.
At a hearing before a House appropriations panel, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said that he asked his department's inspector general to suspend a probe into the meetings between Treasury officials and the White House.
"Mr. Fiske does not want him to investigate," Mr. Bentsen said, because it could compromise the independent counsel's probe, "and the inspector general agreed not to do so."
Mr. Bentsen added that the decision was made without any input from the White House.
A separate review of the meetings that the Treasury secretary had earlier requested by the Office of Government Ethics will proceed.
John Harwood contributed to this article.
