Trade negotiators ended six days of talks with a proposal but still no agreement to slash world-wide aluminum output, delaying hopes for a quick turnaround in the severely depressed industry.
Western aluminum producers expressed hopes before the secretive meeting started that delegates from the U.S., the European Union, Russia, Canada, Australia and Norway would agree to cut global aluminum output as much as 11%, or two million tons, and obtain an explicit commitment from Russia to curb its aluminum exports one-third, or 500,000 tons.
Instead, delegates agreed to aim for an accord on a proposed "memorandum of understanding" by Friday and to meet again in Canada at the end of next month, according to a written statement issued by the European Commission.
The contents of the proposed memorandum weren't disclosed.
Analysts were encouraged by the fact that government officials at least were considering the memorandum and that Russia had agreed to share production data with the West.
The fact that the EU statement estimated overproduction at 1.5 million to two million tons was seen as an indication that the negotiators were aiming for cuts of a similar level.
"There's nothing in here that makes you think they're not going down the road toward production cuts," said Peter Anker, an analyst with NatWest Securities Corp. in New York.
"It just doesn't tell you exactly where they are on that road.
The important thing here is that they're still working on a conclusion."
Perhaps the main achievement in the talks -- which initially were scheduled to last for only two days -- was to keep Russia at the negotiating table despite the country's flagging commitment to market reform.
On Friday, Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin declared that boosting industrial production was one of his new government's priorities.
Several industry officials monitoring the talks in Brussels last week expressed relief the Russians didn't walk away.
U.S. and European aluminum producers are blaming Russia for the overcapacity problem.
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union and its metal-hungry military machine, Russian exports have surged to an estimated 1.5 million tons last year from 300,000 tons in 1990.
Stockpiles, meanwhile, have grown to an estimated 4.5 million tons world-wide, and aluminum prices have plunged to near-record lows.
U.S. producers, led by Aluminum Co. of America Chairman Paul O'Neill, had threatened to file antidumping actions against Russian exporters if the Brussels meeting didn't prove conclusive.
Mr. O'Neill declined to comment yesterday.
Officials of the Aluminum Association, which represents U.S. producers, weren't available for comment.
One person familiar with talks among a group of smaller U.S. aluminum companies said its members will review a draft antidumping complaint this week.
European smelters, in turn, have said they may seek to extend the EU's 180,000ton-a-year quota for Russian aluminum, which is scheduled to expire next month.
Given the meeting's inconclusive result, aluminum trading on commodities markets could be nervous today, potentially undermining a recent price recovery sparked by expectations of a productioncut pact.
On the London Metal Exchange Friday, the aluminum bid price rose $14 in erratic trading to $1,201 a ton, buoyed by hopes that the Brussels negotiators would reach an accord over the weekend.
But as last week's negotiations showed, reaching a global accord is a tall order.
In addition to the political problems in Russia, officials close to the talks last week indicated that there had been difficulties in agreeing on how to share out the burden of cutbacks among Russia, the U.S., the EU and other producer regions.
Russia, in particular, is seeking Western investment in return for curtailing aluminum output.
The country said it needs help to modernize its heavily polluting smelters and develop aluminum consumption in the civilian sector.
But even if the negotiations, which were launched last summer, were to yield an accord, many metals traders doubt it would work.
One key uncertainty is whether the Russian government is in any position to control the amount of aluminum exported by its huge Siberian smelters, which operate independently.
In addition, several key aluminum-producing nations, such as Brazil, Venezuela, the Ukraine and the Persian Gulf states, aren't even participating in the effort to negotiate a global output accord.
