NATO ORDERED Serbs to halt their shelling of Sarajevo or face air strikes.
The ultimatum gives the Bosnian Serbs 10 days to either withdraw their artillery, mortars and tanks 12 miles beyond the center of Sarajevo or place those weapons under U.N. control.
Any shelling before that could face immediate retaliation.
U.S. officials said air strikes could be launched against artillery emplacements, anti-aircraft weapons and military support equipment.
Even before the NATO ultimatum was issued, the Serbs agreed to a cease-fire in Sarajevo and told the U.N. commander there that they would withdraw their weapons.
President Clinton, who had been lobbying hard for the ultimatum with Western allies, emphasized that "no one should doubt NATO's resolve.
NATO is now set to act."
ISRAEL AND THE PLO REACHED an accord on the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
PLO leader Arafat and Israel's foreign minister, Peres, said in Cairo that they had agreed on some critical security issues that have stalled an Israeli-PLO peace accord.
Peres said he and Arafat settled "five or six of the most complicated issues" involved in turning over control of the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho to the Palestinians.
But Peres added, "We didn't complete our work."
The final accord is to be negotiated between Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Rabin.
One unresolved issue is how much land around Jericho will be ceded to the Palestinians.
A panel of medical experts declared that a bacterium is the underlying cause of most peptic ulcers and urged doctors to begin using antibiotics to treat infected patients.
The recommendations would mark a drastic change in ulcer treatment.
Now, most patients are given drugs to stop production of stomach acid.
The U.S. recognized the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia after two years of sidestepping in deference to Greece.
Diplomatic ties will be established once Macedonia pledges to try to resolve differences with Greece.
Athens contends that referring to the country as Macedonia implies it has a claim on the Greek province of Macedonia.
Tonya Harding sued the U.S. Olympic Committee for $20 million to block any attempt to keep her from skating in the Winter Olympics.
The committee has set a hearing for Tuesday in Oslo concerning Harding and the Jan. 6 attack on a rival skater, Nancy Kerrigan.
Mandela said his African National Congress was willing to continue talks with white right-wing groups concerning April's all-race elections, but he again rejected a white homeland in postapartheid South Africa.
Talks between the ANC, the government and the right-wingers broke down on Tuesday.
Clinton visited a prison in suburban Maryland to unveil a federal antidrug strategy that will focus on treatment rather than interdiction.
The $13.2 billion plan for 1995, which represents a $1 billion increase over this year, boosts spending for treatment, education and prevention.
The programs will target hard-core abusers.
Smoking significantly increases a woman's risk of developing the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis, according to a study by doctors in Australia.
The research confirms the findings of several prior studies that have linked smoking and a potentially dangerous reduction in bone density.
Poland's Solidarity trade union staged its biggest demonstration in four years, protesting that living conditions were deteriorating and that the government had failed to implement social welfare policies.
Over 20,000 Poles marched in Warsaw to denounce the leftist coalition government.
A senator suggested that mysterious illnesses afflicting hundreds of U.S. Gulf War veterans were caused by Iraqi use of biological weapons developed from cultures sent from the U.S. Michigan Democrat Riegle said he was "deeply troubled" that the U.S. had permitted export of the biological cultures from 1985 to 1989.
China's Deng appeared on state TV for the first time in over a year, advocating faster growth for Shanghai.
The paramount leader, 89, looked frail as he was shown visiting the city.
