Tokyo stocks slumped 1.2% on Tuesday under the renewed strength of the yen, which drove down export-linked issues.
London shares fell slightly, dragged lower by losses in the British bond and futures markets.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 113.46, down 0.96, reflecting lower markets in all regions.
Plantations stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 190.13, up 4.09, or 2.2%, with United Plantations of Malaysia posting a 7.6% gain in its local currency.
Apparel retailers stocks trailed at 93.54, down 2.98, or 3.1%, with Gap of the U.S. sliding 6.8% in local currency.
The Nikkei 225-stock index, which advanced 115.31 points on Monday, skidded 232.05 to 19709.74, closing near the day's low.
In trading Wednesday in Tokyo, the Nikkei index sank 295.26 points to close the morning session at 19414.48.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 260 million shares, compared with 254 million shares a day earlier.
Losers trounced gainers, 693-328.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section shares, which rose 2.49 points on Monday, slid 16.33, or 1%, to 1596.51.
The yen's rapid appreciation was driven by disappointment about the package of deregulatory and market-opening measures that the Japanese government announced Tuesday morning.
While stock-market investors didn't react directly to news of the package, they took profits on high-flying export-oriented multimedia shares, given the yen's rise.
A strong yen eats into exporters' profits from abroad.
The strengthening yen also caused index futures to soften, triggering arbitrage selling of equities.
The Nikkei peaked at 19969.19 in the session's first 20 minutes and sank as low as 19653.03 just before the close.
Investors postponed aggressive buying partly because of concerns about what is ahead for overseas stock and currency markets.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-stock index fell 6.1 points to 3123.4.
The FT 30-stock index tumbled 9.5 points to 2470.1.
Volume was 673.8 million shares, compared with 505.9 million shares a day earlier.
Investors, looking for direction, were reluctant to acquire new holdings ahead of the fiscal year ending tomorrow.
Continuing uncertainty about U.S. and British interest rates compounded the negative sentiment that stemmed from declines in British government bonds and weakness in sterling.
In Frankfurt, prices advanced slightly, as trading emphasis shifted from cyclical sectors such as chemicals and automobiles to financial issues such as banks and insurance companies.
The DAX 30-stock index rose 6.93 points to 2168.35.
Cyclical issues, which investors have strongly favored recently, now appear to be overbought.
In Paris, stocks fell sharply in thin trading, resuming their decline after Monday's short-lived technical respite; a weak opening on Wall Street contributed to the decline.
In Amsterdam, shares were broadly mixed to lower as Dutch and German bond prices failed to hold on to early gains; the weaker dollar and the soft opening on Wall Street also weighed on sentiment.
In Milan, shares, including those traded electronically, sank 1.9% on profit-taking and concerns about the victory in Italian general elections by a coalition of right-wing, regional separatist and neo-fascist parties.
Investors were skeptical that the disparate coalition would be able to form a cohesive government.
In Madrid, stocks tumbled for the third straight session; investors fretted about early declines on Wall Street and continuing worries about the bond market.
In Stockholm, prices skidded 1.3% in thin trading, the market's 10th consecutive decline; investors were put off by rising yields on Swedish bonds.
In Zurich, equities fell 1.2% in light trading; buying interest was scarce ahead of the long Easter weekend.
In Mexico City, stocks rose; the market opened sharply lower but recovered when Mexico's governing party chose Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, campaign manager of slain presidential contender Luis Donaldo Colosio, as its new candidate.
In Sydney, prices fell for a fourth consecutive trading session, reflecting nervousness in overseas bond and equities markets; investors stayed on the sidelines ahead of a new budget for the Australian government.
In Hong Kong, shares rocketed 3.1% on a late surge in futures prices, a rebound by bank stocks and other selective buying.
In Singapore, stocks jumped 1.6% on thin volume; investor sentiment remained weak, but a lack of bearish news damped selling.
In Kuala Lumpur, equities surged 1.1%, rebounding from recent losses as investors hunted for bargains.
In Seoul, stocks fell on profit-taking after sharp gains in the previous session.
In Manila, shares rose for the third straight day on moderate volume, boosted by expectations of good corporate earnings for the first quarter.
In Wellington, equities slipped as weakness in Australian prices filtered through in late trading.
In Bangkok, shares rose despite poor market sentiment and concerns by investors about a Thai political dispute over constitutional amendments.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
