The nation's biggest mutual-fund company is seeing big outflows of investor dollars from its fund that specializes in notes and bonds of developing countries.
Money has gushed out of Fidelity Investments' New Markets Income Fund, contributing to a shrinkage of more than 40% in the fund's size since the end of January.
What sent many investors fleeing was sagging performance for so-called emerging-markets debt in recent weeks.
Most other emerging markets income funds had only mild outflows, or even inflows, according to AMG Data Services, a fund-flow tracking firm, and according to executives at several funds.
At year end, there were seven bond funds either dedicated to emerging markets or routinely making heavy investments in emerging markets, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
These funds had $6.3 billion in assets at the end of 1993.
Emerging-markets bonds also are found widely in many international-bond funds, and even U.S.-bond funds, in smaller amounts.
After posting big returns after its start in May 1993, the Fidelity fund reversed course.
It is down more than 14% so far this year in total return, a figure that combines the fund's share-price change plus dividends.
The fund, which had $358 million in assets on Jan. 31, 1994, now is down to $200 million.
The fund invests in the debt of "emerging-market" countries, which "have fallen a lot more than European and other bond markets," says manager Robert Citrone, who was in New York for a lunch with the news media.
He blamed some of the big decline on "technical" factors such as massive selling by hedge funds and other speculators.
Another contributor to the fund's woes: It held some derivative securities that fared worse than the actual "cash" markets, although these derivatives were less than 3% of the fund.
More significantly, many developing-country bonds were hit hard when the terms of the Polish debt restructuring were learned.
Some shareholders of the fund also had concerns because last weekend neither Fidelity's phone representatives nor its monthly "Mutual Fund Guide" publication had information on the fund's holdings.
Mr. Citrone says Fidelity is working to make the new fund's portfolio holdings available on a regular basis.
Mr. Citrone says developing-market bonds now are a great buy.
Fixed-rate Mexican Brady bonds yield 4.5 percentage points more than U.S. Treasurys, and Argentine Brady bonds yield 6 percentage points more.
Brady bonds are made from defaulted loans restructured under guidelines set in place by former U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
Half the fund is in Mexican and Argentine bonds.
"We're back now to interest-rate spread levels we had before" the ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Citrone says.
Mr. Citrone says he didn't have much trouble selling emerging-market debt to meet redemptions.
But he adds that Fidelity is thinking of imposing a redemption fee on the fund to discourage short-term trading.
