In a day of generally weak performances on global bourses, many reacted badly to a stingy cut in a German lending rate and to broad weakness in bonds.
London shares fell, finishing at the session's lows, as the market was unsettled by an early sell-off on Wall Street.
Tokyo stocks ended mixed Wednesday in a quiet session, drifting lower through the morning but recovering in a late futures-driven rally in the final half-hour.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.17, down 0.43, reflecting lower Asia/Pacific and European markets and higher American markets.
Biotechnology stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 73.85, up 1.37, or 1.9%, with Pioneer Hi-Bred International of the U.S. posting a 3.5% gain in its local currency.
Other non-ferrous metals stocks trailed at 108.75, down 2.16, or 1.95%, with Energy Resources of Australia sliding 7.4% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index shed 17.7 points to 3246.7, which was the session's low, down from the intraday high of 3270.5.
The FT 30-stock index slipped 6.0 points to 2553.0.
Volume was 730.2 million shares, compared with 677.9 million shares a day earlier.
The market was fairly stable for most of the day, as nagging concerns about world interest rates were offset by generally positive British corporate news.
Depressing sentiment was many investors' belief that the current round of European rate reductions is finished and that the U.S. will boost its rates, deterring economic improvements.
The market also was disappointed by a meager cut in the German Bundesbank's repo rate: The central bank allocated funds under this week's securities repurchase operations at 5.94%, barely changed from 5.97% last week and not enough to indicate more key interest rates will fall.
Further nervousness in London was linked to publication of the U.S. Federal Reserve's update on the economy in a report that was to be released after the British bourse closed, but strategists theorized that New York's early slide was sparked by concerns about economic weakness in some U.S. regions.
In Frankfurt, shares eased as the market continued to look for a sense of direction.
The DAX 30-stock index fell 7.95 points to 2116.09, with decliners outnumbering advancers 19-11, in quiet trading.
In Paris, disappointment about the German central bank's small repo rate cut in the morning set the tone for trading stocks, which finished with broad declines; in the absence of other market-moving news in France, the Bundesbank move added to growing market sentiment that the French and German central banks will be stingy with their rate cuts in coming weeks.
In Amsterdam, prices dropped, pulled down by soft bonds and a weaker start for New York stocks, as well as selling on the options exchange and disappointing Dutch corporate earnings.
In Milan, shares fell, taking their cue from the poor performance of Italian bond futures, which took a beating because of the tiny German rate cut.
In Madrid, stocks drifted down in thin trading, in response to weakness in U.S. and European bond markets.
In Zurich, the main index sank 1.5% on strong foreign selling of banking and insurance issues, a downturn in the Swiss bond market, futures-related selling and Wall Street's early reversal.
But in Stockholm, equities managed small gains, as strong demand for some blue chips offset sluggish trading in most other issues.
And in Brussels, shares finished mixed, with declines prevented by a Belgian central bank cut in its key rate to 6.15% from 6.25%.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 86.51 points Tuesday, fell 59.21 to 19839.18.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei rose 112.82 points to close the morning session at 19952.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 300 million shares, compared with 304.8 million shares a day earlier.
Losers swamped gainers, 615-393.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which fell 11.77 points Tuesday, dropped 10.83 to 1605.49.
Most investors postponed major moves ahead of Friday's special quotation for the settlement of March stock-index futures and options.
Much of stocks' early declines, which took the Nikkei to a trading low of 19665.67, stemmed from worries about continued selling by corporations to log profits ahead of Japan's fiscal year end of March 31; such sales have been particularly heavy because of the bond market's weakness, which makes profits there scarcer than in the stock market.
Arbitragers bought Nikkei futures in the late going.
Near the end of the session, the Nikkei marked its intraday high of 19894.29.
In Sydney, the market slumped 1.1%, giving up almost all of the previous day's gains.
The sell-off was attributed to a weaker Australian bond market, which followed U.S. bond prices down, as the Sydney bourse returned to a pattern of being dominated by overseas factors and relatively lower foreign investment.
In Hong Kong, also following other markets down, shares slipped in extremely quiet trading, ending a string of three increases in a row; lacking fresh news developments, Hong Kong investors awaited any action on China's economy from this week's meeting of legislators in Beijing.
In Singapore, stocks fell amid persistently negative sentiment, with institutional investors sidelined as they awaited more signs from the U.S. about its economic recovery amid worries that interest rates could move higher if inflationary pressures expanded.
In Manila, prices plummeted in heavy trading as selling pressure set in on a lack of market-moving news.
In Seoul, shares closed lower for the third straight day on continued fears of a liquidity drain by the South Korean central bank.
In Wellington, equities fell, mainly in reaction to a rise in bond-market yields.
In Bangkok, stocks fell on profittaking, especially in the banking and communications sectors.
But in Taipei, shares posted gains, following a late rally from deep losses prompted by profit-taking in paper and textile shares.
In Mexico City, stocks continued to fall, losing 1.5% as the peso fell against the U.S. dollar in currency dealings and Mexican interest rates rose; profit-taking also contributed to the declines.
Among corporate developments, in Amsterdam, Fokker plunged 18.30 guilders, or 12%, to 20.90 guilders ($10.85).
The aerospace company posted a 1993 net loss of 460 million guilders ($238.8 million), compared with year-earlier net income of 20 million guilders, citing lower sales, higher financing costs and charges related to drastic restructuring programs.
Fokker, 51%-controlled by Deutsche Aerospace of Germany, named a new chairman and asked labor unions for further concessions.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
