"The Paper" is the New Age version of "The Front Page," the great newspaper play by Ben Hecht and Charles MacArthur.
Both are about the cynicism, the craziness and the exhilaration of daily journalism.
But "The Front Page," written in 1928, was defiantly, gleefully cynical about reporters and editors -- maybe even more so in the 1940 Howard Hawks movie version, "His Girl Friday."
"The Paper," however, was written now, when moviemakers quake at the thought of leaving a single character unredeemed.
This evangelical spirit shows up in the most unlikely places.
Even Steven Seagal felt compelled to embellish his latest action picture with an environmental message.
No wonder whenever a little sharp humor makes its way into "The Paper" the filmmakers quickly cushion the impact with a big gob of "human interest" -- the pregnant wife pressuring her editor-husband to spend more time at home, another editor trying to be reconciled with his estranged daughter.
These pious interludes seem especially false in light of the film's intrinsic cynicism.
When "The Front Page" was made into a movie in 1940, the crime reporter Hildy Johnson went from male to female, giving Rosalind Russell her defining comedy role as the tough journalist who would do anything for a story.
In "The Paper" there are two major female characters -- one of them (Marisa Tomei) a whiny pregnant wife and former reporter and the other (Glenn Close) the paper's managing editor who tries to get a raise by offering herself to the paper's publisher (a noble man who haughtily rejects her).
Both of them end up in the hospital, both glowing.
One has given birth, the other has been shot in the leg after she has learned higher ethics from her male colleague.
The movie's story has been constructed like an episode from a Steven Bochco television drama -- "L.A. Law" or "NYPD Blue" -- following the professional and personal lives of a number of characters, all cast and played well, though it is a pity to watch the adorable Ms. Tomei as the pregnant wife being forced to figure out how to whine with dignity.
Like those Bochco shows, "The Paper" mixes realism of style and content with farce: fistfights between editors, a columnist firing a pistol into the ceiling to get attention.
There are even cameo appearances by real-life journalists, the kind of thing TV series usually resort to in the fifth season to perk up ratings.
Unlike the television dramas, however, "The Paper" has to cram all these stories into two hours, not an entire season.
So many stories to tell, so much emotion to work through, so many moral dilemmas to solve, and all without a commercial break -- though many cans of Coke are prominently displayed.
"The Paper" is most entertaining when it stays close to its subject, life inside a big-city daily newspaper called the "Sun," a scrappy tabloid like New York's "Daily News."
Screenwriters David and Stephen Koepp aren't exactly gagwriters (David Koepp's biggest claim to fame is the screenplay for "Jurassic Park" and his brother Stephen is a senior editor at "Time") but they are studious researchers.
They've caught some of the wisecracking one-upmanship that's part of the tension and the absurdity of newsroom life.
An editor looks at a proposed headline and observes with practiced wryness: "God forbid this paper should run anything without an exclamation mark."
They understand that very often a reporter and editor will spend much more time discussing whether a reporter's chair is chiropractically correct than they will planning a story.
Ron Howard directs these scenes with good timing and the same appreciation for a punch line he showed in "Splash" and "Parenthood."
There just aren't enough punch lines.
And there certainly isn't enough of the rapid-fire dialogue that makes "His Girl Friday" seem fresher at 54 than "The Paper" does right out of the can.
Earnestness restrains the film like a girdle.
You can't laugh when you can't breathe.
You can, however, breathe freely at "The Ref," a truly unbridled and truly funny movie.
Like the screwball comedies of the '30s and '40s, this picture is small in scale.
Most of it takes place in a comfortable house in the Connecticut suburbs, where a bickering married couple are held hostage by a thief, who takes to acting like their family therapist.
It's Christmas.
Outside, the local police -- bumblers -- search for the thief, and relatives come to dinner.
There's not much to this concoction besides the talk, but the talk is great.
Richard LaGravenese, who wrote the script with Marie Weiss, also wrote the script for "The Fisher King," a wonderfully articulate movie.
Here, everyone talks with biting humor and never bothers to beg for apologies.
Only at the end does the inescapable redemptive hand of Hollywood clamp down and smear a little niceness all around.
Of course, good talk takes good talkers and the principle bickerers here are as good as they get, Judy Davis and Kevin Spacey.
They both have deadly comic timing, which is given nice play by director Ted Demme.
They know how to use a pause, how to swing words like hatchets, and they don't stop swinging.
VIDEO TIP: "The Ref" is a variation on the old Hollywood standby, the couple who split up and end up back together.
The classic version of this was "The Awful Truth," the 1937 comedy with Irene Dunne and Cary Grant as a divorced couple who keep each other from pairing up with somebody else.
