Dr. Bernadine Healy's article ("Mammograms -- Your Breasts, Your Choice," editorial page, Dec. 28) clearly outlined the weaknesses in the recent decisions that have eliminated support for breast cancer screening for women ages 40-49.
Dr. Lee F. Newcomer's Letter to the Editor, critical of Dr. Healy's review ("The Mammography Controversy," Jan. 19), is an example of how health planners will use what they have read, without determining the accuracy of the analyses, to make major health-policy decisions.
Dr. Newcomer's statement that the "eight trials . . . failed to show any benefit" is simply incorrect.
In fact, one out of the eight trials have shown that mammography screening can reduce deaths from breast cancer, for women ages 40-49, by 22% (as in the Edinburgh trial) to as much as 49% (in the Malmo trial).
The reason the data are "not statistically significant" is that mathematically they cannot be significant.
Even the National Cancer Institute has acknowledged that there have not been enough women in the trials ages 40-49 to permit the results to be "statistically significant."
Dr. Newcomer's comments are based on old data.
The Swedish trial that he cited as showing excess deaths among screened women is the Malmo trial, which demonstrates a 49% reduction in breast cancer deaths for women ages 40-49.
There is ample evidence that nothing magical happens at age 50 that suddenly allows screening to work.
If all of the available data are reviewed, there is clearly a benefit for screening women ages 40-49 as there is for women ages 50-59.
As "National Medical Director" for a large health-care organization, Dr. Newcomer should heed his own advice from Mark Twain concerning "half-educated physicians."
He and his colleagues have a responsibility to those whose care they determine, to know and understand the most recent scientific information.
Daniel B. Kopans, M.D.
In a letter to the editor yesterday on breast cancer, there was a significant typographical error in one sentence.
It should have read: "In fact, five out of the eight trials have shown that mammography screening can reduce deaths from cancer, for women ages 40-49, by 22% (as in the Edinburgh trial) to as much as 49% (in the Malmo trial)."
(WSJ Feb. 3, 1994)
