QVC Network Inc. is under increased pressure to improve its bid for Paramount Communications Inc. following the Paramount board's endorsement of the latest $9.8 billion, $83-a-share, takeover bid by Viacom Inc.
The Paramount directors endorsed the Viacom bid, based on an opinion by their adviser, Lazard Freres & Co., that it was "marginally superior," even though its market value currently is lower than the QVC bid, currently valued at about $10.2 billion, or $84.72 a share.
Lazard based its opinion on other tests of value for the cash-and-stock bids plus informal polls of traders and investors, many of whom say they favor the Viacom bid because it provides extra compensation if Viacom Class B shares aren't trading at $48 a share a year following a Viacom-Paramount acquisition.
The board terminated a merger agreement that it struck just before Christmas with QVC, and signed a new merger accord with Viacom.
The accords are designed to be severed as soon as the other side makes a higher offer under bidding rules set by Paramount.
Viacom first agreed to acquire Paramount on Sept. 12.
QVC is expected to return with a revised bid sometime this week, and both companies are supposed to make their best and final offers by Feb. 1, which Paramount is promoting as "SuperBid Tuesday" after SuperBowl Sunday.
One factor the Paramount board tried to take into account in evaluating the bids is what Paramount advisers call the "victory paradox," under which the contestant that has the better bid sees its stock get hit in the marketplace.
As a result, Lazard attempted to value QVC's bid based on its stock price when QVC was perceived to have the winning bid, so that it would be comparable to the valuation of Viacom's bid when traders believe Viacom has the better bid.
When QVC was thought to be the winner, its stock traded as low as $38 a share, far below its closing price of $44 a share in composite trading Friday on the Nasdaq stock market.
However, one person close to QVC complained that such a method could have resulted in Lazard valuing QVC's stock at a level $5 or $6 lower than its current market price, while valuing Viacom stock at its current market price.
The exact numbers Lazard used couldn't be obtained, and a spokesman for Lazard declined to comment.
But Lazard was understood to have used several of the same valuation methodologies that it has used throughout the contest.
Peter Schoenfeld, vice chairman and head of proprietary trading at Wertheim Schroder & Co., said he believed the Paramount board acted "rationally" in endorsing the Viacom bid.
Mr. Schoenfeld explained that roughly 75% of Viacom's bid comprises cash and a contingent-value right that locks in a minimum value even if the price of Viacom's stock falls.
By comparison, he said, only about 55% of QVC's bid includes cash or other fixed values.
"At this point, we would be tendering our shares to Viacom," he said.
Mr. Schoenfeld added that the board's action increases the likelihood that QVC could lose the contest if it didn't revise its bid by Jan. 31.
Viacom could win the contest if QVC didn't raise its bid by that date and Viacom garnered 50.1% of Paramount shares under its offer.
Barry Diller, QVC's chairman, continued to court takeover stock traders last Friday, meeting with traders from about seven firms that specialize in takeover trading, known as arbitrage.
Allowing traders with big Paramount positions the chance to swap ideas with Mr. Diller could help in a close-fought bidding finale because the case for QVC's stock price depends heavily on the perception of Mr. Diller's abilities as a manager of entertainment assets.
One person in the QVC camp noted that the outcome of the deal is now in the hands of very short-term players.
"The tough part of all of this is that after the Paramount deal is done, most of them will be gone," this person said.
Viacom is offering $107 a share in cash for 50.1% of Paramount shares plus securities for the remaining 49.9%.
QVC is offering $92 in cash for 50.1% plus securities for 49.9%.
Mr. Diller is said to be considering boosting the cash in his bid, as well as adding some mechanism for bolstering the price of QVC stock being offered as part of his cash-and-stock bid.
If he does come back with a revised bid, as traders consider likely, it probably will be sometime during the middle to latter part of this week.
QVC will want to see where Viacom's stock trades early this week with the Paramount board's endorsement.
But it may also want to make the change a few days before Jan. 31 to allow its own stock to settle at its new level as well.
In an interview, Mr. Diller said the board's decision came as no surprise.
"We were disappointed," he said.
"We continue to believe our offer is superior, beyond the short term.
While we may be accused of tilting at windmills, we believe you can't analyze this transaction without a long-term view."
But the QVC chief said he couldn't say when QVC would respond with another offer, or even if it would.
Both QVC and Viacom submitted memos to the Paramount board before the meeting touting the value of their offers, and QVC advisers at Allen & Co. were angered that their memo was given to Viacom before the meeting, allowing Viacom advisers at Smith Barney Shearson Inc. the chance to respond.
But one person close to the board said the directors discounted the memos as "selling documents" anyway, and called the dispute "a tempest in a teapot."
