Japan keeps getting harder to govern.
The government Friday morning shelved controversial plans for a tax cut after a dispute threatened to tear apart the ruling coalition.
"We have decided to go back to the drawing board," said Ichiro Ozawa, a key coalition leader.
But Finance Ministry officials were confident that a package including tax cuts will be worked out before Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa meets President Clinton at their Washington summit next Friday.
"The discussion has returned to square one, but it doesn't mean there won't be a tax reduction," said one ministry official.
The fracas reflects the political mayhem that has stalled economic planning for months, as Mr. Hosokawa and his ruling coalition have been caught in a tug-of-war over a critical economic-stimulus package.
Most recent battles have been limited to Japan's political world.
The finance battle has engulfed the mighty bureaucracy, which tried to take advantage of the political instability to push its own agenda but quickly got caught in the crossfire.
Tax policy is at the heart of the dispute.
The latest struggle began early Thursday, when Mr. Hosokawa proposed cutting income taxes and other levies by six trillion yen ($55 billion), the centerpiece of his plan to spur business activity.
To offset the revenue loss, and to appease the fiscal conservatives at the Ministry of Finance, he said the government would replace the nation's 3% sales tax in 1997 with a 7% "national welfare tax," a euphemism for a European-style value-added tax.
The announcement touched off one of the most hectic days in Mr. Hosokawa's stormy six-month reign.
The Socialists, the largest bloc in his government and long-time opponents of sales levies, promptly threatened to leave the coalition.
Even members of Mr. Hosokawa's own party, who support the plan in broad outline, accused him of hatching the program in backroom bargaining.
"I can't understand why Mr. Hosokawa took a policy line totally dictated by the Finance Ministry," said Shun Ohide, a senior Socialist legislator.
This squall is particularly unnerving for the U.S. government, which is urgently demanding progress in stalled trade talks before the planned summit between Mr. Hosokawa and President Clinton.
With just over a week to go, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor is now in Tokyo trying to force Mr. Hosokawa and other top politicians to focus on the negotiations.
Mr. Kantor refused to make any public assessment of his meetings, but did tell reporters that he had a "very good" session Thursday with Mr. Hosokawa.
While forcing some delays, the tax-policy dispute probably won't derail Mr. Hosokawa's economic-stimulus package.
Japan's leaders are under intense pressure from business executives and the Clinton administration to spur domestic demand and imports.
And even if the Socialists do abandon Mr. Hosokawa, most analysts think he could survive for a while as the head of a government with a parliamentary minority.
But however the tax tussle ends, it highlights the disturbing instabilities of the new era of coalition rule.
While Mr. Hosokawa's sales-tax decision may have pleased Japan's elite bureaucrats, it risks undermining his considerable popularity.
After his tax announcement, the prime minister took his worst public tongue-lashing since taking power.
The Asahi Shimbun newspaper ran a front-page article blasting his tax move as "abrupt and unconvincing."
Over the longer term, the new era of multiparty rule exposes finance policy to greater public debate, endangering the bureaucrats' control of the agenda.
"There are some people who want to get social-security coverage without paying the burden," said Ryutaro Hashimoto, a former Liberal Democrat finance minister, in an interview last month.
"Economic measures will become an issue."
Masayoshi Kanabayashi contributed to this article.
