At Better Basketballs . . .
HERE'S A basketball with an identity crisis.
Last May 18, this column told how John Hynes, a Boston bond trader, had rearranged the seams on a basketball to make it easier to grip.
Now here comes Marvin Palmquist with a basketball that looks like a giant golfball -- white and dimpled.
Fingertips fit nicely into the dimples for "solid" gripping, says Mr. Palmquist.
An entrepreneur and owner of Lloyd's Corp., Rockford, Ill., he also says his ball marries two crazes, golf and basketball, and is "more interesting and aesthetic" than a standard ball.
He doesn't expect his basketball to take over the professional circuit, but he sees "a large potential market for backyard, driveway play."
Mr. Palmquist may be too modest.
James McLaughlin, athletic director at Woodstock Union High School, Woodstock, Vt., called the new ball "a good teaching ball for younger kids; easier to control with smaller hands."
Mr. McLaughlin was able to palm the Palmquist ball, a feat he says he can't perform with a standard basketball.
Julie Adams, a Woodstock freshman, said simply: "It's easier to grab."
There already is a white Palmquist soccer ball with dimples among the pentagons.
The inventor says his next project is a dimpled football.
Pumps and Aerosols . . .
THE WAR BETWEEN the aerosols and the pumps goes on.
In an item on Jan. 12, 1993, about kinds of hand and finger pumps, this column said: "Aerosols use smoggy hydrocarbons to propel product; pumps use muscle power and pure air."
The aerosol industry came down with all four feet on that.
Timothy Stonich, executive vice president of U.S.
Can, said The Wall Street Journal had "succumbed to aerosol bashing."
J. Richard Frauenheim, president of Diversified CPC International, a maker of aerosol propellants, said that most of the world's smog-causing gasses "are naturally produced by flowers, trees, cows, belching, etc."
Harry McCain, president of the National Aerosol Association, a trade group, said that while pumps don't use chemical propellants, they must use chemical solvents -- usually alcohol -- to break up contents into a fine spray and hasten drying.
Alcohol is "more smog-forming" than the hydrocarbon propellants that power aerosols, said Mr. McCain.
The pump industry counters forcefully.
While acknowledging that pumps require solvents to dispense some products, Brendan Swan, president of AirSpray International, Pompano Beach, Fla., says that on average, products contained in its pumps have 40% to 50% fewer smog-causing chemicals than aerosols.
Rolf Svensson, president of LD Systems, Charlotte, N.C., another pump maker, says relatively few of the products his Eurosprays dispense require solvents.
Eurospray is selling well in Europe where environmental rules are stricter, he adds, but sales are "sluggish" in the U.S., where companies whose products are dispensed by aerosols are reluctant to switch while clean-air rules are in flux.
UGLINESS rampant?
Our last March 22 column tore into Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H., for permitting a wheelchair ramp to spoil the face of one of its lovely old buildings.
Form+Function may have been unfair to single out Dartmouth.
Ramps scar the facades of many public structures, especially in northern states where steps were built to reach a front door that was raised up above the snow.
Architects have sent pictures of attractive ramps they have designed.
It's easier to build good-looking wheelchair access into a new building.
Architect Peter Bohlin brought the ramp inside the Winchester-Thurston School in Pennsylvania, where it does double duty with the school's sloping corridor.
Henry Cobb is designing Boston's new Federal Courthouse without the traditional "courthouse steps."
He's found other ways to "dignify" the building, including a huge arch over the entrance.
The real challenge comes in retrofitting a building for handicap access.
Mr. Cobb calls most attempts "a tragedy" for architecture and "no-win" for wheelchair users, who usually have to negotiate a ramp with too many twists and turns.
David Smotrich gets an `A' for effort in the relatively unobtrusive ramp he designed for Columbia University's Hartley Hall in New York.
Among the most resourceful retrofitters are architects Davis, Brody, who slipped a ramp into the lobby of New York's new Midtown Community Court.
With the advantage of space to work with, Davis, Brody also installed two half-circular wheelchair ramps on either side of the entrance to the old birdhouse at the Bronx Zoo.
The ramps are symmetrical and classical.
