It's not your father's mutual fund.
Mutual funds long have been seen as a conservative way to tap into the stock market.
But these days, U.S. stock funds are anything but dull portfolios of predictable blue-chip shares.
In pursuit of higher returns, many fund managers have been cranking up the risk level, by shifting into smaller companies and foreign markets.
Funds also have been delving into more richly priced stocks.
"I think there's been a gradual erosion in the quality of mutual funds and a gradual rise in the risk level," says Richard Hoey, manager of the $1.5 billion Dreyfus Growth & Income Fund.
"There are several reasons," he says.
"Riskier stocks have been outperforming low-risk stocks.
We've had outperformance by small-cap relative to large-cap stocks.
And last year, we had outperformance by foreign markets relative to the U.S. market.
You've got the highest returns from taking the highest risk."
So far, that aggressiveness has paid off handsomely, with U.S. stock funds outpacing Standard & Poor's 500-stock index for the past three calendar years.
But if the stock market enters a protracted decline -- which some analysts believe is happening right now -- then some U.S. funds could get hit especially hard.
"The funds do have higher-octane material than the market as a whole," says John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a Chicago newsletter.
"That explains why the funds have done so well over the last three years.
If you get a market crash where the smaller, more expensive stocks fall the most, the funds will underperform the indexes."
To gauge the risk taken by diversified U.S. stock funds, Morningstar looked at the 1,040 funds classified as equity-income, growth-and-income, growth, aggressive growth and small-company.
As of Jan. 31, these funds owned stocks with an average stock-market value of $5.2 billion, well below the $6.7 billion average for the stocks in the Vanguard Index Trust-Total Stock Market Portfolio.
The Vanguard fund is an index fund that seeks to track the performance of the Wilshire 5,000-stock index, which includes all U.S. listed companies.
Moreover, U.S. stock funds weren't just confining themselves to U.S. stocks.
Morningstar calculates that U.S. stock funds had an average 5.5% of their assets in foreign stocks, including a 1.5% stake in emerging markets.
"It's getting wild," Dreyfus's Mr. Hoey says.
"I can't tell you how many calls I get from breathless American stock salesmen about the latest Latin American issue."
Some U.S. stock funds are making an especially large bet on foreign markets.
Strong Discovery Fund, an aggressive growth fund, currently has 22% abroad, including 9.1% in Hong Kong, 4.2% in Brazil and 3.2% in Mexico.
Richard Strong, manager of the $350 million fund, says shareholders may not realize that U.S. stock funds are increasingly looking abroad in their search for better performance.
"The volatility will educate them," Mr. Strong says.
"But so too will the returns."
Morningstar also calculates that diversified U.S. funds have been investing in pricier stocks.
Mutual funds typically own stocks that are marginally more expensive than the broad U.S. market, based on such measures as stock prices as a multiple of companies' per-share earnings.
Overall, according to Morningstar's calculations, diversified U.S. funds own stocks that are trading at 23.7 times trailing 12-month earnings, compared with 22.8 times earnings for the stocks in Vanguard's Wilshire 5,000 index fund.
But some funds have particularly expensive tastes.
IAI Emerging Growth Fund, for instance, owns stocks that are trading at 45.8 times earnings.
IAI Emerging Growth's stocks are also trading at 10 times "book value," another widely used point of reference that is the difference between a company's assets and its liabilities.
By contrast, the stocks in the Vanguard index fund trade at 3.7 times book value.
"If you don't want to lose principal on any given day, you shouldn't be in the fund," says the IAI fund's manager, Rick Leggott.
"But if you want to earn above-average returns over long periods of time, it's an excellent vehicle."
Not all funds, of course, are taking on so much risk.
Among the 1,040 diversified U.S. stock funds, there are 204 that own stocks trading at an average of less than 20 times earnings.
In addition, funds on average have 8.3% of their portfolio in cash, which should provide a cushion against a stock-market decline.
"There's a dramatic variation in the risk level among funds," says Dreyfus's Mr. Hoey.
"There are some funds that are running much higher risk levels than their shareholders may be aware of."
Even some apparently conservative funds are taking a surprising amount of risk.
Consider Fidelity Blue Chip Growth Fund.
The fund's name may conjure up images of AT&T and Procter & Gamble.
But the fund's portfolio tells another story.
According to Morningstar, Fidelity Blue Chip Growth's stock holdings have an average market value of $2.8 billion, roughly half that of the typical U.S. stock fund.
Its holdings trade at 29 times earnings, well above the market, and 15% of the fund's assets are invested abroad.
"Just because a company doesn't advertise on television during the Super Bowl doesn't mean it's not a blue-chip company," says Michael Gordon, manager of the $1.3 billion fund.
"I'm trying to find larger-capitalization stocks with good earnings growth.
To me, that's a blue-chip company."
Oppenheimer Main Street Income & Growth Fund ranks as the fourth best-performing diversified U.S. stock fund over the past three calendar years.
That's a pretty nifty result for a growth-and-income fund, which is how the Oppenheimer fund is classified by both Morningstar and Lipper Analytical Services.
But it turns out that the Oppenheimer fund is really a small-company stock fund in disguise.
Its holdings have a tiny average market value of just $380 million.
The fund's 12-month yield, meanwhile, is a modest 1.1%, below the 1.7% average for all growth-and-income funds, according to Lipper Analytical.
"It's certainly not your conventional growth-and-income fund," concedes Jon Fossel, chairman of Oppenheimer Management, which manages the fund.
"There's no doubt the fund's manager has got a lot of aggressive small-cap stocks.
But . . . he's got a lot of utilities and convertibles.
It's a small-cap-oriented growth and sometimes-income fund."
Because risky funds have done so well during the past three years, Vanguard Group Chairman John Bogle suggests avoiding funds that rank among the top performers.
"Whoever has been most speculative over the past couple of years will be at the top of the leader list," Mr. Bogle says.
"I'd avoid all funds claiming to be No. 1.
I think a sensible formula might be to put half your money into a conservative, middle-ofthe-road stock fund and the other half of your money in a short-term bond fund."
How do you find a conservative stock fund?
Morningstar's Mr. Rekenthaler suggests looking at a fund's portfolio to make sure the fund is diversified across a variety of industries and that its portfolio includes some well-known companies.
"Yield is a pretty good sign," he adds.
"If you've got a yield over 3%, you've either got conservative stocks in the fund or you've got a lot of cash and bonds.
Either way, you'll have some down-market protection."
Among conservative stock funds, Mr. Rekenthaler favors such no-load funds as T. Rowe Price Equity-Income Fund, USAA Mutual Income Stock Fund and Vanguard Equity-Income Fund.
