The Treasury officials facing questions about the propriety of their White House meetings about the Whitewater affair had earlier established clear rules for monitoring, but not influencing, politically sensitive cases.
Last May, when the Resolution Trust Corp. was considering a suit against a Louisiana congressman who had defaulted on loans from failed thrifts, the Treasury said it wanted to be notified before any suit was filed, but officials emphasized they hadn't any intention of interfering in the case.
The policy is outlined in a series of memos written last May concerning a possible RTC suit against Rep. William Jefferson (D., La.).
Treasury officials had met in April with Mr. Jefferson to discuss a problem his former law firm was having with the RTC, but they didn't discuss any pending action against the congressman.
"We have asked that we be advised prior to initiation of litigation against Members of Congress, so that we wouldn't be surprised in our dealings with the Hill," Jean Hanson, who was about to become the Treasury's general counsel, wrote in a memo to an RTC official.
"By the same token, we emphasized that no action should be taken to compromise the ability of the RTC to recover sums properly due it."
Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman has said that he was only trying to give White House officials a similar "heads up" when he and Ms. Hanson went to the White House on Feb. 2.
He said they discussed RTC procedures that could lead to suits stemming from the failure of Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, an Arkansas thrift that has been linked to President and Mrs. Clinton's political and business dealings.
Mr. Altman is the interim head of the RTC.
The disclosure earlier this month that Treasury officials went to the White House three times to discuss possible legal action against Madison Guaranty provoked a firestorm of criticism.
Mr. Altman, Ms. Hanson and several White House and Treasury officials have been subpoenaed to testify before a grand jury that is investigating the failure of Madison, as well as the Clintons' involvement in Whitewater Development Co., a failed land-development company in which Mr. and Mrs. Clinton had invested with the former head of Madison.
The incident involving Rep. Jefferson also shows how tricky political cases can be.
On May 17, 1993, Richard Aboussie, then the RTC's acting general counsel, sent an electronic-mail message to RTC officials in Dallas and Washington.
It said that Ms. Hanson had directed that "the RTC shall not file any litigation with respect to the Congressman without" permission from Mr. Altman.
Ms. Hanson objected to Mr. Aboussie's interpretation of her instructions.
"The memorandum could be read to imply that Treasury has imposed a freeze on this litigation.
This is emphatically not the case," she said in a memo to Mr. Aboussie.
While the Treasury wants to be notified of cases against members of Congress, "in no event do we intend to block the commencement of litigation against Congressman Jefferson, or any other Member of Congress for that matter," if litigation is appropriate.
On May 24, Mr. Aboussie sent out a new memo calling his first message misleading, and noting that "Mr. Altman does not reserve to himself the authority to determine that litigation should proceed, or to require that his permission be obtained before going forward.
He simply wants to be advised adequately in advance before litigation against a Member of Congress is filed."
As it turns out, an RTC official said the thrift-cleanup agency didn't file a lawsuit against Mr. Jefferson.
Ronald Glancz, a former Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. lawyer currently with the firm of Venable, Baetjer, Howard & Civiletti, said that "there is nothing unusual about informing the head of an agency about legal action against a member of Congress."
What would be inappropriate is trying to suppress lawsuits for political reasons, he added.
