In his March 1 editorial-page commentary "HUD's Big Leap: Housing Policy and the `Homeless,'" Howard Husock accuses "liberal" HUD Secretary Cisneros of overstating the size of the homeless population by including families who are "`doubled up,' with two or three children sharing a bedroom."
Mr. Husock claims this supposed overstatement is politically calculated to support increased spending on federal housing programs for the poor.
The HUD document on which Mr. Husock bases his argument refers to a Columbia University survey that suggests that 3% of the population -- more than seven million people -- had been "literally homeless" -- i.e. living on the street or in a shelter -- at some point between 1985 to 1990.
But contrary to Mr. Husock's assertion, and as is clear from the face of the document, this estimate includes only those living on the streets or in shelters.
It does not include people who are doubled up or otherwise ill-housed.
Nor is it inconsistent with a 1987 estimate of 600,000 homeless on a single night.
Rather, the Columbia study illustrates the well-known fact that many more people experience homelessness over a period of time, such as a year or five years, than are homeless on any particular night.
This means that many more people are at risk of homelessness -- whether because of loss of job, health, family crisis or other precipitating event -- than are actually on the streets or in a shelter at any give moment.
Those most at risk are those with fewest resources to survive such crises; generally, the poorest.
The policy implications are that long-term solutions, including affordable housing, jobs and social services, are needed to really solve the problem of homelessness.
The current HUD budget includes nothing like the major increases Mr. Husock decries -- and, in fact, proposes cutting housing programs for poor people.
It is important to note that the Census Bureau, the federal agency responsible for population data, has not attempted to enumerate the nation's homeless people.
A 1992 lawsuit by the national Law Center and others challenged that failure on constitutional grounds.
The suit is still pending.
Mr. Husock's comments show a lack of understanding of both the social and financial issues involved in low-income housing.
His argument against increased HUD subsidies seems to be a variation of the jeremiad, "There goes the neighborhood": subsidies will encourage poor people to reproduce and expand their disruptive activities to stable neighborhoods.
As evidence that the private market can provide adequate low-income housing with minimal government subsidy, he uses a specious comparison between two very different types of subsidized housing in New York City.
As a private developer of subsidized, mixed-income housing, I can assure Mr. Husock's that low- and middle-income people can live together in harmony.
I can also assure him that if we in the private sector could house low-income people without substantial government assistance, we would.
Subsidies for decent housing with a modicum of privacy -- such as a bedroom where a poor child can do his homework without interruption -- should not be considered a luxury but rather an investment.
Bernard T. Carr
Bronx, N.Y.
