With less than three weeks to go before the Olympic flame is lit in Lillehammer, Norway, the CBS network is quietly boasting about what it considers its own Olympian feat: The Winter Games are virtually sold out at healthy prices ranging from $250,000 to $350,000 for each 30-second spot.
It's quite a different situation from two years ago when CBS broadcast the Winter Olympics from Albertville, France.
Then, CBS scrambled to sell advertising at a discount, with some spots going for less than $250,000.
This time around, CBS is guaranteeing advertisers an average audience rating of 18.6%.
In 1992, the network was too conservative about the audience that it guaranteed, estimating 17.1% of U.S. homes with TV sets would watch.
In the end, CBS had average ratings of 18.7%.
"It was an awful climate in 1992 for advertising," says Joseph D. Abruzzese, CBS senior vice president of television network sales.
Yet despite the sluggish ad sales, he says, the network "broke even" on its $243 million bid for U.S. television rights to the 1992 Winter Olympics.
CBS Chairman Laurence A. Tisch told a news conference this month that the network expects to make money on the 1994 Winter Olympics, for which it paid $300 million to secure television rights.
That is welcome news to even CBS's broadcast-network rivals, Capital Cities/ABC and General Electric's NBC.
It signifies renewed confidence that the three major broadcast networks can deliver large audiences for major events.
"CBS is lucky because of a confluence of marketing events," says Jon Mandel, senior vice president of Grey Advertising.
"The Olympics is a marquee sports event at a time when there are few such major audience-grabbing programs.
There is no Summer Olympics as there was in 1992 to siphon ad spending."
Also, the advertising marketplace is recovering with strong network sales in prime-time and daytime, says Mr. Mandel.
What's more, there are pitched marketing battles among major advertisers that freely spend millions on campaigns.
For example, American Telephone & Telegraph, Sprint and MCI Communications are all advertising during the Olympics, which will be broadcast early morning, prime-time and late, late night over 120 hours from Feb. 12 to Feb. 27.
Similarly, American Express and Visa International, also engaged in a never-ending market-share skirmish, are both advertising heavily.
And fast-food rivals McDonald's and Wendy's International are major sponsors.
A CBS executive says Wendy's is outspending McDonald's, a sponsor of the Winter Games.
Other major sponsors include Chrysler, which will advertise its new Neon automobile and other models, Ford Motor, Johnson & Johnson, Kmart, Eastman Kodak, Walt Disney, Coca-Cola, Anheuser-Busch and VF Corp.'s Lee Jeans.
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance, Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance and Principal Financial Group also will have a multitude of spots.
Advertising, but not considered "major" sponsors by the network, are Kellogg, Nestle and Xerox.
Reebok International will break one of its first campaigns from Leo Burnett, which replaced Chiat/Day last year.
One Reebok ad, which was filmed in Los Angeles this past weekend, will star figure skater Nancy Kerrigan, who is on center stage as a result of last month's attack against her allegedly carried out by individuals close to rival Tonya Harding (who isn't set to appear in any ads).
The Reebok campaign will feature women athletes who excel in their sports, including Sandra Farmer Patrick, who competes in the 400-meter hurdles; Julie Foudy, captain of the World Cup championship soccer team; and Nancy Feigen, whom Reebok describes as the No. 1-ranked rock climber.
International Business Machines is scheduled to make its first Olympics advertising with a new image campaign tied directly to the Olympics from Wells Rich Greene BDDP.
The agency is silent on details, although one ad-industry executive says the ads will "show IBM's contribution to managing the Olympic Games."
A four-page pull-out ad in February's issue of Life magazine may foreshadow the television spots.
"Without the slightest exaggeration, we can proudly say that everything you'll see . . . will be touched in some way by IBM," says the ad, with the headline: Gold, Silver, Bronze.
And Blue."
(IBM's nickname is Big Blue.)
This time around, CBS's Mr. Abruzzese says, the network took in $100 million from advertisers who weren't in the 1992 Games.
But some companies that advertised in the 1992 Winter Games are choosing to sit out this year's Olympics.
Among the no-shows: Miller Brewing, Mars and the U.S. Postal Service.
Already, CBS's Mr. Abruzzese says he is getting calls from advertisers interested in sponsoring the 1998 Winter Games in Nagano, Japan.
CBS certainly will need all of the advertisers it can get then because the network will pay $375 million for the television rights.
Has Mr. Abruzzese closed any deals yet for four years from now?
No, he responds.
But it isn't because he doesn't want to.
"We are prohibited from signing deals," he says, "until the corporate sponsors are decided."
Burger King, a unit of Grand Metropolitan, today is expected to name three finalists in a review for the creative portion of its estimated $100 million-plus national account.
They are: Ammirati & Puris, New York; Interpublic Group's Lowe & Partners/SMS, New York; and Euro RSCG's Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer.
Burger King declined to comment.
Agency officials couldn't be reached.
Eliminated from the competition is Saatchi & Saatchi Co.'s Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, New York, which has a foot in the door with the client, creating its children's advertising.
Also eliminated: WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather, an agency that some observers considered had an inside track because of its recent experience with Hardee's Food Systems.
The incumbent on the account, D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, New York, is competing for the media portion of the business.
Nutri/System Inc., Horsham, Pa., said it selected Gray Kirk/VanSant, Baltimore, to create ads for the launch of a new "wellness" program it plans at Nutri/System centers this spring.
Nutri/System spends about $30 million a year on advertising.
Nutri/System came out of bankruptcy-court protection last month.
It had hired the Philadelphia office of Foote, Cone & Belding Communications last fall for a weight-loss campaign.
That agency also pitched for the new assignment, Nutri/System said; it declined to name the other contenders.
Ad Notes. . . .
ACCOUNT: First Interstate Bancorp, Los Angeles, said it selected Hal Riney & Partners, San Francisco, for its estimated $25 million to $30 million account.
The account was handled by Campbell & Wagman, Los Angeles.
In the review's final round, Riney bested the Los Angeles office of Omnicom Group's DDB Needham.
REVIEW: Minolta Corp., a Ramsey, N.J., unit of Minolta Camera Co., has put its estimated $10 million to $15 million ad account into review, a Minolta spokesman said, confirming reports in trade publications.
Saatchi & Saatchi's CME KHBB, is the incumbent on the photographic portion of the business; Bozell, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon & Eckhardt, handles the office-copier and business-equipment portion.
Consultant Alan Achenbaum is conducting the search.
MCCANN: Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson acquired 100% of McCann-Erickson Hakuhodo, the Japanese agency it had operated in a joint venture with the Japanese ad agency Hakuhodo.
McCann previously owned 51% and Hakuhodo, 49%.
The agency, with estimated billings of $750 million, is dropping Hakuhodo from its name.
