German airline Lufthansa AG surpassed even its own expectations for 1993, narrowing its loss by more than two-thirds to 110 million marks ($65.2 million).
Preliminary figures released yesterday show the parent airline narrowed its loss from 373 million marks a year earlier.
Lufthansa, which had hoped to halve its loss from the previous year, attributed the improvement to an aggressive restructuring program that slashed its work force by about 8%.
Lufthansa has been restructuring since 1991, when it swung into the red for the first time in two decades as the airline industry reached its worst recession.
But unlike some of its European counterparts, the German carrier's changes involve more than cosmetic reorganization and capital injections.
While Lufthansa's home in Germany dooms it to remain a high-cost airline, the carrier has won praise from analysts for bringing costs more in line with revenue.
In fact, the carrier cut its operating costs by 3% -- or 500 million marks -- in 1993.
The biggest factor in bringing down spending was the elimination of 4,000 jobs in 1993; the move accounted for savings of more than 300 million marks.
The airline also trimmed costs by moving to smaller aircraft, which helped keep airport charges unchanged from the previous year.
Lufthansa noted that in 1992, charges rose by 343 million marks.
Lufthansa's consolidated results aren't due until May and analysts expect they will show only slight differences from the parent-company figures.
Meanwhile, yesterday's news encouraged analysts to predict the airline will at least break even in the current year.
"They're pulling out all the stops to turn a profit," said James Halstead of Swiss Bank Corp. in London.
Indeed, Lufthansa is under intense pressure to post a break-even result or a profit in the current year since the German government intends to sell much of its 51% stake in the airline.
First, however, the government must solve the tricky question of how to provide for Lufthansa workers' pensions, which are now part of a state scheme that cannot make payments for companies in which the government is a minority shareholder.
