They say everything's bigger in Texas.
But to look at the long-term returns chalked up by Texas-based mutual funds, you would swear this was Rhode Island.
For the past five- and 10-year periods, most Texas equity funds underperformed their national peer groups, according to an analysis for Texas Journal by Lipper Analytical Services Inc., a Summit, N.J., publisher of mutual-fund data.
Whatever the category, few of the roughly 80 funds based here have been long-term standouts -- and in many cases, their performance has been downright puny.
Consider American Capital Asset Management Inc.'s Growth & Income fund.
Although the Houston fund's aim is longterm growth, its 190% cumulative return for the decade ended Dec. 31 trailed its growth-fund peer group by about 50 percentage points.
Houston-based Texas Commerce Bancshares Inc.'s Balanced fund has looked similarly anemic, with five-year returns of 66%, compared with 88% for the comparable Lipper index.
And Capstone Asset Management Inc.'s U.S. Trend fund, also out of Houston, trailed Lipper's growth-fund index by more than 51 points for the 10-year period.
For Texans, such numbers are more than a blow to state pride; they're also a blow to their wallets.
That's because -- aside from a few nationally known mutual funds based here -- most Texas funds get their money from Texans.
So, why the lackluster performance?
For starters, Texas hosts a large number of small funds, whose tiny asset bases mean their overhead is relatively high, cutting into returns.
Some fund managers also say they don't aim for the front of the pack, opting instead for less-risky, more-stable, investments.
And critics argue that Texas funds have a hard time attracting top-rate money managers, who instead gravitate toward mutual-fund meccas in New York, Boston and Philadelphia.
"For whatever reasons, there just hasn't been a lot of talent running Texas funds," says Gerald Perritt, editor of the Mutual Fund Letter in Chicago.
This doesn't mean that all Texas equity funds have been rotten performers.
Some have fared well, and many others are improving.
Indeed, if you look at 1993 returns alone, the picture for Texas funds improves significantly.
For example, US:Gold Shares, a fund managed by United Services Advisors Inc. of San Antonio, was the second-best fund in the country last year, with a 124% return, according to Lipper.
But a year doesn't a mutual-fund star make.
Over the five-year period ended in December, US:Gold Shares ranked as the seventh-worst fund in the country, with a total return of less than 1%; over 10 years, the fund was fourth from the bottom.
Sure, there was an extended bear market in gold, but Lipper's gold index still managed a cumulative 43% gain over the five-year period.
Thus, five- and 10-year numbers offer a more meaningful glimpse of fund performance, an indication of how well managers battled a changing economy, booming and busting industries, and both the mini-bear market of 1990 and the October 1987 crash.
A key problem for Texas-based funds is that most of them have less than $200 million in assets, and many don't even reach $20 million.
Those are relatively small numbers in the mutual-fund game, and it presents managers with a variety of challenges.
When Concorde Financial Corp. of Dallas launched its only fund, Value Fund, in 1987, it "couldn't find local experts" in fund marketing or custodial and legal services, says Elizabeth Foster, analyst/secretary for the fund.
Value Fund, a growth and income fund with $12.6 million in assets, had an average annual return of 7.1% for the five years ended in December -- nearly half the 13.3% peer-group average.
"Texas is behind the learning curve, and that certainly makes it more difficult for us," Ms. Foster says.
The result is that small outfits such as Concorde, or Herbert R. Smith Inc., which runs the Avondale Total Return fund out of Wichita Falls, can't spread overhead among several funds, and they contract out for much, if not all, of their back-office needs.
In the case of Avondale, a balanced fund with just $8 million in assets and about 130 shareholders, the expenses of running the fund approach 1.8%, more than double the average for large balanced funds.
And it used to be much worse: Avondale -- which returned about 8.8% annually over the past five years, compared with 13.4% for Lipper's balanced-fund index -- has trimmed its costs 25% in recent years by linking up with Professionally Managed Portfolios, a New York umbrella group of small funds that negotiates for reduced rates for printing, accounting, legal and other services.
Another handicap for the small Texas funds: no depth.
With small funds, "investors are buying one person, not a research team," says John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a newsletter in Chicago.
While larger fund companies, such as San Antonio's USAA Investment Management Inc., employ a dozen or more equity-research analysts, small funds can't afford such a luxury.
As such, returns can suffer simply because "portfolio managers don't have time to analyze as many options," says Mr. Perritt, the newsletter editor.
Says Herbert Smith, who not only heads up his eponymous money-management firm, but also serves as Avondale's portfolio manager and its fundamental and technical analyst: "You're talking to the research department."
But size doesn't entirely explain Texas' dismal mutual-fund record.
Some of the biggest and best-known Texas mutual funds have fared poorly as well.
For instance, giant American Capital, whose nine equity funds manage more than $9.5 billion, could only muster one fund that beat its Lipper benchmark in the past decade.
That fund: Emerging Growth (A) fund, which beat the market average by 14.2 percentage points.
Alan Sachtleben, American Capital's chief investment officer for equities, says the company's underperformance is partly due to its conservative philosophy.
"We don't want to shoot the lights out one year, only to risk falling on our face the next year," he says.
"You lose shareholders in the whipsaw."
Perhaps, but Mr. Sachtleben also concedes that American Capital wishes it had shot out a few more lights than it did.
And, he says, it is determined to turn things around.
One bright spot: American Capital's Equity Income (A) fund.
For the five years through 1988, Equity Income typically sat in the bottom half of Morningstar's performance quartile rankings.
The fund routinely held large bets in a single sector.
A typical investment: a 4.5% stake in Manufacturers Hanover Corp. coupled with a 4% stake in Chemical Banking Corp.
As a result, poor economic news or the crash of a stock within a sector could, and did, drag down large chunks of the portfolio.
So, in 1990, the company named James Gilligan, a securities analyst with nine years experience at American Capital, as head of the fund.
The 35-year-old Mr. Gilligan spent his first few weeks turning over one-third of the portfolio, moving out of large financial -- and utility-sector bets, and toward a more diversified, and less concentrated, portfolio of consumer and health-care stocks, including McDonald's Corp., Sara Lee Corp. and Humana Inc.
Under his command, Equity Income's performance never has slipped below Morningstar's second quartile.
And over the five years ended in December, the fund beat its Lipper index by nearly 11 percentage points.
Good Service, but . . .
USAA Investment Management Co., with $3.5 billion in equity assets, also has grappled with its share of laggard funds.
To be sure, the company has long cultivated a reputation for having good service and some of the industry's lowest expense ratios, which ease some of the pressure to produce stellar returns.
But in recent years, the performance of some funds has deteriorated even by USAA's standards.
USAA's gold, aggressive growth, and Cornerstone offerings all trailed their respective benchmark indexes by double-digit percentage points for the five years ended in December.
Through 10 years, the company's growth fund trailed the benchmark by 70 percentage points.
"With 20/20 hindsight we can say that we were invested in the wrong stocks, in the wrong industries," says Michael Roth, president of the company's mutual-fund arm.
An example: the company's Mutual:Aggressive Growth fund's 38% stake in health-care stocks in 1991.
Though that proved beneficial that year, the fund held on for the round trip when those stocks burned in 1992.
To break with the past, USAA placed Bill Fries, who has been with USAA as a stock picker and analyst for 19 years, in charge of Mutual:Aggressive on Jan. 1.
In his first few weeks he has compiled a list of value-oriented and cyclical stocks -- about a third of the portfolio -- that will supply the cash needed to bring a growth bent to the fund.
"We're going to turn this fund around," Mr. Fries says.
Here's a look at the returns on selected Texas-based mutual funds for the five and 10 years ended in December.
The returns are compared with Lipper Analytical Services Inc.'s indexes for funds with similar investment objectives.
