Raising new questions about whether the White House may have meddled in an investigation of Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, President Clinton said he was told about a criminal referral in the case before the action was made public.
Mr. Clinton's disclosure provides the first evidence that he, as well as his staff, obtained advance warning of the Resolution Trust Corp.'s decision to request a criminal inquiry into whether funds from Madison Guaranty may have been improperly diverted into his gubernatorial campaigns or into Whitewater Development.
Speaking to reporters, Mr. Clinton said yesterday that at sometime in October "I became aware" that the RTC was referring questions about Madison funds for further investigation.
"I don't remember when I knew about it or who told me about it," Mr. Clinton said, "but it was just sort of presented as a fact, a decision that had been made by the government.
And I didn't think much about it at the time."
The president's remarks come on the heels of other disclosures last week that top Treasury Department and RTC officials met three times with White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum and other White House officials to discuss the Madison case.
The RTC is an independent regulatory agency and its investigations are supposed to proceed in confidence.
Mr. Nussbaum resigned under pressure from his job last weekend after the unusual meetings were reported by the media.
He and the other officials who attended the meetings have been subpoenaed to appear on Thursday before a grand jury here investigating the Whitewater affair.
Last night, Mr. Clinton appeared to be on the verge of picking veteran Washington attorney Lloyd Cutler, 76, to succeed Mr. Nussbaum as White House counsel.
Mr. Cutler served in the same capacity for former President Carter and was hailed as a strong choice by Democrats.
"He's calm, collected and experienced," said Bert Lance, another Carter aide.
"He will have the best interest of the president and the presidency at heart."
Mr. Cutler couldn't be reached for comment last night.
Mr. Cutler's choice would be the second time that Mr. Clinton reached out to the Washington establishment for help at a time of distress.
Last spring, he picked media guru David Gergen to bring order into the White House.
The president apparently was apprised of the RTC action sometime after the first meeting Sept. 29, when Treasury General Counsel Jean Hanson told Mr. Nussbaum that the RTC was asking the Justice Department to investigate.
A senior White House official said this discussion occurred at the end of a meeting on a different topic.
Although it remained unclear exactly when the president was told, White House officials said yesterday that Mr. Nussbaum informed Bruce Lindsey, an aide to the president, who was dealing with media questions related to the investigation of Madison and the Clintons' Whitewater real estate partnership with Madison's owner, James McDougal.
The White House official said that neither Mr. Nussbaum nor Mr. Lindsey told the president about the referral.
The referral was made on Oct. 8, but it didn't become public until the end of the month.
White House aides also said Hillary Rodham Clinton was unaware of the referral until it became public, and that she didn't know about the contacts with Treasury officials until Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman testified last week.
Mr. Clinton used his session with reporters yesterday to defend his wife.
"I believe I'm a better authority than anybody else in America on my wife," he said.
"I have never known a person with a stronger sense of right and wrong in my life -- ever."
After the uproar over the meetings, the White House is taking great pains to stem the damage.
Mr. Clinton's disclosure that he had advance knowledge about the RTC referral seemed to be part of a broader effort to get out as much information as possible.
His remarks came as the deputy White House counsel issued guidelines for all White House staffers to keep any information that the special counsel investigating Whitewater may seek.
Mr. Fiske, the special counsel, yesterday expressed a "strong concern" about any congressional hearings into the Whitewater affair.
The House Banking panel plans hearings starting March 24 to deal with the performance of the RTC, and Republicans have been promised a full day to call their own witnesses in that hearing.
In letters to House and Senate Banking Committee leaders, Mr. Fiske said that a congressional inquiry would "pose a severe risk to the integrity of our investigation," and that "inevitably, any such inquiry would overlap substantially with the grand jury's activities."
Republican leaders of the two committees -- New York Sen. Alfonse D'Amato and Iowa Rep. James Leach -- responded that congressional hearings are necessary and that Mr. Fiske's request may be premature and too broad.
The Democratic chairmen of the two committees -- Michigan Sen. Donald Riegle and Texas Rep. Henry Gonzalez -- didn't challenge the special counsel's plea.
Mr. Fiske agreed to a meeting with committee leaders in Sen. D'Amato's office at 11:30 a.m. tomorrow, a spokesman for the senator said.
Mr. Fisk declined to comment.
Any hearings are likely to bring up the question of document shredding at the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock.
Contrary to statements from the firm, two couriers insisted that they had shredded files of White House lawyer Vincent W. Foster in late January.
One of the couriers, Jeremy Hedges, said in an interview yesterday that he and his colleagues were often dispatched to the Arkansas Governor's Mansion during the 1992 presidential campaign to pick up sealed envelopes from Mrs. Clinton, a Rose partner of Mr. Foster's.
But Mr. Hedges and others said they didn't know what happened to the contents of the envelopes.
Mr. Hedges has appeared before a federal grand jury and recounted how he and another courier, Clayton Lindsey, ran the contents of a box bearing Mr. Foster's initials -- VWF -- through the firm's shredder.
Mr. Lindsey has been told by Fiske aides to expect a grand jury summons to give his version of the shredding.
The firm says an old box of Mr. Foster's was being reused by a clerk in helping a lawyer change offices.
"There were no Foster files destroyed," asserted Ronald Clark, the firm's managing partner, in an interview over the weekend.
But yesterday, neither Mr. Hedges nor Mr. Lindsey wavered in their recollections.
"The files were his, definitely," said Mr. Hedges, 20, a college student.
"The files were set up, organized in one manila folder after another, with tabs saying VWF searches, VWF correspondence and VWF pleadings."
"I don't want to call the firm a liar," he added, "but I think the probability of the firm's version of events is pretty slim."
Mr. Lindsey, 19, corroborated Mr. Hedges's account.
Mr. Clark didn't return calls yesterday for further comment.
The shredding, first reported by the New York Times -- is of interest to investigators because Mr. Foster was the Clintons' personal attorney until his death last July.
In a Feb. 16 appearance before the grand jury, Mr. Hedges said it occurred in late January.
Mr. Fiske was appointed special counsel on Jan. 20.
The firm began the practice of shredding more than two years ago after Mr. Clinton entered the presidential race and the firm came under greater scrutiny from reporters and others, according to employees.
But Mr. Clark denied the allegation of one employee that large amounts of potentially embarrassing documents were destroyed in "shredfests" after Mr. Clinton finished an encouraging second in the New Hampshire primary in February 1992 and won the New York primary in April.
"No Whitewater or Madison Guaranty files have been or will be destroyed," Mr. Clark said this weekend.
The investigation of the discussion between White House and Treasury officials represents an expansion of the role of the Washington wing of Mr. Fiske's operation, led by Roderick Lankler.
Mr. Lankler had planned to focus primarily on events relating to Mr. Foster's death.
Mr. Fiske's staffers now are also trying to determine whether the meetings resulted in any attempt to obstruct Mr. Fiske's probe.
Meanwhile, the RTC plans to audit legal bills from Rose Law Firm.
The firm worked for the RTC over several years and has come under fire for representing the agency in a case involving Madison, apparently without disclosing it had previously represented the thrift.
This month it was disclosed that Rose was reviewing the billing records of former partner Webster Hubbell, now a high-ranking Justice Department official.
The RTC was a Hubbell client.
The firm's managing partner didn't return phone calls yesterday.
Albert R. Karr and Ellen Joan Pollock contributed to this article.
