Public television has been very, very good to Larry Lancit and Cecily Truett.
On the strength of producing one acclaimed Public Broadcasting Service children's series, "Reading Rainbow," plus PBS's commitment to broadcast another next year, the husband-and-wife team took their company, Lancit Media Productions Ltd., public.
Lancit, currently valued at $80 million, and its co-producer, public station KCET-TV in Los Angeles, already have signed a $3.1 million deal with Sony Corp. and a $1.5 million deal with Fisher-Price Inc. to market merchandise spinoffs from their new children's show, "The Puzzleworks."
Meanwhile, the conduit for all this commercial success -- the public television system -- limps along on the shabby-genteel prestige of an institution untainted by profits but dependent on the kindness of strangers to get along.
Some people call public TV elitist; some see it controlled by liberals, others by conservatives and big business; still others see it as a wasteful use of $275 million in taxpayers' money in a world of proliferating cable channels.
In fiscal 1991, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting reaped $317,000 in product-licensing fees for its entire lineup of shows that includes such merchandising blockbusters as "Shining Time Station," home of Thomas the Tank Engine.
That amount -- a record for CPB, but a pittance in the world of product licensing -- was the result of poorly designed contracts intended to avoid any hint of profit-making.
This is the dilemma that stymies public television, never more so than today.
Public television is supposed to provide noncommercial alternative programming, yet be self-sustaining.
But does the pursuit of shows that attract subscriber dollars keep less bankable shows off the air?
Meanwhile, when a program like "Barney & Friends" proves wildly popular, what bureaucratic quagmire or misguided sense of mission keeps public TV from cashing in on the resulting solid-gold franchise?
Such questions percolate from the lofty corridors of the CPB to the lowliest small-town public TV-station manager's desk.
As a telecommunications revolution swirls around it, public television is groping to justify its existence to a rising chorus of critics, shore up its funding base, recapture defecting viewers and find a suitable role for itself in the fast-approaching multichannel TV future.
"We have to get ready so we're not left in the dust," says Robert Ottenhoff, PBS's chief operating officer.
In one sign of tumultuous changes afoot, six of the eight top officers of the CPB are new this year; among those replaced was the executive who negotiated CPB's cut of product-licensing deals.
At an unprecedented December meeting that brought together administrators of the system's triad -- the CPB, its PBS programming arm and the 351 local stations -- there was dark talk of cutting down as many as a third of the stations by forcing mergers.
Right now, many cities have several public stations competing for overlapping audiences and sponsors.
And come Feb. 1, a new leader takes charge at PBS: Ervin Duggan, who is stepping down as a member of the Federal Communications Commission and has vowed to "rebuild the case for public broadcasting."
Ultimately, that may be accomplished by returning public TV to its educational roots, with a big boost from technology.
If "telecourses" are more prosaic than Big Bird and "Masterpiece Theatre," they are, increasingly, where the money is.
State governments are scrambling to build distance-learning networks to bring instruction and interactive data to schools and businesses, and public TV stations are linchpins of these new multimedia networks.
While Congress has been unwilling to spring for unrestricted PBS programming budgets, it has been receptive to the system's new educational priorities.
It came up with a special $150 million allocation for PBS's just-launched Telstar 401 satellite, which will carry the new Ready to Learn channel of instructional programming for preschoolers.
Though PBS has lurched from money crunch to money crunch for most of its 25-year history, it now faces a fundamental change in its constituency of patrons, one that is already altering what goes on the air.
Of public TV's total $1.39 billion budget in fiscal 1992, Congress's share has dropped to slightly over 13% from nearly 20% in 1980.
The portion provided by state governments has dipped even more sharply, to 16% from almost 25% in 1980.
Thus, there is growing pressure on subscribers and corporations to take up the slack; together, they now account for about 38% of public TV's budget, up from 23%.
Universities and foundations account for the rest.
Yet prime-time viewership has slumped 18% in the past six years, and subscriber contributions rose only modestly in fiscal 1992, the latest figures available.
Corporate funding was off 3%, and PBS says that in fiscal 1993, support from business for national programming nose-dived 13.4% -- and insiders expect further declines this year.
"We are just not getting the kind of response we need from the recession-battered business world," says Richard Carlson, president and chief executive of CPB.
But Al Vecchione, executive producer of "The MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour" and a 22-year veteran of public television, blames underwriter defections on PBS's stringent guidelines governing the nature and length of corporate messages, even though those guidelines have been loosened in recent years.
Companies can broadcast a full-length commercial on cable TV and reach the same size audience, as on, say, "Nova," he argues.
"I do not support the idea of commercials on public television," he says, "but the guidelines ought to be liberalized and standardized."
"MacNeil/Lehrer" recently lost a major underwriter when PepsiCo Inc. announced it would pull out in June.
New York Life Insurance Co. and Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. will step into the breach, giving a total of $55 million over five years.
But Mr. Vecchione says he "hasn't raised a single dollar in two years" from corporate sponsors for the public-affairs specials that his company also produces.
Unless the system's funding troubles can be resolved, "it will be a commercial medium in the next century," warns Bruce Christensen, who served as PBS's president from 1984 until last summer.
Many suggest it is tilting perilously close to that now.
The rapid transformation of the TV industry already has begun to rob public TV of its distinctive voice.
Cable networks like Discovery and Arts & Entertainment still don't reach all television viewers, but they routinely offer cable subscribers the sort of cultural fare and documentaries that once were the sole province of PBS.
Cable's Bravo channel even offers advertisers "underwriting" opportunities.
Meanwhile, public TV is assiduously courting subscribers and business, which purists decry as equivalent to chasing big ratings.
For example, this season's prime-time PBS lineup includes a failed, though critically acclaimed, network drama series, "I'll Fly Away."
And PBS is developing scripts for a potential comedy series produced by former NBC Entertainment President Brandon Tartikoff.
Sitcoms "will be our death knell," says William Baker, president of WNET-TV in New York.
"Too many people in public television think of themselves as high-end commercial broadcasters.
If you treat it like commercial television, you're doomed."
At the individual station level, the clash between the system's mission and the marketplace is even more vivid.
Each station gets a portion of its funds -- less than 20% on average -- from the CPB, a private, nonprofit entity that administers Congress's annual allocation, which amounts to $275 million in fiscal 1994.
After funneling some of the money back to PBS for its national-programming service, the stations are on their own to fund the remainder of their budgets.
In recent years, some have had to slash expenses drastically, while others have tried a more entrepreneurial approach.
Seattle's KCTS-TV and Detroit's WTVS-TV formed a joint venture in London that seeks out European partners -- often commercial broadcasters -- with whom they co-produce shows, thus halving their own costs.
A number of stations have cut deals with a franchise known as Learningsmith, which sells paraphernalia related to public TV programs such as books and videotapes but returns less than 5% of sales to the stations.
Others lease out their production facilities to commercial broadcasters: Chicago's WTTW derives nearly a quarter of its revenues from such deals.
-- Over two weeks last October, Chicago's WTTW presented 40 hours of product pitches in a home-shopping show that featured such items as bronze statues, sweat shirts and jewelry.
Critics were aghast that home shopping was crowding out regular programming, but viewers registered "very few negative responses," according to a station official.
-- Norm Abrams, the host of "The New Yankee Workshop," a PBS home-woodworking show produced by Boston's WGBH, putters on camera with tools made by one of the show's underwriters, Delta International Machinery Corp.
The brand names are covered up, but a press kit for the show notes that "it's not unusual for distributors to receive phone calls from viewers inquiring about Delta tools they've seen Norm use on the show."
-- Last year, PBS distributed a glowing documentary on journalist James Reston; the show was produced by the Scranton, Pa., public TV station in association with the New York Times, Mr. Reston's employer for 42 years until his retirement in 1987.
Its producer and director, Susan W. Dryfoos, is a member of the Sulzberger family that runs the newspaper.
Mr. Duggan, PBS's incoming president, views such commercialism as a function of PBS's "penury," brought on, he says, by 12 years of tight-fisted Republican administrations in Washington.
He likens the system to a newly widowed woman "forced to take in laundry" to make ends meet.
Some of that penny-pinching stemmed from Republican complaints that public television is a poorly disguised mouthpiece for liberal causes.
Others have countered that big business -- and thus conservative thinking -- controls public TV's underwriting purse strings.
While PBS cries poverty, many of its program suppliers have gotten rich through public television exposure.
"Barney" merchandise, everything from lunch boxes to underwear, generates several hundred million dollars in retail sales annually, analysts estimate.
A cut goes back to the private Lyons Group, which produces the show, but almost nothing goes to the CPB, which together with PBS has contributed more than $2.5 million to produce episodes featuring the purple dinosaur.
And "Barney" producers can count on more public money for new episodes, because any CPB licensing earnings must be plowed back into new production.
The terms of the deal have outraged lawmakers who control the Congressional allocation for public television.
Similarly, PBS continues to subsidize "Sesame Street," which earns millions on its toys and clothing lines, with $6 million annually.
Lancit Media's new series, "The Puzzleworks," is PBS's first major undertaking for preschoolers since "Sesame Street" made its debut 25 years ago.
So far, Lancit and KCET-TV in Los Angeles have lined up $8 million in outside financing -- including a $4.5 million grant from CPB, its largest ever-toward the first year's production budget.
CPB's deal with Lancit is its standard: CPB put up seed money equal to about 38% of the show's first-year budget.
In turn, it will receive -- and return to Lancit and KCET for new production -- 19% of the net ancillary revenues from merchandising, after deducting costs of marketing, promotion and distribution, among others.
Mr. Christensen argues that because public television won't provide total funding for shows, it has to offer incentives to attract "entrepreneurial" producers.
"You can't have it both ways," he says.
Adds PBS's Mr. Ottenhoff: "For every `Barney,' there are 20 to 30 other programs that are underfunded."
Nevertheless, both CPB and PBS officials say that all licensing policies are under review.
"We don't have to get in the profit-making business," says a CPB executive, "but we should get more back" to use to generate new shows.
The national-program schedule is just part of the business of public television; the rest of its mandate is the less visible educational side, which PBS also oversees.
After years of taking a back seat to national programming, instructional TV is now where the action is.
A glimpse of public television's future can be seen today in South Carolina, where public TV's electronic classrooms reach into every school, prison and county building.
And in Utah, Salt Lake City's KUED-TV is part of a state-wide consortium that is developing an interactive video, audio and data system that brings science classes to high-school students on a Navajo reservation and medical training to rural doctors.
Consortium members include Utah's colleges, the state office of education and private industry.
The group also works closely with phone company U S West and cable company Tele-Communications Inc.
"We've got to prove our worth," says Fred Esplin, KUED's general manager.
"If we're truly meeting needs, then the money will be there."
Mr. Duggan, the incoming PBS president, says that while he will "be out rattling the tin cup," public television also must learn to do more with "imagination and originality."
Rather than focus on the funding crunch, he prefers to emphasize what he calls "unhappy trends" in commercial broadcasting that make public TV increasingly necessary: the "feeding frenzy to see who can be the most exploitive" in news, children's and entertainment series programming.
He also expects to make the case that the new information superhighway should be built around the public television infrastructure already in place.
"A lot of good marriages come when you marry the girl or boy next door, and in this case, that's public television," he says.
LANCIT MEDIA PRODUCTIONS Ltd., the producer of the "Reading Rainbow" series on Public Broadcasting Service, went public in 1991.
A page-one article Thursday said incorrectly that at the time of the initial public offering Lancit had a PBS commitment for another series, "The Puzzleworks."
Lancit didn't receive the commitment for "The Puzzleworks" until after the initial public offering.
(WSJ Jan. 17, 1994)
