The much-heralded age of personal digital communicating has gotten off to a rocky start.
But just wait.
The current problem can be summed up in one word: Newton.
Apple Computer Inc. raised expectations by heavily promoting its Newton MessagePad as the first personal digital assistant, a hand-held wireless communicator that could link personal files, addresses and lists, and even convert handwriting to digital type.
But when the product arrived in stores, it couldn't recognize handwriting particularly well, couldn't communicate at all without lots of costly additional gear and was widely ridiculed.
The Newton, says Microsoft Corp.
Chairman William H. Gates, may have "set the category back a couple of years."
To be fair, the Newton shouldn't get all the blame.
It was followed by other ostensible PDAs: the Zoomer, a personal organizer from Casio Computer Co. and Tandy Corp. that communicates mainly with a designated desktop computer; and BellSouth Corp.'s Simon, a cellular phone that can store files, as well as try to send faxes and electronic mail over a chancy analog transmission system.
"So far, these PDAs are more frustrating to use and more time-consuming than what they purport to replace," says Alan Reiter, editor of Mobile Data Report, a newsletter in Alexandria, Va.
"They are beta test products being sold as commercial products."
Herschel Shosteck, a cellular-phone analyst in Silver Spring, Md., says PDAs are about as useful as magnets on refrigerator doors, "which can hold schedules of meetings, phone numbers and personal calendars.
Until PDAs offer the same prices and robustness as kitchen magnets, there's a limited market."
But don't be misled by the early bungling: Despite the bad start and widespread skepticism, PDAs are still likely, sometime in the not-too-distant future, to transform the way many people communicate -- perhaps rivaling or exceeding cellular phones or personal computers in their impact.
That's because within three to five years, PDAs will be fine-tuned to automate, integrate, filtrate and locate all kinds of valuable information.
For PDAs to become a compelling mass-market product, three things must happen: Wireless networks must become ubiquitous and reliable; lots of useful services must be available over those networks; and the devices must offer many useful functions.
It's the combination that will make PDAs irresistible for some people: While PCs and other devices may be able to duplicate the services and functions, PDAs will deliver them -- along with powerful messaging and communicating capability -- wherever and whenever a user wants.
The foundation for meeting those three conditions has already been laid.
Two companies -- Ardis, a joint venture of Motorola Inc. and International Business Machines Corp., and RAM Mobile Data, owned by BellSouth Corp. of Atlanta and RAM Broadcasting Corp. of Woodbridge, N.J. -- already offer wireless networks, but only for data and only in metropolitan areas.
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. of Kirkland, Wash., plans a more comprehensive wireless data network -- called cellular digital packet data, or CDPD -- that will overlap with its existing analog cellular system.
CDPD users with dual-mode cellular phones or PDAs could handle both voice and data without the transmission errors and breakdowns common in analog systems, including current cellular networks.
Barring problems, CDPD could be available nationwide in two to three years.
If McCaw's efforts flounder, a lack of agreement on standards could force PDA users to wait another year or two, for widespread installation of so-called personal communications services capable of carrying both voice and data.
Other companies are at work to make PDAs easier to use and more functional.
General Magic Inc., a consortium whose members include Apple and American Telephone & Telegraph Co., last month introduced a powerful program called Magic Cap, which simplifies many communications tasks.
Designed to be an operating system for PDAs and, later, an application program for PCs, Magic Cap could be to PDAs what the Macintosh operating system was to PCs: a better, simpler way to do things that becomes the industry model.
At the same time, AT&T and General Magic announced plans to introduce a service this summer called PersonaLink, which may add more value to PDAs than anything else.
It will create an "intelligent network" service, allowing a PDA user to launch "electronic agents," powerful ways to filter and find information from external networks even while you're not on-line.
Motorola is expected to be the first to market with a wireless PDA using Magic Cap and capable of using PersonaLink; the Schaumburg, Ill., company plans to begin selling it sometime late in the first half of this year.
Japan's Sony Corp. will offer a similar PDA at about the same time, but its device may have only a wired telephone link.
Philips Electronics NV of the Netherlands and the Panasonic division of Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. are expected to introduce similar products late this year or early in 1995.
All four companies are General Magic backers.
It's difficult even for wireless specialists to understand precisely how a new kind of personal digital communicating will evolve from these developments, or how appealing it will prove.
"How many people using cellular phones now were chomping at the bit to use them in 1982?"
Mr. Reiter asks.
"How many people riding railways in the 1800s were demanding airplane tickets?
The interesting thing about this market is that even smart people don't know what is going to happen."
Much of the uncertainty centers on intelligent networking, a tool unlike anything available to network users today.
AT&T's PersonaLink service is based on communications software developed by General Magic called Telescript.
If a PDA with Telescript software is connected through PersonaLink to a service provider with Telescript, the PDA user will be able to remotely program the provider's computer to do important things that save the user valuable time, or to help locate things and services that may be hard to find.
Starting this summer, people will be able to use PersonaLink to filter communications between Telescript-equipped devices, an important function in an era of information overkill.
By clicking a mouse or tapping a stylus on some simple rules in a file, users can instruct the network to assign priorities or attributes to messages both coming and going: Tell PersonaLink to fax an expected incoming message to 18 colleagues around the world.
Have it beep the PDA if the boss or babysitter sends a message, but dump messages from an ex-husband in a trash can.
The more futuristic part of intelligent networking involves electronic agents doing remote searching, matching and compiling at the user's bidding.
To offer a hypothetical example involving today's networks, it would be like dispatching someone into the Prodigy on-line service to collect travel information you requested -- say, about travel to Hawaii -- while you do something else on your PDA or even while it's turned off.
Over time, airlines, restaurants and other service providers are expected to sign up with networks like PersonaLink, to obtain a sort of electronic 800-number access to consumers.
If enough sign up, consumers and businesses will be able to find each other in a kind of nationwide electronic marketplace, a commercial Internet.
Michael P. Schulhof, chief executive of Sony Corp. of America, envisions the day when a consumer, hearing a song he likes on his PDA, will be able to use the device to identify the album by a digital code contained in the broadcast signal.
He could then tap an icon sending a wireless order to Sony through PersonaLink; Sony would ship him the CD, billed to a previously entered Visa account number.
Rich Miller, one of Telescript's co-developers at General Magic, says intelligent networking will evolve to include electronic "requests for proposals," sent by potential buyers to potential sellers.
Put out an RFP for a 1955 Thunderbird.
The electronic agent, not you, will search networks for all postings of such cars, and download lists, prices and phone numbers into the PDA, or beep you if it finds one that meets your criteria: say, in good condition, in your region, for less than $9,000.
Put out an RFP for a two-week Hawaiian vacation in August, and rank responses by cost or a value index of your own making.
Or create a "personality" agent that lists as many interests as you want floating around in the ether, so the PDA can continually match you with sellers' offerings.
This automation sets intelligent networking apart from previous efforts at electronic marketplaces, such as videotex, Mr. Miller says.
The user doesn't search; his or her electronic agent does.
The search mechanisms needed for this kind of matching already exist in advanced database software.
Consumers will be able to use PCs and interactive TVs in this electronic marketplace, but if they want the potential for quick access or quick response, anywhere, anytime, they will see a need for PDAs that doesn't exist today.
The power of General Magic's Magic Cap software is that it simplifies the use of intelligent agents so much, even computer nonusers will be able to easily automate and customize communications.
The system presents users with three main screens: a desk, a hallway to other rooms in your "house," and a main street along which you can travel.
Tapping objects on the desk opens some basic files, such as your directory of names, addresses and phone numbers.
Tapping rooms opens other files, such as a library of news articles.
Tapping buildings on main street provides access to services, such as an AT&T building that allows you to customize your mailbox at PersonaLink, or an electronics store that lets you take a virtual tour inside, shopping for electronic gear by more tapping.
Magic Cap "is a navigation metaphor designed to reach beyond computer users to telephone and TV users," says Andy Hertzfeld, one of its principal programmers.
"They should be able to tap their intuition as to how it should work, using their knowledge of the physical universe they've lived in all their lives."
Software companies and service providers will offer to send files to place themselves in your system; when you accept, your Magic Cap landscape will change to reflect their presence.
The information will move to you either by modem or in the form of electronic credit-card-size inserts that slip into slots in your PDA.
You can also download files from your personal computer with a cable.
And sophisticated PDA users can use programming tools to fashion their own desk, hallway and main street.
Other operating systems will be modified or created to take advantage of Telescript, but Magic Cap, 3 1/2 years in the making, appears to have a significant lead in making both PDAs and network services easier to use.
It does so partly by automating the programming that sends electronic agents into networks to work for you.
If Dow Jones News/Retrieval (an on-line service owned by Dow Jones & Co., publisher of this newspaper) were hooked into PersonaLink, you could enter your library by tapping the door.
Then, by tapping in a menu of rules, you could send messages in Telescript asking to be alerted when Apple's stock drops below $20 a share.
A music "store" on main street could contain Sony's number for CDs, or Tower Records' number.
If Tower belonged to PersonaLink, you could send an agent-messenger to await the arrival of the latest Pearl Jam CD, at which time the agent would beep your PDA.
The "in" box on your desk contains rules for prioritizing messages.
Tapping on one rule, for instance, assigns an urgent priority to messages from your wife.
Any or all incoming messages can be automatically routed to a file cabinet on your "desk."
Sending messages is equally automated.
Tapping open the stationery drawer at the bottom left of the desk presents a choice of postcard, letter, urgent postcard, etc.
Tapping one pulls it out of the drawer, with a "name finder" on the side; tap a scroller or alphabetic tabs to indicate the recipient, and tap again.
You are then offered a choice of the recipient's fax, e-mail, PersonaLink, Internet or telephone numbers and addresses.
Tap your choice, and then either scribble a note on the screen with the stylus or call up a screen keyboard to enter typed text.
Tap a selection of "stamps," priority codes or special icons that will help determine the message's importance to the other person.
Tap the send button, and off it goes.
If you are sending to another Magic Cap user, you can easily include a bit of song, such as a funeral dirge, and animated characters, such as a man running downhill pursued by a huge boulder (one of Mr. Hertzfeld's favorites).
Each Magic Cap function can also be used by software developers to write programs that expand its uses.
For the library, Mead Data Central Inc., Dayton, Ohio, offers daily news summaries, and America Online Inc., Vienna, Va., its own myriad services.
For the file cabinet, Intuit Inc. of Menlo Park, Calif., offers Pocket Quicken, an electronic checkbook that can track your spending in several different ways (the icon for that function is a dollar sign with wings).
Around midyear, a company called eShop Inc., in San Mateo, Calif., will begin shipping stores and malls software that will allow them to build virtual versions of themselves on interested consumers' main streets.
The software will provide Magic Cap users with pictorial tours through the stores and their wares.
Beware: If you tap it, you may have bought it.
Some industry watchers still say PDAs won't offer enough unique features to find a broad market.
Mr. Shosteck, the cellular-phone analyst, says most people will still prefer to communicate by voice, and those that won't will still have cheap ways to swap messages by pager or computer.
"Who needs wireless connectivity anyway?" he asks.
"For a well-organized business or professional person, the need for instant connectivity isn't so great.
The person who really needs it is incompetent."
But Mr. Shosteck and many other experts also underestimated the demand for cellular phones and pagers, which was driven by advances in chip and software designs that reduced prices and increased performance.
The same technological forces probably will hasten the day of wireless networks, powerful PDAs and wireless services.
Marc Porat, General Magic's chief executive, also predicts subsidies from network operators and wireless providers of goods and services will slash PDA prices, starting this year.
BIS Strategic Decisions, a Norwell, Mass., market-research group known for conservative demand forecasts, predicts annual PDA sales will reach about one million units in 1997, along with another million units for other wireless devices such as subnotebook computers.
The firm also predicts a total installed base of about 7.5 million wireless devices by the end of 1998.
"Magic Cap and Telescript have the potential to be the foundation" for the spread of PDAs and intelligent wireless networks, says Richard Siber, supervisor of the BIS studies.
Though he says the technology is too young for confident predictions, "knowing their partners, it certainly could turn out that way."
General Magic's Mr. Porat cautions that building up extensive intelligent networks will take years, but he expects PDA devices to take off faster.
He calls 1993 "the year of PDA demos," and 1994 "the year of the first serious products.
In 1995, real things happen."
Mr. Hill is the chief of The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau, where Mr. Carlton is a staff reporter.
