In most markets, Coke and Pepsi give headaches to the competition.
In Canada, the two beverage giants are the ones reaching for the aspirin.
Private-label sodas -- through a combination of new products, aggressive marketing and low prices -- are cutting into the market share of Coca-Cola Co. and PepsiCo Inc. in Canada.
Now both Coke and Pepsi are starting to cut costs and introduce new products to recapture consumers' interest.
The battle, industry observers say, is a lesson in how quickly private labels can displace big brands.
Indeed, private-label brands can be "major change makers" in an industry, says Ray Goldberg, a professor at Harvard Business School who has studied soft-drink markets.
Grocers in Canada say Coke and Pepsi had begun to take them for granted: The grocers would feature them in stores' choicest display space and then, because of retail price wars, end up selling them at prices barely above -- and sometimes below-cost.
"Coke and Pepsi figured we couldn't do without their products," says Eugene Yakimoski, owner of an IGA store in Winnepeg, Manitoba.
Small wonder.
As recently as 1990, private-label soft drinks accounted for less than 5% of sales, according to grocers' estimates.
The packaging certainly didn't help.
A brand called Yukon Club featured those two words in plain white letters on a colored label.
At A&P Canada, until just five years ago, private-label drinks in cans had to be opened with a can opener, says William Sheine, vice president of marketing for the supermarket chain.
The revolution began in 1991 when Canada's major grocery chains, led by Loblaw Cos., agreed to sell sodas made by Toronto-based Cott Corp., using the RC Cola formulation.
The chains created flashier packaging for the new drinks and gave them names like President's Choice (Loblaw's multiproduct private-label line) and Our Compliments (at stores supplied by Oshawa).
Promotions and advertising highlighted the private-label drinks.
And grocers placed the drinks in end-of-aisle displays, hung banners and set up vending machines to sell the products for 25 Canadian cents (about 19 U.S. cents and a third the price of a Coke or Pepsi at the time).
But supermarket executives say their profit margin on the private-label drinks -- even considering marketing costs -- is as high as 20%, compared with a high of 5% on Coke and Pepsi products.
The comparative figures, they add, take into account that Coke and Pepsi deliver products to stores and contribute to merchandising.
Coke and Pepsi dispute those numbers.
Tony Eames, a Coke executive in Canada, says retailers can make profit margins as high as 20% depending on how much they discount the products.
Retailers also found Canadian consumers eager for new brands, particularly when they are cheaper.
"Most of my customers are meat-and-potatoes families with three kids, looking for the best value," says Cliff Marshall, manager of the A&P in North Bay, Ontario.
The results: Private-label soft drinks in Canadian supermarkets, not long ago a negligible presence, now account for about one-quarter of all soft-drink sales, according to data compiled by the A.C. Nielsen market-research firm.
Having watched their sales volume decline, executives at both Coke and Pepsi say they expect their prices this year to come closer to that of private labels.
Indeed, Coke last week made a deal with Loblaw to gain more shelf space in its stores.
But with ad costs of about $20 million a year each, plus the expenses linked to huge distribution systems, the beverage giants will be hard pressed to match private-label prices.
Instead, they are turning to new marketing ploys.
Last year, for instance, Pepsi interviewed 2,000 Canadian consumers to find out what they see as "value" in a drink.
A primary response was product innovations.
Thus, Pepsi this year is introducing Pepsi Max, with a third the calories of a regular Pepsi.
The company also plans to sell products promoted in the U.S., such as the Big Slam one-liter bottle and an easy-to-carry case of 24 cans.
Coke has created new ads aimed at housewives, who are usually overlooked in favor of teens.
One of the ads features a new contoured plastic bottle that Coke says is easier to grip.
And both companies are cutting costs.
In the past decade, Coke and Pepsi consolidated their local Canadian bottlers into single systems.
In the fourth quarter, Coca-Cola Beverages Ltd., the Toronto bottler 49%-owned by Coca-Cola, said it would halt production at half of its 16 bottling plants and lay off 13% of its 4,300 employees.
The company is also working to speed up deliveries and cut warehousing costs.
Pepsi, which runs company-owned operations out of Toronto, is closing one bottling plant and cutting 45 jobs.
Can private-label soft drinks be as successful in the U.S.?
Cott says it now sells its drinks to 56 U.S. chains, including A&P and Safeway -- up from a handful of customers just a few years ago.
And in the first 10 months of 1993, private labels gained more volume than any major brand in the U.S., according to the trade publication Beverage Digest.
Supermarkets want "good quality and good value," says Prof. Goldberg at Harvard, "and they are seeing someone who provides both, recession or no recession."
