NOW THAT President Clinton has urged Congress and the nation to take on the big and important issues, take a moment to ponder the small and important issue of Mansour el Kikhia.
At a time when Americans are increasingly inclined to turn inward, his story offers a poignant reminder that outlaw regimes are still prowling the world, and that the U.S. still has a special responsibility to stand up to them.
Mansour el Kikhia is an American resident and struggling businessman.
More important, he once was Libya's foreign minister and United Nations ambassador.
A decade ago, he broke away from the madcap regime of Moammar Gadhafi and went into exile to oppose it.
Last month, a strange thing happened to Mr. Kikhia.
While in Cairo to attend a human rights conference, he simply disappeared from his hotel.
It's pretty clear he didn't leave voluntarily; though he's a diabetic, the insulin and syringes he depends on were left behind.
To anyone who has followed the Gadhafi regime, this doesn't look like much of a mystery.
There seems little doubt that agents acting on behalf of Libya abducted Mr. Kikhia to silence him.
Mr. Kikhia's family is convinced he was spirited out of Egypt and into neighboring Libya.
A cousin living in Texas, who also is named Mansour el Kikhia, says he was told by a reliable source this week that the dissident was seen being led out of an airplane in the Libyan capital of Tripoli shortly after his capture.
LIBYA HAS a well-documented history of this kind of political terrorism.
Since 1986, the State Department says, Libyan agents have murdered anti-Gadhafi exiles in Italy, Greece and France, and tried unsuccessfully in Austria.
Two other dissidents disappeared in Egypt a few years ago.
With that kind of record, Col. Gadhafi doesn't deserve the benefit of the doubt now.
By sheer coincidence, President Clinton's national security adviser, Anthony Lake, has a passing acquaintance with the Kikhia family, and that has helped put this case on the White House radar screen.
President Clinton has written a personal letter to Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, asking Egypt to help track down Mr. Kikhia.
Otherwise, the world has little noticed.
Yet the Kikhia case shouldn't simply be forgotten.
For one thing, it arises just as Libya is conducting a concerted campaign to wriggle out of U.N. economic sanctions imposed because of its refusal to hand over two Libyan agents charged with blowing up the Pan Am 103 jetliner over Scotland five years ago.
If the world community needed any new motivation to keep the screws turned on Libya, Mr. Kikhia should provide it.
The U.S. can make it clear that, in addition to action on the Pan Am 103 front, it wants Mr. Kikhia accounted for before any easing of pressure.
Second, the Kikhia case is a reminder that the practice of simply rubbing out political opponents abroad is becoming distressingly common.
Iran does it systematically.
And now there is a "significant concern" in the American intelligence community "that if Gadhafi gets away with this one, he has other scores to settle as well," says Henry Schuler, a friend of the Kikhia family and a Libya analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
THE U.S. has a particular obligation to act when American residents are hurt by this kind of lawlessness, but it should be vocal even in cases that have nothing to do with Americans.
Clinton administration foreign policy is based on the premise that the post-Cold War world will be more stable if the family of democracies is enlarged, but democracy won't expand if democratic voices can be snuffed out.
The Kikhia abduction also leaves a cloud hanging over Egypt.
Some of Mr. Kikhia's friends suspect he couldn't have been abducted unless somebody in the Egyptian security service at least looked the other way.
Egyptian officials passionately dispute that.
They argue that Egyptians have no reason to tolerate terrorism at a time when terrorist attacks are scaring off millions of badly needed tourist dollars from Egypt.
Egypt insists it is doing all it can to find Mr. Kikhia, including pressing Libya.
But the Kikhia case ought to prompt Egypt to reconsider the sympathetic stance it has taken toward Libya's actions in the Pan Am 103 standoff.
Egypt's strategy is to prevent neighboring Libya from becoming even more isolated.
It worries that harsher economic sanctions on Libya would send thousands of Egyptians who now work there streaming home jobless.
And many Egyptians figure that, bad as the Gadhafi regime may be, it could be replaced by something worse -- perhaps a radical Islamic government -- if it is brought down.
But understandable as those concerns may be, at some point there's a price to be paid for associating with outlaws.
