Novell Inc., moving aggressively to counter the dominance of Microsoft Corp., agreed to purchase WordPerfect Corp. for $1.4 billion in stock and Borland International Inc.'s spreadsheet business for $145 million.
The transactions should help Novell, the longtime leader in software for networking personal computers, realize its desire to own a big-enough lineup of products to compete virtually on all fronts with Microsoft, which has come to dominate the software industry in recent years.
It also signals the end of an era when small companies could compete for the most lucrative software markets, as was the case during the 1980s.
For WordPerfect, Novell is paying 59 million of its shares, which closed at $23.75, down 25 cents, or 1%, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday.
"This creates a software powerhouse," said Philippe Kahn, chief executive officer at Borland.
Novell now "provides a strong alternative to Microsoft" for corporate America, said Chuck Stegman, an analyst at Dataquest Inc., a research firm.
The planned acquisitions by Novell, based in Provo, Utah, create a software behemoth that, while still only half the size of Microsoft in terms of revenue, spans an impressive range of key businesses.
WordPerfect has been the traditional leader in word-processing programs, a feisty competitor in electronic-mail systems and a budding rival in electronic publishing.
Borland's Quattro Pro spreadsheet, which is popular with financial analysts, holds a distant third place in its market behind Lotus Development Corp. and Microsoft.
But the deals also constitute something of a rescue of WordPerfect and Borland from successful attacks on their product lines by Microsoft.
WordPerfect has lost much of its market share to Microsoft's Word program, and Borland's cash flow has been severely hurt by price wars with Microsoft's "suite" of common applications called Microsoft Office.
Borland said yesterday that it will report a decline in revenue and a significant loss for the current quarter.
But Mr. Kahn also said yesterday, "No one can say Borland has cash problems any more."
Borland stock jumped $1.375, or 10.8%, to $14.125 in Nasdaq trading yesterday.
Novell faces a big job meshing the disparate elements of its acquisition, but Novell is aided by the fact that WordPerfect is based a few miles away in Orem, Utah, and that the company earns enough profit, an estimated $60 million in 1993, not to dilute Novell's earnings per share.
"We think this is a natural merger," said Raymond Noorda, Novell's chief executive officer.
Microsoft executives, however, scoffed at the combination, insisting that products peddled by WordPerfect and Borland's spreadsheet aren't likely to fare any better under Novell's stewardship.
The deals are "a validation of our suite strategy," said Peter Higgins, who runs Microsoft's applications business.
Mr. Higgins claimed the enlarged Novell still "doesn't own a compelling suite of applications."
By packaging applications in suites, Microsoft effectively drove down the price of software, with a helping hand from Borland, which in recent years has sold its Quattro spreadsheet for as little as $50 in order to win a following.
With prices plummeting, WordPerfect, Borland and others have laid off workers in order to reduce costs and seen sharp declines in profits or posted losses.
Only the economies of scale that come with size seem to enable companies to cope with lower prices.
With Microsoft so much larger than Novell, and intent on wresting away Novell's core business with its recently released Windows NT networking software, "what choice did Novell have but to get bigger?" asked Richard Shaffer, editor of the Computer Letter.
In this quest, Novell achieved a coup in obtaining WordPerfect, whose 1993 revenue of nearly $700 million made it the fourth-largest PC software supplier.
A closely held company, WordPerfect had looked long and hard over the past two years at an initial public stock offering that would turn its two owners and co-founder, Bruce Bastian and Alan Ashton, into megamillionaires.
"This is a great way for Wordperfect to go public," said Jeff Leopold, a software analyst for Yankee Group.
The sale to Novell should make Messrs. Bastian and Ashton among the wealthiest men in the U.S.
Each should reap nearly $700 million in Novell stock, on top of hundreds of millions of dollars gained from WordPerfect's past operations.
The loser in yesterday's deal may have been Lotus, which Mr. Noorda said made an effort recently to purchase Novell.
Mr. Noorda said he rebuffed the offer.
Lotus declined to comment.
Four years ago, the two companies announced a merger but then called it off.
One uncertainty about the deal involves who will lead Novell, since Mr. Noorda, 69 years old, is past the normal retirement age and has acknowledged that a search is under way for his successor.
"They better find a great CEO," said Terry Garnett, a senior vice president at Oracle Corp., a large database-software company.
Adrian Rietveld, WordPerfect's chief executive, is one possible successor to Mr. Noorda, although Mr. Rietveld has only been in his position a few months.
Any one of a few senior executives at Novell could also claim the top spot too.
Mr. Noorda said that he intends to remain as chairman of Novell and that "we're hopeful that there will be a new CEO by mid-June."
Should Novell's deals be completed, complaints about Microsoft's domination over the software industry -- complaints that have spawned a succession of federal investigations -- may abate.
Mr. Kahn of Borland said, "For the last two to three years people lost faith that they could compete with Microsoft.
Now there is a better choice."
The sale of Borland's spreadsheet operations would leave the company with a substantial business in database software and a thriving software-tools business.
However, the sale of the company's spreadsheet business leaves unresolved a pending damage claim against the company, perhaps for as much as $100 million, brought by Lotus, which alleges that Borland's spreadsheet infringes on the copyrights for Lotus's spreadsheet.
In buying Borland's spreadsheet business, Mr. Noorda acknowledged that he was partly motivated by a desire to help keep Borland, which competes directly with Microsoft in its businesses, afloat.
Besides bolstering the forces arrayed against Microsoft, the world's biggest software supplier, the deal reflects a trend toward consolidation within the software industry, as individual companies struggle with large marketing and development expenses, and as profit margins wilt in the face of sporadic price wars.
"Consolidation is really the theme in the software industry now," said Peter Rogers, an analyst at Rogers Stephens & Co. -- in millions
