Michael Fortunato, a West Virginia doctor, opened a new office five miles across the Ohio River last summer -- just far enough to shield part of his income from West Virginia's new 2% tax on doctors' revenues.
While an extreme reaction, Dr. Fortunato's move to Ohio reflects growing concern within the medical community about many states' new reliance on doctors and hospitals to help defray the cost of medical care for the poor.
Within the past year, lawmakers in Minnesota and Kentucky also have implemented 2% revenue taxes, which doctors are challenging in court.
Nebraska, Tennessee, Minnesota and Washington, D.C., have placed new licensing fees on physicians, and physician taxes are on the agenda in about a dozen states.
Meanwhile, about 25 states have placed levies on hospitals to help carry the burden.
These new financing efforts spring from many states' increasing desperation over the costs of the federal Medicaid program for the poor, which is partly funded by the states.
The assessments have renewed the question of whether it is fair to tax one group of people to pay for services that benefit society.
Similar taxes on lawyers that have been proposed in some states for various purposes also have aroused controversy.
Because such taxes often target highly paid and sometimes unpopular professions, they have become politically fashionable in an era of public hostility to broad tax hikes.
States typically justify the physician assessment, for instance, as a way of requiring doctors to fulfill their ethical responsibility to care for the poor.
In addition, some state officials point out, because the state gives doctors a valuable and exclusive license to practice medicine, it has a right to collect a small tax for the public good.
But the taxes have triggered fierce resistance from the American Medical Association and its affiliated state organizations.
Taxing doctors to cover health care for the poor is "like building contractors having to build homes for the homeless, or lawyers having to pay taxes to fund the building of prison systems," says Ardis Hoven, the president of the Kentucky Medical Association.
"This was basically a special professional tax that was benefiting only one segment of society . . . the indigent."
In Kentucky, a group of physicians, the state medical association and some health-maintenance organizations have argued that the state's new tax -- which also assesses hospitals and HMOs 2.5% of their revenues -- violates Kentucky's constitution.
In November, a judge agreed; his ruling is under appeal.
"There is no reasonable basis to single out these health-care providers to pay special taxes to support the Medicaid program," wrote state Judge Roger Crittenden in his ruling.
"This program benefits the state's residents as a whole, and there are no justifiable reasons for arbitrarily designating physicians to pay for it."
But last month, the chief justice of the Kentucky Supreme Court said the state could continue collecting the tax until the appeal is decided.
States have found themselves squeezed financially from several directions.
Above all, the price of medical care has soared.
The federal government has expanded the services covered by Medicaid and has made more people eligible for it.
And the recession has driven more people onto the program's rolls.
Congress hasn't increased the federal share of Medicaid funding in years, leaving the states to pick up the slack.
Medicaid has become "the PacMan of state government," says Richard Hegner, a Medicaid specialist at George Washington University's intergovernmental health policy project.
President Clinton's health plan, as written, would help relieve the states' financial crunch by eliminating major parts of the Medicaid program.
Instead, poor and unemployed people would be pooled into the same giant health-care alliances as the general public, and the cost of their health coverage would be paid mostly by the federal government.
Meanwhile, legislatures that tax physicians are, in effect, encouraging them to maintain their income by reaching out for new patients, including those covered by Medicaid, says Uwe Reinhardt, a Princeton University health economist.
"You can still keep your Mercedes, but instead of going home at 5 o'clock, you go home at 5:30," he says.
The other option, says Dr. Fortunato of West Virginia, is to move out of state.
Dr. Fortunato sees about 20% of his patients in rented office space in Martins Ferry, Ohio, and is considering moving his entire practice there if the tax rate is raised.
Anticipating such a response, Minnesota has extended its tax to out-of-state physicians who treat Minnesota patients.
Physicians in neighboring North Dakota, South Dakota, Iowa and Wisconsin have filed a lawsuit -- largely funded by the AMA -- challenging the Minnesota border-state tax as unconstitutional.
The former Greenfield & Chimicles, one of the nation's largest plaintiffs' firms, continues to be rocked by defections.
Last summer, name partner Richard Greenfield left the Haverford, Pa., firm amid a New Jersey federal-court inquiry into allegations of ethical improprieties in a securities class action that he handled involving investor Donald Trump.
Mr. Greenfield ultimately accepted a $5,000 fine and a one-year suspension from the practice of law in federal courts that started Jan. 1.
This week, the surviving firm, Chimicles, Burt & Jacobsen, announced that two other lawyers, including name partner C. Oliver Burt and partner Michael J. Pucillo, were leaving to form Burt & Pucillo.
The new firm will have offices in Haverford and will assume control of the former Chimicles Burt office in West Palm Beach, Fla.
A total of five lawyers, including part-time lawyers, are involved in the latest move.
"I think it is just a natural evolution in the practice of law that young lawyers want to start their own firm," said Mr. Pucillo, 40 years old.
Mr. Burt couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Pucillo said that among the cases that the two lawyers would be taking with them were class-action suits against AmeriFirst Bank and Southeast Banking Corp., two failed Florida lending institutions.
Nicholas Chimicles said the departures had "nothing to do with the termination of Greenfield & Chimicles" and didn't suggest any major problems at the firm.
The firm was renamed Chimicles, Jacobsen & Tikellis, and maintains 32 lawyers, with offices in Los Angeles, Wilmington, Del., and Haverford.
"I feel very bad about it," Mr. Greenfield said of his old firm.
"A bunch of these guys are my friends, and it is a shame that it is not holding together."
He said the firm had about 45 attorneys just before he departed last year.
Two old-line Florida firms -- Macfarlane Ferguson, based in Tampa, and Ausley, McMullen, McGeehee, Carothers & Proctor, based in Tallahassee -- are joining forces.
Litigation-oriented Ausley McMullen, with 32 lawyers in Tallahassee, is the oldest and biggest law firm in the state capital.
Its clients include Sprint Corp., TECO Energy Inc. and CSX Corp.
Macfarlane Ferguson is best known for representing Lykes Bros. Inc., a closely held company in Tampa with vast interests in Florida agriculture, meat packing, shipping and energy.
The merger, which takes effect Feb. 1, is expected to boost Macfarlane Ferguson's statewide presence.
Before the pact, the firm had only four lawyers in Tallahassee.
The combined firms, to be known as Macfarlane, Ausley, Ferguson & McMullen, will have 110 lawyers, with 32 in Tallahassee, 14 in Clearwater and 64 in Tampa.
Richard B. Schmitt and Milo Geyelin contributed to this article.
