Northwest Airlines posted its second consecutive quarterly profit for the fourth quarter, benefiting from cost-cutting and more stable fares.
The nation's fourth-largest airline, which narrowly averted a bankruptcy-law filing last summer, said it earned $10.5 million in the quarter.
In the third quarter, it had posted its first profit in two years, a healthy $112.3 million.
Northwest said its fourth-quarter results were reduced by an $85 million accounting charge associated with its new wage contracts but boosted by a $29 million credit from a year-end ticket-liability accounting adjustment.
Operating profit was $74.8 million on revenue of $2.15 billion.
Closely held Northwest, which hopes to raise as much as $460 million from an initial public offering planned for the current quarter, had a loss of $695.2 million in the year-earlier fourth quarter.
In that period, it had an operating loss of $185.4 million on revenue of $1.93 billion.
The only major U.S. airline to report net income in the fourth quarter, Northwest said its earnings reflected cost-cutting, an improved industry pricing climate and a strong increase in yield, a measure of revenue received for each seat.
Costs fell 2% in the final quarter, yield was up 11%, and load factor, the percentage of seats sold, rose more than 3%, Northwest said.
Traffic in the traditionally slow fourth quarter was flat, but because Northwest cut its capacity nearly 5%, it got more usage from its planes.
And the company said its revenue per available seat-mile, another performance measure, jumped 16.7% in the period.
"Six months ago, I would have said this was very unlikely," said one debt analyst who follows Northwest.
While Northwest did initiate some price promotions early in the fourth quarter, industry prices generally for full-fare and 14-day advance-purchase tickets are 20% higher than a year ago and aren't being discounted.
These fares account for about 40% of Northwest's U.S. business, which itself contributes nearly two-thirds of total revenue.
The company's new three-year labor contracts, which call for wage and benefit cuts, are saving about $20 million a month.
The $886 million in concessions, which unions agreed to in exchange for as much as a 37% stake in Northwest, helped the carrier avoid a Chapter 11 filing for protection from creditors.
Also contributing to the turnaround are a two-year cost-cutting drive that eliminated 4,300 positions, shrinking or closing of unprofitable U.S. hubs and slow improvement in the important Japanese market.
