The Securities and Exchange Commission's staff accused Bank of Boston Corp. of violating securities laws by failing to disclose fully the deterioration of its loan portfolio in 1989.
The SEC said its staff filed a complaint with an SEC administrative law judge, requesting a hearing to determine whether the company should have made additional disclosures in SEC filings regarding escalating problems in its real-estate portfolio for 1989's second-quarter and year-end results.
The SEC's staff alleged that the Bank of Boston knew, but didn't adequately disclose in filings, that a review by the Office of the Comptroller of Currency of the bank's domestic real-estate portfolio had confirmed "major problems" in the portfolio that resulted in the downgrading of loans totaling about $1.1 billion.
The bank, in a statement, said: "We believe that we reported fully, based on the information available to us at the time.
Bank of Boston was the first major New England bank to report real-estate loan problems in October 1989.
We are proud that our industry-leading quick actions in dealing with a deteriorating real-estate environment led to us being the first major bank to put these problems behind us.
"We believe that the SEC has had the benefit of hindsight in bringing this proceeding and that ultimately we will prevail," the bank added.
Like many New England banks, Bank of Boston was hard hit by real-estate problems in the depressed regional economy in 1989, resulting in continued losses through 1991.
In recent quarters, the bank has reported improved results.
For 1993's third quarter, Bank of Boston had net income of $41.4 million, or 30 cents a share, after an $85 million pretax restructuring charge.
Assets totaled $39 billion.
Bank of Boston is the second-largest bank in New England.
The SEC complaint was announced after the stock market closed.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Bank of Boston closed at $24.125, up 37.5 cents, on volume of 249,400 shares.
The SEC said that if its staff's allegations are proven true, it could take "remedial action."
That probably would involve a cease-and-desist order requiring the company to make adequate disclosures in the future.
Gerard S. Cassidy, an analyst at Hancock Institutional Equity Services, said that shareholder lawsuits probably will be filed if the judge finds that Bank of Boston deliberately held back data.
Proving that, however, will be difficult because the bank, like many others in the late 1980s, had poor monitoring systems in place for its loan portfolio, he added.
"In 1987 and 1988, banks were growing rapidly.
Most expenses were spent on growing portfolios.
Minimal money was spent on monitoring portfolios," Mr. Cassidy said.
"With conditions deteriorating so rapidly and Bank of Boston having a weak monitoring system, I'm not sure they willfully did it.
They just didn't know."
For 1989's second quarter, Bank of Boston had net income of $97.8 million, or $1.34 a share.
For all of 1989, the bank had net of $70.4 million, or 80 cents a share, after a $147 million pretax gain.
The year-end results followed a third-quarter loss of $125 million.
