Fab Industries Inc., fueled by stronger volume in higher-margin products, expects to post fiscal fourth-quarter earnings that are "a lot better" than a year earlier, Samson Bitensky, chairman, said.
In an interview, Mr. Bitensky, who is also president of the textile company, said he is comfortable with analysts' estimates that put Fab earnings at about 75 cents a share, or a total of about $4.7 million, for the quarter ended Nov. 30.
That would be an increase of about 19% from a year before, when net income was 63 cents a share, or $4 million.
Sales rose 7.4% to about $46 million from $42.8 million.
For the year, Mr. Bitensky is comfortable with estimates that Fab's earnings rose to about $17 million, or $2.74 a share, from $16.9 million, or $2.65 a share.
Sales were flat at about $190 million.
Earnings and sales declined in fiscal 1993's first half, but Mr. Bitensky is seeing an uptrend that started in the third quarter.
Fab makes textiles mostly for the apparel industry; as retail sales slowed because of consumer uncertainty over the economy, so did Fab's sales, Mr. Bitensky said.
So far this year, "the first quarter looks better than last year in sales and profits," Mr. Bitensky said.
He is looking for first-quarter sales to increase about 10% from the $38.6 million of a year ago, and for first-quarter earnings to rise to at least $2.8 million, or 45 cents a share, from the year-ago $2.3 million, or 37 cents a share.
Fab is looking to expand both internally and through acquisition.
"To round us out, I would like to find a midsize specialty weaving company with good management," Mr. Bitensky said.
His goal is to add $100 million in sales over the next four or five years.
Fab has cash in investments of about $62 million, and no long-term debt.
The executive also said that assuming the dollar continues to strengthen against the mark, he plans to increase capital spending to $7 million to $8 million this year, from the $4.9 million of a year ago.
Fab buys most of its equipment from Germany or Japan.
