To sophisticated institutions and wealthy individuals who gave him more than half a billion dollars to manage, David Askin seemed to offer a financial equivalent of Eldorado: sky-high returns with practically no risk.
By mixing rare and volatile mortgage-backed securities under a "market neutral" strategy, Mr. Askin pledged to deliver returns topping 15% a year.
The strategy relied heavily on borrowed money to juice up returns.
But despite such risks, Mr. Askin assured his investors that no matter what direction interest rates went, his portfolios wouldn't lose value.
Now that investment alchemy, which generated deceptively steady returns of roughly 13% to 18% since 1990, is blowing up.
In just the past six weeks, three hedge funds run by Mr. Askin have sustained huge losses of 35% -- wiping out $165 million of investors' $470 million of capital.
Another roughly $125 million of privately run accounts were similarly hit, Mr. Askin's investors say.
One investor says he thinks losses will approach 50% before the portfolio is fully liquidated.
"It's unbelievable," says Chris Brown of Glenwood Financial Group, a Chicago-based money manager that had $4 million invested with Mr. Askin.
"This was touted as a low-risk, low-volatility, market-neutral investment.
We were clearly misled."
In the face of such losses, Mr. Askin may have little choice but to liquidate the funds, or turn over the portfolios to another investment manager.
Currently, Mr. Askin's investors are deliberating about what to do.
Meanwhile, those investors are raising questions about the methods Mr. Askin used to value the securities in the funds which caused the portfolio's losses to be vastly understated in recent months.
"I think there may be chicanery here," contends Frank Myer, Glenwood's president.
Mr. Askin hotly denies that he did anything wrong.
"Clearly, there were mistakes in judgement," he says.
"But all the information was fully disclosed."
Other managers of hedge funds, which are private partnerships with broad investment leeway, worry that federal regulators will view Mr. Askin's problems as another reason to scrutinize such funds.
The Federal Reserve and the Securities and Exchange Commission recently said they want to tighten disclosure standards for hedge funds.
"It isn't a happy moment for hedge funds," says one manager.
Mr. Askin's investors got their initial whiff of bad news late Friday, when they received a letter from him by facsimile.
"Due to turbulent conditions," he wrote, "there has been a significant reduction in the valuation of securities in our portfolios."
Mr. Askin disclosed that Granite Partners, a $170 million portfolio that he had told investors was down 1.5% in February, actually was down 21.89% that month.
He also disclosed that Wall Street securities firms had "put pressure on us to meet margin requirements" and that "as long as the markets remain unstable we may be subject to further margin calls."
Wall Street firms require customers who buy securities with borrowed funds to put up "margin" deposits as collateral against potential losses.
When losses mount, the firms ask for more money, an event known as a margin call.
What could account for such a large discrepancy in reported returns?
"The preliminary valuation of the portfolio," Mr. Askin's letter explained, "relied to a significant degree on the use of manager marks."
In other words, Mr. Askin used his own estimates to price the mercurial securities in his portfolio, rather than rely on prices from Wall Street dealers.
"Our documents allow us to use manager marks," Mr. Askin says.
"It's something our investors knew about."
He added that after rates rose in February, it became extremely difficult to get good price quotes from Wall Street dealers, because of their reluctance to make markets in such volatile securities at that time.
Pricing is often a problem for the unusual kinds of mortgage-backed securities that Mr. Askin stuffed in his funds.
Using borrowed money, he eventually assembled a $1.5 billion of esoterica such as "interest-only strips," which were to profit from rising interest rates, and discount "principal-only strips," which were to profit from falling rates -- as well as "inverse IOs" and "super POs," which are even quirkier and tougher to value.
"You had a portfolio that was supposed to be market-neutral, made up of illiquid securities -- with leverage on top," says Mary Ann Johnson of Johnson Custom Strategies, a Greenwich, Conn., investment strategist who warned her clients to shun Mr. Askin.
"There was so much risk in the underlying securities, that if anything went wrong, you couldn't get out," Ms. Johnson adds.
The securities were supposed to act in opposite ways with any change in interest rates.
Only things didn't turn out that way when rates started rising earlier this year.
The resulting mismatch caused huge unexpected losses in the funds.
And when Mr. Askin sought to sell securities to cut his losses, he found he couldn't get prices he thought were fair.
Instead, he held onto the securities and priced them using his own estimates, which were "liberal," says one investor.
Until things began coming apart, Mr. Askin had been one of the most respected -- and recommended -- of the hedge fund managers investing in volatile mortgage-backed securities.
A veteran of Drexel Burnham Lambert, where he had been the head of fixed-income research, Mr. Askin helped develop a model widely used by the securities industry to adjust the value of mortgage-backed securities for prepayment risk.
Mortgage prepayments, such as homeowner refinancings, cause the income from mortgage-backed securities to vary widely, and that in turn can make them very difficult to value.
Mr. Askin's investors weren't naifs, either.
They included such prominent institutional money managers as Collins Associates, Evaluation Associates Inc. and Grosvenor Multi-Strategy Fund.
Mr. Askin also raised money from several banks and insurance companies, according to his investors.
These disheartened investors convened Monday at 3:30 p.m. for a meeting that proved to be contentious and that lasted more than two hours.
Investors crowded into Mr. Askin's computer-packed Park Avenue offices and telephoned in from four continents.
The portfolios, Mr. Askin told them, were unraveling fast.
He faced margin calls from Bear, Stearns & Co. and other Wall Street firms that, barring huge sales of securities at fire-sale prices, would leave the hedge funds $42 million short of the cash needed to meet its obligations.
He asked the investors to put up more capital.
They refused.
Very quickly, says one manager who participated, the investors decided to seek an outside appraisal of the portfolio.
The investors decided to send portions of the portfolio to other managers.
"It was like owning the bond market, leveraged a lot," says Jeffrey Grundlach, a portfolio manager at Trust Co. of the West who looked at Mr. Askin's bond portfolio.
"It isn't a good idea to leverage up volatile securities when dealers can mark down securities and force margin calls any time they want," he adds.
