Japan sharpened its trade rhetoric and suggested it would retaliate if the U.S. imposes sanctions that are found to violate international trade rules.
Statements Monday by Yoshiro Sakamoto, a senior trade official at Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, are Japan's latest salvo in a trade dispute that has been brewing ever since U.S.-Japan trade talks collapsed in mid-February.
Just days after those talks fell apart, the U.S. announced it would consider trade sanctions in an attempt to settle a longstanding disagreement over Japan's cellular telephone market.
Tokyo has since warned that if the U.S. goes back on its pledge to lower tariffs on electronics gear and other goods, the Japanese might retaliate by narrowly targeting U.S. exports of goods such as computer parts.
Japanese officials long have said they will contest possible U.S. sanctions by appealing to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, a world trade body.
Rarely, however, have officials made explicit Tokyo's willingness to impose its own tariffs on U.S. products if GATT rules in Japan's favor and the U.S. fails to withdraw its sanctions.
"Should the U.S. take that sort of action, in theory I think we should retaliate," Mr. Sakamoto said.
"Whether or not we apply retaliatory measures in practice depends on the political situation, and will be regulated on a case-by-case basis."
Under GATT rules, a favorable ruling would allow Japan to impose tariffs of up to 100% on U.S. imports in Japan.
Mr. Sakamoto stressed that Japan would prefer to settle trade disputes with the U.S. through negotiations.
Still, he said Japan will stand up against U.S. pressure, and warned the U.S. against trying to settle its trade disputes under the threat of sanctions.
Such measures "will not provide the U.S. with the advantage it seeks," he said.
Under the shadow of U.S. sanctions, however, Japan has begun scrambling for a package of unilateral market-opening measures it hopes to unveil by the end of March.
Mr. Sakamoto said the package probably will include many of the proposals Japan made in recent negotiations with the U.S., including the use of collected data to measure trends in import penetration.
Japan, however, will continue to refuse U.S. demands for future targets, he said.
U.S. officials played down Mr. Sakamoto's comments on retaliation, noting that despite its oft-stated intentions, Japan never has taken a trade case involving the U.S. before GATT.
Japan's threat of retaliation "is no big deal," said one U.S. official.
"They've got to take it to the GATT first, then win the case -- and then they'll have to decide what they're going to do about it."
