Citicorp, hoping to accelerate its recent recovery, said it would take $604 million in fourth-quarter charges to slash operations and personnel further.
The bank also said its net income for the quarter more than doubled.
The nation's biggest banking company, which will post record earnings for 1993 after incurring billions of dollars of writeoffs for bad loans, is making further cuts now amid growing competition in the banking industry for everything from corporate loans to credit cards.
The restructuring charges, which amount to $425 million, are driven by the expected moves of Christopher Steffen, a cost-cutting expert hired six months ago as Citicorp's senior executive in charge of productivity.
The remaining $179 million of the charges relates to the sale of part of Citicorp's loss-plagued Quotron subsidiary to Reuters America Holdings Inc., the U.S. unit of Reuters Holdings PLC.
Citicorp gilded the charge announcement by saying it will report fourth-quarter earnings next week of about $575 million after charges and one-time gains, up from $280 million a year earlier.
Together, the announcements triggered a sharp rally in Citicorp shares, which climbed $2.125 to $40.75, a record high, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
That compares with $8.50 a share in late 1991, when the bank was in the middle of writing off mountains of bad debt, primarily in real estate.
In the past two years, the bank has shed 14,000 employees and $1.3 billion in expenses, which has helped restore profitability.
But in the third quarter of last year, expenses began creeping higher as Citicorp fought to defend its share of the hotly competitive credit-card market.
That, along with lackluster revenue, has prompted the company to cut costs again.
The bank said it would recoup the $425 million restructuring charge by the end of next year through lower expenses.
Some executives believe as much as $1 billion in annual costs could eventually be cut.
"They need round two of cost savings," said Judah Kraushaar, banking analyst at Merrill Lynch & Co.
Though Citicorp didn't say where the cuts will come from, the bank is reacting to a slow-growing economy and a mature industry rather than any impending crisis.
Whether it's consolidating customer service operations or cutting staff at its branches, Citicorp hopes to fend off increasing competition from both inside and outside the banking industry.
Other banks, such as Fleet Financial Group Inc., are taking similar measures.
"Nobody's expecting a dramatic turnaround in revenue growth, so they're finding more ways to streamline," Mr. Kraushaar said.
Because Citicorp doesn't have a long history of expense management, some analysts are hoping Mr. Steffen can instill more discipline.
"The job now is to institutionalize an attitude toward costs," Mr. Steffen told a meeting of Citibank's new management associates late last year.
The bank needs to be "doing more with what we have."
The restructurings probably will result in thousands of layoffs around the country over the next two years, analysts say.
The bank's total work force was about 81,000 employees as of a year ago, the last time the bank disclosed the figure.
It's most likely that the layoffs will largely be at the U.S. operations -- primarily in retail banking -- but global finance will also be asked for its share of cost reductions.
The bank has more than 1,500 offices and branches in the U.S., some of which could be consolidated.
While the sale of Quotron's stock-price data business to Reuters wasn't particularly surprising -- Citicorp had been losing money on the financial-information service since it was purchased in 1986 -- the $179 million charge related to the sale was unexpected.
Citicorp had already taken substantial charges that analysts figured had reduced the value of Quotron on Citicorp's books to virtually nothing.
In 1992 Quotron had a loss of $40 million, compared with a $503 million loss a year earlier.
"Quotron had been a bad decision.
It's an honorable exit," said Brent Erensel, banking analyst at UBS Securities.
"It's a propitious time to part with past mistakes."
Citicorp also has the cash to pay for write-downs, given the improved earnings outlook.
Without giving details, Citicorp said fourth-quarter earnings would be $1.06 a share, well above analysts' consensus estimates of 94 cents a share.
The bank's profit of $280 million a year earlier amounted to 53 cents a share.
For the year, Citicorp expects to post record net income of $2.2 billion, or $4.11 a share, including a $300 million one-time accounting gain.
Aside from $107 million in gains from the sale of Brazilian debt, the banking company recognized $200 million in deferred tax benefits in the fourth quarter.
