When radio stations nationwide want a savvy commentator on the Whitewater mess, they call up the newspaper with the inside track: the Washington Times.
The scrappy 12-year-old broadsheet, dwarfed in influence, prestige and circulation by the Washington Post, is breaking stories that have helped propel Whitewater into a full-fledged Washington scandal -- though it was the New York Times that first raised questions about the issue in March 1992.
Pegged as ultraright-wing, and associated with the views of its owner, the Rev. Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church, the Times is relishing its lead on one of the top stories of the day.
Its Whitewater scoops include the disclosure of Hillary Rodham Clinton's letter requesting power of attorney on Whitewater, the removal of files from the office of White House lawyer Vincent Foster, and the shredding of documents at the Rose Law Firm.
All these stories were reported by Jerry Seper, who writes many of the paper's more controversial articles.
"Whitewater has perhaps given this company the same morale boost that Watergate gave the Post a few years back," says Ronald Godwin, senior vice president of the Washington Times.
Advertising and circulation are up, though he credits the improving economy as much as the scandal coverage.
With the boost comes a new respectability.
"It's become impossible to have an informed discussion of Whitewater with anyone who's not reading the Washington Times," the Village Voice said recently.
The Guardian of London asserted that the paper is "winning the expose race so far."
At the same time, the Times' Whitewater coverage troubles some observers who cite too many unnamed sources and hyped headlines.
And the shredding story, some point out, never mentioned that law firms often shred documents.
"They have broken some aspects of Whitewater, though almost always overplaying them," says Larry Sabato, a professor of government at the University of Virginia.
"They have also pushed some of the wackiest theories."
The paper also combines conservative politics with news judgment more akin to the tabloids.
References to presidential philandering pepper its pages.
This week, for instance, in a political cartoon poking fun at the resignation of Webster Hubbell, a brassiere hangs from Mr. Clinton's suit pocket.
And in a column last week, Wesley Pruden, the editor in chief, noted how President Clinton "clamped down on his lower lip" during a speech, and added "As any number of ladies past might say, how could you resist?"
Mr. Pruden defends such coverage saying that the president is a public figure who is exhibiting "tabloid behavior."
Moreover, he adds, the Times is an equal opportunity needler.
When rumors surfaced two years ago about President Bush's alleged extramarital affair, "Everybody in town was talking about it, and everybody ignored it," he notes.
"Except us."
The morale boost comes at a welcome time for the paper.
Mr. Godwin doesn't dispute reports that the Unification Church has lost much of the reported $500 million to $1 billion it has invested in the paper over the last 12 years, but Times officials decline to say what the paper's culmulative losses have been.
To save $20 million over two years, the paper launched a round of staff cuts last fall and consolidated several sections.
According to Mr. Godwin, the paper's business plan calls for it to break even within five years.
The Post has had to follow the Times on some titillating local stories, including a recent Times scoop on Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly's annual $5,000 bill to the city for a professional makeup artist.
Another was its series on a local "call boy" ring, in which a couple of low-level Bush administration officials were ensnared, as well as Rep. Barney Frank.
The coverage implicated one of the Times' own editors as well, and the editor resigned.
"It was quite an interesting afternoon," Mr. Pruden recalls.
But other front-page exposes have fallen flat amid unsubstantiated charges, making the rest of the print press some times loath to follow the stories.
"There's no question that the Washington Times has broken some important stories that we have occasionally chased," says Post media critic Howard Kurtz.
"But some of the stories have such a partisan edge that they need to be taken with a grain of salt."
Mr. Seper, the Whitewater reporter, has been sued for libel at least twice, and one of the suits against Mr. Seper and his former employer, the Arizona Republic, is pending.
More recently, he led the paper for several days with unsubstantiated stories alleging that Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, who was being considered for a Supreme Court post, had ties to organized crime.
"Most people took it as, `Oh, it's the Washington Times, what do you expect?'" recalls Mary Helen Thompson, a spokesman for Mr. Babbitt.
"I think we reported correctly what we were told," says Mr. Pruden.
The Washington Times is nominating Mr. Seper for the Pulitzer prize for his Whitewater coverage, notes Mr. Pruden.
"But it will be a cold day in hell before the New York Times or the Washington Post lets that happen," he adds.
The paper's "ownership problem," as some who work there delicately refer to its ties to the Unification Church, provides another reason for skepticism from the outside.
But its employees -- perhaps a dozen of 220 editorial staffers are members -- are clearly trying to play down the religious affiliation.
Josette Shiner, the managing editor, is highly regarded by present and past reporters.
When her membership in the church was referred to in a Washington Post story, she complained and received a written apology from executive editor Leonard Downie Jr.
"I have a real problem with someone's personal religion being an issue at all," she says.
Several reporters have left the paper in ideological flaps, charging that their stories were given a hard conservative tone.
Dawn Weyrich Coel quit her reporting job after a story she wrote on the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas hearings was altered to contain factual errors.
Gene Grabowski quit his reporting job in 1988 after writing a Dukakis campaign story that ran beneath a headline screaming: "Dukakis' Kin Hints at Sessions."
Mr. Grabowski says his editors trumped up allegations of psychological treatments of the former presidential candidate.
But even disgruntled former employees assert that the Times fills a niche by providing an alternative voice in the nation's capital."
Their biggest sin is they are politically incorrect," says Mr. Grabowski, adding, "It's irreverent and wild.
The Post is part of the establishment."
