Exxon Corp., capitalizing on its farflung international operations, reported a 7.1% increase in fourth-quarter net income despite sharply lower oil prices.
Meanwhile, net for two other oil giants tumbled, as Mobil Corp. and Chevron Corp. saw huge charges take a bite out of their bottom lines.
Profit at Mobil fell 32%, at Chevron 73%.
Exxon and Mobil both posted operating profit that was ahead of analysts' expectations, given the havoc caused by the recent oil-price decline.
"Earnings from their refining and marketing businesses were stronger than we thought they would be," said Paul Mlotok, oil analyst for Morgan Stanley & Co. in New York.
Mr. Mlotok said that an aggressive cost-cutting program at Mobil helped to prop up its refining and marketing, or downstream, business, while Exxon's diversification overseas in that sector provided support.
Chevron's earnings met market expectations, with its downstream business making a lackluster showing.
Even a strong performance from the downstream sector of Chevron's piece of the Caltex operation it shares with Texaco Inc. in the Far East didn't provide enough power to override the effects of lower oil prices.
And much of Chevron's refining and marketing operations in the U.S. is located on the West Coast, a locale still being plagued by a particularly weak economy.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Exxon stock rose 12.5 cents, or 0.2%, to close at $66.25 a share; but Mobil shares fell 37.5 cents, or 0.5%, to close at $79.875; and Chevron stock fell 12.5 cents, or 0.1%, to close at $92.50 a share.
Exxon's revenue in the quarter fell 9.6% to $27.84 billion from $30.79 billion.
All of Exxon's businesses made a strong showing compared with other oil companies, analysts said.
According to Chairman Lee R. Raymond, "Net income for the fourth quarter was Exxon's highest quarterly earnings since the first quarter of 1991."
In Exxon's case, the decline in oil prices was partly offset by an increase in oil and gas production, largely through the startup of several oil and gas projects.
In addition, refining and marketing earnings for the quarter jumped by more than 60% over the same period last year, as sales and profit margins increased.
The company claims that lower costs for crude, the raw material from which oil products are made, helped to overcome the decline in product prices.
Profit from the company's exploration and production business declined only slightly.
Profit from the chemical sector, which for years has been a weak area of the petroleum business for the entire industry, more than doubled to $133 million.
Separately, Exxon announced yesterday that it has taken another step toward getting a huge natural-gas project in Venezuela off the ground.
Exxon said it had signed an agreement to set up a company to look into the viability of the giant Cristobal Colon project, which has been in the works for several years.
An informal agreement had been reached early last year.
The transaction includes Exxon, Mitsubishi Corp. and units of the Venezuelan oil company and Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos.
Mobil's operating profit in the fourth quarter rose 3.4% to $602 million.
Chairman Allen Murray attributed the improvement to a strong performance in the refining and marketing business.
Downstream operations in the U.S. and Far East were especially lucrative, he said.
Echoing analysts' comments, Mr. Murray also said that Mobil's downstream businesses were still benefiting from aggressive cost-cutting programs of recent years.
He also said that corralling costs continues to be a priority at the company.
During the fourth quarter, Mobil took a charge of $253 million, of which $250 million was related to inventory adjustments.
Without that charge, operating profit for the quarter would have been $602 million, Mobil said.
Exploration and production operations overseas were profitable despite lower oil prices.
Operating profit in that sector edged higher as oil production grew, primarily in Nigeria and the U.K. area of the North Sea.
Higher natural-gas prices helped to offset lower oil prices, especially in the U.S.
Mobil's revenue in the quarter fell by 4.3% to $16.86 billion from $17.62 billion.
Chevron's fourth-quarter revenue fell 16% to $8.91 billion from $10.66 billion.
Chevron's bottom line for the quarter was hit hard by a huge charge that encompassed not only the cost of the company's continuing restructuring, but included as well part of a charge for the planned sale of two of its refineries.
Excluding special items, the company's operating profit declined by only 5% to $515 million.
According to Chevron's chief executive officer, Kenneth Derr, the company was able to maintain a relatively strong operating performance because of the strength of its international operations in both the upstream and downstream businesses.
And that was despite lower oil prices.
During the fourth quarter, the company received an average of $12.75 a barrel for its oil, $4 less than during the same period last year.
Quarterly natural-gas prices realized by Chevron ran at about $2 per thousand cubic feet, 25 cents less than last year during the same period.
CHEVRON Corp.'s fourth-quarter net income didn't include charges for the planned sale of two refineries.
Those charges were taken in the second quarter.
An article yesterday incorrectly reported that the charges were included in fourth-quarter results.
(WSJ Jan. 27, 1994)
