Following are excerpts from a letter House banking committee ranking minority member James A. Leach sent to independent counsel Robert Fiske last week.
A related editorial appears nearby {see related editorial: "Review & Outlook (Editorial): The Fiske Coverup II" -- WSJ March 14, 1994}.
Dear Mr. Fiske:
I am writing to make clear to you that, as Ranking Member of the committee of jurisdiction over an issue which you are probing, I am fully prepared to recognize the legitimate concerns, as indicated below, of your office.
I believe, however, that you have an equal obligation not to interfere with the legitimate oversight responsibilities of Congress . . . .
I hereby request that the special counsel do nothing that will: 1) put a chilling effect on our Congressional investigation and oversight, particularly with regard to witnesses and strategy you may gather from the material we have supplied you; 2) intervene or tilt the checks and balances between the Legislative and Executive Branches; or 3) pursue a course that tilts towards choosing sides in what is a legitimate difference between America's two great political parties.
With regard to witnesses we wish to invite, you have been provided our prospective list.
I am prepared to agree that a week or two delay in hearings could be considered if you suggest time is inadequate for you to interview all on our witness list.
But I would stress the minority does not control the hearing process.
Given the manner in which the majority party has failed for over four months to accede to a restrained request for a hearing, we have no choice but to latch on to the one modest power we have: an insistence, that however uncomfortable, the majority comply with the law and hold a statutorily required oversight hearing on the RTC, with a date specific in the next four weeks . . .
I would bring to your attention the following passage from Mr. Walsh's recent report on the Iran-Contra probe:
It is in this context that I must confess to more than a little concern about your assertion that you have a "strong concern" about "any hearing" our committee might hold and your belief that Congressional inquiry "would pose a severe risk to the integrity of our investigation."
I reiterate this concern in light of the historical irony that it was Senator Ervin's committee that revealed the existence of the Watergate tapes and that it was the recent Senate hearing that revealed improper contracts between Executive Branch agencies and the White House.
Hearings almost always reveal knowledge and perspective that is helpful to prosecutors.
The major recent exception involved the excessive zeal of the majority party to embarrass President Reagan that caused it to offer immunity to certain witnesses.
Given the circumstance, unlike most of the past several decades where the majority party in Congress was opposite that of the White House, I am concerned that your public lobbying of Congress has the effect of sending a chilling precedent for Congressional oversight and a fatuous pretext for the majority party which controls the machinery of Congress to delay, defer, or avoid its Constitutional responsibilities.
I would . . . bring to your attention the following exchange between Mr. Livingston of Louisiana and the Secretary of the Treasury before a House Appropriations Committee this afternoon.
Mr. Livingston asked if Secretary Bentsen had been apprised in advance of Roger Altman's meeting at the White House on the failure of Madison Guaranty.
The Secretary responded: "On advice of Mr. Fiske, the special counsel, I refuse to answer."
{It} should be stressed that not only does the Congress have constitutionally-mandated oversight responsibilities, but that traditionally in all Western democracies it is the responsibility of the party out of power to hold the party in power accountable for breaches of the public trust.
It may be standard operating procedure for all prosecutors to be doubtful of intervention by the Congress.
But it is not standard operating procedure to bias or tilt in any way the American political process or to make premature public judgments about the White House being "very responsive and cooperative" to a probe when there are indications to the contrary.
I am particularly concerned that officials of the Kansas City RTC office are being gagged and possibly coerced by the Washington RTC office.
(See attached confidential memo.)
It is also unprecedented presumption for a counsel to suggest, as reported today in the Washington Post: "I would prefer that there be no hearings."
I have known very few issues where public accountability is more important.
This is after all an issue of public ethics as well as public law.
Accordingly, as you vigorously seek documents, I would stress again my apprehension that at the end of the process the White House can be expected to seek to seal the vast array of documents related to your inquiry.
Here the constitutionally differentiated distinction between a Justice Department inquiry seeking criminal and civil accountability and Congressional oversight which often involves the question of public disclosure is substantial.
But the differentiated roles of Congress and a special counsel does not mean, as you have implied, that the two are incompatible.
The two are generally complementary.
Indeed, one could credibly suggest that any attempt by a prosecuting attorney to constrain Congress beyond the standards indicated above is counterproductive.
Constraining a Congressional inquiry has the effect of reducing knowledge, thus reducing prosecutorial discretion.
One of the understandably important aspects of criminal investigations from the prosecutorial standpoint is confidentiality.
One of the understandably important aspects of democracy is openness.
Both must be respected to the maximum degree possible and neither should or has to jeopardize the other.
James A. Leach
