Dow Corning Corp. said it will record a fourth-quarter pretax charge of $640 million, representing its "best current estimate" of the company's potential liability under a proposed $4.75 billion settlement of all breast-implant litigation.
The 50-50 joint venture between Dow Chemical Co. and Corning Inc. said the after-tax effect of the charge will be $415 million, to be absorbed equally by its two corporate parents.
The Food and Drug Administration halted cosmetic silicone breast implants in 1992, after a number of lawsuits and complaints surfaced alleging health problems caused by silicone leaking from implants.
In September, Dow Corning -- once the world's biggest maker of silicone breast implants -- disclosed that it and other implant makers were in settlement talks with attorneys representing several thousand women who had filed suit claiming to have been harmed by the devices.
Under that plan manufacturers, raw-material suppliers, health-care suppliers and insurers would fund payments to the claimants over 30 years.
The specific size of the charge Dow Corning would have to take to cover the proposed settlement hadn't previously been made public, but the figure the company provided Friday was generally in line with observers' earlier estimates.
The venture calculated its total implant liability, including legal, administrative and research costs, at $1.24 billion.
It said it expects that figure to be reduced by insurance payments of $600 million.
But Dow Corning cautioned that the big charge isn't necessarily the final word of the fiscal punishment implants represent.
As settlement negotiations continue, the company said, "additional facts and circumstances may develop" that could require additional provisions.
"We are encouraged by the progress being made in the settlement negotiations," a Dow Corning official said.
"While no settlement agreement has been reached yet, we believe that a resolution can be found."
Dow Corning took pains to point out that, based on its current evaluation of what it will receive from insurers and from its own operations, it expects to "generate the financial liquidity required" to meet its continuing operational needs and participate in the proposed settlement.
In the wake of the announcement, Standard & Poor's Corp. affirmed its current ratings on Dow Corning's debt of about $560 million, noting that the expected financial impact is already recognized in the current rating.
But it said that the venture's rating outlook remains negative, "as there is still uncertainty as to whether the settlement will be finalized."
Terms of the final agreement and the extent of Dow Corning's ultimate insurance recoveries are also uncertain.
It also noted that it's not clear how many claimants may "opt out" of the settlement, and pursue their claims separately.
When the proposed settlement was initially disclosed, some lawyers representing women who claim to have suffered autoimmune illnesses and other ailments from silicone implants contended that the payments were inadequate.
In separate releases Dow Chemical in Midland, Mich., said its share of the venture's charge will require a fourth-quarter charge of $192 million, or 70 cents a share; Corning, of Corning, N.Y., said its half would require a fourth-quarter charge of $203 million, or $1.06 a share.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading Friday, Dow shares moved up 50 cents, to $58.875 a share.
Corning shares rose 25 cents to $31 a share.
