In a move that will reopen a congressional probe of the Bush administration's dealings with Iraq before the Persian Gulf War, President Clinton has ordered federal agencies to make public their files on the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro case.
In a letter to House Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas), President Clinton said he also will give committee investigators access to what are believed to be large files of classified documents dealing with the case.
Those documents would remain classified, however, and unavailable to the public.
The BNL case involves a widespread arms-procurement network used by the Iraqis to buy arms-related equipment from companies in the U.S., Chile, and Europe prior to the Gulf War.
"This administration believes that the American people have good reason to learn the details of the U.S. government's military, diplomatic and economic assistance to Saddam Hussein's regime," the president wrote Mr. Gonzalez.
His letter was released yesterday.
Rep. Gonzalez, who has charged that President Bush's aides organized a coverup in the case, said he will resume the investigation immediately.
He promised to "tell the American public the full truth about the BNL scandal."
The move is expected to shed light on a "tilt" toward Iraq by the Bush administration that continued almost to the eve of the Gulf War.
One of the charges explored by Mr. Gonzalez is that the U.S. and Italian governments may have known that the Atlanta branch of Italian government-owned BNL was being used for backdoor financing of Iraq's arms needs, using loans borrowed from other U.S. banks.
In a related development, members of a commission appointed by the Italian Senate to investigate the case rejected yesterday a draft report that said BNL was the "victim" of a fraud perpetrated by its Atlanta branch.
The commission is believed to be pushing for a version that removes the "victim" theory.
"We don't want to give the impression that the Senate sacrificed its search for truth at the altar of a misplaced sense of national duty and put all the blame on BNL's ex-Atlanta branch manager Chris Drogoul," the ex-communist Democratic Party of the Left said in a statement.
"It's contradictory to claim that BNL is a victim even if its managers were responsible."
In December, a U.S. court sentenced Mr. Drogoul to 37 months in prison for his role in granting the loans to Iraq during the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war.
Most of the loans weren't authorized by senior BNL managers, and many of them illegally carried U.S. Export-Import Bank guarantees.
Mr. Drogoul managed the Atlanta office from 1984 until it was raided by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in 1991.
