Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt unveiled a scaled-back version of the grazing proposal he has repeatedly tried to implement through legislative or administrative action.
The latest version of the plan -- a proposal to be printed in the Federal Register next week -- resulted from discussions among Mr. Babbitt and various Western governors and others in the region who opposed earlier efforts.
The new plan would shift decision-making on federal land use toward the local level in several ways, including the creation of local advisory councils and allowing states to set certain conservation standards.
At a news conference, Mr. Babbitt said the new proposal was "in every way an improvement" on an August proposal, which he discarded in favor of a legislative compromise that fell victim to a filibuster by Sen. Pete Domenici (R., N.M.).
Mr. Babbitt said the new rule reflected a consensus that "remote-control" regulation of federal land by Washington was unworkable.
An Interior Department statement issued on the plan included cautiously favorable comments from Govs.
Cecil Andrus (D., Idaho), Bob Miller (D., Nev.) and Mike Sullivan (D., Wyo.).
But Anna Aurilio, staff scientist at U.S. Public Interest Research Group, an environmental and consumer group, criticized what she termed "weak standards and guidelines" in the plan, adding, "The only teeth in the plan are those on the cows."
Ranchers were also critical.
Brad Little of the American Sheep Industry Association said in a statement, "Babbitt's original proposal killed Western ranching.
The new proposal puts us in intensive care."
As expected, the proposed regulation includes a scaled-back version of the grazing-fee increase that the Interior Department proposed in August.
Under the new plan, grazing fees would be set at $2.75 an animal unit month in 1995, $3.50 in 1996, and $3.96 in 1997.
An animal unit month is the amount of forage it takes to feed one cow and a calf or five sheep for one month.
The current grazing fee is $1.98 and would have risen to $4.28 under the August proposal.
Under the new grazing-fee plan, ranchers who exceed environmental standards required by law could keep grazing fees at $2.75.
Earlier this month, Sen. Harry Reid (D., Nev.), who helped craft the failed legislative compromise, and Rep. George Miller (D., Calif.), chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee, said in a letter to Mr. Babbitt that they had strong objections to a draft of the proposed regulation.
An aide to Mr. Miller said the congressman was "heartened" that the Interior Department had addressed some of the concerns raised in the letter, though "there are still problems with the plan."
An Interior aide said the department hoped to issue a final rule by the end of the year.
