It was just over a year ago that Sister Wendy Beckett, a frail, gap-toothed nun, emerged from a trailer here on the grounds of a Carmelite Monastery where she lived in solitude for 22 years.
Her destination: the world.
Sister Wendy wasn't just praying all those years alone -- though a lot of that was going on, too.
She was writing about art.
Art, mind you, she only had seen in books and on museum post cards.
A British Broadcasting Corp. producer spotted her spirited, down-to-earth articles and convinced the Mother Superior that Sister Wendy could work wonders for art appreciation -- not to mention the image of nuns.
On camera, with her educated and precise accent and her black habit billowing behind her, she proved a natural.
"Sister Wendy's Odyssey," drawing 3.5 million viewers, is the most successful BBC arts program since Kenneth Clark's 1970s series, "Civilisation."
The show is no slick production; Sister Wendy, who never bothers with a script, simply stands in front of art works and talks.
Neither is it a series of pedantic lectures by a stern teaching nun.
Viewers love Sister Wendy's entertaining and provocative critiques, particularly when they involve nudes and earthy details.
Describing the two figures in Stanley Spencer's "Self-portrait with Patricia Preece," Sister Wendy gushes, "I love all those glistening strands of his hair, and her pubic hair is so soft and fluffy . . ."
The 63-year-old nun calls her love for art a way of loving God, and her approach is based on her belief that even a woman in a supermarket "is perhaps better prepared to experience art than the scholar in his ivory tower."
Viewers apparently agree.
So popular was the initial six-part series on art in Britain that the BBC shot, and next month will begin airing, a new 10-part series on art museums of continental Europe, "Sister Wendy's Grand Tour."
WGBH-TV in Boston is talking with her about doing a show in the U.S.
Sister Wendy joined the Sisters of Notre Dame teaching order when she was just 16.
"I can't think of a time when it wasn't clear to me," she says of her decision.
But devotion to a religious life did not mean shutting out life in general; it meant balancing her enthusiasms.
Sister Wendy attended Oxford University and won the highest honors for English, but her order did not permit her to mingle with the other students.
She taught for 16 years, then asked for a special dispensation from the teaching nuns to live a life of contemplative prayer, in solitude.
Permission granted, Sister Wendy in 1970 moved to a trailer on the Carmelite Monastery grounds, a wooded spot in Norfolk County where thrushes sing and pheasants skirt along grassy clearings.
Though she did not become a Carmelite, Sister Wendy devised a regimen more rigid than the cloistered nuns followed: rising at 3 a.m., praying seven hours a day and subsisting mainly on fruits and skim milk.
Her solitary life left her time to study, and about 12 years ago she threw herself into art.
"In many ways I am an inadequate person," she says.
"I am no good at cooking, sewing or gardening.
Yet I am lit up by the wonder of what I see" in art.
"If a limited person like me can receive this enrichment, so can anybody."
Fueled by her study of art books and journals, Sister Wendy began to write, first magazine articles, then a book, "Contemporary Women Artists," which brought her to the BBC's attention.
No Art-Speak Her taste casts a wide net, everything from Bernini's neo-classical "Rape of Proserpine" to Paul Klee's abstract art, and she has been criticized for a certain lack of discrimination.
Brian Sewell, the sharp-penned art critic of London's Evening Standard, says, "She's rather like your elderly aunt who wants to present everything as being sweet and benign.
If I was an artist and got rave reviews from her, I'd be quite disturbed."
Others say that's her charm.
"She doesn't speak in art-speak," says Rachel Barnes, a lecturer at the Tate Gallery and National Gallery in London.
"She has got a gift for opening up art so that people -- ordinary people -- can see what she has."
Hear Sister Wendy on the treatment of Saint Sebastian in Renaissance art: "He was a favorite subject . . . but I am afraid this was not because he was an heroic Christian martyr.
Rather, it was a chance to paint a glorious male nude."
Or the depiction of Venus in Botticelli's "Birth of Venus": "You can't ever imagine her doing the washing up."
Life since the BBC came knocking is "like being in a dream," the nun says.
She receives dozens of letters a day and has been featured at book signings, press conferences and on a quiz show.
On the road, she has taken to eating steak and ice cream and drinks Diet Coke.
She took her first ride in a sports car -- her producer's MG.
The BBC won't disclose what Sister Wendy earns from her shows and their associated books, except to say it is a "substantial sum."
Her fees go to the Carmelite order which runs a hospice for sick children on the monastery grounds.
Sister Wendy still awakens at 3 a.m. and devotes the same number of hours to prayer as before and attends daily Mass with the Carmelites.
She still lives in seclusion on their grounds.
A few months ago, though, she agreed "reluctantly" to give up her leaky, uninsulated trailer for a secondhand, one-room house on cinder blocks whose best feature, she notes, is "an indoor lavatory."
She has a bed, a desk, a virtual gallery of art posters, and books -- so many that her fellow nuns found her buried under them one morning when she was late for Mass, after a shelf over her bed collapsed.
There are no mirrors in her cabin, and no TV.
The BBC provided the Carmelites with a TV and video player one evening so the nuns could watch Sister Wendy's series.
They cheered at the end of each segment, then asked to watch the whole thing again, says Sister Alies Therese, the cloistered order's liaison with the outside world.
Right now, Sister Wendy is out promoting her new series and the book based on it.
Sipping tea in the elegant Lansdowne Club in London recently, before a throng of reporters, she admits there are some benefits to getting out into the world -- like watching TV "snooker," a version of pool.
"Ooh, the drama!
When that ball comes right to the edge of the hole and just stops . . .
It makes me think of how God must feel when he sees us on the brink of something, and then we just stop."
