Maybe interactive TV isn't such a great idea, after all.
For the full two weeks of CBS Inc.'s coverage of the 1994 Winter Olympic Games, the Prodigy on-line computer service is offering subscribers a chance to "chat" about the programming with CBS personnel.
It isn't always pretty.
"This is by far the worst coverage ever," one user railed in a computer message zapped all the way to Lillehammer, Norway.
Referring to CBS's taped stories, he complained about the "diversionary human-interest junk."
Others wondered who cared about Paula Zahn's interview of someone named Lilly Hammer, or the taped story about a Norwegian folk singer named Sputnik.
TV color commentary of an entirely different stripe.
A few cite the network's "outstanding coverage," but others invoke less kindly adjectives, including "Gag," "Arrgghh!" and "Get with the program."
For CBS, which at one time had actually been a partner in the Prodigy venture with current co-owners International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co., the new effort is a foray into electronic interactivity.
Prodigy gets some free promotion on CBS's late-night coverage, while the electronic bulletin board lets CBS send "our Olympic message to a new audience of two million Prodigy users," a CBS spokesman said.
But the message coming back from cyberspace, it seems, sometimes comes down to this missile from an impatient viewer: "One word: Stinks."
Some on-line commentators asked CBS's stable of commentators to "shut their traps" and ease up on the "constant chatter" during the opening ceremonies.
The network's early announcement of medal winners before the event is televised also has angered meddling couch-Olympians.
"It takes away all the excitement of the competition," wrote one Prodigy user.
But CBS host Pat O'Brien seemed to drum up the most interest on an electronic bulletin board titled "Ask Pat O'Brien."
He received hundreds of viewer messages asking about such burning issues as, "Pat . . . why was there so little coverage of the first two rounds of the luge?"
And: "Hey, Pat, would you please say Hey to my cousin Jimmy Dima," a CBS employee.
Mr. O'Brien responded that, yes, he would.
Much of the on-line discussion centered on CBS coverage of the Harding-Kerrigan figure-skating affair, which many complained was too lengthy.
To continued complaints, Mr. O'Brien finally countered, "Just a reminder, we didn't create the Tonya Harding/Nancy Kerrigan story.
Killing the messenger just doesn't work anymore."
Apparently viewers like the new way of talking back to the TV set.
George Schweitzer, CBS senior vice president, said the response to the service has been "overwhelming."
But in such an open forum, anyone -- not just CBS -- is a target.
In a slightly ominous note, one Prodigy subscriber simply asked: "I would like to know who is responsible for those horrible outfits the American team wears during the opening ceremonies."
