The Federal Reserve and other major central banks plan to take a hard look at hedge funds' trading activities with an eye to controlling their aggressive practices.
Following the huge sell-off in government-bond markets during the past few weeks, U.S., European and Japanese monetary authorities and bank regulators are increasingly concerned about the impact of hedge funds.
"Central bankers have two reasons to be interested: As banking supervisors, we have to regulate bank exposures from the standpoint of lender's risk and credit risk; hedge funds, in effect, are borrowing from banks," said one European central banker.
"The other area of concern is market management: Do these funds make markets more unstable than they otherwise would be?"
Hedge funds are unregulated private investment partnerships that are exempted from disclosure because they are limited to 99 limited partners.
They are renowned for wagering huge sums in global currency, bond and stock markets in search of quick profits.
They have grown so large and powerful that their aggressive trading activity moves markets.
In addition to funds' huge borrowings from banks, central banks are particularly concerned about the way hedge funds can use derivatives such as futures, options and swaps to increase, or leverage, the bets they can take on particular markets.
For example, with roughly $10 billion under management, hedge-fund manager Soros Fund Management is "in a position to marshal the firepower of something like $75 billion to $150 billion," said Christopher Golden, an international bond strategist at Lehman Brothers International in London.
Last week, Soros Fund Management acknowledged that it had lost $600 million in two days by wrongly gambling that the dollar would rise against the yen.
The disclosure came on the heels of revelations of heavy losses at other large hedge funds.
There is no imminent crackdown planned, but central bankers said that hedge funds' risk-taking activities need to be better understood and that their impact on government bond markets will be the main topic of discussion on March 7 and 8, when representatives of the world's 11 major central banks meet in Basel, Switzerland.
"It isn't a question of tighter controls," said an executive at the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, in Frankfurt.
"We have to study the effect and impact of derivatives on the monetary transmission process before one comes to any conclusions."
Meanwhile, examiners at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York are concerned about how well commercial banks are monitoring their loans to hedge funds -- specifically the leverage the banks are accepting and whether they are keeping on top of hedge funds' recent losses.
They also worry about the minimum disclosure involved in lending to funds.
"I bet that a lot of central banks and commercial banks don't know what these guys are doing with the money banks lend them," says a senior executive at a large U.S. investment bank in London.
"If a hedge fund gets a line at bank A and leverages 10 times, does bank A know it is also going to bank B, borrowing the same amount of money and leveraging 20 times?"
He added: "Do the banks know the funds are taking one-way casino-type bets?"
The head of one large U.S. hedge fund said that commercial banks became much more complacent about lending to hedge funds after many of the funds turned in spectacular performances last year.
He said that banks began lending more money to more hedge funds, many of which were new ones created to get in on what looked like easy profits and fat fees.
But the hedge-fund manager said that the banks had lost sight of how volatile markets can be and that big gains can easily turn into big losses.
Two hedge funds said that officials from their own lending banks, which normally monitor loans once or twice a month, were paying more frequent visits in the wake of the big losses hedge funds have recently suffered.
And while there have been no reports of commercial banks actually reducing or cutting off credit to hedge funds, some banks had tightened their "risk parameters," meaning that they are limiting the amount of borrowed money that a fund may allocate to a particular speculation.
Nonetheless, while U.S. regulations currently restrict how much banks can lend on margin for stock transactions, there are no such limits on loans to funds that would want to use the money for speculation in bond markets.
Behind the central banks' latest concern lie the huge losses that investors have suffered in global bond markets over the past month and a half, and especially last week when French, German and British government bond prices fell 1.4% to 2.2%.
Much of the decline in prices -- and rise in bond yields -- has been attributed to forced selling by highly leveraged hedge funds that bet wrongly that European and Japanese bond yields would fall.
In mid-January, one hedge fund asked Goldman, Sachs & Co. to unload $2.5 billion of 20-year Japanese government bonds.
By the time the U.S. investment bank completed the trade, the bonds' yield had jumped to 4.30% from 3.70%.
Goldman officials said they don't comment on clients' activities.
This isn't the first time central banks have considered trying to do something about the freewheeling trading activities of hedge funds and other speculators such as the proprietary trading desks of big commercial and investment banks.
A former senior central banker said that such action was contemplated in September 1992, when speculative assaults on the pound and lira forced Britain and Italy to pull their currencies out the European exchange-rate mechanism, a joint float of European currencies that trade within specific bands of one another.
Bankers and even some central bankers are skeptical that anything much can be done to restrain hedge funds' aggressive behavior in world currency and securities markets.
Several bankers felt that central banks would try to jawbone banks into cutting back their lending to hedge funds.
However, "from a practical point of view, the ability of banks to lend against collateral is impossible to control," said Mr. Golden of Lehman Brothers.
"In the futures market, there is absolutely no ability to control hedge funds' activities."
"The authorities are bound to be upset with anything that has the potential to be so destabilizing," said Mr. Golden.
"But at the same time, the hedge funds can say: `Everything we are doing is legitimate, aboveboard, and in the final analysis, we're the ones that are taking the losses.'"
"But," adds the Lehman Brothers executive, "Every bond portfolio . . . is taking paper losses, which is what is worrying the authorities."
