Retailer Wal-Mart Stores has long been known for its low-priced merchandise and lofty stock price.
Make no mistake, the stock still isn't cheap based on most traditional market yardsticks.
But after a 19% swoon in the past year, Wal-Mart looks like a bargain to some growth-stock investors, who envision healthy earnings growth in the years ahead.
"I cannot own enough Wal-Mart," says James Craig, manager of the Janus Fund, a Denver-based mutual fund.
Wal-Mart is Janus Fund's biggest position, accounting for 5% of the fund's $9.5 billion in assets.
Wal-Mart's stock peaked at 34 1/8 in March 1993, when it was trading at 39 times the prior year's earnings.
In Friday's down market, the stock closed unchanged at 27 3/4, or 27 times the Street's estimates for the fiscal year through last month.
"You have had the multiple compress tremendously," notes Mr. Craig.
Investors bailed out as it became clear that earnings growth was slowing at the Bentonville, Ark., company.
Per-share earnings had risen at a 25% annual clip in the five years through January 1993, and at a 36% rate in the five years prior to that.
But in the just-ended fiscal year, analysts figure that Wal-Mart earned $1.03 a share, 18% above the year-earlier level.
Wal-Mart will release its full-year results this morning before the market opens.
Rod Linafelter, co-manager of $1.9 billion Berger 100 Fund, sold his Wal-Mart stake last year.
"That was probably the most difficult sell decision I've ever made," he says.
"It's the closest I've ever come to being emotionally attached to a stock.
Frankly, if it had just been my own money, I might have held it forever."
Mr. Linafelter reckons Wal-Mart's pershare earnings will grow 15% to 16% annually in the years ahead.
"I still think Wal-Mart is a great, great company," he says.
"But I think that we're in for a protracted period of decelerating growth rates, and I don't think the price-to-earnings multiple yet reflects that."
But other investors aren't yet willing to give up on the retailer, which for years had reigned as the country's pre-eminent growth stock.
"It's a company we've owned for 23 years," says Roger Engemann, president of Roger Engemann & Associates.
"It used to grow 30% to 35% a year.
Now it's growing about 20% a year, which we still think is pretty good.
I think this is a terrific time to buy it."
According to Zacks Investment Research, analysts are looking for a 20% rise in earnings to $1.24 a share in the current fiscal year, ending in January 1995.
For the following year, through January 1996, analysts forecast $1.48 a share, a 19% improvement.
"I still think it's a company that -- despite its size -- is going to have superlative growth," says Robert Doll Jr., manager of the $750 million-asset Oppenheimer Special Fund.
"The consensus is that the long-term growth rate is 19.3%," compared with a 9% earnings growth rate for the broad market.
Mr. Doll suspects that the figures for both Wal-Mart and the broad market are a little high.
Nonetheless, he thinks WalMart is attractive.
The stock is trading at around 22 times forecasted earnings for the next 12 months, compared with 16 times earnings for the stocks in the Standard & Poor's 500.
By buying Wal-Mart, "I get more than double the growth of the average company at a 38% premium to the market," says Mr. Doll.
Janus Fund's Mr. Craig thinks WalMart will do even better than Wall Street expects.
He attributes the past year's slower earnings growth to the brutal battle for dominance between Sam's Wholesale Clubs, operated by Wal-Mart, and the other warehouse stores.
But the war is apparently winding down.
Late last year, Kmart threw in the towel, agreeing to sell most of its Pace stores to Wal-Mart.
Now that Wal-Mart has beaten the competition, Mr. Craig thinks sales at Sam's will improve -- and so too will Wal-Mart's earnings growth.
"I expect upside earnings surprises," says Mr. Craig.
"We're not talking about blowout numbers.
But if Wal-Mart earns a couple of pennies extra, you're talking about a good move in the stock."
Mr. Craig notes that Wal-Mart, with its stock-market capitalization of $64 billion, is a major component of the S&P 500-stock index.
As a result, if Wal-Mart starts to do well, money managers will rush to buy it, because it's simply too big to ignore.
"The thing I really like about Wal-Mart is, when I look at my competition, it's not among their top 10 holdings," says Mr. Craig.
