Short interest continued to climb to record levels on the New York Stock Exchange, rising 3.7% to 1.32 billion shares in mid-February.
Big Board short interest totaled 1,323,065,502 shares, up from 1,275,614,471 a month earlier.
Short interest on the American Stock Exchange rose 3.5% to a record 104,891,875 shares from the 101,363,116 (adjusted) shares reported in mid-January.
Some analysts suggest that the record levels of short interest on the Big Board in recent months partly reflect a string of corporate takeovers that provide opportunities for arbitrage.
RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.'s short interest position stayed at the top, increasing 1.7 million shares, to 29.2 million shares, possibly reflecting high arbitrage levels in the company's stock.
The short interest position of Columbia Healthcare Corp. declined by 4.6 million shares to 17.7 million shares, after registering a large jump a month ago related to its then-pending acquisition of HCA Hospital Corp. of America.
That acquisition was completed Feb. 10; the decrease in the short interest level possibly reflects short sellers' moves to cover their positions.
Traders who sell securities "short" borrow stock and sell it, betting that the stock's price will decline and that they can buy the shares back later at a lower price for return to the lender.
Short interest is the number of shares that haven't yet been purchased for return to lenders.
Harry Strunk, an investment adviser who tracks short interest in Palm Beach, Fla., said that short sellers had a "tough time" in January, when the stock market soared to new highs.
Rising stock prices, he noted, make it more expensive for short sellers to buy back shares in the market.
However, the decision by the Federal Reserve Board to raise the federal funds rate a quarter of a percentage point in early February was beneficial to short sellers.
A higher interest rate prompts money to migrate from the stock market to other securities, such as Treasury bills and bonds.
As a result, some stock prices fall, which makes it easier for short sellers to buy back shares and cover their positions.
The level of negative sentiment measured by the Big Board short interest ratio fell to 4.24 from 4.60.
The ratio is the number of trading days at the exchange's average daily trading volume that would be required to convert the total short interest position.
Average daily Big Board volume was 311.9 million shares.
Big Board and Amex short interest positions were calculated for the month including the 22 trading days through Feb. 8, with Feb. 15 as the settlement date.
The following tables show the Big Board and Amex issues in which a short interest position of at least 250,000 shares existed at mid-February or in which the short position had changed by at least 50,000 shares since mid-January.
