The House Energy and Commerce Committee leadership is drafting a health-care bill that would place a lighter burden on small business than would the Clinton administration's plan, while requiring companies with more than 1,000 employees to pay a 1% payroll tax.
The cost of the standard benefits package to business would be reduced by requiring individuals to pay higher out-of-pocket expenditures.
And the measure would scrap the mandatory aspect of the president's health-insurance purchasing alliances in favor of a more voluntary system that gives larger companies more opportunity to self-insure.
At the heart of the bill are a series of trade-offs between small and big business to give companies more flexibility while still demanding some contribution in the form of a payroll tax.
At one end of the scale, companies with 10 or fewer employees would have the option of covering their employees and receiving subsidies from the government, or they could simply pay a graduated tax of 1% to 2% of payroll to help cover the cost of their workers' health insurance.
At the other end, companies with 1,000 or more employees would be barred from the alliances for eight years but required to pay not only 80% of their workers' premiums but also a 1% payroll tax to help fund the larger system.
The draft is the product of negotiations among moderate Democrats on the committee, Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) and Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), head of the health subcommittee.
And after weeks of frustration, Mr. Waxman indicated last night that he is hopeful the Democrats will have a working majority that can report a bill to the House floor after the spring recess.
"We have made concessions to bring along the votes," the Californian said.
"I'm encouraged.
We may have a breakthrough, though we don't have the votes yet."
The plan is less government-oriented than a second alternative now before the House Ways and Means Health subcommittee, but also borrows from some of the compromises tested there.
The Ways and Means panel hopes to complete its work this week in anticipation of full committee action after the recess ends in mid-April.
In its work yesterday, Democrats upheld cost controls akin to those sought by the president.
In a further effort to rein in health-care costs, the panel also approved a provision to limit non-economic damages in medical malpractice cases to no more than $350,000.
Two Democrats, Reps. Benjamin Cardin of Maryland and Michael Andrews of Texas, joined the subcommittee's four Republicans in the 6-5 vote approving the cap.
As now drafted, the cost controls in the subcommittee bill set a goal of slowing the growth in overall health expenditures by two percentage points in 1996 and one additional point annually thereafter -- until health expenditures are rising no faster than the nation's nominal gross domestic product.
Failure to meet the 1996 goal could trigger explicit government rate-setting on medical services beginning in 1998.
To pick up votes, the Democratic leadership has been willing to make several accommodations to give states more flexibility.
For example, if a state stays within its own approved spending targets, it could escape the federal cost-control system.
And the subcommittee yesterday adopted an amendment by Rep. Gerald Kleczka (D., Wis.) that would guard against penalizing one state for the excesses of another.
Six of the panel's seven Democrats banded together to defeat an amendment offered by Rep. Jim McCrery (R., La.) to strike the expenditure-target and rate-setting provisions from the bill.
He proposed instead limiting tax benefits for employerprovided health benefits.
Rep. Andrews of Texas was the only Democrat to join the subcommittee's four Republicans in voting for the amendment.
Mr. McCrery argued that limiting tax breaks on health benefits would spur employers and employees to shop for health coverage more carefully and question medical prices.
The amendment sought to allow workers tax-free treatment for only an amount of benefits equal to the average cost of a federally defined minimum package of health benefits.
Employer deductions for worker health benefits would be capped at that level, too.
"To simply put on at this time arbitrary cost controls, I believe, will lead us to the rationing of health care," Mr. McCrery said.
The subcommittee went on to adopt by voice vote a provision proposed by Rep. Jim McDermott (D., Wash.) that would wipe out by 2005 the disparity in rates that doctors and hospitals receive for patients with private insurance and patients in government programs.
The House action came as members of the Senate Finance Committee concluded a two-day health-care retreat in rural Virginia, where much of the discussion focused on whether the government should require employers to provide health coverage for their workers.
"I can accept mandates," Sen. Bob Packwood (R., Ore.) said in an interview after the retreat.
"I think I'd prefer individual if they could be made to work, but I wouldn't reject employer."
He said his colleagues didn't reach any consensus on mandates other than a general realization that they were needed to achieve universal health coverage.
