Trying to make sense of the withdrawal by Defense nominee Bobby Ray Inman yesterday, we were reminded of the odd encounter that CBS's Dan Rather had on the streets of New York a few years ago.
Mr. Rather's assailant asked the bizarre question, "Kenneth, what's the frequency?"
Mr. Inman's explanations are similarly perplexing.
By now of course a certain level of high-wire weirdness seems to be routine in the Clinton presidency.
This administration rarely does a swan dive when a triple-backward-somersault with a twist can be tried instead.
So we get Attorney General candidates with nanny problems, death-defying Congressional votes, stonewalling on a suicide, bungee jumps into Somalia and Haiti, and now a Defense nominee who accepts the job by publicly condescending about his "comfort level" with the President and then leaves it a month later deploring "modern McCarthyism."
Let us stipulate that Mr. Inman has a point that something rotten has happened to the nomination process in Washington, though it hardly started with the Clinton years.
These columns deplored the personal attacks that were made against Reagan nominees, and we've done the same when ethics trivia has been used against Clinton appointees.
The feminist-Naderite liberals were the ones who went after Zoe Baird, while we defended her, and the same crowd wanted Mr. Inman to shed some blood for his own nanny tax problems.
Mr. Inman is also surely right that the media, especially when it heads off in a pack, can too easily "disparage or destroy reputations."
Yet what is so striking about Mr. Inman's complaint is how mild were the criticisms of him compared with the standards set over the past 12 years.
While we don't know what might have emerged from Congressional hearings or may be hidden in FBI reports, Mr. Inman himself noted yesterday that he'd probably have been confirmed by the Senate Armed Services Committee by "a unanimous vote."
His Republican endorsers included, by his own account, "Dick Cheney and Bob Gates," and Senators "John Warner, John McCain and Kay Hutchison."
This is a lot better than John Tower ever did among Democrats.
These Republican endorsements make Mr. Inman's attack on Bob Dole especially puzzling.
Mr. Inman says he heard "indications from friends on the Republican side of the aisle" that Mr. Dole had targeted him, but he offers no evidence.
In public, Mr. Dole had actually praised him as a "very good person for the job," though he did quip that maybe Mr. Inman was a "Gergen Republican" and would have to answer some "tough questions" about his business dealings.
For his part, Mr. Dole responded yesterday that "I have no idea what's gotten into Bobby Inman."
Mr. Inman's story becomes 100% weird, however, when it links Mr. Dole to New York Times columnist William Safire in a conspiracy.
Citing unspecified "reports," Mr. Inman alleges "a trade between Mr. Safire and Senator Dole, that if Senator Dole would turn up the heat on my nomination that Safire would turn up the heat on Whitewater Development."
But Mr. Dole hardly needed anyone to raise suspicions, since the White House has been doing such a good job all by itself; indeed, one logical explanation of Mr. Inman's withdrawal is that he decided that the Clinton Administration was a ship taking on too much Whitewater.
And while Mr. Safire did give Mr. Inman a rough time in print, that critique was balanced by a generally fawning reception on Capitol Hill and positive assessments elsewhere in the press.
It is not as if reporters searched his video rentals as they did Robert Bork's.
The Safire-Dole conspiracy theory reminds us of what it was like to be accused of murdering Vincent Foster; this looks like a similar attempt to divert attention from other possible motives for Mr. Inman's withdrawal.
We don't pretend to know what those motives might be, but his explanations so far only deepen the mystery.
The problem for the country is that an important job at Defense remains unfilled at an important time.
The shakeout in Mr. Clinton's national security team has been unparalleled for any recent President's first year, a fact that gets noticed in dangerous places like North Korea.
Mr. Clinton could plug this leaking image with a Defense choice like James Woolsey, who gets high marks as CIA director.
But since that is the simple, sensible choice, we suppose it would be too easy for this tangled presidency.
