Rising mortgage rates, while throwing cold water on the already fading refinancing boom, aren't yet having an appreciable effect on sales of either new or existing homes, housing analysts said.
Rates on conventional 30-year mortgages rose last week to 7.44% from 7.25% the week before -- more than half a percentage point above a 25-year low reached last October, according to HSH Associates, a Butler, N.J., publisher of mortgage data.
But rates, which tend to follow the bond market and have climbed on inflationary worries, are still historically low.
Most analysts expect rates to either stay flat or gradually rise toward 8% this year.
Jonathan Gray, a housing-industry analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., said ascending rates are a sign of an improving economy and that any dampening effects on the housing market would be offset by an increase in people with jobs and confidence who are looking to buy homes.
"The numbers of homes selling won't change much," he said.
"I don't see starts or existing-home sales suffering.
Its main impact is on refinancings, which have been exquisitely sensitive to changes."
Indeed, the Mortgage Bankers Association's index of refinancing activity last week fell to 879.4 from 1012.7 the week before.
The index peaked in September at 1727.3 and slid at the end of the year before picking up recently.
A rate of 100 is considered normal and anything over 700 is considered a boom.
Mr. Gray said he is projecting a 60% drop in refinancing activity this year to $210 billion from the record $535 billion last year.
But at the same time that the refinancing wave subsides, the number of people buying mortgages for the first time is surging.
Such applications are expected to hit a record $565 billion this year, vs. the previous high-water mark of $495 billion last year.
Last year, refinancing activity averaged 53% and jumped as high as 70% of all mortgage applications as homeowners took repeated advantage of falling rates to cut their monthly payments.
But according to the Mortgage Bankers Association, that volume has fallen to 43% and chief economist David Lereah predicts further declines that will result in refinancing averaging no more than 35% of mortgages this year.
"There's been a big drop in a short period, and we're going to see further drops," he said.
Most analysts agree that a large spike in rates would stymie the housing recovery, but as Mr. Gray said, "We're hundreds of basis points away from that."
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.
Still, home builders are concerned.
Philip Dion, the chairman and chief executive at Del Webb Corp., said that builders have already been passing on the costs of rising timber expenses to buyers and that escalating rates could price many people out of the market.
"The potential exists for a very significant negative reaction by the home buyer," he said.
"The fact remains that the monthly mortgage payment is the bottom line.
Sometimes all it takes is $25 or $50, and they're out of the market in substantial quantities."
But even a full one-point increase in mortgages would still leave most home buyers with historically low rates.
"Most people buying homes have never seen interest rates this low," said Ingo Winzer, editor of the Local Market Monitor, which tracks regional real estate.
John Tuccillo, chief economist for the National Association of Realtors, said the inflationary fears are misplaced and will only keep interest rates up for a few months.
"In the summer, you'll see the rates come sliding back down," he said.
The main impact of higher short-term rates, he said, would be to delay the spring home-buying season, which usually starts in March, to around May or June.
Nevertheless, he predicts, in 1994 housing will still post the best year for resales since at least 1978.
