A 33% equity stake in Grumman Corp. held by employees of the embattled defense contractor could pose an obstacle to Northrop Corp.'s $2.04 billion hostile bid for Grumman.
The Grumman employees' equity stake is held by a Grumman savings and retirement plan.
It represents an unusually large percentage of employee ownership for a major corporation.
The trustees of the Grumman plan, all of whom are Grumman executives, have the power to decide whether to accept the Northrop offer or a rival $1.87 billion bid by Martin Marietta Corp., or to let the employee shareholders decide for themselves.
Northrop on Thursday offered $60 a share for Grumman, topping a friendly $55-a-share merger agreement between Grumman and Martin Marietta.
Most investment bankers believe Grumman in the end will be sold to the highest bidder, particularly since each bidder is offering all cash, reducing the uncertainties inherent in valuing stock offers.
But legal experts say the three Grumman executives who serve as trustees to the Grumman savings and retirement plan that holds the stock have a small amount of leeway under federal law to consider factors other than the absolute dollar value of each bid, such as future layoffs of Grumman workers.
Martin Marietta and Northrop are expected to lay off thousands of Grumman employees once either bidder acquires the company.
However, there are signs that Martin Marietta might campaign for Grumman employees' support on the grounds that its bid might result in fewer layoffs.
One of the leading precedents in this area involved Grumman itself, which more than a decade ago fought off a hostile takeover bid by LTV Corp. by selling a block of stock to employees who declined to accept the LTV bid.
The Department of Labor later charged that the Grumman action had hurt the employees because their stock was purchased at a high price that reflected the LTV bid, and the shares later fell in price after the LTV bid was withdrawn.
But Grumman eventually escaped any sanctions because its stock, buoyed by the 1980s bull market, eventually outdistanced the per-share price tag on the LTV offer.
Under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, or Erisa, which governs their decison making, the Grumman plan trustees must act in the best interests of the participants of the plan.
In other words, they can't opt for the Martin Marietta offer simply because that offer has the backing of Grumman management.
A Grumman spokesman said Friday that the trustees are "studying all their options right now," and wouldn't be available to comment on the situation.
Under the rules of the investment plan, the trustees may choose to allow the Grumman employees to decide individually which bid they prefer.
In that case, many Grumman employees, particularly retirees, might opt for the higher bid.
One person close to the Marietta-Grumman merger proposal predicted that the trustees will give the employees the chance to decide for themselves.
The Grumman executives who are trustees of the plan are Robert Foster, Howard Dunn and Robert Denien.
Interviews with several experts on Erisa law indicate that the trustees would probably be less vulnerable to lawsuits if they accepted the highest bid, but that the decision isn't necessarily open and shut.
Bronislaw E. Grala, an Erisa expert at the law firm Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft in Washington, said that opinions differ and case law isn't uniform, but "there is a theory that a trustee is entitled to take into account . . . that it may be preferable to accept a lower offer if the offeror is more likely to stay in business and eventually put more money into the plan."
But Mr. Grala added, "The Department of Labor would probably say there is a burden of proof on the trustees to overcome if they were to choose the lesser cash offer."
Normally, a 33% block of stock wouldn't be large enough to block an offer by itself.
But Grumman is incorporated in New York, where state law requires that an acquirer obtain two-thirds of a company's stock to merge the two companies.
Martin Marietta or Northrop could obtain control of Grumman by buying 50.1% of its stock, but couldn't merge the two companies.
In responding to Northrop's bid, Martin Marietta Chairman Norman Augustine appeared to acknowledge the potential importance of employee sentiment when he said: "As we have come to know the Grumman employees of these past several weeks, we have gained ever greater respect for their talent, integrity and professionalism.
They deserve the utmost consideration."
Meanwhile, Grumman's stock continued to surge Friday, rising $3 a share to $64.75 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, indicating traders expect the bidding to reach $70 a share.
And Northrop's shares didn't decline, as a bidder's stock usually does, because of rumors -- which some traders said Martin Marietta didn't discourage -- that Martin Marietta might launch a bid for Northrop itself to remove Northrop as a defense-industry competitor.
Northrop's shares rose 12.5 cents to $41.375 and Martin Marietta's shares fell $2 to $44.50 on the Big Board.
The rumors were given added credence by traders because it was Martin Marietta that executed the first and only "Pac-Man" defense in which the target of a hostile takeover bid responded by making a hostile offer for the original bidder.
The tactic eventually succeeded by forcing the bidder, Bendix Corp., to be acquired by AlliedSignal Corp.
Martin Marietta wouldn't have to keep all of Northrop for that strategy to make sense.
The tactic might reduce the price it has to pay for Grumman, and Martin Marietta could also recoup part of the cost by selling pieces of Northrop.
In an all-out bidding war, analysts believe Martin Marietta can afford to pay more if it chooses, because it is a larger company with a stronger balance sheet.
