A high level Central Intelligence Agency team sent to Moscow to seek Russia's cooperation in the unfolding spy scandal is returning "empty handed," according to a senior U.S. official.
The Clinton administration has asked that Moscow withdraw at least one top official from the Russian Embassy in Washington who it says "ran" Aldrich Ames, the CIA's former counterintelligence chief accused of spying for the Soviet Union and Russia.
The administration sent the high-level CIA team to Moscow earlier this week to meet with Russian intelligence officials and "discuss the whole case, how to proceed and who would take responsibility," said the top U.S. official.
"They weren't turned down, but they weren't given any assurances."
Officials said that the administration would now increase the diplomatic pressure on the Yeltsin government for swift satisfaction or expel the Russian official or perhaps other officials.
Moscow's recalcitrance comes at a time when senior lawmakers are calling for retaliation, including a suspension of U.S. aid to Russia.
President Clinton is to meet with congressional leaders at the White House this morning to try to quell their anger over the scandal.
For a second day in a row, Secretary of State Warren Christopher faced tough questioning on Capitol Hill about the spy case and the administration's continued enthusiasm for Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Rep. Benjamin Gilman (R., N.Y.), the ranking minority member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and a longtime supporter of aid to Russia, warned Mr. Christopher that the arrest and "the signal that Moscow is sending with this continued spying" could erode U.S. public support for aid to Russia.
"There were already some reservations about maintaining such a high level, given the uncertainty of the Russians' commitment toward necessary economic reform," he said.
Yesterday morning, CIA officials briefed the House Intelligence Committee in a closed-door session on the case of Mr. Ames and his wife, Rosario, who were arrested on espionage charges this week.
According to committee members, the CIA hopes to interview Russian spies imprisoned by their government in hopes that the U.S. can determine how many executions may have occurred because of Mr. Ames's alleged disclosures.
The officials said they had no firm evidence on the number of executions.
However, they suggested there were as many as 10 individuals secretly working for the CIA and Federal Bureau of Investigation who disappeared.
At the hearing there was "great dissatisfaction" because of how little hard information the CIA could divulge.
In an attempt to address the espionage problem, several senators have reintroduced legislation that will give the FBI and the CIA more power to investigate the finances and other aspects of the lives of employees with access to secrets.
"I want to point the blame on ourselves.
We've been naive," said Sen. William Cohen (R., Maine), who explained the changes in the legislation were recommended by a high-level panel four years ago as a way to prevent people from selling secrets, but were then ignored by Congress.
While the panel's recommendations were written into legislation by members of the Senate Intelligence Committee in 1990, the bill never made in out of the committee.
The attitude of Congress at the time, Sen. Cohen said yesterday, was that the end of the Cold War made the changes unnecessary.
Mr. Yeltsin, meanwhile, increased concern about the direction of Russian politics in a toughly worded address to parliament.
Mr. Yeltsin declared that Russia would no longer make what he said were "one-sided concessions" on foreign policy and defense.
He also harshly criticized the Clinton administration's plan for slowly expanding the North Atlantic Treaty Organization eastward, warning that any attempt to enlarge the alliance without Russia was "the path toward new threats for Europe and the world."
William Cummings, the lawyer for Mrs. Ames, said his client "has been devastated by the distortions, out-of-context selected statements and alleged quotations in the government's affidavit, along with the subsequent press coverage.
She will be giving no rebuttal to the press."
His office said, however, that Mrs. Ames would "have a brief statement at a later time."
It isn't clear whether the proposed expansion of CIA and FBI powers to investigate employees would have tripped up Mr. and Mrs. Ames.
Sen. David Boren (D., Okla.), who is co-sponsoring the measure, said the changes might have enabled the government to detect Mr. Ames's activities earlier.
Today, the government's access to private financial data is limited and a court order is needed to investigate private business dealings to verify employee income.
Mr. Ames was able to conceal what are alleged to be more than $1 million in payments from the Russians by telling his CIA supervisors that the money came from his Colombian-born wife's wealthy family.
"Knowing that agencies could spot-check information like that without giving any warning will give people a big disincentive for lying in the future," said Sen. Boren.
The proposed changes would also require employees like Mr. Ames to report all overseas travel and to agree to random polygraph tests.
Mr. Ames apparently traveled to South America without telling the CIA and passed two polygraph tests, which are now administered every five years.
In testimony yesterday before the House Intelligence Committee, CIA Director R. James Woolsey endorsed the measure to broaden the FBI and CIA's power to investigate employees.
He had served on the commission that originally suggested these steps.
He declined to comment on the specifics of the Ames case during the session, which was focused on the CIA's budget and other matters.
Mr. Woolsey noted, however, that he was concerned that changes to improve security would have to be properly balanced against the constitutional rights of employees.
With worries about Russia mounting, Secretary of State Christopher worked hard in his Capitol Hill testimony to find a silver lining in Mr. Yeltsin's speech.
He pointed to the Russian leader's "personal commitment to combat inflation" and noted that Mr. Yeltsin "was in a strong, vigorous mood and made a strong vigorous speech, which is a good sign in itself."
Sounding a theme that Mr. Clinton will take with congressional leaders today, Mr. Christopher emphasized that aid to Russia is not charity but an investment in U.S. security.
A democratic, reform-oriented Russia would be a stable and reliable partner for the U.S., he said.
"Certainly a continuation of the nuclear arrangements that we have with them, which will result in the dismantlement of thousands of nuclear weapons makes the U.S. and the rest of the world safer," he said.
Joe Davidson contributed to this article.
