When Arthur Levitt, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, speaks before the American Chamber of Commerce in Frankfurt on Monday, the top executives of Germany's leading public companies will be listening carefully.
They will not be seeking insight on "emerging trends in the international securities markets," as the invitation promises, however.
Instead, they will be looking hopefully for some indication from the SEC chairman that he is willing to consider "substantive compromise," as one German executive put it, in the long-running controversy over the level of financial disclosure required from German companies wishing to list their shares on U.S. stock exchanges.
They are likely to be disappointed.
Corporate Germany was shocked by concessions Daimler-Benz made to the SEC last autumn, when it became the first German company listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
In agreeing to report its results according to U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), Daimler's management broke ranks with its corporate brethren in a war of opposing philosophies where the battle lines are deeply drawn.
Germany and the U.S. have diametrically different approaches to capital markets and to the relationship between companies and their shareholders.
In the U.S., management is ultimately accountable to the shareholder and an efficient, liquid, transparent market is the ideal.
In the words of the SEC's chief accountant, "information is king and also queen."
Under the German system, creditors outrank shareholders in the corporate legal hierarchy.
The country's major financial institutions play a pivotal role in the capital markets and in corporate governance by taking big stakes (on their own account and on behalf of individual clients) in leading companies.
These stakes, which are monitored through seats on the companies' supervisory boards or senior governing bodies, may lead to a less liquid market, but Germans argue they are critical in enabling management to pursue long-term strategies.
Deutsche Bank, the country's largest, alone holds more than 100 corporate board seats.
Management also receives a good deal of leeway in the reporting of financial results, in calculating pension liabilities and in building up "hidden reserves" from earnings in good years, which are then released to bolster profits in leaner times.
Perhaps nowhere is the difference between these two systems seen more starkly than in the publishing of Daimler-Benz's first-half results last fall as the company prepared for its Big Board listing.
While the company showed a profit of 168 million marks ($97 million) under German rules, Daimler reported a loss of 949 million marks ($548 million) after conforming to GAAP and eliminating the impact of hidden reserves.
There are many other reasons why German companies hesitate to subject themselves to U.S. reporting requirements.
Major banks, for example, would have to consolidate the results of the industrial companies in which they hold big positions (Deutsche Bank's 28% holding in Daimler-Benz, for instance) into their own financial statements.
The cost of converting books to GAAP is substantial.
German law makes no distinction between published accounts and tax accounts.
And, as one German executive put it, "it's a very political issue because German CEOs have invested time arguing that our accounting is better than U.S. accounting."
It is also a fact that many U.S. institutional investors can -- and do -- already invest in German companies either through U.S.-traded American depositary receipts or by buying shares directly on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
None of these arguments are likely to carry the day with Mr. Levitt or his colleagues at the SEC, however.
The SEC was established in large part to protect the interests of investors (particularly small, individual investors), and this is a charge that the SEC takes most seriously.
Moreover, there is little domestic pressure in the U.S. for a relaxing of the rules for German (or other overseas) companies.
A common sentiment, expressed to us by several large U.S. investors, is that German companies have to play by the rules of this market if they want to list here.
The most important rule when in the U.S. is that everyone gets the same information at the same time.
American investors not only want a level playing field, they want good quality information that they can use to make informed decisions.
As George Evans of Oppenheimer Management Co. puts it: "The way it is now, investing in German companies can be a stab in the dark.
You simply don't know enough about what's going on inside the company."
There is a lot at stake on both sides of this argument.
If the U.S. is to maintain its position as home of the world's leading securities markets, these markets must continue to attract international issuers from both developed and emerging economies.
For their part, German companies need access to capital, and they will find no greater, more liquid or (for the moment, at least) cheaper capital pools than in America.
The Securities Industry Association estimated last year that less than 7% of America's $5 trillion of institutional and mutual funds assets are invested in foreign securities.
Three-quarters of the German institutional investors we surveyed last August said they expect more German companies to tap the international capital markets in the years ahead, with New York and London being the leading candidates.
Each side believes its position is philosophically right.
In the long term, however, the pressure has to be on Germany.
Already the two most global markets in the world are those for capital and information.
National boundaries barely inhibit the movement of money and news.
As Oppenheimer's Mr. Evans says: "The American standard {of disclosure} is taking over the rest of the world, but German companies have been at the less aggressive end of this trend so far.
A whole host of countries have been switching over to the international system lately, most notably Switzerland, which has gone through tremendous changes in the last five or six years with regard to this issue."
Last July, Renaldo Schmitz, a member of Deutsche Bank's managing board, warned in an English-language publication: "If German industry is seriously interested in attracting foreign investors into its equity on a long-term basis it will have to change its attitude toward shareholder expectations."
As Daimler-Benz has discovered, German corporations will also have to work hard to attract U.S. investors who have grown used to being aggressively courted by American companies.
Those public German companies that want to be competitive players on the global stage will watch Daimler-Benz and its U.S. listing less as the desperate act of a renegade and more as the experiment of a pioneer.
They will learn from Daimler's experience so that their own will be that much smoother when -- not if -- their turn comes.
Mr. Duffy is chairman of the New York office of Ogilvy Adams & Rinehart, a public relations firm that specializes in cross-border investor relations.
Mr. Murray heads the firm's Frankfurt office.
