As a trader among the screaming throng at the most crowded futures exchange in the world, Jim Heinz was often squeezed out of place by burly colleagues and hurled bodily into the trading pit below.
That's one of the reasons Mr. Heinz has left the floor of the Chicago Board of Trade and now places his orders by phone.
"Trading ought to be a cerebral activity," he says, "not `I got the trade because I'm 6-foot-5, 290 pounds.'"
Today, Mr. Heinz and the other 2,100 voting members of the Board of Trade have a chance to ease the chronic crowding at their exchange.
Traders will vote on a proposal to dig deep into exchange coffers to buy and raze an adjoining building in downtown Chicago and to construct a huge new trading floor on the site.
Despite the obvious need for more breathing room, the proposal isn't getting the warmest of welcomes.
Leslie Rosenthal, a former exchange chairman, is waging an aggressive campaign to defeat the proposal.
"It's too big and too expensive," Mr. Rosenthal says.
The leadership of the CBOT -- principally Patrick H. Arbor, chairman of the CBOT and champion of the move -- is trying "to sell the membership on a plan that would build a trading floor the size of a supertanker.
The problem is that once we start, we can't turn it around and once finished, we will be sailing it half-empty."
Nonsense, says Mr. Arbor.
At the CBOT, "we're choked and throttled for space," he says.
"We don't have booth space for the big brokerage firms that bring orders to the floor.
Our sight lines are inadequate to bring orders to the pits in an efficient manner."
And the space problem isn't confined to the Board of Trade.
In New York, four futures exchanges share the same cramped trading floor.
Hazards abound there, such as the rolls of carpet ripped up by slashing feet and phone cords that stretch across aisles along which pass hundreds of traders.
Basically, the U.S. futures industry is the victim of its own rapid growth, with a booming business that in many cases has overtaken the exchanges' physical capability to manage it.
Three of the four New York markets also plan to build a new trading floor and have selected a site in Manhattan.
The New York Mercantile Exchange, the biggest of the four New York markets, may move with them, or may go its own way.
"We're searching desperately for new space," says Allen Marx, a Nymex trader and member of an exchange committee contemplating possible relocation venues.
In Chicago, the price of expansion is steep.
The total cost of Mr. Arbor's building proposal, which includes a 60,000-square-foot elevated trading floor that would span a Chicago street, is estimated at $171.5 million.
What members will vote on today, however, is merely the $26 million cost of acquiring the building.
In 1992, traders defeated a proposal to acquire the same building for $24 million and develop it for a relatively modest $100 million.
So why does Mr. Arbor think he has a better chance this time?
"There's no increase in trading fees built into this proposal," he says.
"Last time, there was."
Mr. Arbor's plan calls for the cost of the project to be paid out of general exchange revenues over the next 10 years.
The Board of Trade had record trading volume of 178 million futures and options contracts in 1993, producing total exchange revenue of $98 million.
If growth continues at a 3% to 5% clip, Mr. Arbor says, the exchange will be able to pay for the new facility without raising fees.
Mr. Rosenthal asserts that Mr. Arbor's revenue projections for the coming decade are overly optimistic.
He notes that a similar expansion in the early 1980s -- construction of a building that is now called the Board of Trade annex -- was budgeted at $30 million but ended up costing about $120 million.
Nor does Mr. Rosenthal, who runs his own futures brokerage firm, Quantum Financial Services, believe CBOT trading volume will grow at the pace Mr. Arbor predicts.
Yet Mr. Arbor's plan has gotten a boost lately from the endorsements of many prominent CBOT traders.
Among them are L. Thomas Baldwin, one of the biggest and most influential Treasury-bond futures traders at the exchange; Conrad Leslie, a CBOT veteran; and Thomas Cunningham, chairman of the exchange committee that represents so-called local traders, who trade for their own profit.
"I think it's going to pass," says Mr. Heinz, although he professes himself undecided about which way to vote and says many of his colleagues are similarly torn.
"It's very expensive," he says.
"It's a sizable commitment to the open-outcry system of floor trading.
Electronic, screen-based trading is gaining a foothold at other futures exchanges and may be the wave of the future.
If it is, we might be building a huge white elephant."
To ease chronic crowding on its trading floor, the Chicago Board of Trade has proposed acquiring an adjoining building and constructing a high-tech trading floor on the site.
The new facility would be connected to the famous art deco Board of Trade building by an overhead span.
Here are some details of the proposal:
