A water tower painted like a giant ear of corn looms over the edge of Rochester, Minn.
Smoked wild game is the specialty at nearby Hardy's Barbeque.
And for fun, locals can go to one of seven bowling alleys.
Hardly signs of life on the cutting edge.
But scattered across the farmlands are high-tech companies that have fueled growth to the point where Minnesota's Olmsted County is one of the 20 fastest-growing counties in the nation.
Dakota and Washington counties, suburbs of Minneapolis-St.
Paul, also made the list of white-collar boom towns, thanks to an increase in high-tech industry jobs.
While there is still blue-collar work on farms, dairies and corn-packing plants, the area is referred to as "medical alley."
"This is going to be a place for investment opportunities," says Tim Maudlin, a managing partner of Medical Innovation Partners, a venture capital group that invests in the region.
Much of the growth has been fueled by businesses spawned by the Mayo Clinic, one of the region's major employers, and those managers who leave International Business Machines Corp.'s Rochester plant to start businesses.
Home-grown success has convinced economic developers to do the unthinkable: They rarely try to woo businesses to the county.
"We're going inward," says Gary Smith, executive vice president of Rochester Area Economic Development Inc., a private nonprofit economic development group.
"It's a lot more sensible approach to building an economic future than chasing smokestacks."
Millions of dollars in venture capital have poured into the region.
The Rochester development group started a fund about four years ago to help local startups and, more importantly, to match entrepreneurs with investors.
"There's capital available for the truly good entrepreneurial ideas," says Mr. Smith.
"Not a lot of other communities of 70,000 people have that."
The office matched Showcase Corp., a software company founded by David Wenz and other ex-IBM employees, with an investor, who had $250,000.
"We really worked off our IBM track records," says Mr. Wenz, who was one of IBM's top patent holders when he left the company in 1989.
"We built products that made hundreds of millions for IBM."
That record also helped win backing from Norwest Venture Capital in Minneapolis.
It invested about $3.5 million in exchange for a 30% stake in Showcase, Mr. Wenz says.
That allowed the five-year-old company to work on software with health-care and manufacturing applications.
Showcase is producing results.
It has five offices in the U.S. and one in Denmark.
Its revenues are about $7 million a year and should double this year, Mr. Wenz says.
"We're profitable and we don't owe anyone any money," he says.
Even the century-old Mayo Clinic has taken advantage of the interest in new ventures.
Medical Innovation Partners, the venture capital group working with the clinic, raised $35 million last year, says Mr. Maudlin, a managing partner.
With Mayo developing more technologies, the group expects to create four companies a year in the next four years to market them, he says.
The clinic in 1985 formed its own medical ventures group to license inventions -- a lesson learned the hard way.
Mayo doctors discovered cortisone in 1950, but the clinic never licensed it and so never received royalties from the lucrative drug.
It has diversified from diagnosing disease into such profitable businesses as book publishing and international consulting.
Even the Mayo name brings in money.
A Mayo health newsletter has 419,000 subscribers.
"The Mayo Clinic Family Health Book," which covers everything from anemia to X-rays, has sold 600,000 copies since its release in 1990.
Rick Colvin, executive director of Mayo Medical Ventures, estimates that about $50 million in venture capital is invested in Mayo technologies, which generate licensee sales of about $100 million a year.
One such technology is a three-dimensional image-manipulating software called ANALYZE, which allows doctors to plan surgery -- including the 1992 separation of twins joined at the abdomen and sternum -- on a computer.
Another invention is the Genesis knee, an artificial joint.
It and ANALYZE each produce more than $1 million in royalties a year for Mayo.
IVI Publishing Inc. in Eagan, a Twin Cities suburb, was formed to market a Mayo invention that matches multimedia technologies with health-care information.
The company's founders had approached Mayo about producing the CD-ROM version of the "Mayo Clinic Family Health Book."
IVI got its funding through Medical Innovation Partners, which is now its biggest shareholder, with about a 20% stake.
IVI has raised about $35 million in capital since its startup three years ago.
"There's a history here of people investing in medical technology and having success," says Charles Nickoloff, vice president and a founder.
"I don't think we've lost any opportunities by not being on either coast."
The surge in new ventures and influx of middle managers has helped boost Olmsted County's median income to $35,788, well above the national median of $30,056 and a more than 78% increase from 1980.
Still, Mr. Wenz sometimes encounters preconceptions when recruiting employees from urban areas.
Their reaction: "Why would I want to live in the middle of a cornfield?"
Besides the remote location, January temperatures can dip to 20 degrees below zero.
But once people visit, they often stay.
One reason: The median price for a three-bedroom house is $93,500, compared with the national median of $106,800.
"I don't think we ever lost a major recruit," he says.
Some become so hooked on the region that they limit business dealings to fellow Midwesterners.
Tom Gauthier founded two companies, Gauthier Industries Inc. and Gauthier Medical Inc. in Rochester.
"I tried doing business on the East Coast," Mr. Gauthier says.
But now he sticks closer to home.
"It was bureaucratic, back-stabbing and highly competitive."
