Nissan Motor Co., in an unprecedented move, said it will buy back all the estimated 33,000 Nissan vans it sold from 1987 to 1990 because of potential engine fires.
The program could cost Nissan as much as $180 million, according to industry officials.
The move comes five months after Nissan launched its fourth recall of the Nissan van, code-named C-22.
The Japanese auto maker has already repurchased 1,350 vans that were too expensive to repair and had them destroyed.
Nissan said it is offering to buy back the vans to keep its customers satisfied.
"We can't run away from an issue just because we think it's a financial hardship," said Earl Hesterberg, vice president and general manager of the company's Nissan division.
"Brand image is very important.
We believe that should stand behind the product."
But the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration "made clear that it expected some more aggressive action," said Bill Boehly, the NHTSA's associate administrator.
He said he is pleased with the buyback plan and urged van owners to accept the offer.
Nissan officials declined to comment about how much the company will pay.
But industry experts expect Nissan to pay an average of $6,000 a vehicle, depending on its condition.
Nissan said it also settled a class-action suit filed by Nissan van owners, who had sought to force the company to refund the full retail price of the vehicles.
As part of the settlement, owners of the 1987-90 vans will also receive a $500 coupon toward the purchase of another Nissan vehicle.
The coupon, which expires at the end of the year, could cost Nissan an additional $15 million if every Nissan van owner cashed in.
The problem with the vans originates with the fan belt which, if it breaks, could cause the minivan to overheat, possibly resulting in fires in the engine compartment.
Nissan will notify owners of the 1987-90 model-year vans of the refund offer, which expires 120 days after receipt of the letter.
Owners accepting the offer will receive a check for the current retail value of the Nissan van.
But Nissan's long-running troubles with the vans may not be over.
Yesterday, four surviving children of an Orlando couple that died in a 1988 Nissan van filed a suit against Nissan in Orange County Circuit Court in Florida, claiming that defects caused the crash that resulted in their parents' death.
Earl and Georgia F. Adams were killed Dec. 10 when their 1988 Nissan van veered off the road, crashed into a tractor-trailer, and exploded.
John Overchuck, an attorney representing the children, said the suit seeks more than $15,000 in damages.
In Carson, Calif., a Nissan spokesman said the suit is without merit.
"We have investigated the accident, and it has nothing to do with the recall condition," the Nissan spokesman said.
"It is a car crash."
As for the buyback, Sean Kane, senior associate at for Ralph Hoar & Associates, an Arlington, Va., research firm, called it "too little, too late."
His organization had petitioned the NHTSA last year to order Nissan to repurchase all the vans.
The NHTSA had denied that petition after Nissan agreed to conduct the fourth recall last August.
There have been some 160 reports of fires in the vans, Nissan said, although not all of them were caused by engine-compartment problems.
The Nissan spokesman said there have been no serious injuries or fatalities related to product defects.
The repairs made in the recalls never resolved the problem.
Nissan is on the comeback trail, with a hot-selling minivan and midsized sedan, and saw the recurring recalls as a stain on its image.
The buyback doesn't include Nissan's current Quest minivan but covers an earlier minivan that Nissan stopped building in 1990.
Nissan dealers are hopeful that this action will close the book on this recall debacle.
"This van was a problem child to start with," said John Baldwin, new-car manager at Green Gifford Motor, Norfolk, Va.
"Nissan has gone the extra mile to sooth those nerves but it's been a comedy of errors."
