Short interest on the Nasdaq Stock Market, a generally bearish indicator, set a record for the 12th consecutive month in mid-January, jumping 1.5% to 682.4 million shares from mid-December's 672 million.
The year-long climb in uncovered short positions is a growing indicator that investors are expecting a large number of Nasdaq stocks -- from giants such as MCI Communications Corp, Intel Corp. and Apple Computer Inc., to midsize companies such as Canadian soft-drink maker Cott Corp. -- to fall.
Apple, for example, saw its short-interest position surge 137.1% to 6.2 million shares from 2.6 million a month earlier, marking the largest volume increase on Nasdaq for the period.
Short sales are bets that a stock will tumble.
An investor sells borrowed shares, knowing that they must eventually be replaced for return to the lender.
If the replacement shares cost less than those sold earlier, the short seller makes a profit.
Short interest is the total of shares sold short at any point and not yet covered.
This month's figures represent sales reported as of Jan. 4 and settled as of Jan. 14.
Short interest on the Nasdaq National Market, comprising the larger-capitalization issues, climbed less than 1% to 635.3 million shares from 630.4 million a month earlier.
Telecommunications, technology and consumer nondurable stocks were again among those with the largest short positions.
Short selling among the small-capitalization stocks, which make up about a third of the Nasdaq market, climbed 13% to 47.1 million shares from 41.6 million a month earlier.
The National Market's short interest ratio as of mid-January fell to 2.26 from 2.57.
The short interest ratio for the smallest Nasdaq stocks rose to 0.92 from 0.87.
The ratio -- the number of trading days at the market's average volume that would be required to close out the total short position through share purchases -- is viewed as a measure of trader sentiment.
Among the companies with the largest short interest positions, American Power Conversion Corp.'s fell 5% to 12.2 million shares; Comcast Corp.'s Class A special shares jumped 13.3% to 11.8 million shares; MCI's rose 29% to 9.9 million shares while Snapple Beverage Corp.'s fell 3.2% to 9.8 million.
Following Apple, the Nasdaq stocks with the largest volume increase in short interest were telecommunications groups L.M. Ericsson Telephone Co., which trades as an American depositary receipt, and LDDS Communications Inc.
Ericsson's short interest soared to 3.5 million shares from 11,455 a month ago, while LDDS' position more than doubled to 5.4 million shares from 2.4 million.
The following table shows the Nasdaq issues in which a short interest position of at least 100,000 shares existed at mid-January, or in which the short position had changed by at least 50,000 shares since mid-December.
