The first big post-Cold War espionage case began with a love affair in Mexico City.
He was a Central Intelligence Agency brat reeling from a failed marriage.
She was a 30-year old, multilingual diplomat from Colombia who had attended Princeton, read Hegel and Kant and took telephone calls from her country's president in her apartment.
And the country where they were posted -- Mexico of the early 1980s -- was a locus of often-shadowy international activity, with the U.S. and the Soviet Union each maintaining substantial operations there to monitor the upheavals in Latin America.
Aldrich H. Ames and Maria del Rosario Casas met at a luncheon of the city's diplomatic club.
It wasn't love at first sight, recall people who watched the two, but rather a gradual warming between two mature people who shared a literary bent, a liberal cast of mind and their work for the CIA.
The relationship blossomed into marriage and then, according to the FBI, an elaborate, almost a decade-long conspiracy to betray the U.S. in what may be one of the most damaging spy scandals ever.
Money, as is often the case, appears to be the reason why these two people, who both began their relationship with important diplomatic assignments, allegedly turned to a criminal path.
According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Moscow paid the Ameses $1.5 million for highly sensitive intelligence on the U.S.
Some Washington insiders contend their alleged disclosures caused the executions of 10 Russians caught helping the U.S.
The Ameses' arrest also is shaking the budding U.S.-Russian friendship, which the Clinton adminstration has held out as a cornerstone of its foreign policy.
In response to the unfolding spy scandal, the Clinton administration on Friday expelled Russia's top intelligence officer in the U.S., Aleksandr Lysenko, after Moscow refused to withdraw him voluntarily.
U.S. officials said they expected the Yeltsin government to retaliate by expelling the top CIA official from the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, possibly as early as today.
"We're hoping it will stop there," says a senior U.S. official.
But where it started was the high life in Mexico City.
"She was bright, alert, had put in a year at Princeton, and she came from a decent family," recalls Irwin Rubenstein, a former U.S. diplomat who served with Mr. Ames in Mexico.
He and Mr. Ames were part of a group of four close friends who worked in the political section of the embassy and frequently went for long lunches where they discussed books -- mainly contemporary fiction and political science -- and debated political issues in an easygoing way.
Mr. Ames's friends at the embassy were pleased with the match.
In his first months at the embassy, having left behind a crumbling marriage in the U.S., Mr. Ames drank heavily.
He cut back on that when he began dating Rosario, as she preferred to be called.
"She did seem to be a positive influence on getting him to not get sloppy drunk, as he did on occasion" around Christmas of 1981, recalls a State Department official who worked across the hall from Mr. Ames in the embassy.
The CIA station in Mexico City was under intense pressure from headquarters.
The station failed to predict Mexico's nationalization of private banks in September 1982.
Meanwhile, the Reagan administration was riveted on the operations of Salvadoran leftists and Nicaraguan Sandinistas who passed through Mexico.
And Constantine Menges, installed as the new national intelligence officer for Latin America, had persuaded CIA chief William Casey that Mexico could well be the next Iran.
As part of its effort to intensify intelligence-gathering prowess, the Mexico City station recruited Ms. Casas as an "access agent."
Recalls a friend of Mr. Ames: "She'd bump up against Soviet-bloc people, especially Cubans.
She tried to draw them out, assess them, glean information from them."
It helped that Ms. Casas's great love, after literature, was Cuban music.
She boasted an extensive collection of salsa records.
They lived a swank life of the diplomatic set: Housing allowances, expense accounts and long lunches at the bistros and cafes across the street from the embassy.
Rick Ames's cozy, book-lined apartment was in the "Pink Zone," an elegant diplomatic quarter of palm gardens behind pink stucco walls.
Pursuing his high-school hobby of amateur dramatics, he participated frequently in the U.S. Embassy's productions of plays.
Weekends often brought trips, sometimes to vineyards and other spots in the hills, sponsored by the diplomatic club where he first met Ms. Casas.
The office of the Mexican president sometimes provided a passenger jet for longer trips, such as those to the beaches of Acapulco and the ruins of the Yucatan.
The good life Mr. Ames and Ms. Casas came to enjoy in Mexico crashed in October 1983 when Mr. Ames was reassigned to Washington.
Unlike many in the agency, Mr. Ames didn't use the opportunity of the foreign posting, with generous overseas benefits and an expense account, to build a nest egg for the inevitable return to the higher living costs of Washington, D.C.
And a messy divorce further depleted his income.
Mr. Ames had told his wife, still living in New York, that he was "head over heels in love" with another woman, one friend recalls.
She responded by taking him to the cleaners in the divorce.
The first Mrs. Ames didn't return calls seeking comment.
"When he came back from Mexico City, he was pretty wiped out financially," recalls a co-worker from this period.
"The divorce wasn't very pleasant for him."
Despite his new job -- he had been promoted to chief of the Soviet branch of the CIA's counterintelligence group -- he still held the midlevel government ranking of GS-14, making less than $54,000.
And Ms. Casas no longer was on the CIA payroll.
A few months later, she moved to Washington to join him.
The couple had ratcheted down from three incomes -- his, hers as a diplomat, and whatever the CIA paid her -- to just his one.
They found themselves living in a spartan condominium on the Route 7 commercial strip in northern Virginia.
The first Mrs. Ames apparently had kept all the furniture.
In the summer 1985, the couple married, but the wedding was a barebones affair at a Unitarian church in a Virginia suburb of Washington, D.C.
Only about 30 people attended, mainly relatives, with a smattering of colleagues from the agency.
The ceremony was followed by a long wait for the photographer and then a glass of wine, with no reception, recalls one guest.
Mrs. Ames had known financial constraints before.
Although she came from one of Bogota's well-respected "buenas familias," she was never wealthy.
A methodical "A" student who went into teaching at the University of the Andes, she didn't own a car and would either borrow her mother's humble Fiat or take public transportation.
Sometimes she would cadge small amounts of money to pay for lunch or a bus ride home.
"It was a tight life," says Gretel Wernher, the dean of the humanities department.
Although Mr. Ames had a number of good jobs, he also had problems.
Alan Wolfe, who supervised Mr. Ames's work in Rome from 1986 to 1989, describes him as "a lackluster officer and a drunk," adding, "I had to counsel him on the extent to which he was drinking his lunch."
The summer of 1985, Mr. Ames was designated to meet Vitaly Yurchenko, who had been head of counterintelligence in the KGB's most important department, but who was defecting to the U.S. Mr. Ames overslept the morning he was scheduled to meet the high-level defector at Andrews Air Force Base.
Perhaps the KGB provided a way out of lives that seemed full of muddles and small humiliations.
According to court documents, the CIA connection enabled the Ameses to purchase a $540,000 house in Arlington, Va., and a 1992 Jaguar.
They also acquired a vacation apartment in the colonial city of Cartagena, Colombia, and an apartment in the fashionable northern part of Bogota.
Supporting the conclusion that money rather than politics drove the espionage arrangements was the widely held perception that neither of the Ameses held strong political opinions.
At a time when the University of the Andes was a hotbed of romantic left-wing causes, Mrs. Ames is remembered as being apolitical.
"She didn't have an ideology," Dean Wernher says.
Still, some recent characterizations of the Ameses as drab failures have become caricatured.
Noting that Mr. Ames landed a series of plum jobs in New York, Mexico City, Rome and at CIA headquarters, Mr. Rubenstein, the former U.S. diplomat who served with Mr. Ames in Mexico, asks: "If he was no good, why did they keep him around and give him decent jobs?"
Indeed, Mr. Ames's potential usefulness to Moscow stemmed from his access to critical information.
As recently as last year, Mr. Ames traveled to the former Soviet republic of Georgia on agency business.
Now, that visit has raised some new worries, because the CIA station chief in Georgia was shot and killed in August -- an incident that initially was explained as a chance mishap.
Even in his last CIA job, tracking drug trafficking in the Black Sea area, he still would show up frequently in the Soviet counterintelligence section, a former CIA officer says.
His presence didn't raise alarms -- his new work was related, and he had been a schmoozer since his days in the 1960s as an agency record clerk.
"One of his favorite things was to walk around, talking to people, filling the room with smoke," this person says.
"I think he'd done it all his life."
