In a move that appears to have removed a U.S.-Canada trade irritant, Bell Canada and Northern Telecom Ltd. agreed to eliminate a longstanding preferred-supplier arrangement between the two Canadian companies.
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said the change will give U.S. telecommunications-equipment makers new opportunities to export to Canada.
In return, the office of the trade representative will drop references to the supply relationship from an annual report on foreign trade barriers, making Northern Telecom's U.S. subsidiary eligible for export support from the U.S. Commerce and State departments.
Under an agreement dating back to 1939, Bell Canada, a unit of Montreal-based BCE Inc., has allowed Northern Telecom to make the first proposal to supply much of its equipment.
Northern Telecom, based in Toronto, is 52%-owned by BCE.
If Northern Telecom's proposal met the specifications, Bell Canada, the country's biggest telephone company, could accept it without seeking other bids, as long as the price was as low as that offered to any other Canadian telephone company.
Now, Bell Canada will put new products and services out to competitive bidding, and Northern will compete "like any other" supplier, said Diane Chabot, Bell Canada's group vice president-logistics.
The arrangement won't necessarily affect supply arrangements for equipment already in Bell Canada's installed base.
A Northern Telecom spokesman said the company is "absolutely delighted" with the new arrangement, because it believes support from the U.S. government is crucial to its efforts to export from its U.S. factories.
About 29% of Northern Telecom's $8 billion in annual revenue comes from outside North America, and that proportion could grow significantly through sales to such fast-growing markets such as China, Mexico and Brazil, said the spokesman, Robert O'Brien.
The export-support program involves representations of behalf of U.S.-based companies by U.S. diplomats and commercial officers overseas.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co., which has been lobbying the U.S. government to pull its commercial support of Northern's U.S. business in foreign markets, called yesterday's developments "a major breakthrough."
