At the Currier household, like most others, the kids can bicker about almost anything.
Tonight's debate is over who will use a computer program called Undersea Adventure.
"I'm the one who wants to be the marine biologist, so I should get to use it," 15-year-old Colleen tells her brother.
So you can better understand your species?" retorts 13-year-old Steven, as Colleen flops in front of a screen soon filled with the terrifying image of a great white shark, mouth gaping and dagger-like teeth flashing as it rushes angrily at the steel bars of an underwater cage.
Some things, like sibling rivalry, never change.
So, too, the way people shape the future on their own turf.
For all the promised glitzy features of tomorrow's digital world, the Darwinian test in real life is simple and severe: What works is what people care enough about to use in everyday life in their own homes.
For now, regardless of what they say when they rationalize the cost of getting fully outfitted, families with fancy, multimedia computers seem to care much more about the entertainment part of the digital world than the educational.
Experts point out, however, that with some of the better programs already on the market, the two don't have to be mutually exclusive.
Here, in a neighborhood of modest ranch houses barely a mile from Disneyland, the Currier family -- father Terry, mother Connie, and Colleen and Steven -- have started down a track millions more may travel in the next few years.
This isn't part of corporate test-marketing.
The Curriers' interest is purely personal.
Unhampered by theories of what their digital doings should be, the Curriers have followed whim and fancy.
Mr. Currier, a tall, thin 45-year old with an easy smile, says, "I think computers are for anything that's fun."
The future, of course, promises to be far more elaborate.
But the basics of digital adolescence are with us today.
Interactive software offers video clips and CD-quality stereo sound on home computers costing less than $2,000.
By the end of this year, some 3.6 million households will have multimedia computers, equipped with CD-ROM drives, sound boards and speakers, says Dataquest Inc., a San Jose, Calif., firm that tracks computer statistics.
As for staying connected, more than 20 million household callers already "log on" to on-line computer services and electronic bulletin boards, and that number is expected to leap 50% in the next 12 months, says Jack Rickard, editor and publisher of Boardwatch magazine.
For most households, change will be evolutionary, not revolutionary.
Many of the Curriers' pastimes remain far removed from silicon chips and laser disks.
Steven still plays soccer on a championship team.
Colleen moons over magazines and puzzles over algebra.
And when Mrs. Currier pulls together a report for the local high school band's booster club, she does it on an aging typewriter.
Yet, computers are playing a growing role in the Currier household, especially for the children.
On average, Terry and the kids figure they each spend two hours or so a day -- more on weekends -- on one of the family's two machines.
And, if the virtual future is still a tad fuzzy, the Currier home offers strong hints about its focus.
Even now, the Currier kids have taken to hanging out at a local digital drugstore -- making dates with boyfriends and girlfriends through cyberspace -- and, from time to time, fighting over Dad's computer.
"Computers are imagination machines for children," says Bill Gross, president and chief executive of Knowledge Adventure Inc., the La Crescenta, Calif., maker of Undersea Adventure and other multimedia software.
"They can have control, and with the best software, they can direct their own exploration voyage."
Soon after Colleen wrests primacy over the keyboard from Steven, the opening scene of Undersea Adventure gives way to the steely look of a bulkhead in a submarine.
Our teenage captain guides the computer mouse to push buttons and levers, and an area on the bulkhead projects a movie of dolphins leaping joyfully out of the sea.
"Oh, they're so beautiful," Colleen coos.
"You just think they're cute," her brother counters, smoothly challenging her to the program's marine biology quiz and smirking when she flubs a question.
Computers have always come easily in the Currier household.
Mr. Currier got the PC bug in the mid-1980s and joined a local computer club.
His first machine -- now the family's second -- sits in his son's bedroom.
A year and a half ago, they bought a far faster machine with an Intel 486 processor.
And last Christmas, the family gave Dad a CD-ROM drive to play the disks that look like music CDs but carry vast amounts of audio, video and other information for computers.
None of this is cheap.
The family estimates that it spends $500 a year on software.
The 486 computer cost $4,000, though a comparable model would be much cheaper now.
"I tell people I could easily spend that much on a stamp collection," says Terry.
"I just don't happen to collect stamps."
In the industry jargon, the Curriers are "early adopters": people who enjoy new devices and have little fear about using them.
But this isn't an indulgent house full of unused gizmos.
The family's interests are focused.
The only abandoned item visible is an early Nintendo game machine gathering dust near the television.
It seems primitive these days, says Steven, who prefers the more elaborate programs available for his father's computer.
One member of the family hasn't joined the digital parade.
"I'm not really that interested," Mrs. Currier admits.
"The other three spend so much time on those things, and I haven't learned much of anything about it.
When Terry leaves the computer on, I have to get one of the kids to turn it off."
Lack of interest is scarcely a problem for the rest of the family.
"I probably spend too much time on the computer," Mr. Currier confesses -- as much as 18 hours a week at home, he figures, and that's after hours worrying about computerized scheduling and parts information at Ford Motor Co., where he works.
Much of Mr. Currier's home time is spent on America Online Inc., a Vienna, Va., data service with more than 600,000 subscribers, where he reads such publications as Time magazine and PC World, saving some articles on his computer for later retrieval.
Some time is spent on computer games.
Then there's time spent fiddling with drawing programs and other things.
But increasingly, Mr. Currier finds he's competing with the kids for terminal time.
Educators have high hopes that computers will improve children's study habits at home.
But if the Curriers are typical, example, educational programs have a way to go.
Colleen's problems with algebra sent Mr. Currier to the computer store last year for a program to help.
It was a bust.
Colleen found the limited question-and-answer format no more enlightening than what was happening on the teacher's blackboard.
"It's no help just to see the right answer there without an explanation how it was calculated," Colleen says.
She got an uncharacteristic low grade in the subject.
Brother Steven has taken a look at the family's electronic encyclopedia, a CD-ROM disk.
"It has some good pictures," he says of the program.
But the reference disk has been lying largely unused.
"They'll get around to it," Mr. Currier says.
Bone-dry educational material, it seems, is no more popular on computer than in book form.
"A lot depends on how explicitly educational the software is," says Stewart Alsop, a long-time writer about home computers and editor in chief of InfoWorld, a newspaper about computers.
But programs that teach, say, about marine biology while making it fun clearly have a far better chance of succeeding than programs offering math and grammar drills.
Electronic encyclopedias have been one of the main drawing cards behind home purchases of computer CD-ROM drives.
Many drives come with an encyclopedia.
For several hundred dollars (the Curriers paid $280 for theirs), a family can buy both the CD-ROM drive and information in electronic form that would cost $1,000 or more to buy on paper.
However, asks John McCarthy, director of technology research at Forrester Research Inc., consultants in Cambridge, Mass., "How often do you pull out the Encyclopaedia Brittanica from the shelf?"
Far more popular with the youngest member of the Currier household is Doom, a game program every bit as ghoulish as its name implies.
With dinner over and homework done, Steven, a master at such things, maneuvers with the computer mouse through the halls of what appears to be an ancient palace, slashing at villains everywhere.
"I'll get the shotgun; now, this is really cool," he says.
The sound of clashing swords from the computer's speakers gives way to a roar, as a shotgun's double barrels buck with the recoil.
Steven has dispatched yet another enemy.
"You can also get a chain saw and cut people in half," he adds with delight.
Distasteful as such games may be to some adults, their attraction is all too predictable, analysts say.
"What we've found is that people buy multimedia computers for the encyclopedia and education programs but often end up playing games," says Bruce Ryon, Dataquest's multimedia analyst.
Colleen is turned off.
"I haven't played Doom -- and I don't want to," she tells Steven, adding that he too surely must have better things to do in life.
It's not long before Colleen shoos Steven to his own room and computer from the cozy space filled with books and computer programs that has become Dad's office.
Settling down once again at the machine, Colleen dials in to her favorite pastime, phoning in by computer to an electronic bulletin board, a private operation centered not far away.
Here, Colleen, Steven, and many of their friends in the area exchange messages for a monthly fee of $10.
"We call it chunking," she explains, "after the chunk chunk chunk sound of the keyboard."
From an adult point of view, it's a virtual drugstore, a place for the kids to hang out, gossip and grouse -- all from the home computer.
With a few buzzes and burps, Colleen's computer connects to the bulletin board, and the screen becomes a blizzard of colored writing scrolling in.
No longer the Currier daughter, Colleen is "Goofy," her nom de screen on the bulletin board, surrounded by friends including Cow Exploder, Brisby, Watcher, Akasha, and Iridium.
Let the chatter begin:
HAY GUESS WHAT GUYS?
ME AND AKASHA WON LAST NIGHT!
IRIDIUM JUST JOINED THIS CHANNEL!
HI TONY!
HI TONY!
TRISTESSA IS SMOOCHING WITH IRIDIUM.
Does it make sense?
Maybe not.
But it meets Mr. Currier's "fun standard," and it has proved useful, in more ways than one.
"Colleen had absolutely no interest in computers until her friends got her on this board," Mr. Currier says, recalling that his daughter used to try to sweet-talk him into typing her school papers into the word processor.
Now, he says, "we can't get her away from the computer, and her typing speed is wonderful."
Truth to tell, there are certain attractions to this bulletin board for a 15-year-old.
At last count, there were 230 boys and 50 girls signed up on it.
"That makes it a pretty good place to be," Colleen says with a laugh.
For those tired of virtual relationships, it's perfectly acceptable to date fellow denizens of the digital drugstore.
And Colleen allows as how she's gone out with three "pretty neat guys" she met on the board.
Where older sisters go, of course, younger brothers eventually tag along.
Digital drugstores are no exception.
Steven started lurking in cyberspace last summer.
In a single day, with little else to do, he says, he spent 14 hours on the bulletin board.
"Take Off Hoser," as he is known on the board, soon was wowing them out in computer land.
Recently, he had his first date -- which he had arranged through the board.
Was it fun?
"Oh, she was all right," mutters the master of Doom, gazing at his shoes.
Mr. Rose is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau.
