The U.S. trade deficit in goods and services widened in January to $6.3 billion from $4.14 billion in December, the Commerce Department said, as overseas economic slumps hurt U.S. exports.
January's numbers were the department's first monthly figures to account for trade in services, as well as goods.
Under the old method, looking solely at goods, the merchandise trade deficit expanded to $11.03 billion in January from December's $8.75 billion.
Overall tallies of the trade deficit are likely to continue to be narrower under the new calculation than the old, because the U.S. typically runs surpluses in the sales of services, the Commerce Department noted.
The department said that it was expanding its report to reflect the growing importance of services in the U.S. economy.
In 1980, services represented 18% of U.S. trade.
By 1993, they had grown to 29%, according to the department.
Moreover, during that time, trade in services nearly quadrupled in value while trade in goods doubled.
Information on trade in services previously was released quarterly.
Services include such items as travel and tourism -- the biggest share, at about one-third -- as well as education and medical care.
The bulk of the services data comes from estimates, the department said, as was the case previously.
The department said it can't yet compile country-by-country trade figures on services but will continue to do so on goods.
Excluding services, exports took a steep drop in January, falling 6.8% to $38.73 billion -- the largest monthly decline on record.
"It's big, but don't panic," said Brian Horrigan, senior economist with Loomis Sayles & Co. in Boston.
"When you consider how bad the world economy is, it's actually pretty good."
In particular, the U.S. showed declines in merchandise exports to Japan and Western Europe -- particularly the United Kingdom and Germany.
Exports to China tumbled 47.2%, expanding the U.S. trade deficit with China to $2.2 billion in January from $1.3 billion in December.
Exports to Japan fell 10%, widening the U.S. trade deficit with that country to $4.62 billion.
The U.S. surplus with Mexico, its third-largest trading partner, increased to $322 million.
U.S. services exports, which show narrower gyrations month by month, were flat at $15.75 billion.
Imports of goods fell 0.8% to $49.76 billion from December.
Imports of services fell 1.8% to $11.02 billion.
Economists were mildly surprised by the widening of the trade gap.
Elliott Platt, economist for Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, said he expected the weaker trade numbers to shave about 0.5 percentage point off first-quarter economic growth.
"These numbers bear out the suspicion that the December level of exports was unsustainably high," he said.
In particular, aircraft sales, the biggest single export in December, fell.
In January, aircraft exports tumbled to $2 billion from $2.5 billion in the previous month.
Telecommunications, industrial engines and computer equipment also saw sizable declines.
