American Express has a charge card.
American Express has a securities business.
Split them apart and what do you get?
A split view on Wall Street, where analysts are churning out "buy" opinions on American Express but a few big investors say the big gains in the stock are already over.
News of the company's planned spinoff of Lehman Brothers pushed up American Express stock 1 1/4 yesterday to 32 3/4.
Volume was heavy at 7.1 million shares.
Several analysts rushed to upgrade the stock.
But, as is the case with many corporate turnarounds, investors who are arriving late may find the buffet picked over.
Now that American Express shares have risen from around 25 at the beginning of 1993, some big investors say the easy money has been made.
Moreover, they say, the parent company faces a tough battle trying to restore growth in its charge-card business.
"I'm not admiring of American Express's position domestically," says John Neff, manager of Vanguard Group's Windsor fund.
"Even Citicorp, which has an attractive card, is now giving its card away gratis," he points out.
After the initial excitement wears off, investors may also realize that the spinoff may not be such great shakes, either.
"We view the transaction as neutral for American Express shareholders," Joan Solotar, an analyst at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, said yesterday in comments to clients.
She added: "The sum of the parts will not be greater than the whole."
To be sure, few large investors think American Express's stock is about to take a tumble.
Indeed, investors who bought American Express for its travel-services appeal have long seen the securities business as an annoyingly unpredictable appendage.
When the spinoff is completed and Lehman shares are distributed as a dividend sometime in late April or May, such holders will be able to breathe a lot easier.
And now that Harvey Golub is holding the reins, some big investors believe American Express will be able to rebuild its franchise.
That process could be slow going, however.
"The turnaround came from 20 at the end of 1992 to 32," says Robert Torray, a money manager who notes that American Express is one of his largest holdings.
Mr. Torray isn't bailing out, but neither is he buying more shares now.
"From here on up, the company is going to have to perform," he says.
The bullish case goes like this: American Express stock has been trading at a modest multiple of around 10 times earnings estimates for 1994.
That's well below the low-teens multiples of competitors, such as as Advanta and First USA.
Now, with Lehman out of its hair and improvements showing up in the fourth-quarter charge-card business, investors' view of the stock may change.
For the first time since the fourth quarter of 1991, the company has reported that the number of cards outstanding increased on a year-over-year basis.
Net income of its Travel Related Services unit rose to $213 million, up from $181 million in the year-before quarter.
Indeed, Ned Davis, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co., told clients American Express could climb to 36, based on a multiple of 12 times his earnings estimate for 1994.
That doesn't even include the Lehman dividend that shareholders will receive in April, which he says has a value of around $5 per American Express share.
The trouble is, it's going to be a long haul for Mr. Golub, American Express's chairman.
For starters, says Windsor's Mr. Neff, "They charge merchants more.
That's tough smoke these days."
"We don't believe the Street is anticipating" an approaching slowdown in first-quarter earnings, says DLJ's Ms. Solotar.
Furthermore, she says, the corporate-purchasing card "will be slightly additive to earnings beginning in 1995, but will not be significant enough to change our outlook for the company."
One question for American Express shareholders as they weigh whether to hang on to shares of Lehman the investment bank: Are they getting in on the ground floor of a gold mine or getting saddled with the parent's riskiest asset?
Lehman, founded in 1850 and one of Wall Street's top-ranked investment banks, became part of American Express and its Shearson brokerage unit in 1984.
The merger was rocky from the beginning.
A Lehman public offering had been expected for months, even before Shearson was acquired in July by Smith Barney, a unit of Primerica, which merged with Travelers and took the Travelers name.
But American Express raised eyebrows with the decision to spin off Lehman, a move reminiscent of Sears, Roebuck & Co.'s 1993 spinoff of Dean Witter Discover.
Some analysts argue that an initial public offering of Lehman would have been a better move; American Express disagrees.
American Express startled analysts with its planned capital infusion of $1.09 billion into Lehman.
The amount is $500 million more than the Street expected based upon remarks by American Express executives last summer.
DLJ's Ms. Solotar said the additional capital only underlines the hurdles faced by Lehman, compared with its competitors, some of which are better capitalized and have higher returns on equity.
"The large capital infusion was needed because Lehman's equity-to-asset ratio was drastically below that of its competitors," says Ms. Solotar.
In its favor, Lehman has been amassing clout on Wall Street.
From 1985 through 1990, Shearson Lehman had been mired at fifth to eighth place in Wall Street's corporate rankings, leading underwritings of roughly $22 billion of stock and debt combined each year, on average.
But Lehman solo soared to third place in 1991.
It has stayed there, and in 1993 underwrote $115.6 billion of new offerings, according to Securities Data Co.
Skeptics say Lehman is still undercapitalized relative to major competitors, especially given the risky markets in which it wants to participate.
Its return on equity after the spinoff will be about 12%, two-thirds of the industry average.
And, there's a sense that if the company had gone public in early fall, when brokerage stocks were peaking at record levels and the Wall Street boom was going great guns, Lehman shares simply would have had more steam left in them.
Richard Fuld Jr., president and chief executive officer of Lehman, disputes that the window of opportunity has closed.
"I believe that the industry is just scratching at the surface, you have a whole world just coming out of recession out there."
But the spinoff structure holds a built-in threat of price-depressing stock sales, both by American Express shareholders who don't want to stay in Lehman, and by Lehman's own senior management.
The managers were paid much of their 1993 bonuses in a $60 million internal offering of Lehman "phantom" shares and can cash out the first third of their shares one year after the firm goes public.
Analysts say American Express's planned capital infusion is higher than expected because earlier estimates of what it would take to garner Lehman Brothers a single-A credit rating were unrealistically low.
"I'm not sure where they got those numbers," says Jake Newman, analyst at Standard & Poor's Corp.
Substantial additional capital was always "needed to offset the risks of the business," he said.
"Underwriting volumes and securities-market trading volumes fluctuate.
There's inventory risk."
Meanwhile, Lehman seems poised for some aggressive moves.
It is moving to set up a triple-A-rated derivatives subsidiary, a big business-getter at some firms.
A cost-cutting program moved 1,400 employees to Jersey City, N.J., offices, transferred others to its swaps and international divisions, and Lehman insiders expect some downsizing of staff.
Still up in the air is the potential valuation of Lehman.
Analysts say it might be valued at a multiple of seven to nine times 1993 operating earnings of $376 million.
*After cash infusion, equity rises to $3.3 billion
Sources: Standard & Poor's Corp., Lehman Brothers
UNNERVING DIVERGENCE: For two days last week, the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at a 52-week high, while the Dow Jones Utility Average closed at a 52-week low.
According to James Stack, writer of the InvesTech Market Analyst newsletter in Whitefish, Mont., there was no prior day in market history when that happened.
But there were three previous times when the industrials hit a high the same week the utilities hit a low.
In each case, the stock market plunged afterward.
In December 1965, the warning signal sounded one month before the bear market of 1966.
In May 1972, the signal was a few months early, but the bear market of 1973-74 was the worst in 30 years.
The only other time the signal has sounded was in July 1990, the same month the Dow industrials began a 20% slide.
A slide in the utility average often presages a rise in interest rates, and rising rates can be poison to stocks.
GREAT SCOTT: Scott Paper Co. is expected to announce a restructuring charge against earnings this morning, and Wall Street is watching closely.
Bruce Kirk of S.G. Warburg notes that Phillip E. Lippincott, chairman and chief executive officer of the Philadelphia company, plans to step down this spring, making the time ripe for "some real surgery."
Mr. Kirk looks for a minimum pretax charge of $200 million.
Some analysts say Scott may be considering selling or spinning off its S.D. Warren specialty-papers business.
The company declined to comment; in October it said a significant charge was likely because of competitive pressures.
Since then the stock, buoyed by restructuring hopes, is up from about 36 to yesterday's 43 3/8, down 1/8.
Some analysts say the stock could get a boost if the restructuring addresses specific problem areas, such as overcapacity in specialty papers.
Other analysts say a spinoff or plan to sell S.D. Warren would have a strong positive impact on the stock.
But many believe Scott will wait for a new chief executive before making such a decision.
