The New York Stock Exchange announced five new listings, including three initial public offerings.
The National Association of Securities Dealers announced eight new listings, seven of which were IPOs.
The American Stock Exchange also announced new listings.
The Big Board began trading two real estate investment trusts: Bay Apartment Communities Inc., San Jose, Calif., under BYA; and Macerich Co., Santa Monica, Calif., MAC.
Emerging Tigers Fund Inc., Plainsboro, N.J., TGF, is a closed-end fund.
These three companies are initial public offerings.
The Big Board also began trading the American depository shares of Telefonica de Argentina SA, Buenos Aires, Argentina, a licensed supplier of fixed-link public telecommunications services, TAR; and Western Atlas Inc., Beverly Hills, Calif., an operator of oil field information services and industrial automation businesses, WAI.
The company is a spinoff of Litton Industries Inc.
Nasdaq added the following to its national market system: Borror Corp., Dublin, Ohio, a builder of single-family homes, BORR; Drypers Corp., Houston, a manufacturer of disposable baby diapers, DYPR; Just For Feet Inc., Birmingham, Ala., an operator of athletic and outdoor footwear, FEET; Prophet 21 Inc., Wilmington, Del., a provider of on-line business management systems, PXXI; TransTexas Gas Corp., Houston, involved in the development and production of natural gas, TTXG; UroMed Corp., Watertown, Mass., manufacturer of products for the management of urological disorders, URMD; Olympic Steel Inc., Cleveland, a producer of steel products, ZEUS; and Eagle Hardware & Garden Inc., Tukwila, Wash., EAGLG, which operates 13 home-improvement centers.
The American Stock Exchange began trading Greenstar Telecommunications Inc., Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, a developer, installer and marketer of fibre optic telecommunications networks, GST.
Amex began trading five million Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. warrants tied to the dollar and the yen.
Amex and the Chicago Board Options Exchange will begin trading options on Gateway 2000 Inc. tomorrow.
The Amex's Emerging Company Marketplace began trading Soligen Technologies Inc., Northridge, Calif.
The Philadelphia Stock Exchange began trading put and call options on Taco Cabana Inc.
