We don't choose our parents, and few of us would likely have chosen Sol Hurok as managerial patriarch of music and dance in America.
But the inescapable conclusion of Harlow Robinson's "The Last Impresario" (Viking, 521 pages, $26.95), a thorough, if flabbergasting, account of the career of the uneducated, maybe illiterate, Ukrainian immigrant who so successfully brought the taste for high culture to the American public, is that, somehow, he was.
If that isn't enough, this flamboyant, inscrutable impresario, whom the choreographer Agnes De Mille once dismissed as "a peasant and a midget," happened to be an important figure in the beginning of the civil rights movement and in the creation of the National Endowment for the Arts.
He was a key player in maintaining American/Soviet relations throughout the Cold War, helping pave the way for glasnost.
He turned the violinist Isaac Stern and the Russian ballerina Anna Pavlova into megastars, but he also, however unintentionally, wound up giving lawyer Alan Dershowitz his first big celebrity break.
He was born Solomon Izrailevich Gurkov in a small Ukrainian village, Pogar, near the Russian border, in 1888.
He came to America at age 18 -- penniless he sometimes insisted -- and never learned to speak English very well.
Mr. Robinson claims he never spoke Russian particularly well either.
"Violinist Isaac Stern liked to joke that `Hurok knows six languages -- and all of them are Yiddish.'"
After landing in the Brooklyn immigrant community of Brownsville, where he became active in socialist politics, Hurok had his first taste of the impresario's life by arranging entertainment for fund-raising events.
But it was hearing the "Liebestod" from Wagner's "Tristan und Isolde" on the piano that changed his life, he said.
The sorrowful song of death moved him unspeakably, and Hurok felt that if he could respond like that to music, so could the rest of the unwashed masses.
He was right, as he found out when he persuaded the Russian emigrant violinist Efrem Zimbalist to perform for a socialist benefit.
From there, it was but a matter of shrewd advertisement to get those same audiences into the entertainment palaces in Manhattan.
"A manager does not make an artist, what he makes is an audience," Hurok once said, and it was an easy philosophy for him to live by.
Thanks to his common touch, Hurok could build a ballet audience in a country that considered classical dance too sissified for the average American.
But Hurok also made it possible for the likes of Pavlova and Isadora Duncan to become public sensations through bizarre publicity coups.
When he became involved with the Monte Carlo Ballet Russe, the famous company that Serge Diaghilev had founded in Paris, he paid a woman in the audience $50 to scream during the simulated masturbation episode in "Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun."
That shameless flair for publicity could have incredible consequences.
When, in 1939, his client, the celebrated black mezzo Marian Anderson, was kept by the Daughters of the American Revolution from singing at the segregated Constitution Hall in Washington, D.C., Hurok personally financed her public performance at the Lincoln Memorial, knowing that the publicity would make her far more valuable.
He hardly could have anticipated, though, that the event, which attracted some 75,000 spectators, would galvanize public attention on the whole racial issue.
As Hurok became more successful he became an increasingly preposterous figure; attired in flowing cape and with gold-tipped cane, he held court at the Russian Tea Room and practically considered Carnegie Hall his office.
His malapropisms -- "As long as I am alive, I shall continue for the rest of my life" -- added to the legend.
Still, he increasingly came under attack for favoring Russian and European artists, helping foster the notion that culture is foreign.
After World War II, however, Hurok turned his Russian connections to remarkable advantage, importing Russian artists, exporting Americans.
It is Mr. Robinson's convincing contention that this constant cross-cultural exposure was the principal way peoples of the two countries kept in communication.
And it was also Hurok's experience with the Russian model of government support of the arts that inspired him to lobby for the creation of the NEA during the Kennedy administration.
His tireless support of Russian artists, moreover, led to an alleged bombing attack against him by the Jewish Defense League; it was by defending one of the JDL attackers that Mr. Dershowitz launched his career.
In the end Hurok made lots of money, but he cared most about the art he believed in, the artists he adored and public he trusted, however banal his tastes could sometimes seem.
In that, he really was the last impresario.
His agency made little sense after his death in 1974, and it was quickly absorbed into the more impersonal business-oriented managements.
One need only look today at the tight-lipped powerful managers -- who stay behind the scenes, extracting exorbitant fees for their clients while publicly expressing little interest in their art -- to mourn his passing.
