The Environmental Protection Agency in December proposed requiring that 30% of gasoline sold under an EPA smog-cleanup program contain a renewable oxygenate, which in nearly all cases would be ethanol.
The rule followed up on a campaign promise by President Clinton.
A Feb. 14 letter sent over Mr. Pena's signature to White House budget director Leon Panetta, stated, "I strongly oppose the proposed regulation."
The letter argued that the rule would result in a loss to the federal highway trust fund of as much as $465 million a year because ethanol receives tax breaks unavailable to methanol, its main competitor in the smog-reducing "reformulated gas" market.
It also said that the proposed ethanol requirement would have a "negligible impact" on reducing oil imports, one of its stated goals, and that it's uncertain what the impact would be on global warming.
When contacted Friday, a Transportation Department spokeswoman said the letter doesn't reflect Mr. Pena's actual views.
The aide, Jennifer Watson, read the following prepared statement: "The secretary supports this policy, and is a longstanding supporter of ethanol.
When staff informed him that there could be an impact on the highway trust fund he asked that the staff make the budget office aware of the impact but also to make clear that he supported the overall policy.
Unfortunately, staff then drafted a letter that went far beyond any instructions the secretary had given.
The letter was not signed by the secretary, it was signed by an autopen, and it was not authorized by him."
Mr. Pena's letter came to light as 35 senators -- including Bill Bradley (D., N.J.), George Mitchell (D., Maine), and Malcolm Wallop (R., Wyo.) -- were preparing to send EPA Administrator Carol Browner a letter voicing opposition to the proposed rule.
The EPA currently is reviewing public comments on the proposal, and could produce a final rule as early as June.
The rule would require that roughly one-tenth of all gasoline sold in the U.S. be blended with ethanol, a substantial boon for Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., the politically active agriculture giant that manufactures 50% to 70% of all ethanol produced in the U.S.
According to incomplete 1993 records at the Federal Election Commission, Archer-Daniels-Midland, which traditionally has favored Republicans over Democrats, gave the Democratic Party $46,500 last year, slightly more than the $42,500 it gave the Republican party.
The rule has strong support in the Midwest because it would provide an expanded market for corn, from which ethanol is derived.
The Clinton administration has argued that any losses to the Treasury would be offset by reduced Agriculture Department payments to corn growers.
