In a widening breach with Haitian President Jean Bertrand Aristide, the U.S. is backing a plan that aims to restore democracy on the island nation but doesn't include a firm date for the ousted president's return.
The plan, which is being pushed by a Haitian parliamentary delegation, calls for Mr. Aristide's eventual restoration, after he names a new prime minister and a new broad-based government takes certain actions.
But unlike a previous agreement last summer to end the crisis in Haiti, the current blueprint doesn't include a specific timetable for the restoration of Mr. Aristide, who was overthrown in a September 1991 military coup after being elected by a wide majority.
A senior U.S. official insisted that the administration had never called for Mr. Aristide's immediate return and wasn't backing away from him.
Instead, it has always preferred to have Haiti first build a functioning government.
However, the proposal could possibly lead to a situation in which Mr. Aristide doesn't return.
Michael Barnes, a former U.S. congressman who is Mr. Aristide's chief American adviser, said yesterday that "I wouldn't recommend that the government of Haiti enter into any new agreement that doesn't assure the rapid return of the president on a date certain."
Mr. Barnes, whose comments reflect Mr. Aristide's views, complained that the U.S. hasn't followed through on its commitment to increase international sanctions against Haiti's military rulers by Jan. 15.
The senior U.S. official, displaying pique with Mr. Aristide, indicated that the Haitian president either lacks the flexibility or doesn't understand the steps that will be necessary to resolve the crisis in Haiti and prepare for his return.
Speaking of the parliamentarians' plan, the U.S. official accused Mr. Aristide of being "not forthcoming in doing any of this."
According to people familiar with the situation, Lawrence Pezzullo, the State Department's special adviser on Haiti, has been pressing Mr. Aristide for about 10 days to accept the latest plan.
Mr. Aristide wants the international community to move first with more sanctions through the United Nations Security Council.
The U.S., along with Canada, France and Venezuela, has formulated Haitian sanctions that would expand penalties already in force by nations in this hemisphere.
The contemplated sanctions include asking U.N. members to freeze the overseas assets and restrict the travel of military leaders and their supporters, and to impose a trade embargo and ban on commercial air flights.
But another senior U.S. official indicated that there could still be a long consultation process ahead at the U.N.
"We're not on a fast track today, but we're laying the groundwork," the official said.
And the official, who briefed reporters here yesterday, indicated he wasn't enthusiastic about imposing new sanctions, because they could destroy Haiti completely.
The senior U.S. official insisted that the U.S. "is pursuing as diligently as it may a program of restoring democracy and the president of the country."
But the official added that Mr. Aristide needs to understand that he must work with a broad-based government, and that would mean curbing some of his presidential powers.
Mr. Aristide got into a spat with the Clinton administration earlier this month when he accused the U.S. of "erecting a floating Berlin wall" to stop Haitians from fleeing the island's military dictatorship.
State Department spokesman Michael McCurry said Mr. Aristide's comment on the U.S. policy of interdiction and repatriation "amounts in effect to encouraging people to leave Haiti in a way that could result in deaths at sea."
The administration believes the current embargo, imposed by the Organization of American States, is squeezing Haiti's military rulers and beginning to cause divisions within their ranks.
Under the plan proposed by the Haitian members of Parliament, the legislature would approve an amnesty for those involved in the 1991 coup; the military leader, Raoul Cedras, would retire; and Michel Francois, the powerful head of the Port-au-Prince police, would be transferred to another post.
The new prime minister would then be confirmed by Haiti's Parliament, prompting the end of international sanctions and leading to Mr. Aristide's return.
