Almost three years after the Persian Gulf War, the battle is just beginning for corporations trying to recoup billions of dollars they lost in Iraq and Kuwait.
The outcome is far from certain.
The U.S. State Department is in the final stages of collecting and sorting through claims from American companies that lost property or business during the war.
By April 1, these claims must be sent to the United Nations Compensation Commission in Geneva, which is charged with allocating payments from Iraq to companies and individuals who sustained losses.
Iraq is supposed to contribute 30% of its oil revenue to victims of the war.
But so far, the question of when Iraq will start exporting oil is mired in negotiations over ending the trade embargo and over other political issues remaining from the conflict.
"The first question that occurs to everybody is where is the money going to come from," says Arthur Rovine, a New York lawyer for people filing claims.
"It's clear where it's supposed to come from, but when it will come is another matter. . . .
It's going to be a long time before companies get their money," he adds.
Certainly, a great deal of money is at stake.
So far, about 185 claims demanding $1.6 billion have been filed by U.S. companies, according to a State Department official.
The compensation commission in Geneva says it has received 2,352 claims from companies in more than 30 other countries, asserting losses of some $8 billion.
More than 2,000 more corporate claims are expected by the deadline.
The demands for compensation are a hodgepodge.
One U.S. business put in a claim for just $112.
The Kuwaiti national oil company put in a $900 million claim seeking compensation for losses as a result of the oil-well fires set by the retreating Iraqis.
But corporate claims won't even be considered by the commissioners for a year, U.N. officials say.
That is because the U.N. is giving priority to several categories of individuals, including workers who had to leave Kuwait and Iraq abruptly when the fighting broke out.
Ambassador Carlos Alzamora, executive secretary of the commission, says the first batch of 1,000 claims on behalf of people badly injured or killed in the fighting will be paid out in May.
The $5 million in payments will come from contributions already made by various U.N. members.
The next batch of claims will be paid to departees and individuals with losses under $100,000.
Ambassador Alzamora said he hopes to be able to fund payments with frozen assets from oil revenue owed to Iraq as a result of deliveries made in the month before the Gulf War began.
But even if the U.N. is able to collect that money, it likely all will be distributed by the time the commission starts paying claims to corporations.
There is some good news for companies.
U.N. officials are intent on avoiding problems faced by the Iranian claims tribunal, established after the hostage crisis, that is still hearing claims after almost 13 years.
The Iranian tribunal was hampered, in part, because it was run as an arbitration panel.
Anyone could request a hearing, and Iran was entitled to respond to all allegations.
The new compensation panel will assume that Iraq is liable for losses and will simply assess damages.
Hearings can be granted at the discretion of the commissioners, and Iraq will be allowed only limited opportunities to respond to claims, though specific procedures for dealing with corporate claims haven't been fully worked out.
The compensation commission also is attempting to settle individual claims expeditiously.
The commission, which is expected to have a $16 million budget in 1994, is using computerized data bases for evaluating small claims.
Many individuals will be entitled to pre-established amounts.
For example, certain individual departees will get $4,000; some families will get $8,000.
But despite such efforts, companies and their lawyers are taking a wait-and-see attitude.
"I have no reason to be pessimistic but none to be optimistic either," says Christopher Thompson, general counsel of Brown & Root Inc. in Houston.
The company, a unit of Halliburton Co., Dallas, has a roughly $18 million claim stemming from an offshore oil-platform project in Iraq.
But it still has an Iran-related claim pending.
A hearing is set for October in the Hague.
"Sometimes these things take on a life of their own," says Mr. Thompson.
