Natural gas futures prices slipped yesterday based on statistics showing that less of the fuel was used in recent days than anticipated.
Analysis released by the American Gas Association showed that gas storage in the U.S. last week declined by only 11 billion cubic feet.
Market participants had been expecting supplies to fall by 50 billion cubic feet to 75 billion cubic feet.
"It was a much smaller drawdown than we've seen in the last few weeks," said John Saucer, energy analyst with Smith Barney Shearson Inc. in Houston.
As a result, the price of natural gas for April delivery fell by 3.9 cents per million BTUs to $2.124.
Prices this week have been volatile, with the April contract trading as low as $2.03 per million BTUs several days ago to as high as $2.18 during Wednesday's trading session.
Mr. Saucer and other market experts expect the futures price of gas to continue to ease during the near-term.
They point out that natural gas sold in the cash, or spot, market is selling at a much lower level, and the futures prices will probably decline to a level closer to the cash price.
But even as the futures price declines, traders expect the price of natural gas in the cash market, which has been edging up slowly in the last few days, to continue to strengthen as users load up on what they consider bargain-basement prices.
Analysts believe that some users have started to restock for next fall already.
Typically, restocking occurs during the summer.
Mr. Saucer believes that for the nearterm gas prices in the futures and cash markets will converge and approach a level of about $2.05 per million BTUs.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of soybean futures contracts slipped amid reports of beneficial rains in soybean-growing regions of Argentina.
South America is beginning to harvest what is widely expected to be a record soybean crop.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the soybean contract for May delivery dropped three cents a bushel to settle at $6.915 a bushel.
Corn prices settled mixed.
Traders are beginning to speculate that the corn harvest in South Africa won't be as big as forecast.
Reports from South Africa a few weeks ago had put the size of the May harvest at roughly 550 million bushels, which would be a bumper crop.
New reports suggest the coming harvest there might amount to roughly 490 million bushels.
Wheat prices settled mostly lower despite concerns about high winds in Southern Plains states such as Kansas, where the winter wheat crop is in the early stages of growth.
Traders are concerned that the winds, which were forecast for yesterday as high as 50 miles an hour, might dry out the top soil.
PRECIOUS METALS: Gold futures prices fell on profit-taking and selling by big investors such as commodity funds, or managed pools of investors' money.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was down $2.60 to $383.
Gold has traded in a narrow price range for months, pushed higher by inflation fears and then beaten back by commodity-fund selling.
Gold traders, analysts say, also remain worried by remarks from Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan a few weeks ago that the Fed watches gold prices as an indicator of inflation and won't hesitate to raise interest rates to curb inflation when it occurs.
COCOA: Cocoa's strong upward price move in recent weeks experienced a sharp correction.
At New York's Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange, cocoa for May delivery fell $27 to $1,216 a ton.
The price of the actively traded May contract rose as high as $1,252 on March 15.
William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch, said the rally has stalled in recent days because prices have reached levels at which industrial consumers of cocoa are balking at buying.
Yet Mr. O'Neill said the outlook for cocoa remains positive, with world production likely to outpace consumption by about 150,000 tons.
Over the long term, he said, he expects cocoa prices to continue their upward trend.
