Earthquakes and other natural disasters are increasingly spawning a formidable aftershock: lawsuits.
Although so-called acts of God certainly can't be blamed on human negligence, lawyers say that the resulting property damage and injuries often can lead to legal fingerpointing.
"Acts of God can be anticipated," said Philip H. Corboy, a leading Chicago personal-injury lawyer and former chairman of the American Bar Association's litigation section.
"You don't build papier-mache houses in San Francisco, for example.
You can be responsible not for the act of God, but for protecting from the act of God."
Until recently, big earthquakes rarely resulted in lawsuits, said Gary T. Schwartz, a law professor at the University of California at Los Angeles who has studied the subject.
Only with modern changes in liability law and public litigiousness have such suits become more common, Prof. Schwartz added.
The San Francisco earthquake of 1989 spawned at least 330 lawsuits by drivers alleging that roads and bridges should have been sturdier.
The cases were resolved through a mass settlement in which the state paid $69 million to the plaintiffs.
The one remaining suit, by a woman who says she has a permanently fractured leg and severe post-traumatic stress disorder, is scheduled to go to trial in May.
Although it's still too early to spot litigation stemming from the recent Los Angeles earthquake, the large number of insurance claims filed suggests that lawsuits will be plentiful.
The state's largest insurer, State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., Bloomington, Ill., already has gotten at least 74,000 claims, more than twice its total claims after the San Francisco quake.
Because few drivers were on the roads during the predawn Los Angeles quake, lawsuits probably will focus on building-construction defects, plaintiffs' lawyers said.
That means less liability for the state, but more for home developers, builders and contractors.
Some Los Angeles construction-defect lawyers are warming up to the task with advertisements soliciting quake-related business.
One such attorney, Daniel G. Epstein in Irvine, is pitching the notion that homeowners also can sue for latent construction problems that the earthquake revealed.
"Things like problems with framing, absence of sheer walls, absence of sheer nailing -- usually you have to open up the walls to find that out," Mr. Epstein said.
"But the earthquake does that for you."
Although many area residents have already contacted lawyers, attorneys haven't filed many suits yet because they need to consult with architects and engineers to see which claims are valid, he said.
Lawyers are also in the process of negotiating with homeowners' insurers.
The insurance industry largely dodged one kind of claim that's usually prevalent after natural disasters -- workers' compensation suits filed by injured employees -- because of the double fortuity that the quake occurred before most people's commuting hours on a day in which most people were off from work anyway as a result of Martin Luther King's birthday.
Insurers can expect some lawsuits arising from coverage disputes, but it's hard to predict how extensive a problem that will be, said Jerry Parsons, a State Farm spokesman.
Architects and designers, who generally can be held liable only for buildings constructed within the past 10 years that don't comply with industry standards, aren't expecting too many quake-related suits.
Schinnerer Management Services Inc., a leading insurer of design professionals and a unit of Marsh & McLennan Cos., New York, faced only two lawsuits and seven claims after the San Francisco earthquake, said Schinnerer's president, Paul L. Genecki.
"Human nature may come into this," he said.
"When it is so devastating, when it is so much an act of God, there may be more of an acceptance that this is just part of the risk you run."
Nonetheless, plenty of people sued homebuilders after Hurricane Andrew swept through Florida in 1992.
Miami-based Lennar Corp., the state's largest developer, spent $2.4 million last year to settle two lawsuits arising from alleged hurricane damage in 350 homes.
The company said it disagreed with the allegations in the suits.
Ervin A. Gonzalez, a Miami attorney handling several hurricane suits, said he has reached settlements in suits involving more than 2,500 homes for almost $10 million.
He also is working on pending suits against two developers.
Florida developers won't be fully out of the woods until 1997, when the last of hurricane-related suits can be filed.
But Allan J. Pekor, Lennar's financial vice president, said he doesn't expect much more litigation.
"The hurricane litigation is long behind us," he said.
In the Midwest, on the other hand, lawsuits from Mississippi flooding in July and August could trickle in for years.
A lot of the suits will be filed by farmers alleging that neighboring farmers failed to store pesticides above the water line, said Don C. Keenan, an Atlanta lawyer and former president of the American Board of Trial Advocates, Los Angeles.
"The long-term damage that was done is the pesticide commingling with well water, crops and homes," said Mr. Keenan, whose firm is looking into a handful of potential flood-related lawsuits.
"These are the kind of cases that take a long time to investigate.
The Midwest floods will go on into the next century, I can assure you."
His firm hasn't filed any flood suits yet.
A 10-year statute of limitations for property damage allows lawyers to continue their investigations for years.
Eventually, government agencies also might be sued for allegedly failing to erect solid flood barriers and to warn of impending disaster.
But in the case of flood, at least, builders will escape most litigation.
"Frankly, other than Noah, nobody's been able to build something that's going to survive a massive flood," Mr. Keenan said.
The recent freeze in the Northeast, meanwhile, is attracting little interest from injury lawyers.
It's possible that more people slipped and fell last month, said New York attorney Pamela A. Liapakis, but she hasn't heard of any special freeze-related litigation.
"We try to keep to the more serious cases," she said.
A federal judge dismissed inventor Robert W. Kearns's windshield-wiper patent claims against 22 foreign-car companies, a significant setback for Mr. Kearns after previous victories against Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp.
Mr. Kearns claimed in his lawsuit that the car companies infringed his patents on the intermittent windshield wiper.
In dismissing the case, U.S. District Judge Avern Cohn of Detroit found that Mr. Kearns couldn't adequately represent himself and had refused to retain a lawyer.
The judge also said in his written order that during the case, Mr. Kearns had demonstrated "his inability to focus, his inability to understand the rules of law and his failure to follow the court's orders."
Judge Cohn dismissed a similar Kearns case against General Motors Corp. last summer.
In 1990, Mr. Kearns won a $10.2 million settlement from Ford, after a jury found that Ford had infringed his patents for wiper systems.
Two years later, he won a $19.8 million jury verdict from Chrysler Corp., which the company has appealed.
Mr. Kearns was represented by lawyers in those cases.
The current case was filed against foreign auto makers, including Toyota Motor Corp., Nissan Motor Co. and Mazda Motor Corp.
Mr. Kearns "refused to follow the court orders, he refused to get a lawyer, and the judge finally had had enough," said George Badenouch, a lawyer with the New York firm Kenyon & Kenyon who represented two of the defendants in the case.
Mr. Kearns said he would ask the judge to reconsider the decision.
"I feel sad for myself, for our country and the standard of living of our citizens," he said.
"The rest of the world is being told that they can simply infringe U.S. patents with impunity."
(Kearns vs. Wood Motors, U.S. District Court, Detroit, Civil No. 78-70642)
Law Note. . .
CRAVATH'S NEW BRANCH: The New York law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore, traditionally averse to opening branch offices, voted to expand to Hong Kong.
The 320-attorney firm will send two current partners and a handful of associates to Hong Kong as early as this summer, concentrating on privatization, project finance and securities work.
Samuel C. Butler, presiding partner, said that Hong Kong, unlike Tokyo, is a "center for companies seeking to raise money in the U.S., which is what we do."
At present, Cravath's only branch is in London.
Edward Felsenthal contributed to this article.
A LEGAL BEAT article Monday about litigation over natural disasters misstated the first name of an Irvine, Calif., plaintiffs' attorney.
He is David G. Epstein.
(WSJ Feb. 9, 1994)
