Two stories about the manipulation of minority voters came out of last November's elections.
One, Ed Rollins's tale of suppressing black turnout was found by New Jersey and federal officials to be a fantasy.
The other, involving hundreds of Latino and black voters in Philadelphia who were pressured into casting illegal absentee ballots, was so real that last week a federal judge took the extraordinary step of removing an incumbent state senator and ordering his opponent seated.
Judge Clarence Newcomer ruled that a "massive scheme" of "absentee ballot fraud, deception, intimidation, harassment and forgery" so tainted a special state senate election that he was invalidating all 1,757 absentee ballots.
This week a federal appeals court cleared the way for Republican Bruce Marks, the winner at polling places on Election Day, to replace Democrat Bill Stinson.
Suspicions about the election were aroused when it was found that in key wards, Mr. Stinson had won up to 99% of the absentee ballots.
The Philadelphia Inquirer interviewed more than 330 voters who were not eligible to vote absentee.
More than 40 apparently had their votes forged and over two-dozen voted twice.
Some were in jail at the time they were supposed to have voted.
The election was so fiercely contested because it determined which party controlled the state senate.
In fact, Democrats were so afraid Mr. Stinson would be removed that last week they hurriedly adjourned the Senate for a month to give them time to appeal Judge Newcomer's ruling and attempt to retain control.
The most disturbing evidence Judge Newcomer heard is that Philadelphia election officials aided the voter fraud by allowing Stinson workers to go door-to-door with absentee ballots in hand "helping" Hispanics and blacks with "a new way to vote."
Democratic committeeman William Jones testified to the Stinson campaign's contempt for the electorate: "There was a joke going around to the effect that they'll sign anything."
Judge Newcomer found the Stinson campaign engaged in "racially discriminatory" practices by "actively misrepresenting and abusing" Latino and black voters.
Much of this was known shortly after the election, yet Mr. Marks, the GOP candidate, was stonewalled by state courts.
The first judge to hear the case was married to a Democratic patronage appointee.
A half-dozen state courts dismissed Mr. Marks's challenges without addressing the merits of his case.
The Justice Department, which quickly dispatched agents to New Jersey to track down Ed Rollins's phantom preachers, waited a month before reluctantly looking into a case of clear and documented fraud across the river in Philadelphia.
The 1965 Voting Rights Act was passed to address such cases.
However, Justice's concerns have increasingly shifted to such constitutionally suspect projects as racial gerrymandering.
In fact, this week Justice announced that it would defend a bizarrely shaped racial gerrymander in Georgia -- the first time it has ever intervened on the side of a state in a voting rights case.
The Philadelphia story shows how the real need for the Voting Rights Act is in policing how peculiar local mores taint elections.
Mr. Stinson counted absentee ballots in his own race on Election Night.
He says he was helping his mother, who was the local election judge.
In fact, a third of the 100 election workers hired by the city were either party officials or their relatives.
So long as there are elections like Mr. Stinson's, the need for federal oversight is clear.
The Justice Department would do well to focus on clear cases of voter exploitation rather than codifying dubious theories of political entitlement.
After all, it was similar views that led President Clinton himself to decide he couldn't appoint Lani Guinier to run the civil rights division at Justice.
