So you want to buy the meanest multimedia machine out there.
Or at least something that allows you to taste this new world everybody is talking about.
But what do you buy?
Where do you even start?
First, accept one thing: The new world of "multimedia," where computers are now powered with the ability to display snazzy graphics, video and stereo sound, is a baffling one.
Computers are pouring in to the market in all sizes and configurations, and adding to the madness is the blizzard of new software enhancements and peripherals designed to run on these newfangled machines.
"A lot of people just don't know what they want," sighs Clarence Castro, a salesman in the computer department of a Sears, Roebuck & Co. store in San Bruno, Calif.
Although divided in their loyalties, those on the cutting edge of the new technology -- programmers, computer makers and other gadget hounds -- provide insights about what people should look for, as well as some of the potential pitfalls.
Here is some of their advice.
What Am I Buying, Anyway?
Most simply, a computer with a CD-ROM drive.
(CD-ROM stands for compact disk-read only memory.)
This is basically a device that reads data stored on a compact disk for display on the computer screen.
Besides displaying text, CD-ROM also plays both still and moving pictures, and sound as well.
A CD-ROM disk, for example, may have an entire set of encylopedias stored on it.
This lets the user call up a page on, say, dinosaurs, and not only read about them, but also see and hear what they were like.
Similarly, a CD-ROM disk on family health could show an animated view of the human body, complete with pumping heart and inflating lungs.
Expect to spend $3,000 for a high-powered, all-purpose multimedia system.
This will include not only the computer, but also a monitor, CD-ROM drive, sound system and such enhancements as an expanded hard drive.
This doesn't mean you have to go all out.
But most experts warn not to try to get a multimedia PC on the cheap, because second-rate monitors won't display video well, and inexpensive speakers will result in poor sound quality.
"Spend a few more dollars, and be a lot happier," says Chuck Farnham, a multimedia-software developer in San Jose, Calif.
Mac vs. PC
Asking techies to judge the best multimedia PC is akin to asking baseball junkies to rank their favorite team.
The biggest dispute: Whether to buy an Apple Computer Inc.
Macintosh or an IBM-compatible PC.
Most impartial experts believe that in quality of multimedia presentation, the two are about equal.
So, the arguments usually boil down to these:
IBM-compatibles are better because there are more programs written for them, since they run on the Microsoft Corp.
Windows operating system, which commands some 90% of the PC market.
Macs are better because they are easier to operate.
Andy Hertzfeld, who is something of a legend in Silicon Valley for having helped develop Apple's first Macintosh a decade ago, is a Mac diehard.
His favorite multimedia computer: a Macintosh Quadra 660 AV (audio-visual), which features such goodies as a built-in double-speed drive for CD-ROM and plenty of storage -- all for around $2,100 (monitor not included).
The 14-inch Sony Corp. monitors he prefers start at about $400.
Mr. Hertzfeld, now software chief of General Magic Inc., a software consortium in Mountain View, Calif., says the Quadra 660 is "easy to pick apart and put together."
(Translation: It's simple to operate.)
He adds: "It's got all the interfaces you need for multimedia."
(Translation: It has recognizable pictures on the screen, such as a trash can for dumping unwanted files, allowing even computer novices to navigate intuitively through the computer's operating system.)
Another Quadra fan, Gary Hare, a producer of CD-ROM interactive titles in Sausalito, Calif., wouldn't use an IBM-compatible PC, he says, because it "can take the rest of your life to set up."
As for the Quadra, he adds, "you can be dumb and set it up."
Now, the other side: Mr. Farnham says IBM-compatible PCs perform some functions better than a Macintosh, such as creating a three-dimensional image on the screen.
"One of my favorite things to do is create business cards on the computer that come spinning around out of the screen in a 3-D block containing the letters of my name," Mr. Farnham says.
His multimedia favorites: AST Research Inc.'s AST Advantage!
Adventure (minitower), which sells for about $2,900, including a monitor, and Dell Computer Corp.'s Dimension, which runs about $2,700, with monitor.
Although Mr. Farnham says these computers offer many of the same features as rival products, such as Compaq Computer Corp.'s Presario 600 and 800 CDS series, and International Business Machines Corp.'s PS/1, he believes AST and Dell offer superior technical support for the inevitable problems.
The computer's hard-disk drive, usually permanently installed inside the computer, allows you to quickly store and retrieve data.
Disk drives are measured in terms of their storage capacity-specifically in megabytes.
One megabyte equals about a million characters.
Hard drives range from about 160 to 340 megabytes.
(To put this into perspective, 160 megabytes equals the storage content of about 32 dictionaries.)
It's best to get as much hard drive as possible, because multimedia programs eat up a lot of storage space.
(The CD-ROM titles themselves play on a separate drive, which can usually handle around 600 megabytes.)
Among the biggest PCs on the market, in terms of storage, are AST's Advantage!, which has 340 megabytes of hard drive, and Compaq's Presario 600 and 800 CDS series, with up to 340 megabytes.
Mr. Hertzfeld recommends having at least 600 megabytes of hard-drive capacity; you can get that by buying an extra drive, an external box about the size of a toaster that connects to the PC.
Mr. Farnham says he gets his extra drives from APS Technologies Inc., a mail-order house in Kansas City, Mo., which sells a Quantum 170-megabyte drive for $289, and extra drives -- in increments of 80 megabytes -- for $127 each.
The CD-ROM drive's speed -- in both running programs and tapping into different files within the programs -- is crucial.
Most newer CD-ROMs come with a double-speed drive, which is essential for playing video and sound smoothly.
(Double-speed, in essence, broadens the pipe through which a CD-ROM funnels data.)
The CD-ROM should also be able to pull a file up in less than four-tenths of a second, so the user can move quickly from, say, one page in an encyclopedia file to another.
A few triple- and even quadruple-speed drives are coming out, but the experts say they aren't needed because almost all CD-ROM programs are designed for single- or double-speed drives.
The experts also advise buying a PC that has a built-in CD-ROM drive.
Although all the big computer companies offer PCs that are, as they say, "multimedia ready," these can operate CD-ROM programs only if a CD-ROM drive is bought separately and then attached to the machine -- and it's a hassle even for computer hacks to set one of these drives up.
"You can lose a lot of hair trying to put one in," says Ted Julian, an analyst for International Data Corp., a Framingham, Mass., market-research firm.
But there's a downside to having a CD-ROM inside the computer: What do you do when it breaks?
You have to take the whole computer in to get it fixed.
Mr. Farnham has bought CD-ROM drives separately, in part, because it's easier to take them in for repairs.
He recommends a separate CD-ROM double-speed drive from Mediavision Inc., Fremont, Calif., that sells (with speakers) for about $300.
Toshiba Corp. of Japan also sells a highly regarded double-speed CD-ROM drive for $499.
When it comes to monitors, think of only one thing: pixels.
Pixels are tiny light-carrying devices that provide resolution on a computer screen.
The more pixels you have, the clearer the picture.
Monitors have resolutions going as high as 1,000 by 1,000 pixels, but 680 by 480 is sufficient, as is a 13- or 14-inch screen.
In fact, buying a super-resolution screen might be a waste, because most software programs don't take advantage of the additional pixels.
Prices for monitors range from $400 to thousands of dollars.
Most experts recommend Sony monitors costing up to $1,000.
All the current multimedia computers suffer from technological limitations.
They are unable, for example, to retrieve files instantaneously.
Full-screen video quality is relatively poor.
And PCs can't display moving images on a full screen; they have to be condensed to a small window about the size of four postage stamps.
"To someone who is a couch potato, that is not very impressive," Mr. Hertzfeld says.
But there are some solutions.
For about $375, an add-in card called Reel Magic, made by Sigma Designs, Fremont, Calif., provides moving pictures on the entire screen.
Apple, Microsoft and other computer companies are all working to improve video quality.
As chips become more powerful over the next three to five years, industry analysts expect glitches, including access delays and flickering video, to disappear.
Meanwhile, special multimedia-editing software can enhance the value or fun of multimedia machines.
Mountain View, Calif.-based Adobe Systems Inc.'s Photo Shop, which retails for about $695, allows the user to touch up photos.
(You can get rid of that double chin, for instance, or give your grandmother a mustache.)
Eastman Kodak Co.'s Photo CD can also do digital tricks with snapshots; it costs $30 for the blank CD plus $1 per picture loaded on.
Scanners needed to display the photos digitally come separately, and Mr. Farnham recommends the scanners made by either Microtek Research & Ready Systems, Santa Clara, Calif., or Sharp Corp., Japan, each costing around $1,400.
Apple's QuickTime allows you to edit video, and comes with the Macintosh at no extra cost.
If you don't want a personal computer to run programs like word-processing or spreadsheets, and you aren't looking for multimedia functions, such as photo and video editing, a video-game player with a CD-ROM attachment may be sufficient.
It certainly can be cheaper; you can buy some video-game players with a CD-ROM addition -- from Sega of America, for instance -- for as little as $200.
But some of the most heavily promoted CD-ROM video-game players have been getting the cold shoulder from consumers.
The CD-I multimedia machine from Philips Electronics NV of the Netherlands ($650 with full video capability) is considered overpriced and underpowered.
So is the $500 Interactive Multiplayer from 3DO Co., Redwood City, Calif., even after a $200 price cut last month.
The 3DO player also suffers from a dearth of software titles and slow play, especially compared with the rapid Jaguar, a game player from Atari Corp. of Sunnyvale, Calif.
Jaguar, however, doesn't yet have much support from software developers, because they worry that Atari isn't financially strong enough to market it.
Mr. Carlton is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau.
