For the 13th consecutive month, short interest on the Nasdaq Stock Market set a record, jumping 2.8% to 701.8 million shares in mid-February from mid-January's 682.4 million.
The continued climb this month in uncovered short positions, a generally bearish indicator, comes partly in the wake of the Federal Reserve Board's Feb. 4 short-term interest rate boost that so unsettled markets.
For the previous 12 months, investors had placed growing bets that Nasdaq stocks -- many of them with rich price-earnings multiples -- were set for a fall.
Now that the Fed's rate rise has ushered in a correction in the stock market, investors seem to be saying that they expect share prices to retreat further, market professionals believe.
"It's not a surprise to me mthat Nasdaq short interest hit another record in {February} because there are more stocks today that are overvalued than there were a month ago," said Stan Trilling, senior vice president with PaineWebber in Los Angeles.
A short sale is a bet that a stock will tumble.
An investor sells borrowed shares, knowing that they must eventually be replaced for return to the lender.
If the replacement shares cost less than those sold earlier, the short seller makes a profit.
Short interest is the total of shares sold short at any given time and not yet covered.
Short interest on the Nasdaq National Market, comprising the larger-capitalization issues, climbed 2.6% to 651.8 million shares from 635.3 million a month earlier.
Among the small-cap stocks, which make up a third of the Nasdaq market, short interest jumped 6.2% to 50 million shares from 47.1 million a month earlier.
The National Market's short interest ratio as of mid-February rose to 2.39 from 2.26.
The short interest ratio for the smallest Nasdaq stocks rose to 0.95 from 0.92.
The ratio -- the number of trading days that would be required to close out the total short position through share purchases -- is viewed as a measure of trader sentiment.
Among the companies with the largest short interest positions, Comcast Corp.'s Class A special shares fell 13% to 15.4 million; American Power Conversion Corp. fell 10% to 11 million shares, and Snapple Beverage Corp. fell 2.1% to 9.3 million shares.
The Nasdaq stocks with the largest volume increases in short interest were Southland Corp., Greenwich Pharmaceuticals Inc., Omega Environmental Inc. and Sun Microsystems Inc.
Those with the largest volume decreases were L.M. Ericsson Telephone Co., which trades as an American depositary receipt; Comcast, MCI Communications Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc.
The following table shows the Nasdaq issues in which a short interest position of at least 100,000 shares existed at mid-February, or in which the short position had changed by at least 50,000 shares since mid-January.
