The son of Oded "Ed" Aboodi, the deal-making adviser to Time Warner Inc., is the subject of federal criminal and civil investigations into insider trading in the company's stock.
According to people familiar with the investigation, the U.S. attorney in Manhattan and the Securities and Exchange Commission are investigating David Aboodi.
Two people close to the matter indicated the younger Mr. Aboodi could be charged as early as next week.
Mr. Aboodi, a vice president at Berkshire Bank, didn't respond to messages left at his office.
The SEC declined comment, as did a senior official of the U.S. attorney's office.
The senior Mr. Aboodi didn't respond to a message.
And a Time Warner spokesman said the company had no comment.
The spokesman added that the senior Mr. Aboodi, whose investment banking firm is at Time Warner headquarters, wasn't available to comment.
The existence of the the civil investigation by the SEC was first disclosed in a new book, "Master of the Game," which chronicles the life of Steve Ross, the founder and chairman of Warner Communications Inc. and architect of its merger with Time Inc. in 1989.
Mr. Ross, who became chairman and co-CEO of Time Warner, died in 1992.
According to the book, by Connie Bruck, that inquiry began in 1992 after David Aboodi, trading for the Aboodi family's account, "traded Time Warner stock at a propitious moment."
The book says the SEC investigation was said to be also exploring the "possible role of Ed Aboodi in the trade carried out by his son."
The senior Mr. Aboodi was one of Mr. Ross's closest advisers under an unusual arrangement.
When Mr. Ross headed the company, Time Warner paid Mr. Aboodi millions of dollars in fees as an outside investment banker while at the same time paying him and his staff salaries and benefits as Time Warner employees.
Mr. Aboodi also was given lucrative stock options.
In his dual role, Mr. Aboodi wielded broad influence at Time Warner, negotiating the Time Warner deal and crafting incentive pay plans and other personal financial dealings for some of the company's top executives.
Under Mr. Ross's successor, Gerald Levin, Mr. Aboodi has continued as an influential adviser, though Mr. Levin terminated him as an inside employee.
Mr. Levin, however, retained Mr. Aboodi and his investment banking firm, Alpine Capital Group, as the company's primary outside adviser.
According to people familiar with the matter, Mr. Levin informed some board members in December or January about the investigation.
The Time Warner spokesman declined to comment on that point, however.
