The unification of Germany in 1989-1990 was the crucial political event of the late 20th century in central Europe.
It was also a deeply ironic moment.
It was ironic, first, because few West Germans had expected it, yet when it began to happen, every political party claimed that its policies had prepared the way and that it alone had the right strategy for making it work.
German unification was ironic, secondly, in the more profound sense that while unexpected it did happen exactly as West German leaders since the mid-1950s had predicted it would: by the grace of Moscow.
Yet those same leaders also believed that Moscow would never grant this grace.
Who opened the Berlin Wall?
The Communist authorities of East Berlin.
Because the Communist authorities of Moscow -- that is, Mikhail Gorbachev -- had decided that control of East Germany was no longer in the interests of the Soviet Union; that, in fact, the USSR stood to gain far more in aid, goodwill and prestige by giving it up.
Why did Mr. Gorbachev think this?
In part because communism as an economic system was failing and he needed to retrench.
But also because he faced the consequences of what Soviet leaders had long known about the West: that it was no threat to the Soviet Union.
The third irony is that all the goodwill and aid in the world did not save Mr. Gorbachev and his beloved Soviet Union from collapse.
Yet this collapse was neither his intention nor that of the West German leaders who negotiated with him to secure unification.
They came to him as suitors, not as Cold War victors.
The story of how democratic West Germany, founded in 1949 by the Western democracies and their German friends, evolved a set of policies for dealing with the division of Germany is a vital part of the historical record.
The key to this storyand what holds permanent lessons for how democracies react to threats, how they approach their enemies and how they find a path that leads neither to appeasement nor to needless provocation -- is the Ostpolitik (Eastern policy) of the 1969-1982 Social Democratic government of Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt.
An intellectual and political history of this policy is sorely needed, especially in this time of postunification depression in a Germany that seems determined to become the sick man of Europe in the next century, as Britain was in the '60s and '70s.
The British writer Timothy Garton Ash -- justly well-known for his elegant, learned and informative essays on the democratic transformations in Eastern Europe in the '80s and on the people, ideas, passions and aspirations that lay behind those transformations -- has attempted this task in "In Europe's Name" (Random House, 688 pages, $27.50).
The result is absolutely indispensable for anyone trying to understand Ostpolitik and the fate of Germany and Europe as a whole in the two decades leading up to unification.
But it is not the decisive interpretation that we need.
Mr. Garton Ash has put great care and effort into his work.
He has interviewed, at length, all the leading actors, including the Communist rulers of East Germany.
He has reflected on the ambiguities of West German leaders obliged both to reassure the Soviets that they were no threat and the Americans that they were not slipping into neutrality or appeasement.
His chapters "Ostpolitik," "Bonn-Moscow-Berlin" and "Second Ostpolitik" constitute a reflective account of events that sets a standard.
However, this is not enough.
The problem lies in the ambivalence of the West German leaders themselves.
Seeing, by the late '60s, that the Soviets were not going to permit peaceful unification, they sought detente with the Communists in the interests of stability.
In doing so, they knowingly rejected the claims of the people of Eastern Europe, including East Germany, for democracy and civil rights.
At what point did this German obsession with stability and the tender feelings of Communist rulers become collusion with tyrants?
Did Ostpolitik delay or bring about democracy and unification?
The Germans themselves refuse to say, but the historian has an obligation to judge.
Mr. Garton Ash shirks that obligation in his presentation of all views.
The record, I believe, will show that for all the goodwill evident in its beginnings, Ostpolitik became a strategy for buttressing undemocratic regimes against their own people, in the name of that great German idol, stability.
The Communist rulers were under no illusion that West Germany was a threat.
They knew where they had the Germans.
The final irony of history is that the Germans sought unification as supplicants, but in vain: The Soviet Union has perished (if not all its works); Germany remains.
The question for all of us is whether it will face the challenge of the future.
To answer the question, we have much information in this valuable book, but precious few real judgments.
Mr. Gress is co-author with Dennis L. Bark of "A History of West Germany" (Blackwell).
