Shawmut National Corp. is comfortable with analysts' expectations of 1994 net income of $2.80 to $3 a share, Chairman Joel B. Alvord said.
In 1993, the bank holding company had net income of $290.7 million, or $2.93 a share, including $46 million, or 49 cents a share, in tax credits and gains from accounting changes.
Mr. Alvord said in an interview that he expects 1994 to be a "good year," with no tax credits recorded.
"As a company, Shawmut came through a deep recession well-capitalized, with strong earnings, a restored dividend, and a leadership position in consumer banking and mortgage banking.
Shawmut is back," he said.
Shawmut's loan portfolio should increase 10% in 1994 from $15.38 billion at Dec. 31, Alvord said.
"We're dramatically under-loaned as a bank," he said.
"Our loan portfolio is at $15 billion.
It should be at $20 billion."
Mr. Alvord said future growth will stem from Shawmut's specialized lending business, which focuses on the radio, television and cable industries, and the asset-based lending sector, which arranges small and medium-sized business loans using customers' assets as collateral.
Mr. Alvord said the specialized lending portfolio should grow 40% in 1994 from $1.13 billion at Dec. 31.
The asset-based lending portfolio should grow 35%, he said.
This portfolio totaled $851 million on Dec. 31.
Shawmut also expects to grow through regional acquisitions.
The banking concern, which is based in Hartford, Conn., said it expects to submit 1993 racial data on mortgage loans and rejections to the Federal Reserve Board this month in order to request that the Fed reconsider its application to acquire New Dartmouth Bank in Manchester, N.H.
In November, the Fed rejected the application because of concerns about Shawmut's compliance with fair-lending laws.
Shawmut has since settled lending-discrimination charges with the Justice Department.
Mr. Alvord said he expects to close the New Dartmouth acquisition late in the first quarter.
Shawmut's pending acquisitions of Peoples Bancorp of Worcester Inc., Worcester, Mass., and Gateway Financial Corp., of Norwalk, Conn., are waiting for approval by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Shawmut expects them to close by June, Mr. Alvord said.
The three acquisitions would add $4 billion to $4.5 billion in assets to Shawmut, which is New England's third-largest banking company, behind Fleet Financial Group Inc. and Bank of Boston Corp.
