Motorola Inc., one of the most prominent U.S. success stories in Japan, has had to fight against Japan Inc. for the access to Japan's market it has acquired.
Now Motorola is once again in a battle to gain "comparable" access where it feels it has been denied.
In a reprise of a similar 1989 fight, the company has enlisted the help of the U.S. government, which will decide by Feb. 15 whether Japan has violated its earlier agreement to allow foreign companies into its cellular telephone market.
Despite the previous trade agreement, "we were not getting the kind of comparable-market access" Motorola expected, says Skip Orr, director of government relations at the company's Japan unit.
"It's been a nine-year process.
Motorola has bent over backward to resolve this situation."
Motorola's experience demonstrates again the fragility of U.S.-Japan trade pacts, which have shown a distressing tendency to unravel years after the two sides thought matters had been solved.
Even now, the U.S. and Japan may be repeating that process in their current negotiations under a previously agreed trade "framework" -- an effort that includes talks on Japan's procurement of telecommunications equipment.
The cellular dispute, however, is also emblematic of the business and bureaucratic obstacles that foreign high-tech manufacturers -- particularly those in the area of telecommunications -- must overcome in Japan.
Motorola has the advantage of arguing its case from a strong position.
Thanks to its technology and a close partnership with DDI Corp., one of several new long-distance companies that have taken on former monopoly Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp., Motorola has established its cellular "base stations" and phone handsets across Japan.
(The company doesn't release sales or earnings figures from the Japanese market.)
Motorola, in fact, is DDI's sole supplier of cellular network equipment.
In the eight geographic regions where DDI competes directly against NTT's cellular system, the much smaller company has grabbed roughly half the market from its larger rival.
"Part of the reason for our success in the cellular market is that the Motorola infrastructure is superior in many, many respects" to that of NTT, says Sachio Semmoto, a senior vice president at DDI.
Even bureaucrats at the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications concede that Motorola doesn't fit the common stereotype of the foreign company that "doesn't try hard enough" to succeed in Japan.
"I believe Motorola understands the Japanese market very well if you look at the success they've already had," says Shun Sakurai, director of the postal ministry's trade policy office.
Nevertheless, Motorola has hit a brick wall in a densely populated, 155 mile-long corridor that stretches south from Tokyo along the eastern coast of Japan to Nagoya.
Outside that region, Motorola's cellular network equipment serves roughly 369,000 people.
Inside, where roughly half of Japan's estimated 1.7 million cellular subscribers live, Motorola's equipment serves a mere 12,900 people.
The reasons for that disparity run back to 1989, when the U.S. and Japan reached an agreement.
After long insisting otherwise, the postal ministry suddenly found it was able to allocate a chunk of the Tokyo-Nagoya radio spectrum to TACS, the cellular system used by Motorola and DDI.
(TACS isn't compatible with NTT's cellular system.)
The ministry, however, didn't license the new frequencies to DDI, which already used Motorola equipment outside of Tokyo and Nagoya.
Instead the ministry handed them to IDO Corp., another long-distance company, which had already begun installing an NTT-style cellular system.
Mr. Sakurai says that allowing DDI into the Tokyo-Nagoya market would have violated ministry policy by allowing too many competitors in that market.
IDO suddenly found itself installing a new cellular network that would compete directly with its existing NTT-style service.
The results haven't pleased anyone.
As of January, IDO had spent 65 billion yen ($600 million) to install 410 base stations for the NTT system, but only 35 billion yen on 110 TACS base stations.
IDO has only 12,000 TACS customers, but it has more than 300,000 subscribers to its NTT-style system.
"You can see why no one wants to use Motorola phones" in Tokyo or Nagoya, says Eric Gan, a telecommunications analyst with Goldman Sachs (Japan) Corp.
IDO says it's in the process of upgrading its TACS network.
It plans to install another 70 Motorola base stations by April, and an additional 100 in the coming year or so.
Motorola and U.S. officials, however, complain that the company's efforts are two little, too late.
U.S. officials claim that Japan has violated a promise in the 1989 agreement to ensure "comparable-market access" in that region.
If the U.S. finds Japan in formal violation of the agreement on Feb. 15, sanctions could result.
Japanese officials, however, deny that charge, and have resorted to narrow legalisms to refute it.
Mr. Sakurai argues, for example, that Japan didn't guarantee comparable-market access, only measures that would reflect the principles of comparable-market access.
Similarly, Japan insists that the Tokyo-Nagoya cellular market is a business matter best left to IDO and Motorola, and that governments have no role beyond urging the companies to talk to one another.
"It's a little disingenuous to say it's simply a business problem," says Mr. Orr.
"Once they forced this marriage between Motorola and IDO, it automatically became a government issue."
