Clear Channel Communications investors certainly tuned into the right stock last year.
In the 12 months ended Sept. 30, net income for the San Antonio operator of radio and television stations increased more than 66% to nearly $6 million.
Revenue was up 41% to $119.7 million.
And the stock, accounting for a 5-for-4 split last February, more than doubled and was one of the top performers on the American Stock Exchange.
Now, however, might be the time to change the channel -- or at least take a commercial break.
William D. Lyons, editor of the Atlanta-based Short On Value newsletter, recently added Clear Channel to his list of overpriced stocks, noting its lofty earnings multiple.
He considers the stock a potential candidate for a short sale, with a target price near $30.
(The stock currently trades in the mid-$40s.)
In a short sale, investors sell shares of borrowed stock, hoping to replace them later at a lower price, pocketing the difference.
CS First Boston analyst Harry J. DeMott says "it's hard to jump on the Clear Channel bandwagon at current prices," although he notes that "the ride certainly isn't over yet . . .
Clear Channel will probably have an upside surprise in earnings for the fourth quarter."
Clear Channel currently trades at more than 84 times the 53 cents a share it earned in the 12 months through Sept. 30, and nearly 50 times the most enthusiastic estimate for 1994.
But even the most bullish analyst only expects the company's earnings to grow 37% a year, meaning Clear Channel is trading at more than double its expected earnings growth rate.
(Typically, investment gurus don't like to see a company's earnings multiple radically exceed its expected growth rate.)
Optimism among some analysts, however, is based on per-share cash flow -- a key measure of performance for broadcast companies.
Clear Channel currently trades between 18 and 20 times 1994's expected cash flow, pretty much matching most analysts' estimates of annual cash-flow growth between 15% and 20%.
But some analysts argue that because Clear Channel's cash flow could grow as much as 30% annually, the company is trading at a discount.
Those estimates assume a continuation of the company's aggressive expansion strategy.
But that assumption seems flawed, and for a simple reason: The Federal Communications Commission.
Yes, expansion will continue for some time, as Clear Channel takes advantage of the FCC's liberal rules regarding radio-station ownership.
But it is certain to slow at some point.
The FCC currently allows ownership of 18 AM and 18 FM stations, with no more than two of each in any one market; the maximum will increase to 20 of each in September.
At present, Clear Channel is rapidly approaching the FCC's current limit: The company owns 32 stations, with the purchase of eight more pending.
Because those pending purchases would cause Clear Channel to exceed the FCC limit, the company is currently seeking FCC approval to divest itself of 11 stations, transferring ownership to Snowden Broadcasting, New Orleans.
However, because Clear Channel owns an 80% non-voting equity interest in Snowden, the FCC has yet to rule on whether the transfer truly terminates Clear Channel's ownership.
If the FCC signs off on the transfer, Clear Channel will be free to snap up more stations.
If the FCC rules against the company, Clear Channel will be required to shed four stations, and then will be able to pick up four more after September.
But whatever the FCC rules, the company is bumping up against legal limits.
And once it can't grow by acquisition much beyond its current rate, shareholders are going to focus on its earnings multiple -- and they won't be pleased.
To be sure, Clear Channel management has proved itself deft at pumping profits out of radio stations; profit margins at some stations are higher than 40%.
Moreover, the company surprised analysts with per-share earnings of 17 cents in the third quarter, triple the year-ago per-share earnings.
Analysts expect from 13 cents to 27 cents for the 1993 fourth quarter.
Radio advertising has rebounded strongly, particularly in Clear Channel's mostly southern markets, and the company's TV properties should continue to prosper now that Fox, with which Clear Channel linked seven of its eight television stations, has gained the rights to the National Football League's NFC conference games.
"The stock didn't run up in 1993 because the market decided to be kind to companies that begin with the letter C," says PaineWebber analyst Alan J. Gottesman .
"Investors began to appreciate that this company wasn't just lucky with its acquisitions, but that it knew what it was doing."
Still, Clear Channel's stock appears to have moved ahead of itself for the time being.
Last June, when the stock traded in the mid-$20s, CS First Boston anticipated a fairly valued stock price of $31.50 within 12 months, based on projections for Clear Channel's 1994 cash flow.
Revised cash-flow estimates put Clear Channel's stock in the low $40s.
A Lehman Brothers report written in October projected a $43 price within the year.
Mr. Gottesman concedes: "The gap between price and value certainly has narrowed in the past year."
D.R. Horton led Texas stocks for the week, gaining $3.375 a share, or more than 21%.
The Arlington-based home builder reported early last week that net sales contracts for the fiscal first quarter ended Dec. 31 totaled $81.2 million, an 83% increase from a year ago.
Horton, which has seen a surge in demand for new homes, also noted that its backlog of homes under contract at Dec. 31 increased 87% to $124.5 million from the year-ago period.
EZCorp, the Austin pawn-shop chain profiled here recently, surged 13% after Salomon Brothers initiated coverage of the company late last week with a "buy" recommendation.
Analyst Donald Zwyer projects a 12-month price target of $24.
EZCorp closed the week at $17, up $2.
VTEL shares shed nearly 22%, to close at $6.25, after a Piper Jaffray analyst downgraded the stock to "accumulate" from "buy."
Analyst Roger Redmond took the action on VTEL, the Austin maker of interactive video-conferencing systems, noting that later this month computer concern Intel will unveil a desktop video-conferencing product incompatible with current standards.
Mr. Redmond projects a temporary slowdown in videoconferencing-product sales as companies wait to see what emerges as the standard.
He cut VTEL's 1994 earnings estimate 75%, to five cents a share from 20 cents.
Cyberonics dropped $1.75, or 14%, after the Food and Drug Administration notified the Webster medical-device company that there are "significant deficiencies" in the company's premarket-approval application for its NeuroCybernetic Prosthesis System, an implantable device used to treat epilepsy.
The FDA requested additional clinical and technical information.
