Some local governments have raided their airports for hundreds of millions of dollars in federal grant money over the past 12 years, according to a congressional study.
The report, released yesterday by the House Transportation Appropriations Subcommittee, found that 17 of 33 airports surveyed have had money diverted for nonaviation purposes since 1982, and that the diverted funds -- almost $900 million -- nearly equaled the federal grants the 17 airports received.
Although the report says at least $640 million of the diversion was legal, some of it was improper.
The study is likely to fuel airlines' claims that airports are increasing surcharges on passengers and airlines so they can pump extra cash into the cities and states that run the airports.
"As we have suspected, local officials have become very creative in finding ways to circumvent federal prohibitions and get money off airports," said Jim Landry, president of the Air Transport Association, which represents airlines.
The association has been fighting Los Angeles over a recent tripling of landing fees at Los Angeles International Airport.
Diversion of airport funds for nonaviation use is generally illegal, unless airport authorities receive special permission from the Transportation Department.
Hawaii, which has proposed increasing sixfold landing fees at Honolulu International Airport, diverted more than $300 million of airport revenue to other purposes over four years, according to the report.
Hawaii did so with the permission of the Transportation Department, and other airport operators have received similar exemptions.
Also, airports that operate under port authorities, such as Boston's Logan International Airport, are allowed to shift funds to other port authority uses.
Other cities claim they are exempt, including San Francisco, which has diverted $119 million from San Francisco International Airport over 12 years to subsidize the city's public transportation system, according to the report.
But the Transportation Department hasn't decided whether the city is exempt.
Some airports, including New Orleans International Airport, donate money to charities.
But the cited diversions more often involve things such as payments in lieu of taxes and municipal use of airport property.
The legality of such practices would depend on the details of each case.
Austin, Texas, for example, runs an 18-hole golf course on airport land at Robert Mueller Municipal Airport; according to the House study, the $84,000 in profit that the city kept last year was a diversion of airport revenue.
Charles Brothers, an assistant city attorney in Austin, disagrees, saying the city pays for maintaining the land and that the Federal Aviation Administration hasn't ruled that the accounting for the golf course is improper.
Bob Carr (D., Mich.), chairman of the House subcommittee, said the FAA's enforcement of diversion rules has been "nothing short of a joke."
He said regulators should consider stripping federal funds from airports caught improperly diverting, but said he wouldn't support general reductions in federal grants to airports.
Airports have been cut off from federal grant money for several months, because the Senate failed to pass an airport funding bill last year.
The Clinton administration last week proposed a four-year airport grant bill totaling $7 billion.
