UAL Corp. and two of its unions signed a definitive pact that calls for the airline's employees to buy the company for about $5 billion.
The Friday agreement between the parent of United Airlines and the pilots and machinists unions must still be approved by UAL stockholders.
If the proposed buyout goes through, UAL would become the largest company in the U.S. to be majority-owned by its workers.
Negotiators for the airline and the unions had reached agreement in principle on the arrangement in December, and set March 15 as the deadline for coming to final terms.
Because of last-minute hitches, however, the talks had to be extended until late last week.
Under the buyout offer, members of United's pilots' and machinists' unions, as well as the company's nonunion employees, will acquire at least a 53% stake in UAL.
In exchange, they agree to more than five years of wage and work-rule concessions.
UAL also gets the right to form a low-cost short-haul carrier, which would improve its competitive posture.
And UAL shareholders will receive a package of cash, preferred stock and notes the unions have valued at $173 a share.
The carrier's flight attendants weren't a party to the agreement, but have expressed interest in participating.
Officials couldn't be reached for comment late Friday.
The transaction doesn't hinge on their participation.
UAL said shareholders will vote on the proposal after proxy materials have been reviewed by the Securities and Exchange Commission; the airline said it will file those documents with the SEC "shortly."
Among other things, UAL will propose a new board of 12 directors, including four independent candidates.
Paul Volcker, the former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and John Van de Kamp, a former California state attorney general, have been discussed by union members as potential directors.
UAL's Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Stephen M. Wolf, called the agreement "the best path to a competitive and successful future for United Airlines."
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading Friday, UAL shares rose $7.75 -- on a day when the overall market took a tumble -- to close at $131.50 a share.
