The peasants of Chiapas have laid claim to one of the most famous names in Mexican history, Emiliano Zapata, to rally support for their uprising in that southern state.
But that doesn't sit well here in Cuautla, a town just over the mountains from Mexico City where the revolutionary general spent much of his life and where people think they know a thing or two about the ideals known as Zapatismo.
Mateo Zapata, one of the general's three surviving children, sits in an unlit office, smoking a cigarette, barely visible in the shadows.
Mr. Zapata, now 77 years old, was just one and a half when his father was assassinated.
He remembers well the struggles his family members faced as they tried to preserve their father's legacy of returning seized land to the peasants.
The Zapata family grew up poor, because one of Zapata's rivals stole all of their belongings.
They even had to give up the family name for several years, taking a relative's name, Caballero, for fear that some revolutionary general would track them down and kill the children, too.
Mr. Zapata says he feels that he and some associates, not the Chiapas rebels, represent the continuation of his father's work.
Mr. Zapata administers pensions paid to veterans of the revolution, of whom there are still a handful even though the revolution ended more than 75 years ago.
He has also put together something called the Plan de Ayala, which hopes to restore land to peasants.
He operates out of a small adobe building that says "Zapatismo Institute" on the side -- or would, if the cracking of the paint hadn't made the full name impossible to make out.
But he refuses to take money from the government, which he considers to be undemocratic.
Referring to one of his father's slogans -- Land, Water, Justice and Law -- Mr. Zapata says, "Many of us have land now, and many of us have water, but where is the justice and where is the law?"
Despite his distaste for the government, Mr. Zapata says that the sort of violence going on in Chiapas belongs to another era and that Zapatismo has turned away from bloodshed.
"I think this movement in Chiapas wrongly took the name of the Zapatistas," he says, "because, for me, Zapatismo is protecting the people, not only giving land back to people but caring for people."
A few blocks away, his 79-year-old sister, Anita, agrees.
"The movement in Chiapas has nothing to do with Zapatismo," says Anita, who looks exactly like her fierce father, except for the addition of considerable blush and the absence of his bushy mustache.
"They took the name just to create an impact with the indigenous people.
But I don't agree with the violence and arms.
It's better to talk."
While Mateo struggles with the land issue, though, Anita, who was once a political leader in the area, now runs a small cafe.
The walls are decorated with pictures of her father.
The two disagree on the future of Zapatismo.
He says that the movement will continue and that his sister has sold out.
She supports the current government and says she thinks Zapatismo will fade as its adherents continue to die off.
Both Mateo and Anita find it odd that more groups haven't tried to use the Zapata name over the years.
They say the only organized group they can remember using the name was a band 20 years ago called The Revolution of Emiliano Zapata.
It sang syrupy, romantic ballads.
