The Shetland Islands, perched at the northern edge of the North Sea, may be on the way to becoming a byword for big, undiscovered oil fields.
A new oil find west of the archipelago has pushed the area back to prominence after having drifted in and out of vogue with oil companies for 20 years.
Although attracted by potentially huge crude discoveries there, industry players have been discouraged by harsh weather, deep water and lack of infrastructure to process and transport oil.
Most of them snubbed areas west and north of the Shetlands in favor of zones farther south in the North Sea and closer to the United Kingdom and Norwegian coasts.
But analysts predict a resurgence of interest west of the Shetlands thanks to new technologies for extracting oil, making the area less threatening and less expensive to work in.
"It's a real, concrete example of how technological advances affect the economics of the oil industry," said Bernard Picchi, a Kidder Peabody & Co. analyst.
The area's unappetizing reputation so far has resulted in only two companies, British Petroleum Co. and Amerada Hess Corp., looking hard enough to find oil.
But neither company has developed its fields for commercial production.
Now that may change.
Exploration and development are set to perk up, enlivened by British Petroleum's recent discovery in the Schiehallion Field, where recoverable reserves are estimated at up to 500 million barrels of oil.
Partly due to Schiehallion, British Petroleum said it is stepping up activity in the area.
Analysts think other players will be drawn to the region, which is viewed as a new and promising frontier if and when oil production in the rest of the North Sea slackens, as some industry analysts predict.
British, Norwegian, Danish and Dutch production in the North Sea amounts to 5.5 million barrels of oil a day, more than any Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries member save Saudi Arabia, although less than the U.S. or Russia, Mr. Picchi said.
He noted that there is no geological connection between the area west of the Shetlands and the three major producing areas of the British and Norwegian North Sea.
"The need to apply new exploration plans and new development concepts is always exciting," he said.
Fears of North Sea oil waning, and advances in underwater development techniques, could attract investment west of the Shetlands even with low oil prices that tend to crimp new exploration, and despite the fact that much of the oil found in the area is heavy and expensive to refine, analysts say.
Schiehallion is jointly controlled by British Petroleum and a unit of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group.
British Petroleum said it and Shell want to produce oil from Schiehallion as well as from the nearby Foinhaven field, discovered in 1992, where recoverable reserves are estimated at up to 300 million barrels.
British Petroleum holds 80% of Foinhaven and Shell, based in the Netherlands, holds 20%.
The two companies hope to produce 100,000 barrels of oil a day from the two fields combined by the end of 1995 or early in 1996.
British Petroleum said its priority is finding the least expensive and most efficient way to produce and transport oil in the area.
Jamie Jardine, a spokesman in Aberdeen, Scotland, said the company is "working with the contracting and supply industry to come up with a way to develop the oil, since conventional North Sea platforms don't work there."
British Petroleum is looking into floating platforms, made out of converted oil tankers, that can process crude oil on site and store it.
The tanker can then transport oil to terminals at either the Shetland Islands or the Orkney Islands, just north of Scotland.
A successful processing and transport system could even facilitate commercial development of the enormous Clair field, British Petroleum's first and biggest find west of the Shetlands.
Clair was discovered 20 years ago and is estimated to contain between 3.5 billion and four billion barrels of reserves.
The crude, though, is a dense and sticky heavy oil that would be expensive to process commercially, even if oil prices weren't hovering at five-year lows.
Mr. Jardine speculated that if British Petroleum or other companies continue to strike oil in the area, a jointly constructed pipeline "may become an option."
British Petroleum's increased commitment to the area is reflected in its spending.
A company official said BP plans to spend about $60 million, and drill six wells in 1994, in its search for new oil west of the Shetlands, compared with $40 million in 1993.
He said the outlay represents the bulk of BP's European exploration and appraisal spending for 1994.
Among other major players in the area, Amerada Hess operates three blocks and has a minority stake in 15 others, most of which are operated by Texaco Inc.
Amerada Hess struck oil on one of its own blocks in 1992 but hasn't developed it.
The company is running seismic tests on its other operating blocks.
"With no commercial infrastructure, you need big finds to start production," said Paul Wilcox, who works on Amerada Hess's Shetland Island team.
"The fact that BP has found oil and will bring some of it onstream sooner rather than later is certainly encouraging.
But for us, it's too soon to tell.
We plan to look at the seismic and see what we've got."
Charles Mailer, a spokesman for Amerada Hess in London, said the BP discovery hasn't prompted Hess to revise upward its plans for capital spending in the area.
"We obviously think it's important, but we're not making a big deal about it.
We are cautious.
We are not shouting it off the rooftops even though it's very interesting that larger fields are being found," Mr. Mailer said.
Texaco, which operates 14 blocks in the area west of the Shetlands, is even more low key.
"We shot some seismic tests last year and will probably do more this year.
We have made no decisions and the BP find hasn't changed Texaco's plans," said Gwyneth Hughes, a Texaco spokeswoman in London.
But some oil industry analysts suspect that the cautious stance reflects reluctance to tip off competitors to the potential of the area, which has been described by some as the "new frontier" and "great untapped secret" of the North Sea.
"It's natural that none of these companies want to engage interest in the area . . . and bid up the acreage price," said Paul Ting, an analyst with Oppenheimer & Co.
He said the time looks ripe for Amerada Hess, in particular, to invest more in the Shetland area, since 1994 is the first of several years that the company won't have to drain its cash on other major projects, like upgrading refineries.
"Hess was cash-hungry.
Now it's got excess cash so I don't think it's unreasonable to assume it will invest" in developing its Shetland interests, Mr. Ting said.
