In the ancient Islamic learning centers of Iran and Iraq, a power struggle is taking place to choose the supreme spiritual leader of the world's Shiite Muslims.
The result of the struggle could either increase the clout of Iran's theocratic regime, or strengthen the school of thought that values separation of church and state.
Because of the high stakes, the governments of Iran and Iraq are meddling in what has traditionally been a purely spiritual matter.
While they are only about 10% of the world's one billion Muslims, Shiites are the overwhelmingly dominant sect in Iran and the majority in Iraq.
Unlike Sunni Muslims, Shiites have a well-organized, hierarchical clergy to which believers look for guidance on every aspect of life.
A handful of the most learned scholars and jurists have the rank of Grand Ayatollah, and from among them is chosen, usually by consensus, the Marja or spiritual leader.
Traditionally, the selection has taken place in the holy city of Najaf, in southern Iraq, which has had a Shiite seminary for over a thousand years.
Most of the sect's star clergy, including the late Grand Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, have been trained there.
But Saddam Hussein's interference in the religious schools, culminating in his bloody suppression of a Shiite-led uprising in southern Iraq after the Gulf War, has left the seminaries devastated.
Hundreds of teachers and scholars have been killed or imprisoned.
Ancient libraries have been burned or looted, destroying priceless Islamic manuscripts that had yet to be studied by modern methods.
Arrests, harassment and sudden closures of religious schools have caused many Shiites to flee.
"The centers of learning are functioning, but they are between life and death," says Sheik Fadhel al-Sahlani, of the Imam al-Khoei Islamic Center in New York City.
"Those who remain will stay there no matter what, with the aim of making sure the Najaf survives."
Among those remaining in Najaf is Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Hussaini al-Seestani, whom many Shiites believe should be recognized as the next Marja.
The post became vacant through the deaths, in quick succession, of two renowned and respected Grand Ayatollahs, Abdul Qassem al-Khoei in Iraq and Muhammad Reza Golpayegani in Iran.
Ayatollah Seestani, 63 years old, was a student of Ayatollah Khoei, and shares his belief that in modern times, a spiritual leader must stay clear of political power.
Political realities, he believes, would inevitably force the spiritual leader to act or endorse actions contrary to Islam.
By contrast, Iran, since the Islamic revolution, has sought to unify state and spiritual power.
Toward that end, Iran claims that since Najaf is so beleaguered by Saddam Hussein's regime, the role of choosing the Marja should fall to Iran's holy city of Qum.
Iran came close to unifying state and spiritual power under Ayatollah Khomeini, whose religious credentials were recognized as impressive even by Shiites who disagreed with many of his actions.
His successor, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, hasn't nearly such good credentials, and doesn't even hold the rank of Grand Ayatollah.
Leading figures in Iran are promoting Grand Ayatollah Mohammed Ali Aragi, a frail scholar said to be over 100 years old and physically failing.
Some Iraqi Shiites fear that the regime only wants to have as Marja a figure too weak to stand in the way of its will.
Yet many Shiites also are alarmed at the power Saddam Hussein now wields in the seminaries of southern Iraq.
Before the Gulf War, Saddam Hussein, a Sunni, contained his persecution of prominent Shiites, trying to portray himself as leader of all the Iraqi people.
But the tone changed markedly during the suppression of the uprising, when Iraqi army tanks rolled into the holy cities blazoned with banners reading "No More Shiites After Today."
Many believe that the death of Ayatollah Khoei in August of 1992 was hastened by Iraqi government persecution.
