If Indonesia's transition to the post-Suharto era proves turbulent, few business groups would have more to lose than Salim Group.
A giant in food, finance and cement, Salim has built itself into Southeast Asia's biggest conglomerate by exploiting close connections with President Suharto and skillfully riding Indonesia's boom.
If the family owners are nervous about Indonesia's political prospects, however, they are keeping it to themselves.
Anthony Salim, president and chief executive officer of the group, said in a rare interview that he believes Indonesia's political succession will be smooth.
"I'm optimistic," said Mr. Anthony, who gave the interview to The Asian Wall Street Journal during a plane ride to Batam Island, where Salim was opening a plant to convert palm oil into an ingredient for soap and cosmetics.
"Why is everybody pessimistic?"
One reason is that there is no clear successor for the 72-year-old Mr. Suharto, who has been president since 1967.
Speculation -- and concern -- about succession is increasing with Mr. Suharto's age.
His current term, the sixth, runs until March 1998.
Mr. Anthony agreed that succession will be a "difficult test" but added: "We already go through so many tests."
Indonesia has a "system" that should work, he argued.
The Indonesian Constitution provides for the vice president to take over the rest of the term if the president dies in office.
After the term, a 1,000-member assembly would select a president for the next five-year term.
But that mechanism has never been tested.
Indonesia has changed leaders only once in the 48 years since independence, and that was anything but smooth: Hundreds of thousands of people were killed during turmoil that followed a Communist-supported coup attempt in 1965.
Suharto, then a general, crushed the revolt and later eased President Sukarno out of office.
Will Salim remain as strong in post-Suharto Indonesia as it is today?
Mr. Anthony said the group's position depends on whether Salim is judged "useful" and "required" for the country.
He implied that Salim will pass that test: "The economy and the players of the economy are intertwined; you can't separate them."
For now, Salim is by far the biggest private player in the Indonesian economy.
The group makes more than half the country's cement and about 90% of its instant noodles.
Salim also owns the biggest private bank, PT Bank Central Asia, as well as hundreds of other companies and tens of thousands of hectares of palm-oil plantations.
Businessmen say Salim's strategy has been to become so big in key industries, notably food and cement, that any future Indonesian leader will rely on the group to help keep the country functioning.
"It's a logical strategy and done smartly," says a senior Indonesian banker.
"Other groups with weaker links to Suharto may fade when he's not around, but Salim should be safe."
Part of the strategy to ensure safety, analysts say, has been to transfer more of Salim's assets into publicly traded companies.
Salim's main cement company, PT Indocement Tunggal Prakarsa, listed shares on the Jakarta Stock Exchange in 1989.
A listing of the Indofood Group, which includes noodle factories, is expected later this year.
The 44-year-old Mr. Anthony is the youngest of the three sons of 77-year-old Liem Sioe Liong, Salim's founder and chairman.
Mr. Liem traces his ties with Mr. Suharto back to the 1950s, when Mr. Suharto was an army lieutenant colonel whose unit bought food from Mr. Liem, a petty trader who had migrated to Central Java from China.
Mr. Liem, whose Indonesian name is Soedono Salim, has prospered since Mr. Suharto became president in 1967.
The president's foster brother, Sudwikatmono, is a longtime business partner and president-director of Indocement.
Parlaying its political ties into opportunities and pursuing them vigorously with professional managers, Salim has built up operations in dozens of countries.
Exactly how big the group is remains a mystery.
Asked to comment on an estimate that 1993 sales totaled at least $9 billion, Mr. Anthony replied: "I guess so, but we don't count it, and we don't want to count."
Mr. Anthony didn't deny that Salim benefits from its political connections.
But, in a statement some Jakarta business people would dispute, he asserted that "a lot of people are as close as us" to the leadership.
About 35% of group revenue comes from outside Indonesia, Mr. Anthony said.
Will that percentage grow?
"The seed has been planted," he said.
"The fruit will grow."
Even though many other countries are opening up for investment, Mr. Anthony said, Indonesia remains "the best place" for Salim.
"If we're afraid of Indonesian investment, why are we doing plantations here?" he asked.
"I'm planting every day.
It's the longest return of all businesses and you can't move the trees."
