Jennifer Culver is blind but can sense when others' eyes are upon her.
"I feel like people are staring at me," the 15-year-old says.
"I feel like an outcast."
But not in this town.
Here in Talladega, visiting a crowded McDonald's, Jennifer isn't self-conscious at all.
Fingering a Braille menu provided by the restaurant, she shouts "Big Mac" and "Egg McMuffin" to several blind friends.
"Here," explains Jennifer, who is part of her school's cheerleading and track teams, "there are so many like me that it's no big deal being blind."
Talladega, in fact, is almost custom-fitted to citizens with disabilities.
Talking stoplights tell pedestrians when to walk and what street they are crossing.
The town's hospital and the police take emergency calls from residents who can't hear or talk.
A factory employs many workers who are deaf, blind or both.
Pizza deliverers can verify an order -- "large sausage and cheese?" -- in American Sign Language.
"You feel odd saying `disabled' here because people are able to do just about anything," says Ruby Green, a vice president of Citizens Bank, which offers Braille statements to blind customers and employs a deaf woman as a teller.
At first glance, Talladega seems an unlikely oasis for the disabled.
Stuck out in the rugged farm country of central Alabama, it is best known for the nearby Talladega Superspeedway and for the local federal correctional institution, whose inmates have included Manuel Noriega and Jim Bakker.
But near the town square is an antebellum school for the deaf, which has grown to include schools for the blind and for people with multiple disabilities.
This cluster of facilities -- known as the Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind -- is unusual.
And its local importance is magnified by the many students who settle here, giving the town of 19,000 about 1,000 disabled citizens, half of them at the institute.
The institute, which grants high-school diplomas and provides vocational training, is also Talladega's biggest employer.
Many grads work at its factory, making paper products, neckties, mops and other items, primarily for the U.S. military.
Under the terms of its government contracts, the factory must have 75% of its production done by disabled workers.
The result is a striking example of how disabilities can be overcome and how workers can help one another out.
On the shop floor, a deaf man runs a fast-moving machine that inks the lines on legal pads.
Beside him, a blind man cuts the pads with a guillotine equipped with an electric eye that turns off the machine if his hands move too close to an active blade.
Production manager Norman Culver also is blind.
"I can walk through here and tell by the sound of the machines if folks are working or if they're talking too much," he says.
Most workers reach the factory on a bus driven by a man with one leg.
They eat at a cafeteria staffed by the blind.
The factory receptionist also is legally blind.
Her workstation includes a "talking calculator" that calls out numbers and "screen-magnification software" that enlarges text on her computer screen to a size she can make out.
Eugene Pennington is both blind and deaf, but he can make a broom by touch.
He loads one end of the stick into a rotating vice, wraps the other end with broomcorn, then secures the corn with wire and trims it with a blade.
In nearly 40 years at the factory he has never injured himself.
"I don't take shortcuts," he explains, communicating with his blind manager with "tactile signing," forming letters and words in each others' hands.
Local politicians visit the factory to court the deaf and blind vote, and the town caters to the disabled in dozens of small ways.
It has repaved bumpy sidewalks and installed the talking traffic signals, which are believed to be the first in the U.S. that also name the street being crossed.
Church services are conducted in sign.
Video shops have sign-language tapes and movies captioned for the hearing-impaired.
Even prison inmates get in on the act, transcribing textbooks into Braille for use at the institute.
Inmates volunteer for the work, which pays 12 cents an hour.
"It's better than digging a ditch," says inmate Darryl Smith, proofreading a Braille text about Gothic architecture.
"At least you're doing something useful and intellectually stimulating."
His co-workers are Hispanic prisoners who regard the work as a way to improve their English.
New technology also helps the disabled work alongside the able-bodied in Talladega.
At Colonial Chevrolet, Buford Gilliam can sell you a car without opening his mouth.
Dialing an old customer -- who, like Mr. Gilliam, is deaf -- the salesman connects his phone handset to a keyboard and screen.
"This is Buford calling from Colonial," he types.
"I heard you were considering a new van.
Is that right?"
The words appear on an identical machine at the customer's home.
Her answer flashes back.
"First, I'd like to pay off the last one you sold me," she says.
This is the same device the police and the town's only hospital use for emergency calls.
Mr. Gilliam, who reads lips, also sells cars to hearing customers and has moved enough cars to win honors as Colonial's salesman of the month.
"Buford understands what people mean, not just what they say," says Joel Alderman, Colonial's president.
"He can read inner motives."
Like many in Talladega, Mr. Alderman has learned to do some signing so he can communicate more easily with his employee.
Over at Domino's Pizza, assistant manager Robin Plunkett keeps next to the cash register a book called "The Joy of Signing."
It helps her talk with deaf employees and customers.
While some words such as cheese (rubbing palms) are standard American Sign Language, others require improvisation.
"I've learned a little bit of sign and a lot of body language," she says.
Domino's deliverymen also know sign, though they can get confused when they deliver to the institute.
"They hurry so much that sometimes they can't remember what part of the school they're at," says Leon Jackson, a blind student.
"So they start signing at us even though we can hear."
Integration into everyday life is even possible for those who can't hear or see, like Mr. Pennington, the factory worker.
After work, he takes the bus home to a trailer park where he is the only resident with disabilities.
Inside his mobile home, he shows off gadgets that help him live alone without sight, sound or speech, for instance the vibrating alarm clock beneath his mattress that wakes him for work.
Mr. Pennington does his own banking and shopping.
At the supermarket, he knows products and brands by feel.
Cashiers use their fingers to scribble the total cost in Mr. Pennington's palm.
He counts out the exact sum, telling the denomination of bills in his pocket by the way he has folded them with help from a bank teller.
Now 59, he looks forward to retiring soon.
A deaf sister wants him to come live with her in a rural area near Fayette, Ala.
But Mr. Pennington wonders whether, if he does that, he will be able to enjoy the independence he has here.
"In Talladega," he says, "I am nothing special.
I like that."
