There was more than a little Ronald Reagan in President Clinton's speech Tuesday night.
Notwithstanding the programmatic litany, the president artfully played on effective symbols, while seizing a moral and substantive high ground.
But he also did a pretty good imitation of another famous Republican: Gen. Douglas MacArthur, when he scored his legendary success at Inchon by boldly striking behind enemy lines.
Like the North Koreans four decades ago, Bob Dole and the GOP this week were surprised; they responded more to what they anticipated than to what actually transpired.
From crime to welfare to personal responsibilities, Bill Clinton occupied what Republicans thought was their turf.
Much of the section on values -- "governments don't raise children, parents do" -- could have been delivered by Bill Bennett.
At the same time he skillfully mixed in enough populism -- "we need to give every hardworking, tax-paying American the same health care security that they already give us" -- to keep critics off guard.
Republicans complained he was stealing their thunder.
Sure he was; that's a lot smarter than ceding those issues, which is what Democrats used to do.
The 63-minute speech was too long -- an endemic Clinton affliction -- but the president nevertheless masterfully accomplished exactly what a State of the Union is supposed to achieve: It set the agenda for the political battles ahead.
Mr. Clinton probably did, as critics complain, claim more credit for the improving economy than he deserved.
But these born-again virgins have a short memory.
Did Ronald Reagan credit the oil sheiks for falling oil prices or Paul Volcker for taming inflation, or did George Bush say it was merely coincidence that the fall of the Berlin Wall happened on his watch?
Moreover, last year's Clinton-engineered budget deal was a factor in lower interest rates and the rise in consumer confidence.
Then there's the carping that the president's emphasis on individual responsibility and values was mere rhetoric.
The presidency, Franklin Roosevelt taught us, is "pre-eminently a place of moral leadership."
Also encouraging is the way this speech was stitched together.
In contrast to last February -- when a grumbling president, with a magic marker, was ripping up his first State of the Union address in the Roosevelt Room only hours before delivery -- this time the structure and content were similar to the initial draft completed Jan. 8 by speechwriter David Dreyer.
As well as touching the usual political bases, the White House also reached out for ideas from a handful of "big thinkers," such as Yale Law School Prof. Stephen Carter and Michael Sandel, a professor of government at Harvard.
Now it remains to be seen whether the administration will retreat and allow the opposition to dominate the dialogue the way it did last year or instead will follow through.
The president, for example, was smart to declare that health care and welfare legislation both should be acted on this year.
But it will take considerable skill to have them reinforce one another and not threaten the necessary coalition for either.
The administration contends that the health care issues now are mere details.
Yet even many of the administration's own economists worry whether the economics are realistic.
There are political problems.
Privately administration strategists clearly are worried that Hillary Clinton, whose leadership is critical, could be sidetracked or even crippled by the Whitewater investigation.
Equally troubling would be an indictment of Dan Rostenkowski, the influential Ways and Means Committee chairman.
Even with Mr. Rostenkowski, the administration has to do a much better job of winning support from the two-thirds of small businesses that already provide health coverage.
But the president brings chips to the table too.
Support for the Clinton proposal is tepid.
But the public shows even less appetite for the alternatives, all of which have their own problems.
One example: The conservative Democratic plan, the Cooper-Breaux bill, is a favorite of large insurance and health care interests, but it actually would limit consumers' ability to choose their own doctor far more than the Clinton plan would.
Further, the Inside-the-Beltway conventional wisdom today that the clamor for a sweeping health care measure is subsiding doesn't square with the facts.
By an overwhelming 68% to 27%, the public, in last week's Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, declared it's not possible to address health care problems "without a complete overhaul" of the current system.
"Gee, I sure hope that more Republicans don't pick up on the argument that there's no health care crisis," Vice President Albert Gore cracked in one of Tuesday's briefings to "spin" the press on the State of the Union.
Charges that the president wants to "socialize" health care will work about as well as the same argument did against Medicare in 1965.
On the economy, the president mainly hopes to keep riding the good times.
Yet here, too, there are tough challenges and decisions.
Pushing an overhaul of welfare is good politics; figuring out how to pay for it may not be, as it's clearly going to cost more in the short run.
And Mr. Clinton still hasn't developed a convincing alternative to the balanced-budget constitutional amendment Congress considers next month or really addressed the issue of curbing the continuing growth in entitlement spending.
On foreign policy, Mr. Clinton finally seems focused on the big issues -- Russia, China, Japan, the Middle East, the future of NATO and expanding commerce with Latin America -- instead of the Somalias and Haitis.
The president's insistence Tuesday night that defense couldn't be cut any further seemed to signal a new seriousness about national security to at least one careful Republican observer.
Vice President Gore will have to play a more visible role in foreign policy, but the president also has to level more with the public.
For starters, he should quit misleading people on how successful his Russian policy has been.
Likewise, while most voters have little interest in foreign policy these days, they think it's not too much to expect competence.
In 1993 the Clinton foreign policy decision-making too often resembled a cross between a graduate school seminar and a fraternity house bull session.
That has to change.
After a year in office, Bill Clinton faces a situation almost the exact opposite of Ronald Reagan's after one year: Much of the public is pretty satisfied with his policies but harbors reservations about him personally.
That problem won't subside easily.
But at the start of Year Two Tuesday night, the president clearly connected with the American people -- and that's a good start.
