India expects to post a 3.8% growth rate for the fiscal year ending March 31, far smaller than the projected 5.6% expansion, and down from 4% the previous year, the government said in its annual report.
But officials vowed to continue their ambitious free-market program, which is attracting record foreign investment.
Industrial stagnation and effects of political disturbances in late 1992 and early 1993 were blamed for braking growth.
The agricultural sector, on which more than two-thirds of India's 880 million people depend, grew just 2.3%, and manufacturing expanded 2.5%.
The government fell short of its target of slashing the budget deficit to 4.7% of gross domestic product but didn't specify a number.
Despite the disappointing performance, India's economy still is growing three times faster than two years ago.
The French government dumped plans for an international conference center in Paris, saying it couldn't afford to build it.
About $50 million has been spent on the $509 million project by the Seine River near the Eiffel Tower.
The center was the last of President Francois Mitterrand's so-called Great Works, which included a Louvre museum wing and an opera house.
The government will study an estimated $84 million expansion of a conference center near the Arc de Triomphe.
About 170,000 western German metal workers staged another in a series of warning strikes at auto and related industries in dozens of cities.
The IG Metall union's 3.2 million members are seeking a showdown over industry's ability to boost wages and maintain generous benefits while trying to climb out of recession.
Employers say workers' demands are driving costs up and forcing production out of Germany.
The brief walkouts began after contract talks broke off last month.
Russia has sufficient grain stored and won't need imports this year.
Moreover, the government could sell as much as four million tons of grain to other former Soviet republics.
Last year, Russia imported 10 million metric tons of grain to supplement domestic output of 100 million tons.
Because of this year's surplus, Russia will lift export duties on grain.
Specialists from the European Union will teach Eastern Europeans how to run modern telecommunications.
Western trainers aim to show telecom workers in 10 countries how to bring the industrialized world's worst phone systems up to EU standards.
Under the $6.3 million technical-aid initiative, the trainers will begin the first of the lessons, on regulation and management, this week in Hungary.
Negotiations on enlarging the European Union resume today amid concern about slim chances for a membership accord with Norway.
EU diplomats were optimistic about an agreement with Finland and Sweden on their entry into the 12-country bloc by next Tuesday's deadline.
Austria's application hinges on resolving the sticky issue of EU truck transit, on which a compromise was expected.
But in Norway's case, the issue of fishing rights could sink negotiations.
The problem is so politically sensitive that the EU has been unable to resolve its own disagreements.
EU ambassadors met into the night yesterday in search of a negotiating stance, with foreign ministers to consider the matter today.
The foreign ministers will meet their counterparts from the four candidate countries tomorrow, and talks could run nonstop until the Tuesday deadline for submitting pacts to the European Parliament.
Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden want to join the EU next Jan. 1, and they face lengthy ratification procedures.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
The U.S. State Department issued a warning, cautioning American citizens against traveling to Rwanda because of ethnic fighting and turmoil in the central African state. . . .
The Czech postal agency is investigating how clerks postmarked some letters without noticing they bore fake stamps showing naked men.
