A federal appeals court ruled that the Resolution Trust Corp. may subpoena financial information to judge the net worth of potential legal targets only if it reasonably suspects that those people may be liable for a thrift's failure.
The three-judge panel here affirmed parts of lower-court decisions that the RTC has the power to issue administrative subpoenas seeking individuals' financial data.
The ruling covered two cases, involving enforcement investigations by the savings-and-loan cleanup agency against William Walde, former chairman of Trustbank Savings, a failed S&L in McLean, Va., and against eight directors of American Pioneer Savings Bank, a failed thrift in Orlando, Fla.
The agency may go after the personal financial information to determine a potential defendant's liability in an S&L failure, to identify attachable assets, or to establish evidence of illegal asset transfers aimed at avoiding restitution payments sought by the RTC, said Judge James Buckley, writing the court's opinion.
The judges found that some of the information sought by the RTC, such as personal bank statements, was relevant to asset-transfer or other purposes, while other data it pursued, such as alimony payments, weren't relevant.
However, the agency's efforts to determine whether it should sue an S&L official, based on that official's financial worth, aren't legitimate, the court said.
It disagreed with what it called the RTC's attempt "to subpoena information relevant to wealth rather than liability."
It held that "in cases such as these, where the RTC has no . . . suspicion to believe that the former officer or director is liable to S&Ls in its custody, the RTC may not subpoena his personal financial information for the purpose of assessing the cost-effectiveness of prospective litigation."
It has been the RTC's policy to try to determine if suing thrift officers and directors could cost more than the amount it could recover, agency spokesman Stephen Katsanos said.
But he said, "We don't think the appeals court ruling will have a major effect on our ability to subpoena" potential targets' financial information.
Mr. Katsanos said that since the two subpoena cases were launched, the RTC has in fact sued Mr. Walde and the American Pioneer directors.
He said the suits showed a reasonable suspicion that the defendants are liable for the thrift failures.
The suits also gave the RTC the right to go after the defendants' financial information in court, he said.
The RTC alleges that Mr. Walde fraudulently shifted sizable assets into a trust for his children, and challenged Mr. Walde's contention that his financial worth has been mostly dissipated.
Thomas Buchanan, Mr. Walde's lawyer, called the court ruling "a major victory for the officers and directors of failed institutions."
He said that more than 30 cases involving RTC subpoenas have been stayed, pending the Walde decision.
Thomas Vartanian, a Washington attorney who represents government targets in two similar cases, said that both the RTC and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. have insisted on "a right to investigate financial wherewithal" of potential defendants.
Now, he said, such cases will have to be reargued.
"The RTC has barked up the wrong tree," Mr. Vartanian said.
