North Korea has repeatedly resorted to threats to use force against South Korea -- to influence Seoul, to deal the American imperialists a punishing blow, to defend its sovereignty.
Its threats have caused tremors in Seoul, Beijing, Tokyo and even in Washington.
Some on the Western side have said war must be prevented at all costs, that it is time to cancel the Team Spirit exercises, withdraw the offer of Patriot missiles, resume bilateral discussions immediately, offer North Korea aid, diplomatic recognition, trade -- anything to stop the weird and unpredictable leaders in Pyongyang from launching a suicidal war.
The first step in preventing war is for the U.S. to send a clear and unmistakable message to Pyongyang that any resort to force by North Korea will result in its ultimate destruction.
This must be delivered at the highest level and be backed up with the machinery to carry it out.
For its part, the U.S. would pledge no first use of force.
Some U.S. friends and allies in Asia would worry about our strong rhetoric and our concrete moves in countering the North Korean threat of force, but there is no other way to deal with North Korea.
Historical experience bears this out.
The Korean War in 1950 was in part caused by confusing American actions.
Recall the withdrawal of all American troops from South Korea in 1948 and Secretary of State Dean Acheson's ambiguity in January 1950 over whether the Korean peninsula was within the U.S. defensive perimeter.
Kim Il Sung met with Stalin in the spring of 1950 and told him that the North could occupy all of South Korea in a matter of weeks and that the U.S. would not intervene.
Millions died as a result of this tragic miscalculation.
Yet a credible American threat of force has worked with North Korea in the past.
It worked in securing the release of the Pueblo's crew in 1968 after Pyongyang had seized the ship and held the men for 11 months.
It also worked when American B-52 bombers overflew the demilitarized zone after the ax murder of two Americans at Panmunjon in 1976 -- the scare forced North Korea to conciliate.
And shortly after then-Defense Secretary Richard Cheney decided not to withdraw 5,000 U.S. troops from South Korea in November 1991, North Korea signed two agreements with the South on reconciliation and denuclearization.
Experienced South Korean negotiators have told the U.S. repeatedly that North Korea views concessions as weakness and reacts favorably only to clarity of intent backed by power.
The North Korean game plan has become increasingly apparent.
Pyongyang wants to preserve nuclear weapons to ensure its own survival.
North Korea's economy is failing: It needs trade, aid and investment from the West, South Korea and Japan to keep Kim Il Sung's regime alive.
The North wants to have both its weapons and economic aid.
It will therefore permit inspections of its installations only in so far as they do not reveal the nuclear weapons program.
If intrusive challenge inspections are pushed, or if economic sanctions are implemented, the North Koreans will then use the threat of war to force concessions from the U.S. on these key issues.
They have reason to believe there are influential Americans who support their position.
Hence they persist.
The Clinton administration in its early months gave conflicting signals to the North.
President Clinton himself delivered a strong message to North Korea in July, when he said "if they ever use them {nuclear weapons}, it would be the end of their country."
But his negotiators allowed the North Koreans to stall talks, defy and frustrate inspections, break off negotiations with South Korea, violate agreements and dominate the dialogue in both New York and Geneva.
Since these negotiations have failed, the president is getting tougher and he is pulling his squabbling bureaucrats, including those at the State Department, into line.
Mr. Clinton's goal should be to make it impossible for North Korea to resort to force.
Once this is clearly established, then the focus of negotiations can be on political, economic and diplomatic means to gain North Korean acceptance of full challenge inspections and on resumption of dialogue with the South.
Only after this is accomplished should the incentives of diplomatic recognition, trade, investments and loans come into play.
Of course, bad bilateral relations between the U.S. and China will influence China's role in North Korea, and linking most-favored-nation status with human rights has unfortunately poisoned the relationship.
China was a major force in getting both South and North Korea into the United Nations in 1991 -- over Kim Il Sung's initial strong objections to joint entry.
China has told the U.S. that North Korea is facing severe economic hardship this spring and that it has informed North Korea that it will not support any attack on the South.
It has also told both the West and North Korea that it supports a denuclearized Korean peninsula.
China has acknowledged privately that it has economic leverage over North Korea.
And Beijing has played a key role in the international arena before.
In 1990, for example, China supported a U.S.-led coalition against its Third World friend, Iraq, and dumped Pol Pot in favor of the U.N. peace plan in Cambodia.
The Clinton administration is wisely resuming this strategic dialogue with China, started in 1989 by then-National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft in the face of savage criticism.
This relationship, combined with the Japanese role in cutting remittances, U.S. military deterrence, and continuing international demands for compliance with inspections, should be sufficient to forestall bloody war.
Mr. Lilley was U.S. ambassador to South Korea (1986-1989) and ambassador to China (1989-91).
