Mention Walt Disney in the same breath with insects, and most people think of Jiminy Cricket.
But wizards at the Magic Kingdom have embarked on a new adventure in entomology.
Together with the University of California, they're waging an ecological turf war against an Australian insect that hitchhiked to California.
Scientists recruited the pest's natural enemy, a tiny wasp the size of a grain of pepper, as a biological alternative to chemical pesticides.
Although it sounds like an invention of New Age ecologists, biological control is an ancient practice.
In A.D. 300, the Chinese deployed ants to kill pests threatening Mandarin oranges.
California citrus growers adopted the technique a century ago, by importing Vidalia beetles, a kin of ladybugs, to curb scale infesting the groves.
This time, the pest is the eugenia psyllid (pronounced SILL-id), an aphid-like creature that dines and lays its eggs on the lush leaves of the eugenia tree.
Eugenia, another import from Down Under, loves the temperate climate of coastal California.
Thus it has been prized as border shrubs and trees for decades by gardeners from San Diego to the San Francisco Bay, among other West Coast regions.
A few Florida nurseries also began selling eugenia, but the plant's intolerance of heat and cold have kept it from being widely adopted in this country.
Disneyland's gardeners loved eugenia, planting about 2,400 linear feet of it as hedges, and pruning still more of the trees into topiary sculptures of Mickey Mouse, Pluto and other cartoon characters.
They little suspected the park's pristine gardens would become juicy fodder for an alien bug.
Enter the stowaway psyllids in the late 1980s, probably in a tourist's suitcase or in the hold of a commercial jetliner.
Once here, the voracious bugs savaged eugenia, blistering leaves and stunting growth, says Dr. Donald L. Dahlsten, professor of biological control at the University of California at Berkeley.
"The psyllid larvae sit right down in a pit formed by sucking on the leaves' underside," he says.
The bugs also excrete a sugar-laden waste that nourishes the growth of sooty mold, caking leaves with blackish dust.
Says Dr. Dahlsten: "You have a mess."
Californians sprayed pesticides and garden soaps at the infestation.
But the bugs breed faster than chemicals can kill them.
"Now you can't find a single eugenia in the state without them," he says.
"Millions have been spent trying to get rid of the pest."
Disney officials in 1991 called Dr. Dahlsten for help.
As it happened, the professor was packing for a sabbatical in Australia.
Once there, he visited a rain forest outside Sydney, the aboriginal home of the eugenia, where he combed the foliage to find the psyllids' natural enemy.
His quest was rewarded.
Healthy eugenia flourished there.
Oddly, he also found dead psyllid larvae, all bearing holes punched by a tiny stingerless wasp.
That miniwasp, named Tamarixia, measures just 1.5 mm, or half the length of its prey.
But by inserting its ovipositor through the body of the psyllid larva and depositing its eggs under it, the wasp effectively kills its enemy and saves the eugenia.
Next came red tape and quarantine.
"The hardest part was getting permission to ship wasps out of Australia," Dr. Dahlsten says.
Under laws regulating export of exotic fauna, he waited a month for permission from Australian parks and agriculture chiefs.
Transport security was tight.
Egg-bearing leaves were encased in gelatin capsules, like those used by druggists.
Boxed, double-bagged, entombed in mailing tubes, the wasp eggs boarded commercial jetliners bound for San Francisco.
Once the wasps landed there, U.S. Department of Agriculture officials placed them under quarantine at Dr. Dahlsten's experimental agricultural station near the Berkeley campus.
There, they hatched, mated, fed on eugenia psyllids, and waited another six months for a green light from the USDA and county officials.
All this was necessary so Dr. Dahlsten could convince officials that the wasps wouldn't ravage other plants or insects.
Luckily, the wasps only eat psyllids.
"This thing is a specialist," he says proudly.
From his office festooned with bird and bug mobiles, the rugged silver-haired scientist recently took a reporter for a peek at his outdoor lab, an experimental greenhouse.
There he shook a branch of healthy eugenia to dislodge the bugs.
"They're hard to catch today because of the cold," he grumbles.
Tapping the bough, he cups his hand to catch a pale winged fly, and a few black flecks looking like ground pepper.
The critters scuttle under a microscope.
"See here's the psyllid, and here are the wasps," he says, explaining the once-blighted bush bears healthy new leaves because the two bugs now live in balance.
In July 1992, a handful of wasps, 78 females and 25 males, were unleashed at Disneyland.
Every three or four weeks, Dr. Dahlsten visits the park for a census report on predator and prey.
"At Disneyland, there's been a 90% reduction in the psyllid population, and a definite improvement in the foliage," he says.
"We're not declaring success just yet.
We're only in the midst of the second year of the test.
We're being cautious because biological controls take three to five years."
Project sponsor Walt Disney Imagineering, a part of Walt Disney Co., confirms the immigrant has adapted well to its new home.
"The Tamarixia wasps spread around the park in two months.
They seem to be prolific, which is our good fortune," says Disney ecologist Donald Kent.
"We haven't had to use pesticides since May 1992, and the plants look better."
With a happy ending in sight at the Magic Kingdom, scientists introduced the wasps in May 1993 at the San Diego Zoo.
There, eugenia are used for both decorative landscaping and monkey forage, ruling out all pesticides.
"We really had some ugly trees.
But their appearance has improved dramatically," says zoo arborist Danny Simpson.
This spring, Dr. Dahlsten may extend Tamarixia's road show into San Francisco and Marin County.
Unsurprisingly, the little wasp is drawing attention of biological control companies.
Rincon-Vitoba Insectaries Inc. of Ventura, Calif., wants to commercialize Tamarixia, but the bug's natural success poses a paradox for would-be marketers.
"Once these things move around on their own, there won't be a market for anybody," says Dr. Dahlsten.
Of course, a bug that distributes itself, he adds, is the ideal biological agent."
