Calgene Inc. got more bad news about its genetically engineered tomato, when the Food and Drug Administration postponed next week's long-awaited hearing on the product.
Calgene's chief executive officer, Roger Salquist, said the agency notified him that it was deferring the hearing, originally scheduled for March 9 and 10, because it was unable to assemble the necessary experts to evaluate the safety of the Flavr Savr tomato.
Mr. Salquist said he doesn't know when the FDA hearing will be rescheduled.
He had predicted that the tomato would be cleared for marketing last fall, and he expressed impatience with FDA delays after "a three-year dialogue" between the company and the agency.
"We envisioned not sitting around waiting for the FDA to get off their butts," he said in an interview.
"I fully expected we'd have this thing concluded in October or November at the latest."
In Washington, an FDA spokesman termed the meeting's delay "a minor logistical problem which we are working to resolve."
Calgene's scientists engineered the Flavr Savr tomato to knock out the gene that makes tomatoes rot.
This would enable growers to ship vine-ripened tomatoes, rather than picking them hard and green.
While Calgene has asserted that the product is completely safe, critics such as biotechnology gadfly Jeremy Rifkin and some restaurant chefs have opposed it.
The FDA's delay was the second bruising the tomato took yesterday.
Earlier, citing heavy operating losses, Calgene said it was "temporarily scaling back" operation of its Calgene Fresh subsidiary and curtailing a test-marketing program of vine-ripened tomatoes.
Calgene Fresh and the test were established to create an infrastructure for the eventual marketing of the Flavr Savr.
Mr. Salquist demurred as to how many employees would be furloughed in the move.
But he added that Calgene Fresh would "move forward" with a staff of about 70, down from a onetime staffing high of about 150.
After the first announcement yesterday, Calgene's shares fell $1, or 7.7%, to $12 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Word of the FDA's move came after the close of trading.
Blaming regulatory delays and the high cost of its tomato program, Calgene recently predicted that its loss for the year ending June 30 will exceed its fiscal 1993 loss of $25.6 million, or $1.13 a share.
Calgene, which is based in Davis, Calif., also said last week that it had reached an agreement with Zeneca AVP and Campbell Soup Co. under which Calgene will retain rights to market fresh Flavr Savr tomatoes, while its two marketing partners share rights to market processed tomatoes.
Despite his frustration, Mr. Salquist said he is "a born optimist," and remains confident that the product eventually will be cleared for market by regulators.
