Following rumors of a boardroom fight and criticism from some politicians, John Cahill will leave his post as chairman of British Aerospace PLC.
Mr. Cahill leaves the position after serving only two years of a five-year contract.
In his place, British Aerospace appointed an American, Bob Bauman, who is chief executive of SmithKline Beecham PLC.
Mr. Bauman, 62 years old, plans to leave SmithKline, an Anglo-American health-care company, in April, when he will move to his new post.
While a statement issued late Friday by British Aerospace portrayed Mr. Cahill's early departure as amicable, the U.K. media speculated that his exit stems from a boardroom battle over the future of the company's defense business.
In addition, Mr. Cahill has come under attack recently from some British parliamentarians because of his generous contract and his refusal for tax purposes to live in the U.K.
An Englishman, Mr. Cahill has homes in both Florida and New England.
In its statement, British Aerospace said that substantial progress has been made in several key areas of the business and that "the board and John Cahill believe it's an appropriate moment for him to relinquish the chairmanship to allow him to spend more time with his family in the U.S."
He leaves the company with about $4.7 million in share options.
While Mr. Cahill earned $800,000 a year plus options, Mr. Bauman will serve only as non-executive chairman and receive a salary of #50,000 ($73,000) a year plus share options.
Mr. Bauman takes charge of a conglomerate with activities in defense, civil aerospace and property development that together generate annual sales of #6 billion.
The company, however, is undergoing change.
Two weeks ago, British Aerospace stunned the markets by announcing the sale for #800 million of its Rover automobiles unit to Germany's Bayerische Motoren Werke AG.
The U.K. company has also moved to restructure its aerospace activities.
And it is enjoying strong orders and results in its defense activities.
The fact that the company's board gave an American the controls of one of the crown jewels of British industry shows their high esteem for Mr. Bauman.
His extensive resume includes current posts on the boards of Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and Reuters Holdings PLC.
He also served as chairman of Avco Corp., an aerospace concern that is a major engineand-parts supplier to British Aerospace.
Appointed to the chairman's post at Beecham PLC in 1986, Mr. Bauman lacked experience in pharmaceuticals.
However, he took advantage of his outsider's status by bucking conventional wisdom, agreeing to a transatlantic merger with SmithKline Beckman Corp. of the U.S.
Mr. Bauman has worked hard to establish good relations with pharmaceutical industry analysts and investors -- a fact not lost on aerospace analysts, who praised his reputation at SmithKline.
