Kofi Amoah loves to converse on the subject but he understands the law of the digital jungle.
He defers a question to a friend across the table in a New York bar where they are unwinding.
"Talk to him," he says.
"He's got a bigger hard drive."
A seat away, Terry Donofrio and his pal Rich DeLio are exploring the same terrain.
They compare measurements.
"You've one-upped me," says Mr. DeLio, concluding that Mr. Donofrio's 20-inch monster -- a computer monitor -- is bigger than his.
If computer mastery has proved genderless, computer talk is largely guy talk, having in some quarters supplanted cars, sports and sex as the subject of choice around the water cooler, and at the bar.
The lingo is overtly masculine -- and sometimes outright macho.
It's a discourse surging with boasts and bravado -- the more megabytes; the more RAM; the bigger the hard drive; the more speed; the more a PC costs, the better.
Indeed, male esteem used to be tied up in cars and "sexual prowess," muses Fred Hoar, president of a computer consulting concern in California's Silicon Valley.
But these days, among a burgeoning class of male techno-literates, many male egos are stoked by "the power and value of your technical equipment" and a fluency in "techno-rap," he says.
Mr. Hoar explains: "If a guy can talk bits, bytes, feeds and speeds, you know right away this guy is a geek."
But being a geek (a word, in computer parlance, synonymous with nerd) isn't bad -- it's good.
"Rugged geekism is the path to the information superhighway," says Mr. Hoar.
"Bill Gates the billionaire {chairman of Microsoft Corp.} is a geek.
Geeks, nerds -- they're `in.'
The nerds are all rich . . . and they are a kind of new aristocracy."
Says Mark Macgillivray, a Sunnyvale, Calif., management consultant, "Computers are the new lingua franca for would-be studs."
There are women nerds, of course.
Lots of them.
But women seem less compelled to talk about their computer conquests or to brag about being the first to get their hands on a triple-clocked Intel processor.
"It's a male bonding thing," says Elaine Santagelo, a manager for the Boston Computer Society, noting that she can't go to a cocktail party these days without encountering megaclusters of men feverishly comparing hard drives and modem speeds.
Celeste Lester, a Rye, N.Y., PC owner and consultant, agrees.
She says the men in her office are constantly prattling on about arcane computer hardware -- the hottest local-bus video, or how many expansion slots a truly hot computer ought to have.
Ms. Lester merely wants her computer to work efficiently.
"Who cares how powerful your hardware is?" she says.
Men not only care deeply about their hardware, they also view the computer as something to conquer.
"They want to whip the thing in line and show it who's boss.
I don't think women get off on taming computers," says Deborah Tannen, author of the book "You Just Don't Understand: Women and Men in Conversation."
There are other factors, as well.
Many men are finding it increasingly difficult, and risky, to talk about women and sex -- at least in the office.
Professional sports, with perhaps the exception of basketball, seem to be losing their allure.
Car mania ebbs and flows, but bragging about Porsches and BMWs went out with the Decade of Greed.
Filling this gap: computers, which, if customized with a big enough hard drive, a fast enough processor and a gigantic surplus of RAM, can be turned into digital hot rods that don't burn gas or take up space in the garage.
Put another way, computers are toys, and when men talk computers "they sometimes turn into little boys again," says Larry Bubel, a public-transit worker and computer owner.
That computerspeak is such a masculine language rife with sexual imagery -- RAM cram, hot key, stacked disk, among others -- isn't surprising, given the overwhelmingly male contingent among the engineers, programmers and entrepreneurs who founded the computer industry.
Steven Mulaik, vice president for a drugstore chain, recalls a decade ago working with nerds on a computer help-desk at Georgia Tech University.
Back then, nerds were still considered socially inept, techno-babblers, and his co-workers conformed to that image, being guys who had no life beyond staying "up all night talking tech," he says.
To compensate, these "sexually repressed techno-nerds" invented manly sounding terms like "megabyte" -- roughly a million bytes or bits of digital information -- that allowed them to live vicariously through their technology, Mr. Mulaik adds.
The nerd, of course, has been revenged, and his language is now "starting to become office colloquial," he notes.
The language is even traveling outside of technology: "Megadeals" describe huge mergers and acquisitions, many of which are filled with "megaproblems."
The new, techno-literate man pays a hip, smart, attractive female a compliment when he calls her a "megawoman."
It's questionable, however, whether the evolution of techno-speak can keep up with the overpowering urge among men to upgrade their systems, and then talk incessantly about it.
Most computers today are still used for rather mundane purposes like word processing, accounting, games and connecting to on-line services.
Virtually all of those can be accomplished with today's bare-bones 486-generation computers, and even the bare-bone 386 models of a couple of years ago.
Tell that to Mr. Donofrio, a Waldwick, N.J., consultant.
Though he admits he probably doesn't need it, he says he just invested in a state of the art PC with a blindingly fast Pentium processor.
"I figured, why wait?" he says with a shrug, adding that he also has CD-ROM and is thinking about adding a sound card -- a peripheral that allows a computer to reproduce digital, stereo sound.
Some fellow consultants in the bar can't match Mr. Donofrio's hardware, but they are happy to cast aspersions on those still stuck in a 386 -- or God, forbid -- 286 rut.
"I mean, those are antiques now," scoffs Chuck Hill, a consultant from Sarasota, Fla.
Such techno-dust-ups are nothing compared with the West Coast techno-hip crowd.
"We're especially jaded out here in Silicon Valley," says Mr. Macgillivray, the Sunnyvale consultant and self-confessed Apple Macintosh power user.
"I remember crass boys in junior high school pulling down their pants and having `big member' contests.
Well, that's what it's like here.
Guys will open a conversation with `So, what kind of processor are you running?'"
And, of course, unless your processor is the newest, fastest and most sophisticated, "you get no respect," he adds.
In fact, in the Valley, true power users -- also known as "heat seekers" -- consider it lame to invest merely in an off-the-shelf, state-of-the-art computer.
"You buy a high-end machine and then upgrade the hell out of it," notes Mr. Macgillivray.
Mr. Hoar is all too well aware of this.
Though he speaks bits, bytes, feeds and speeds, he confesses that the Apple on his desk is a bit outmoded, and that hardly a day goes by without a male colleague coming by and tweaking him for not upgrading his system.
"Well, how big is your hard drive," a questioner wants to know.
Mr. Hoar -- a bit embarrassed perhaps? -- isn't saying.
