A federal appeals court upheld the state of New York's right to adopt California's program for cutting vehicle emissions, including a mandate for zero-emission vehicles, or electric cars.
The ruling amounts to another defeat for the auto industry, which has been fighting the spread to the Northeast of stricter clean-air regulations than those set by the federal government.
Specifically, the Second Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that the 1990 amendments to the federal Clean Air Act give New York the authority to adopt California's program in its entirety.
The decision is likely to add momentum to a petition that 12 Northeast states -- including New York -- and Washington, D.C., have filed with the Environmental Protection Agency calling for similar regulations to be applied to the entire Northeast.
The ruling "removes any legal cloud of uncertainty" from the regional effort, said Thomas Jorling, New York's commissioner of environmental conservation.
"I hope that the auto industry . . . will now get on with the job of building cars that are in accord with this program."
The ruling criticized the auto makers' resistance to the California program's requirement that the industry sell zero-emission vehicles, such as electric cars, by 1998.
The industry, led by Detroit's Big Three, has argued that electric vehicles won't meet most customer needs before the turn of the century because of technological shortcomings.
The court, however, compared that view to the belief, held by some people a century ago, that "anything that ever could be invented had already been invented."
The auto makers did score a small victory.
New York will have to wait until the auto industry's 1996 model year before it can implement the first phase of the stringent California-style program.
The ruling didn't address what kind of fuels would have to be used under that program in New York.
The ruling is a setback for the American Automobile Manufacturers Association, the Big Three lobby that challenged New York's right to adopt the California regulations.
It had attempted to sell an alternative emissions-reduction program for the Northeast, but it ultimately failed to garner widespread support.
An officials for the AAMA had no immediate comment.
The ruling also may influence a separate case in Massachusetts, where the AAMA is fighting to keep the California emissions-reduction program from going into effect next year.
