Ontario's socialized health-care system has a new prescription for patients with a cold or flu: Don't bother your doctor; eat chicken soup.
Ontario residents get free medical coverage.
But officials here complain that frequent snifflers go to the doctor too much, clogging up the health-care system and costing the province about 200 million Canadian dollars (US$148 million) a year.
So now the government is trying to convince cold and flu sufferers that they can cure themselves without professional advice.
"A cold lasts a week, and if you see a doctor it lasts seven days," goes one government advertisement.
The campaign to reduce doctor visits is being tested in London, Ontario, where residents were mailed brochures extolling the virtues of chicken soup.
To clear a stuffed nose, the brochure relates, "Egyptians favor mustard.
Greeks use vinegar and pepper.
Russians swear by horseradish.
And South Asians drink a ginger and coriander tea."
"We don't deny a cold is a miserable thing.
But we're trying to conserve dollars and physician time.
It's like getting people to turn off the lights to conserve energy," says Eleanor Brownridge, who's leading the Ontario program.
If successful, the campaign could spread across the province by next fall's flu season.
Weaning patients from free medical care will take more than soup and horseradish, some say.
"Most people go to the doctor too much.
If they had to pay for it they'd go much less," says Brenda Willis, a registered nurse in London.
People visit a doctor for more reasons than just being sick.
Some people are lonely.
"They like to come and schmooze.
Their appointment's at 3 p.m., they come at 1 p.m.
There's more to do here than at home," says Steve Gottesman, a family practitioner in Toronto.
Still others are scared.
An elderly patient of Dr. Gottesman, otherwise healthy, used to come in every Friday "to make sure he was OK for the weekend," when the office was closed.
The visits ended after a neighbor began checking on the man over the weekend.
Under any health-care system, doctors and nurses sometimes treat more than their patients' illnesses.
Says Ms. Willis: "Some of their lives are pretty poor.
Maybe it's the only sympathy they get."
