The Clinton administration is seeking to boost spending on federal job-training programs by 13%, to more than $7 billion, focusing largely on middle-class unemployed workers but also adding funds for the inner-city poor.
The Labor Department, which administers the programs, would be one of the winners in the administration's fiscal 1995 budget to be released Monday.
But it isn't clear what will happen to training programs run by other agencies, or what programs within the Labor Department might be cut to help pay for the roughly $800 million increase in federal training funds.
The core of the administration's new training initiatives is a "dislocated-worker program," aimed at helping people permanently laid off because of a closed factory, corporate streamlining or import competition.
That program is budgeted at more than $2 billion for the coming fiscal year, and is projected to cost $3 billion annually when fully implemented.
The dislocated-worker fund would combine six existing funding streams currently budgeted at about $1.5 billion.
But the Labor Department's focus on the dislocated-worker program is raising questions about whether the White House is shifting the focus of federal job training to the middle class from the poor.
Administration officials, sensitive to such criticism, said the contention isn't true.
Labor Secretary Robert Reich refused to talk about the specifics of the budget, but argued that money would be doled out fairly.
"This isn't a zero-sum game," Mr. Reich said in an interview.
"The president wants to expand programs for the disadvantaged as well as for dislocated workers."
He noted that those laid-off workers eligible for the dislocated-worker program are "both disadvantaged and working class or lower-middle class."
A look at figures in the president's planned budget shows that spending on programs for youths, who need to be poor to qualify for most programs, would grow 12% next year, according to officials who have seen the budget proposal.
In all, youth programs, mostly targeted at the poor, will increase to $3.1 billion, while spending on programs for adults would gain 14% to $4.1 billion, largely through the dislocated-worker program.
For example, Job Corps, a program that takes poor teenagers out of the inner city and puts them in a boot-camp-type environment, would get an 11% budget increase, to $1.16 billion, under the president's proposal.
The summer youth-employment program would gain $168 million, or 19%, to $1.06 billion.
And the Job Training Partnership Act program for poor adults would gain $142 million over its current budget authority of almost $1 billion.
At the same time, however, the program for disadvantaged youth, which studies have shown fell short of expectations, would be cut by about 9%, or $60 million, to just below $600 million.
Advocates for expansions of job training are warily awaiting Monday's budget announcement.
"Clearly the amount of money they're willing to put in is one of the chief defining characteristics of whether this program is going to be a good one," said Lawrence Mishel, research director of the Economic Policy Institute, a Washington think tank funded in part by unions.
"If there isn't enough money, then there is a hollow promise.
With enough money, it could be a real advance in our labor-market policies."
