Despite the casualties and property damage, the earthquake that struck Los Angeles yesterday morning wasn't the "Big One" that Californians have been expecting for several years.
Geophysicists said the 1992 Southern California quake was 30 times more powerful.
They also said they couldn't immediately determine if yesterday's quake was due to slippage of a known or a previously undiscovered geological fault.
That won't be determined until seismological data from several stations have been analyzed.
Preliminary readings of seismographs showed that yesterday's earthquake, centered under the Los Angeles community of Northridge, registered about 6.6 on the Richter scale for measuring the energy released by earthquakes.
It was followed by more than a half-dozen aftershocks registering between 3.0 and 5.0 on the Richter scale.
"There'll probably be a lot of aftershocks registering 4.0 to 5.0 on the scale for the next four to five days," said geophysicist Stuart Koyanagi of the U.S. Geological Survey's Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo.
By comparison with yesterday's quake, a "major" quake is one that registers 7.0 or higher on the Richter scale.
The June 1992 earthquake centered at the Southern California town of Landers near the Mojave Desert killed one person though it had a Richter reading of 7.5.
The October 1989 quake in San Francisco, which killed 63 people, hit 7.1 on the scale.
"The amount of damage and the loss of life from a quake depends on where it occurs" as much as on the amount of energy released, Mr. Koyanagi said.
The Northridge quake hit in the heavily populated San Fernando Valley that stretches for 50 miles north of downtown Los Angeles.
Only earthquakes registering 8.0 or higher are classed as "great" quakes, examples being the 1964 Alaska earthquake (8.4) and the 1906 San Francisco quake, estimated at 8.3 on the Richter scale.
"We've looked at some of the seismological data here in Pennsylvania and it looks like a typical quake for Southern California," said geophysicist Charles A. Langston at Pennsylvania State University in University Park.
Earthquake researchers hadn't predicted the Northridge quake, "at least not that we know of," said Mr. Koyanagi of the Geological Survey.
Nor was there any warning of an impending quake, although Mr. Koyanagi noted that last week there were several small quakes off the coast of California near Santa Monica that were "suspicious but they weren't quite in the same area" as yesterday's quake.
Nevertheless, "it wasn't unexpected in the sense that Southern California has been having a lot of quakes in the last few years," said Penn State's Dr. Langston.
The repeated shaking of Southern California "seems to have something to do with the mountain building that's going on there," he said.
The San Fernando Valley is created by the Santa Monica and San Gabriel mountain ranges that have been inching toward each other.
One question geophysicists probably will investigate in coming months is whether the Northridge quake has any relation to the Landers quake in June 1992.
The Landers quake was extremely unusual because it seemed to trigger earthquakes across the western U.S. for weeks afterwards, including quakes as far away as Yellowstone National Park and Cascade, Idaho, as though it had shaken up the subterranean geology of the whole earthquake-prone West.
-- JANUARY 17, 1994: Northridge An estimated 6.6-magnitude quake centered near this San Fernando Valley town; at least two dozen dead.
-- June 28, 1992: LanderS A 7.5 earthquake in this town near San Bernardino and a 6.6 aftershock at Big Bear Lake kill one toddler.
-- Oct. 17, 1989: Loma Prieta (Santa Cruz Mountains) 7.1 quake causes widespread damage in the San Francisco Bay area; 63 people die.
-- Oct. 1, 1987: Whittier A 5.9 quake and a 5.3 aftershock kill eight people.
-- Jan. 24, 1980: Livermore A 5.8 quake strikes the area east of San Francisco and damages a nuclear weapons laboratory.
-- Feb. 9, 1971: Sylmar A 6.5 quake in the San Fernando Valley kills 65 people.
-- July 21, 1952: Bakersfield A 7.7 quake in an area 50 miles north of Los Angeles kills 12 people.
-- March 10, 1933: Long Beach A 6.3 quake kills 115 people.
-- April 18-19, 1906: San Francisco Earthquake and fires level the city, killing at least 700 people.
Scientists estimate that the quake would have registered 8.3 on the Richter scale.
