The Food and Drug Administration is aggressively gathering evidence that would allow it to regulate cigarettes.
Testifying before a Congressional subcommittee, Food and Drug Administration Commissioner David A. Kessler presented evidence that tobacco companies intentionally sell cigarettes containing an addictive level of nicotine.
"Cigarette manufacturers may intend that most smokers buy cigarettes to satisfy their nicotine addiction," he said.
He called cigarettes "high-technology nicotine-delivery systems" and said that cigarette-industry research resembles drug development.
Dr. Kessler said the agency did not "yet" have enough evidence to assert regulation over cigarettes, but said the investigation is continuing.
The FDA has the authority to regulate cigarettes if the agency concludes that cigarette makers intend to control the level of nicotine in cigarettes to addict smokers.
Because such a move would lead to a ban on cigarettes, Dr. Kessler said he sought "guidance" from Congress on how nicotine should be regulated if the agency were to rule that cigarettes are a drug.
Dr. Kessler said, "If the agency were to hypothetically assert regulation . . . the question becomes how should nicotine be regulated.
We need to do work in that area."
While Dr. Kessler raised the issue of FDA regulation in a letter last month, his detailed testimony suggested the agency is vigorously pursuing a role in regulating cigarettes.
The prospect has cast a pall over cigarette stocks; Philip Morris Cos. fell 75 cents to $51.50 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading on Friday following the testimony.
Tobacco companies hotly deny there is a need for the FDA to regulate tobacco, a move that has been proposed by some in Congress for several years.
In testimony, tobacco-industry representatives denied a central point of Dr. Kessler's argument -- that nicotine is addictive.
But the FDA uncovered evidence that cigarette companies have suppressed research suggesting nicotine is addictive.
Dr. Kessler said tobacco-company scientists had written papers that indicated nicotine is addictive several years before that idea was commonly accepted.
According to the FDA, one such article had been withdrawn from publication after tobacco-company lawyers expressed concerns.
In his testimony, Dr. Kessler emphasized that the FDA's investigation went far beyond whether tobacco companies were deliberately adding nicotine to cigarettes in the manufacturing process.
In recent weeks, the cigarette industry has rebutted charges that it was "spiking" the level of nicotine in cigarettes.
Last week, Philip Morris filed a $10 billion lawsuit against ABC News, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., because of a broadcast suggesting that the industry was adding nicotine to cigarettes to hook smokers.
Most of the tobacco-industry testimony at the Friday hearing before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment was addressed at disproving "spiking" allegations, pointing out that the cigarette-manufacturing process actually lowers the nicotine level in most cigarettes.
But Dr. Kessler said the fact that the industry is able to lower the nicotine level may bolster the case that tobacco companies intend for cigarettes to possess an addictive level of nicotine.
Dr. Kessler, who has a degree from Harvard Medical School and a law degree from the University of Chicago, said, "It is irrelevant how you increase the nicotine.
The issue is how the level is set and why it is set above the addictive level."
Dr. Kessler spent much of his testimony focusing on patents that the industry developed to increase nicotine in cigarettes by adding nicotine to filters and wrappers.
While cigarette executives denied the patents were in use, Dr. Kessler said, "The number and pattern of these patents leave little doubt that the cigarette industry has developed enormously sophisticated methods for manipulating nicotine levels in cigarettes."
Dr. Kessler's position is gaining support in Washington.
On CBS News's "Face the Nation" yesterday, Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders said that if there is evidence that tobacco companies have controlled the amount of nicotine in their products, cigarettes should be regulated by the Food and Drug Administration.
