Houston private eye Edmund J. Pankau claims to have pulled off exploits that would turn Sam Spade himself green with envy.
In the course of his two-decade career, the 48-year-old investigator, according to published reports, has helped nab a notorious gang of jewel thieves, videotaped Donna Rice and former U.S. Sen. Gary Hart together, and rushed into a burning building to snatch a computer printout of the financial holdings of deposed Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega.
From these and other tales, Mr. Pankau has gained a colorful notoriety, particularly in Texas.
Nearly all major newspapers in the U.S., including this one, have quoted him.
He appears often on television newsmagazine shows.
Phil Donahue, Larry King and Joan Rivers have all interviewed him.
The headline of a 1992 New York Times page-one article billed him as "A New Breed of Sam Spade."
That story was followed by a book deal with Macmillan Inc. for his autobiography.
But whether Mr. Pankau's larger-than-life image is justified is an open question.
Writer Robert Pack, who signed to work on the autobiography, spent six months researching his subject's claims.
And he began to worry that the detective who built his career on sniffing out untruths might be telling a few himself.
"I do not believe it is possible to produce a true, libel-free book about your career," Mr. Pack wrote Mr. Pankau last April.
In an accompanying 15-page statement, which became public last week as part of a lawsuit, Mr. Pack argued that the sleuth couldn't document claims he had made before signing the book deal.
Mr. Pack says Mr. Pankau had promised -- but never delivered -- new information on the Iran-Contra scandal, and details of his investigations of gigantic figures in white-collar crime, people he called "unknown Keatings."
According to Mr. Pack's statement, Mr. Pankau's promises may "constitute fraud" on him and Macmillan.
The publisher declines to comment.
The document became public when Mr. Pankau filed a defamation suit against Mr. Pack in state district court in Houston last month.
The suit, seeking more than $5 million in damages, charges that Mr. Pack "is spreading vicious and unsubstantiated statements about Ed Pankau's veracity, moral character and honor."
Mr. Pankau's attorneys, in attaching Mr. Pack's statement as evidence, filed a motion to seal it from public view.
But District Court Judge Michael Schneider initially left it open pending a hearing on the motion.
At Mr. Pack's request, the case was transferred to federal district court in Houston Friday, and a motion by Mr. Pankau's lawyers to seal parts of the files is now pending there.
Mr. Pack, who among other things collaborated with former White House spokesman Larry Speakes on a best-seller about the Reagan administration, declines to comment on Mr. Pankau.
He is under an order prohibiting him from commenting, according to the lawsuit, as part of a case he has pending against Mr. Pankau with the American Arbitration Association.
The suit doesn't specify what the arbitration case is about.
Mr. Pankau, who heads his own Houston-based firm, Intertect Inc., has declined to discuss the lawsuit and the allegations in Mr. Pack's statement with The Wall Street Journal, aside from one brief phone conversation.
Asked for his version of the highlights of his career, Mr. Pankau made an appointment with a reporter, but his office canceled it, saying he was "detained in Dallas."
The next day, Mr. Pankau agreed to call a reporter at a specified time, but didn't.
His wife said he was called away on an emergency.
Some former clients defend Mr. Pankau as a competent investigator.
Monty E. Pendleton, a Houston-based consultant, says Mr. Pankau tracked down real-estate holdings of one of his debtors by foraging through public records in another state.
"He's got a big ego and likes to brag," Mr. Pendleton says.
"But he also delivers."
Well-known as a financial investigator, Mr. Pankau has worked for clients ranging from banks to the federal government.
Since 1989, he has done 32 jobs for the Resolution Trust Corp. -- mostly searches of public records -- and collected about $150,000 in fees, says agency spokesman Stephen Katsanos.
"He was an average performer," Mr. Katsanos says.
Mr. Pankau has long claimed to be well above average as a detective, but he hasn't championed his veracity.
In his 1992 book "Check It Out!" -- a how-to book on finding out about the people in your life -- he advises would-be private eyes not to be shy about telling a fib or two.
"The true secret of the supersleuths is often a glib-tongued, smooth-talking little pretext, a white lie that often falls into the gray area, but not illegal, realm of the law."
WOUNDED IN VIETNAM?
One of Mr. Pack's biggest complaints, according to his statement, is that in the course of his interviews with Mr. Pankau -- some of them taped -- the detective contradicted himself repeatedly.
Some publications, including Business Week, have said Mr. Pankau was a Green Beret in Vietnam.
One article -- in a 1992 issue of Florida State Magazine -- said he was wounded in combat.
But Mr. Pankau told his biographer he was never in Vietnam, according to Mr. Pack's statement.
When pressed to explain, he allegedly gave Mr. Pack several stories, once saying he had flown over Vietnam and landed briefly -- never leaving the plane -- and another time claiming he had been in Vietnam for a couple of days but wasn't allowed to talk about it.
Army files from the government's National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis show Mr. Pankau spent two weeks in Okinawa but otherwise served entirely in the U.S.
His files don't indicate that he was a Green Beret or that he was wounded -- information that would normally be included on military records, says Cheryl Betts, a spokeswoman for the center.
Mr. Pankau has built his image partly on his experience with the Internal Revenue Service.
The biographical sketch in "Check It Out!" cites his "20 years of investigative experience, both as a special agent" for the IRS and as a private eye.
The book also recounts how Mr. Pankau's boss at the IRS tracked a notorious gang of jewelry thieves by screening subscription lists of jewelry magazines for people with criminal records.
"The infamous `Murph the Surf' and his gang never did figure out that we nailed them by finding their address on a jewelry magazine subscription list," Mr. Pankau writes in "Check It Out!"
But when Mr. Pack told Mr. Pankau that "Murph the Surf" was jailed before Mr. Pankau began working for the IRS, the private eye said he had "forgotten" that, and changed his story to say the unit had investigated other members of the gang, according to Mr. Pack's statement.
John McRae, a supervisor at the Miami IRS unit in the early 1970s when Mr. Pankau was there, disputes even the scaled-down version.
"I don't remember anything about `Murph the Surf,'" Mr. McRae says.
"If we had a successful investigation on him, I would remember."
Moreover, Mr. McRae says Mr. Pankau was primarily a trainee, not a full-fledged special agent, and stayed less than a year.
Mr. McRae says he remembers Mr. Pankau only because he failed the background check.
"That's very rare," Mr. McRae says, adding that he doesn't remember why Mr. Pankau, then in his mid-20s, failed.
The IRS's Florida offices say their records don't go back far enough to have any information on Mr. Pankau.
NORIEGA'S NEMESIS?
One of Mr. Pankau's most renowned feats of derring-do was the time he supposedly snatched a list of Gen. Noriega's holdings from a burning building.
New York Times reporter Steve Lohr wrote in his article on page one of the paper's Feb. 20, 1992, edition, "Mr. Pankau was in Panama on an insurance investigation during the American invasion. . . .
In the confusion, he slipped into a building and made off with a computer printout listing more than $800 million in assets held in 18 countries, assets he is convinced are General Noriega's personal holdings."
A similar version appears in "Check It Out!"
Mr. Pankau begins, "I just happened to be in Panama during the 1989 invasion, sitting in a bar when parachutes blossomed all over the sky."
But Mr. Pankau now says he wasn't in Panama when the fighting broke out.
In the brief phone conversation with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Pankau said that the Times story was a "misquote" and that his employees, not he, were in Panama.
He cut off questioning before a reporter could ask about the discrepancy between this version and the account he gave in his book.
Mr. Lohr, the Times reporter, was traveling and couldn't be reached.
A spokesman, William Adler, said Times editors were no longer familiar enough with details of the article to comment.
The U.S. Attorney's office in Miami, which in 1992 successfully prosecuted Mr. Noriega on drug trafficking charges, says it considered using the document that Mr. Pankau claims lists Gen. Noriega's holdings, but didn't because "it was not possible to verify" its authenticity, says Assistant U.S. Attorney Michael P. Sullivan.
Mr. Pankau, meanwhile, told The Wall Street Journal last week that he has been "retained" by the Panamanian government to track down Mr. Noriega's assets.
But Eusebio Marchosky, who heads the Panamanian government's legal effort to recover Gen. Noriega's assets world-wide, says the government isn't in contact with Mr. Pankau.
"We don't have any sort of agreement with him."
In his statement, Mr. Pack says Mr. Pankau had alluded to immoral, and in some cases criminal activity, by major public and political figures, leading the writer to believe that "each and every one of Pankau's tidbits about these celebrities would, if true, create a major sensation upon publication of the book."
But Mr. Pack says he couldn't get the evidence he needed from Mr. Pankau.
One of Mr. Pankau's most noted escapades is the story he told about videotaping Ms. Rice and Sen. Hart together, which he recounted in a 1992 article in the Washington Post.
The version he gave Mr. Pack was even more detailed, claiming, according to Mr. Pack's statement, "It was he who caught Gary Hart with Donna Rice; and that he tipped off the Miami Herald, which resulted in 1987 news stories that knocked Hart, the leading contender for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination, out of the race, and ended Hart's political career."
James Savage, associate editor for investigative reporting at the Miami Herald, says Mr. Pankau never informed the Herald or gave it any pictures before its story on Sen. Hart's relationship with Ms. Rice.
"I was the editor on the story.
I would have known," Mr. Savage says.
Mr. Pack's statement also says he couldn't get Mr. Pankau to document a host of dramatic stories -- such as a claim that he was kidnapped by Miami drug lords, or an anecdote about the time he won a Bugatti, an expensive Italian sports car, in a poker game with a wealthy rancher accused of manslaughter.
Like the Noriega story, the Bugatti tale has gone through several versions.
The New York Times said he won the car in a "jailhouse" poker game, while Mr. Pack claims the private eye told him the game took place at the defendant's home.
Mr. Pack also says Mr. Pankau showed him in 1992 the car he claimed to have won, and it wasn't a Bugatti, but "a VW Beetle, with some kind of fake front end attached to it."
Asked to recount the story of the car to the Journal, Mr. Pankau said, "I don't want to right now."
