It may be impossible to kick Tonya Harding off the U.S. Olympic team.
Ms. Harding, the U.S. figure skating champion, hasn't been accused of wrongdoing in the attack on rival skater Nancy Kerrigan, but committee officials have said that concerns about the impact on the competition could be grounds for removing Ms. Harding from the team.
Fear of litigation, however, has made it much tougher for amateur sports organizations to bar world-class athletes from competing.
These precedents are likely to have an impact on the U.S. Olympic Committee's review of Ms. Harding's status to compete in the Winter Olympics next month.
Ordinarily, nonprofessional sports groups have plenty of leeway in setting rules for who can compete, such as suspending players accused of gambling or drug violations.
But as the winners' stakes have grown -- a gold medal, for instance, brings seven-figure endorsement fees -- so have the legal protections for athletes facing penalties that could jeopardize their careers.
Even if Ms. Harding was criminally charged in connection with the attack, the Olympic committee could face a tough court battle if it barred her from competing, many sports-law specialists say.
As an athlete deprived of participating in perhaps the greatest opportunity of her career, Ms. Harding would have strong legal claims, the lawyers say, to sue for lost earnings, interference with future business deals and even claims of irreparable harm.
If the committee seeks to disqualify Ms. Harding, "they're just buying a lawsuit," says Jeffrey Izenman, an attorney in the Chicago office of Katten Muchin & Zavis.
Such a suit could prove costly.
In one of the few suits over an Olympic contender's right to compete, track star Butch Reynolds won a $27.4 million award in December 1992 from the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
The federal judge in that case ruled that when an athlete's livelihood is at stake, a private sports organization must follow the same due-process requirements that bar the government from unfairly taking a person's property.
Mr. Reynolds was suspended from competing after he allegedly tested positive for steroids in 1990.
But the court found that the tests were flawed, as Mr. Reynolds had maintained, and it ordered the international track organization to pay damages for breaching its contractual obligations to Mr. Reynolds.
The court said the organization had violated Mr. Reynolds' rights by not granting a "full and fair opportunity" for the disputed steroid tests to be reconsidered.
"The evidence before the court establishes that the International Amateur Athletic Federation's goal throughout these proceedings was -- and remains -- solely to protect its reputation," said U.S. District Judge Joseph Kinneary in his ruling.
The Columbus, Ohio, judge's decision, which has been appealed, calculated compensatory damages at $6.8 million based on Mr. Reynolds past endorsement contracts and punitive damages of $20.5 million.
Paul Weiler, a Harvard Law School professor specializing in sports law, said after the Butch Reynolds decision, the Olympic Committee will think twice about keeping Ms. Harding from competing.
David Young, an attorney for Mr. Reynolds, said the lesson for sports organizations in the Reynolds case should be that U.S. courts put a premium on protecting individual athletes' rights.
Amateur sports organizations "can bar athletes from participating if they protect the athletes' due process rights and follow fair procedures," said Mr. Young.
In Ms. Harding's case, the main question facing Olympic officials at this point is whether the taint of suspicion is enough to keep her from competing.
Ms. Harding's bodyguard, Shawn Eric Eckardt, has been arrested for allegedly arranging the attack, and questions have been raised about Ms. Harding's ex-husband's possible links to the plot.
The ex-husband, Jeff Gillooly, hasn't been charged, and through his attorney has denied having any role.
If the Olympic Committee voted to bar Ms. Harding, her first step procedurally would be an arbitration hearing provided for under a federal amateur-sports law.
At that proceeding, arbitrators would have to look closely at the specific allegations that led the committee to its decision.
Attorneys said that even if arbitrators agreed with the committee, Ms. Harding would be entitled to go to court to seek immediate recourse, such as an injunction blocking the committee from barring her participation.
A court would have to weigh the committee's concerns against the opportunities Ms. Harding would lose.
"The image problem raised by the Olympics committee is very speculative.
On the other side of the coin is the huge cost to the individual," says Prof. Weiler of Harvard.
In a situation such as Ms. Harding's, a court would consider "the fact that someone has invested years of their life in the sport.
You have a right to expect a return on that investment unless there's some very good reason to take it away from you," says Prof. Weiler.
In addition to any possible commercial endorsements, an Olympic medal would increase her future opportunities to skate professionally and to garner personal appearance fees.
Already, however, the value of any medal Ms. Harding might win at the Olympics has dropped.
Agents and sports lawyers say she is unlikely to receive anywhere near the level of endorsement offers she might otherwise have expected.
That fact could make it tougher for Ms. Harding to prove substantial economic harm.
"The committee's attorneys could say that the value of any Olympic win by Harding is zero even if they let her compete," says Mr. Izenman of Katten Muchin in Chicago.
Even so, Ms. Harding could argue that a court should clear the way for her to compete if only because she would be irreparably harmed by not being able to participate in the Olympics.
The claim would be based on the argument that she was being deprived unfairly of a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
Law Note . . . .
NOTED: Legal ethics authority Geoffrey C. Hazard Jr. will join the faculty of the University of Pennsylvania Law School in July.
The 64-year-old professor, who has taught at Yale Law School since 1971, is expected to teach professional responsibility and civil procedure, as well as work with the Law School's Center on Professionalism.
He will also remain a director of the legal-reform-oriented American Law Institute in Philadelphia, where he currently spends several days each week.
Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
