Deputy Attorney General Philip Heymann objected to having White House lawyers sit in on staff interviews by Justice Department investigators following Vincent Foster's suicide.
In the days after Mr. Foster's death, Mr. Heymann complained to White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum about the lawyers' involvement in the interviews with White House staffers.
Mr. Nussbaum, who has steadfastly maintained that he did things properly and ethically, declined to comment.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation was probing allegations, found in a note written by Mr. Foster, that the FBI had lied to the attorney general in its report about alleged irregularities in the White House travel office.
The note was found after the July 20 death of Mr. Foster, who was Mr. Nussbaum's deputy and the personal lawyer of President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The objections of Mr. Heymann indicate how dissatisfied some high-level Justice Department officials were with the actions of top White House aides regarding the Foster investigation.
Mr. Heymann recently announced he is leaving his job, but White House and Justice Department officials said his departure wasn't directly linked to this investigation.
Interviews with Clinton administration and law enforcement officials familiar with a U.S. Park Police report on Mr. Foster's death say it charges that the involvement of White House aides during the suicide probe may have interfered with the investigation.
The Park Police was the lead agency on the suicide because it occurred in a federal park in suburban Virginia.
Since Mr. Foster's death, it has been revealed that documents concerning the Clintons' investment in the Whitewater Development Corp. in Arkansas were among papers taken from his office and turned over to a private lawyer for the Clintons.
An independent counsel is probing Whitewater-related matters, and those papers have since been turned over to the Justice Department.
David Margolis, one of Mr. Heymann's top assistants, was present as White House lawyers sat in on the interviews, according to law enforcement officials.
During the interviewing, he complained about the lawyers' presence to Mr. Heymann who then, according to one official, "raised hell" with Mr. Nussbaum.
Though Mr. Nussbaum believed White House lawyers could appropriately sit in, he discussed the question with Mr. Heymann before ultimately agreeing to remove White House people from subsequent interviews.
The White House staffers who were interviewed were allowed private lawyers, if they chose to have them, according to White House aides.
"Speaking generally," said Lloyd Cutler, who was White House counsel to President Carter, "it is quite normal for the lawyers for an agency to sit in on interviews of agency personnel by law enforcement officials" unless it is a criminal investigation.
A police official said his agency also was annoyed with the involvement of White House aides during its probe of the suicide.
"We have said publicly that we were unhappy with the type of cooperation we got" from Mr. Nussbaum and others in his office, said Major Robert Hines, the U.S. Park Police spokesman.
"Our investigators went over to the White House the day after the suicide but didn't get into Vince's office," said Mr. Hines.
"They sat and waited.
We were informed that everything would be coordinated by the Justice Department.
We were waiting for the Justice Department representative Mr. Margolis.
He was in charge.
He didn't show up until the second day July 22."
The Park Police investigators, he said, didn't like being put on hold for a full day and then being denied a chance to review any of the papers and documents in Mr. Foster's office.
Instead, they basically sat and watched Mr. Nussbaum and his aides screen and sort the papers by category.
Mr. Nussbaum "insisted on sorting what he claimed was executive privilege and what wasn't," said one administration official.
"We didn't mind them screening them," Mr. Hines said.
"We would have liked to have seen them, too."
"It was not normal how that drill in that room went, and it wasn't how we expected it to go," Mr. Hines added.
"Had this been a murder, I don't know what we would have done if we ran into that kind of roadblock.
But we were pretty sure we knew what we were dealing with a suicide."
The White House shows no inclination toward disciplining or reprimanding Mr. Nussbaum.
"What should have been done was done," a top White House aide said.
Any dealings with documents and subsequent investigations were done properly, the aide added.
Separately, the White House has told the Park Police that it could refuse to disclose at least part of Mr. Foster's office telephone logs.
In response to a query from the Park Police, the White House said the Park Police could claim a variety of privileges, including privacy, to decline to release at least part of the logs in response to a Freedom of Information Act request.
Exactly what will be disclosed has since been thrown into question with the appointment of the independent counsel.
