Individual investors are borrowing record amounts of cash to load up on stocks and that has some analysts worried the bull market is getting a little too racy.
After nearly going out of style in 1990 and 1991, the practice of buying stock "on margin," or with borrowed money, has been picking up at U.S. brokerage firms.
Indeed, according to the New York Stock Exchange, margin loans at U.S. brokerage firms have been on a steady climb, rising from $44 billion at the start of last year to a record $60.3 billion in December.
Last year "was kind of a record year for us in terms of building margin balances," says Donna Morris, senior vice president at Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual-fund company.
"It's really a reflection of low interest rates and the fact that investors are taking advantage of the low rates to buy additional securities and consolidate debt."
So far, the stepped-up use of margin has been having a noticeably welcome effect on the performance of the stock market.
Last year, the Dow Jones Industrial Average jumped 13.7%, and, already this year, the index of 30 blue-chip stocks is up 5.1% after a record-setting run Friday that took the industrials to 3945.43, a gain on the day of 19.13 points.
While some analysts say increased margin buying will continue to be a bullish omen for the stock market, others aren't so sure.
They recall that it was only a month after margin lending hit a peak that stock prices skidded in October 1987, culminating in the worst one-day decline in the history of the stock market.
And they say greater reliance on margin is just another sign that investors are willing to take on more risk when it comes to playing in the stock market.
Eventually that extra risk, they fear, will lead to wildly overvalued stock prices.
The stepped-up use of margin suggests there's "a little more speculation in the market," says Leslie Quick III, president of discount broker Quick & Reilly Group Inc.
"It's another sign that things are getting a little heated up."
Mr. Quick, whose firm saw a 33% rise in margin lending last year, says that what is somewhat reassuring is that margin lending has been gaining slowly.
"The fact that it is not a spike but a steady climb is comforting," he says.
"It's a sign that investors are not suddenly going wild."
Margin loans allow investors to borrow amounts of as much as 50% of their stockholdings.
Although usually used to buy more stocks, there isn't any restriction on how the loan can be used.
Typically, margin loans carry rates that are lower than consumers can obtain from most other sources.
Fidelity's margin rates, for instance, range from 5.25% to 7.25% depending on the amount borrowed.
Charles Humm, senior vice president at Merrill Lynch Credit Corp., a subsidiary of Merrill Lynch, says while using margin to finance purchases other than stock is gaining more acceptance, the "majority" of margin borrowing still goes to fund stock purchases.
However, despite the sharp rise in margin debts, Mr. Humm isn't concerned that investors are getting too speculative.
"I think there is a much more conservative approach to margin today," he says.
He noted that in 1987 "there was much more aggressive use of margin accounts on the part of some than we are seeing today."
Other brokerage firms say margin buying by their customers, while growing, is still nowhere near the proportion of total assets that was reached just prior to the 1987 crash.
At Charles Schwab Corp, a big discount brokerage firm, margin debt today represents 2.7% of total equity compared with 12.5% in August 1987.
"Margin buying is up a lot but assets here at Schwab are also up a lot," says a spokesman.
Some analysts like Laszlo Birinyi, who heads a consulting firm that bears his name, say they would only get anxious if it appears that investors are using margin money as "funds of last resort."
"If individuals have money available but say `Heck with it, at 5%, I'll use Merrill's money,' that doesn't bother me," says Mr. Birinyi.
So far, he says there's ample evidence to show that investors are cash-heavy.
He notes that from mid-1992 to mid-1993, individual assets in checking accounts were up 22% while funds in certificates of deposits were only off slightly, suggesting that investors aren't forsaking the safety of their banks for stocks.
Indeed, Mr. Birinyi suggests that investors may be turning increasingly to margin borrowing because it amounts to a cheap and easy loan.
Historically, a combination of low rates and a rising stock market has spurred investors to increase their margin buying.
But, until last year, investors were taking a cautious approach to margin buying, partly because many still had vivid memories of being burned by margin calls in the wake of the October 1987 crash.
A margin call occurs when brokerage firms demand that investors with margin loans put up more cash to make up for the decline in the value of their stock portfolios, which serve as the loan's collateral.
As long as stock prices are rising, margin calls generally aren't a problem.
But Thomas Gallagher, head of institutional equities at Oppenheimer, worries about the effect margin lending will have when the market turns south.
"As long as stock prices keep rising, margin buying is a very bullish sign," because it means that more money is flowing into stocks, says Mr. Gallagher.
"But once the market starts going down, it speeds up the decline" as illiquid investors, deluged with margin calls, start dumping stock.
Meanwhile, Mr. Quick said he will become nervous if margin lending suddenly spurts higher or if it is accompanied by the greater use of other speculative strategies.
"If we saw a spike up in margin debits I would be very concerned and I think the bears on Wall Street would have a field day," he says.
Stocks hit highs yet again after a surprisingly upbeat report on the economy.
The Dow Jones industrials shot up 19.13 points to 3945.43, its second straight record.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index surged 1.65 points to 478.70, also a high, and the Nasdaq Composite Index rocketed 3.65 to 796.53, a record.
Advancing issues outnumbered declining issues, 1,324 to 770.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange fell to 312,636,150 shares from 346,292,160 shares Thursday.
For the week, the Dow Jones industrials and S&P each rose 0.8% and the Nasdaq Composite gained 0.3%.
Stocks rallied Friday after the Commerce Department reported that gross domestic product rose 5.9% in the fourth quarter, well above the 5.2% many had expected, and the strongest since the 1987 fourth quarter.
Despite that economic strength, inflation gauges in the report offered lower-than-expected readings, economists said.
Daimler-Benz AG was the most-active stock on the Big Board, adding 1/4 to 47.
An offering of 15 million American depositary shares of Daimler-Benz was priced at $46.75 each Thursday.
The shares were sold by Deutsche Bank.
Continental Bank surged 6 1/8 to 34 after it agreed to be acquired by BankAmerica in a transaction valued at $1.9 billion.
BankAmerica eased 3/8 to 45 3/8.
Shares of other banks and brokerage firms also rallied.
Citicorp jumped 1 1/4 to 43 1/8, Merrill Lynch 3/4 to 43 1/8, Morgan Stanley 1 3/4 to 77, and Wells Fargo 3 7/8 to 138 7/8.
Scientific-Atlanta tumbled 3 7/8 to 27 7/8.
The company reported a second-quarter loss of 12 cents a share compared with profit of four cents a share a year ago.
The latest quarter's results were depressed by a charge of 31 cents a share for a legal settlement.
Aetna Life & Casualty advanced 1 3/4 to 59 7/8.
The company said it plans to cut 4,000 jobs and take a charge to 1993 earnings of $1.03 billion.
Minerals Technologies surged 1 1/2 to 27 1/2.
The company earned 35 cents a share in the fourth quarter, compared with 22 cents a share a year ago and above analysts' mean estimate of 32 cents.
GP Financial, parent of Green Point Savings Bank, closed unchanged at 19 on Nasdaq volume of 25.1 million shares.
A federal appeals court cleared the way for the company's $800 million conversion from mutual to stock ownership, and the stock began trading shortly after the ruling.
The conversion was priced at $15 a share.
Teledyne shed 2 1/8 to 23 5/8.
The Wall Street Journal reported the company suspended its cash dividend for the first time ever, amid growing signs the aircraft company reached a tentative settlement with the government totaling well over $100 million.
Dave Pettit contributed to this article.
