Prodigy Services Co. staged an unusual news conference to take a tacit swipe at its upstart rival, America Online Inc.
A top Prodigy executive hosted a conference call with reporters to brag about the Prodigy on-line system's ability to serve huge numbers of users.
Earlier this week, America Online told customers it would have to ration access to its computer service during peak hours because rapid growth had overwhelmed its ability to serve all users.
The broadside was a sign of the scrap breaking out in the burgeoning market for on-line computer services.
Prodigy has deep pockets and one million households, but it has yet to turn a profit after about five years of operation.
America Online, by contrast, is independent, has 600,000 subscribers, and is a Wall Street darling, posting profits relatively early and going public in a hugely successful offering.
Scott Kurnit, executive vice president at Prodigy, said in the conference call that his on-line service "could actually handle all of the 40 million personal computers that are currently in households."
While he avoided naming America Online expressly, he challenged reporters to check out Prodigy's hardware strength and compare it with an unnamed rival -- "Look at us, and look at them, and see how they're built and kick the tires."
Prodigy, a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co., also ran TV commercials six times Wednesday night stressing a similiar message.
The spots began with an actress mentioning that "some people are having trouble getting onto the electronic superhighway."
That brought a philosophical response from Steve Case, president and chief executive officer of Vienna, Va.-based America Online: "I'd say all's fair in love and war."
America Online's subscriber base has more than doubled in the past year.
Analysts estimate it needs to be able to serve as many as 16,000 customers during peak usage, but that it can take only 8,000.
Mr. Case disputes those numbers but won't say whether they are too high or too low.
When the system overloads, customers can get busy signals or slow responses.
"The performance is very slow," said Michael B. Williams, a software engineer in Waltham, Mass., who is a frequent user of on-line services.
If service doesn't improve, he said he will cancel his membership rather than ask for the periodic refunds the company has promised to pay.
Mr. Case said America Online has hired staff, acquired extra computer gear, and modified the network software and hopes to solve the problem within two months.
He also said the company will temporarily curb some efforts to sign up subscribers.
"We're holding back on direct marketing," forgoing mailed pitches until the overload problems are fixed, "but there is still demand in the pipeline, and we intend to meet that demand," he said.
Analysts stress that America Online must act quickly.
Says Mark Stahlman of New Media Associates, a consulting firm: "It's crucial that they retain the subscribers they already have."
