The aging Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co. plant here has been run by union contract for more than 30 years.
Rules have dictated who may pick up which wrench.
Employees who completed work quotas in less than eight hours have been allowed to chat or read through the end of shifts.
But not for much longer.
Groupe Michelin bought Uniroyal Goodrich in 1990, and now the big, quirky French company is demanding change.
Fierce union resistance crumbled under Michelin threats to close the plant.
On Saturday, by a vote of 1,007 to 411, Fort Wayne employees chose to accept Michelin's demands, drastically altering the way people make tires here.
It was the last in a series of victories for Michelin: Employees at Uniroyal Goodrich's other plants, in Canada, Oklahoma and Alabama, already had bowed.
"We are calling into question everything the union has built, brick by brick, over the past 30 years -- seniority, the written contract, the grievance procedure," says Steven Nail, a Michelin labor lawyer.
Michelin, which became the world's biggest tire maker when it acquired Uniroyal Goodrich, planned to take years transforming the tired U.S. company.
(In 1992, Michelin posted world-wide revenue of 66.8 billion French francs, or $11.23 billion, down 1.2% from the previous year.)
But with storms lashing the industry around the world, Michelin decided a year ago that it had to speed up the changes.
Feelings have run high.
In Fort Wayne, people on opposite sides of the issue -- both union stalwarts and union dissidents, who wanted to approve Michelin's demands -- accuse one another of making death threats.
Dissident Phillip Geusz says friends warned him a few weeks ago that a man with a deer rifle was stalking him.
"One big guy came up at work and said he'd pray for me in church," Mr. Geusz recalls.
The clash grows partly from the singlemindedness of a company that invented the radial tire and has been run by the same family for more than 100 years.
Its chairman is Francois Michelin, who is in his mid-60s; his son Edouard, in his early 30s, is being trained to succeed him.
The company's executives frame the elder Mr. Michelin's sayings and hang them on their walls.
They believe true Michelin people share profound values, involving duties to one another and to the customer, that outsiders don't understand.
Uniroyal Goodrich suffered because it didn't have such values, they believe.
They are determined to lead it on a conversion.
"They want to run this place the way they run their nonunion Michelin-brand plants in South Carolina!" exclaims Ray Wiseman, who heads the Fort Wayne plant's union, Local 715 of the United Rubber, Cork, Linoleum and Plastic Workers of America.
That, says Michelin, is precisely right.
The industry is in crisis, fueled by its own technological advances.
A good tire used to wear out after 30,000 miles; Michelin today guarantees its best for 80,000.
With sales growth weak across the industry, some analysts fear factory closures could become a plague.
Tire makers in the U.S. were slow to adapt, and brands including Firestone, Uniroyal and Goodrich were acquired by foreign companies.
Meanwhile Michelin, trying to avoid layoffs, sank into world-wide losses and restructured repeatedly.
"We felt we had to move faster" to transform Uniroyal Goodrich, says Carlos Ghosn, head of Michelin's U.S. operations.
All the foreign companies that made big U.S. acquisitions are pushing now for new work rules.
Bridgestone/Firestone Inc., formed after Japan's Bridgestone Corp. bought Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. in 1988, plans to demand concessions in talks with its unions this spring.
Ailing General Tire Inc., owned by Germany's Continental AG, recently forced wage and work-rule concessions at a low-productivity plant in Kentucky.
Michelin's fight at Uniroyal Goodrich has been particularly harsh -- "a struggle over who manages the company," says Michelin's Mr. Nail.
Most galling to employees, Michelin insists that all tire builders, regardless of seniority, "rotate" shifts -- sometimes working days, sometimes nights, sometimes weekends.
Michelin believes that mingling junior and senior employees on all shifts leads to more consistent quality and better safety.
Union members say the constantly changing work hours cause sleep problems, alienation from families and even alcohol and drug abuse.
Michelin wants to invest heavily in new production systems, which it says requires flexible, cooperative employees.
"No company is going to put in expensive new equipment if it has an overall work force whose middle name is `it's not my job,'" says Fort Wayne plant manager Charles Bianco.
For Michelin stalwarts, it also is a moral question: Factories work better, they believe, if employees share hardship by rotating shifts.
"You never get to see your kids when you're on the second shift," says Wilma Waddell, who builds tires (and rotates shifts) at a nonunion Michelin-brand plant in South Carolina.
"But when my son was killed in an accident 14 years ago, Michelin let me stay out as long as I needed.
Michelin takes care of its own."
Uniroyal Goodrich's union calls that paternalism; anti-French sentiment abounds.
The rubber-workers' union has launched an AFL-CIO-backed campaign to boycott all Michelin-brand (although not Uniroyal or Goodrich) products, saying Michelin is inflexible and has a superiority complex.
Lynn Louden, a 42-year-old Fort Wayne tire builder, says he thinks that Michelin next will start demanding cuts in wages and health benefits.
"I really feel they're going to keep coming at us again and again, and they'll try to beat us down to a $10- or $11-an-hour job" from a current hourly wage of nearly $18, he says.
Michelin officials insist they have no devious, antiemployee plans, but they acknowledge that their battle to change Uniroyal Goodrich has only begun.
And while the union has been badly split, union leaders insist they won't lie down and give Michelin a free hand.
Mr. Wiseman, the Fort Wayne local's president, wields a charisma honed over 20 years in power.
For months, he refused even to let his members vote on proposed work-rule changes.
Saturday's vote was forced by national union leadership, overruling Mr. Wiseman, who was demanding continued negotiations to the end.
Asked whether Michelin is beginning to think the acquisition may have been an expensive error, Mr. Ghosn, Michelin's chief of U.S. operations, says the jury is still out.
"You can't judge these things in three or four years' time," he says.
"It takes longer than that; you have to have patience."
