The wife of a Geneva magistrate who is accusing France's Credit Lyonnais of complicity in a major Swiss bankruptcy case has professional links to the failed company at the heart of the affair.
The connection is one of several apparent conflicts of interest and other alleged lapses that are turning the bitterly disputed case into an ethical quagmire.
Among other things, supposedly key documents are said to have disappeared, an "independent" expert appointed by the court turns out to have business ties to the main defendant's lawyers, and confidential Swiss court papers that Credit Lyonnais hadn't seen are suddenly being used as evidence against it in a separate legal battle the bank is waging in the U.S.
Arguments over legal ethics are now largely overshadowing the substance of the Swiss investigation into the bankruptcy of Sasea Holding SA, which collapsed in 1992 amid fraud allegations.
State-owned Credit Lyonnais, France's biggest bank, contends it isn't getting a fair hearing.
Last week, it formally requested that the magistrate, Jean-Louis Crochet, be recused from the case, alleging he has a "personal animosity" against the bank.
The request was filed before details of the link between the case and Mr. Crochet's wife emerged.
Charges of impropriety, however, also go the other way.
In a court order this month, Mr. Crochet accused Credit Lyonnais of "seriously violating the rules of good faith" by allegedly concealing "essential" documents.
The magistrate's order says the documents include a memo, apparently from the bank's lawyers, White & Case, "suggesting to the bank that it remove from its offices various documents relating to the dispute."
The bank denies the charge, saying it has given Judge Crochet free access to all documents in the case except for privileged communications with its attorney.
It was stunned to see Judge Crochet's allegations now being used against it by U.S. financier Kirk Kerkorian in Los Angeles County Superior Court.
Mr. Kerkorian, who is being sued by Credit Lyonnais in connection with his 1990 sale of the film studio Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc., is using Judge Crochet's Swiss court order as evidence of what his lawyers describe as a "coverup" by the French bank.
He filed a court motion last week calling for the dismissal of the Credit Lyonnais suit against him.
Swiss court papers aren't usually open to the public.
Mr. Kerkorian's lawyers say they obtained the documents from parties in the Sasea case they won't name.
The practice doesn't violate Swiss law, says a senior Justice Ministry official in Bern.
But, "It is astonishing the documents ended up in Kerkorian's hands.
Normally, these files are secret," said the official, who asked not to be identified.
In fact, by attaching the Swiss papers to his motion, Mr. Kerkorian has enabled Credit Lyonnais to see them for the first time, its lawyers say.
Judge Crochet had previously removed the bank's right to be a civil party to the criminal case, denying the bank access to all court documents.
Accusing the bank of complicity in Sasea's bankruptcy, Judge Crochet said he will ask French authorities to indict the former chairman of Credit Lyonnais and a top official still with the bank.
In doing so, the magistrate has largely endorsed the argument of Sasea's former owner, Florio Fiorini, an Italian financier who is in jail in Geneva pending charges.
Judge Crochet's wife, Catherine, is a partner in the Geneva law firm Crochet Delauney & Siegrist.
Documents show that her firm represents SI Bank Co., which was controlled by Mr. Fiorini and was a part of Sasea's corporate web.
An auditor's report on Sasea, following its collapse, suggested that Mr. Fiorini made extensive use of SI Bank, which is incorporated in Western Samoa, to shift assets between his companies to "clean up" their balance sheets.
As part of his probe, Judge Crochet searched SI Bank's Monaco office.
In an interview, Mrs. Crochet acknowledged her firm had represented SI Bank, although she said the work was carried out by a partner, Pierre Siegrist, and she wasn't personally involved.
She said she had discovered the link the previous day and immediately notified the Geneva chief prosecutor, Bernard Bertossa.
Mr. Bertossa confirmed that Mrs. Crochet had informed him of the link, but played down its importance.
"It is an incident that should have no bearing on the Sasea procedure," he said.
Lawyers for Credit Lyonnais, however, say the link is the second apparent conflict of interest they have identified.
In its request for Judge Crochet to be recused, the French bank said Gerhard Auer, a supposedly independent auditor appointed by Judge Crochet, was in fact a business associate of the law firm representing Mr. Fiorini, Bonnant & Peyrot.
Among other things, Nicolas Peyrot is the former president of Mr. Auer's audit company, Coresa SA, Swiss records show.
Mr. Fiorini's lawyer, Marc Bonnant, said in an interview that the ties between Mr. Peyrot and Coresa "are no secret."
But he stressed that Mr. Auer was working on the Sasea case as an independent expert, not on behalf of Coresa.
