Procter & Gamble Co. wants to put a new face on its cosmetics business, and Beth J. Kaplan has been appointed to do the makeover.
P&G has demonstrated its might in laundry detergents, diapers and toothpaste, churning out "new and improved" products like bleach-enhanced Tide and thinner Pampers.
But its performance in cosmetics and perfumes, where fresh images are more important than new technology, is spotty.
Its revamped Max Factor brand still hasn't taken off, its Incognito, Le Jardin and Toujours Moi fragrances are losing ground, and there is an internal debate over whether to introduce an Oil of Olay cosmetics line.
Ms. Kaplan, who was named vice president in charge of cosmetics and fragrances, is known as a no-nonsense, fasttrack manager.
She helped build P&G's Always feminine protection brand, and most recently was the general manager of shortening, cooking oil and olestra, a fat substitute P&G wants to market as a cooking ingredient.
But Ms. Kaplan's new job won't be easy.
Cover Girl, which P&G acquired when it bought Noxell, remains a powerhouse, consistently attracting women in their teens and 20s.
Retailers say that's partly because P&G has allowed former Noxell executives to continue managing the brand and running ads featuring high-fashion models.
P&G has also introduced some very successful brand varieties, such as Ethnic Shades.
But that's the only good news.
In January, P&G eliminated its unprofitable Clarion brand -- acquired as part of Noxell -- after deciding it would cost too much to revive it.
Max Factor, purchased from Revlon Inc. in 1991, hasn't picked up much, if any, domestic market share, despite a costly relaunch last year aimed at transforming it into an upscale international brand.
The company spent millions on fancy new compacts, bottles and lipstick tubes, and an estimated $20 million in the U.S. alone on advertising.
But industry sources say the brand has performed far below P&G's projections in the U.S. and Japan, though sales in Europe have been satisfactory.
"There's one tiny problem with Max Factor: The product isn't selling," says Carol Allman, director of merchandising for Eckerd Corp., a drug chain based in Florida.
"They were quiet for so long while they were going through the relaunch that a lot of customers got lured away into rival lines," she says.
But Ms. Kaplan, 36 years old, says it's too soon to pronounce Max Factor a failure.
Only half of the new Max Factor products have been shipped to stores, she says, and the company is "encouraged" by improved sales in recent weeks.
P&G is now considering starting a new cosmetics line that would be an extension of its Oil of Olay skin care brand, according to retailers and former P&G managers.
And while it nears a final decision -- including whether to target younger or older women -- the company is trying to hang on to store shelf space previously occupied by Clarion.
Retailers say P&G is offering them incentives to reserve the space for its brands.
But the broad question is whether P&G should be in cosmetics and perfumes at all.
Successful cosmetics companies know how to package romance and dreams, while "P&G has a packaged-goods mentality" and emphasizes technology and durability, says Allan Mottus, a marketing consultant.
Selling cosmetics also means managing many more varieties of a single brand -- new shades of eyeshadow, lipstick with or without moisturizer.
A former P&G executive recalls, "We used to laugh that if Procter ever got into cosmetics, they'd want to sell one shade of lipstick in three sizes."
If P&G doesn't turn Max Factor around, some believe it may decide to sell its cosmetics business.
"They want two to three cosmetics lines.
They wouldn't be happy with just one," says Eckerd Corp.'s Ms. Allman.
The company hasn't done much to build the mass-market perfume brands it acquired in the Noxell and Max Factor transactions.
Retailers complain that it has curtailed the number of fancy fragrance gift sets it makes for holidays, offering instead a limited selection throughout the year.
"Meanwhile, rivals like Coty know how to manage the gift set business," says the former P&G manager.
But some P&G watchers believe that the company, which has spent more than $2 billion acquiring cosmetics and perfume businesses since 1989, wants to show that it can sell makeup and scents as well as mouthwash and is willing to change.
"P&G will focus on cosmetics," says Burt Flickinger III, a consultant.
"They see an opportunity in the mass consumer market, where Revlon and Lancome are strong players but may be vulnerable."
Navy, P&G's biggest brand, remains a strong seller in drug and mass-merchandise stores, and P&G recently introduced a moisturizing version, Navy White.
The company has also started an ad campaign to pump life into Incognito.
Bob Blanchard, a senior executive in charge of global cosmetics and fragrances, says that "we are growing our cosmetics and fragrances business worldwide at about the same rate we're growing the total corporate business."
And Ms. Kaplan maintains that P&G has no plans to get out of cosmetics and fragrances.
"We're not selling the business," she says, because she wouldn't move from P&G's Cincinnati headquarters to Maryland, where the unit is based, if P&G were about to dump it.
Ms. Kaplan is succeeding John Saxton, a manufacturing expert who spent four years trying to integrate the company's two huge cosmetics acquisitions, Noxell in 1989 and Max Factor in 1991.
Mr. Saxton has been named vice president of national government relations.
Ms. Kaplan joined P&G in 1981, fresh out of the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton business school.
Three years ago, she was involved in P&G's decision to fold its Puritan cooking oil brand into Crisco.
She also oversaw the introduction of one-cup tubs of Crisco and was instrumental in the brand's butter-flavored Crisco and "Cooks Who Know" ad campaigns.
Ms. Kaplan says she's too new at the cosmetics job to discuss specific plans.
"I don't feel that I'm walking into some tough, challenging, impossible assignment," she adds.
"We feel really encouraged by what we've done and the inroads we've made, and the company is very committed."
