New York -- "We who live this plodding life here below never know how many eagles fly over us," wrote Thoreau in his journal on April 24, 1854.
Thanks to Sharon Freedman, an ardent New York birdwatcher with a special passion for hawks, we plodders of 1994 know that at least seven eagles flew over Central Park during recent months.
And that's not all.
Ms. Freedman and her little band of followers sighted 2,532 other great migrating birds of prey making their way from breeding grounds to winter homes over the urban wilds of Manhattan Island.
The Central Park Hawkwatch officially began on Sept. 5, 1993.
That was the day Ms. Freedman, a sturdy, determined young woman, temporarily unemployed as a word processor and typesetter, took on a new, though unpaid, job.
With some savings to tide her over, Ms. Freedman announced that for the next three months she would be counting migratory hawks at Central Park's highest point, the Bel-vedere Castle.
She encouraged anyone interested to join her there.
Organized hawkwatching first began in 1934 at Hawk Mountain in Pennsylvania.
It was designed to save hawk lives by replacing a "varmint shoot" traditionally held at that site every fall with observation and methodical record-keeping.
On Oct. 8, 1992, the millionth raptor, a sharp-shinned hawk, was recorded flying past the Hawk Mountain lookout point.
Today there are thousands of hawkwatches at locations along migratory flyways throughout the U.S.
Their purpose is partly scientific, to provide data about avian population patterns.
In the '50s, for instance, hawkwatches provided early warning of diminishing hawk populations due to DDT spraying, and in recent years counts are indicating the return of several endangered species.
The Hawk Migration Association is an organization for collecting information from hawkwatches and forming conclusions based on it.
Mainly, however, hawkwatching is a sport.
It requires sharp eyes, persistence and endurance, skills that may be transferred to other parts of life.
Like any sport, hawkwatching has its competitive elements, yet it inevitably creates a spirit of camaraderie among its participants.
The major challenge of a hawkwatch is to identify just exactly what kind of bird it is way up there.
For while a bald eagle may look conspicuously different from an osprey or a turkey vulture when pictured in a field guide, it is a different story when the bird is flying so high that to an untrained eye it resembles a small speck.
Sharon Freedman's skill at identifying hawks in flight is nothing short of prodigious.
Using birder's vernacular for two eminently confusable species, the sharp-shinned hawk and Cooper's hawk, Ms. Freedman gives an example of how she operates: "I go by gestalt a lot rather than field marks.
You have to at those distances.
For instance, with Sharpies and Cooper's I'm looking for how they fly.
The Sharpie is a very delicate flyer and the wingbeat comes more from the wrist.
The Cooper's has a heavier wing and the wingbeat comes more from the shoulder.
There's a whoomph to it."
Fall is the time for hawkwatching.
In the spring, perhaps because of weather patterns, northbound hawks tend to disperse over a wide migratory path.
But on the southward journey hawks concentrate most predictably over certain natural formations such as mountain ridges.
That is where they are likely to find rising columns of hot air known as thermals, which allow them to save energy by soaring rather than arduous flap-flap-flapping.
The hawks flying over Sharon Freedman's chosen location last fall had no natural mountains there to help them on their way.
But they had thermals nevertheless, created by the man-made ridges of tall city buildings.
That is why the lookout point at Central Park's Belvedere Castle has long been a gathering place for hawk fanciers during the fall months.
But not until Ms. Freedman's hawkwatch was a systematic study made of the kinds and numbers of migratory birds of prey flying over Central Park.
From September to mid-December, hour after hour and day after day, Ms. Freedman sat on the castle's upper observation deck, cozily ensconced in an overhanging, turret-like, corner structure that students of medieval castles call a bartizan.
There, surrounded by guidebooks, thermoses, sandwiches and extra clothing, Ms. Freedman announced each arriving hawk to her fellow hawkwatchers.
For purposes of quick identification, she had nicknames for the high-rise buildings visible from her Belvedere aerie, such as Tall Red, Pyramid and the Finger, a sliver skyscraper resembling a rude gesture.
Sinai stood for Mt. Sinai Hospital's Annenberg building, a massive structure to the northeast, which was chastised by the "AIA Guide to New York City" for "thrusting itself onto the skyline like the town bully."
Though the Central Park Hawkwatch will always be small potatoes compared with such major-league hawkwatching spots as Hawk Mountain, it was not without its dreams of glory.
For Sharon Freedman had a secret goal that sustained her through the sometimes excruciatingly tedious hours of waiting for hawks to show up: She hoped to see every one of the 15 species of diurnal raptors known to migrate regularly through the northeast quadrant of the U.S.
By Sept. 28 she had racked up the first eight species, starting with 68 broadwinged hawks, three ospreys, five sharp-shinned hawks and one kestrel, all seen on the first day of the hawkwatch.
She recorded a turkey vulture on Sept. 6, a Cooper's hawk on the 17th, a lovely little falcon called a merlin on the l9th, and two goshawks, the largest members of the accipiter family, on the 28th.
By the end of October she was up to 13 species, having added the northern harrier, red-tailed hawk, red-shouldered hawk, peregrine falcon and a rare sighting of a rough-legged hawk on Oct. 26.
Nov. 8 was a red-letter day.
Two bald eagles flew directly over the park's Great Lawn between 12:15 p.m. and 1 p.m.
"I'm in ecstasy," she exulted as she recorded her sighting in the Bird Register, a record of avian comings and goings the park's birdwatchers keep in the Loeb Boathouse.
By the end of November Ms. Freedman's tally was 2,424 migrating birds of prey, representing 14 species.
Missing, and a long shot by anyone's calculations, was the Golden Eagle, Aquila chrysaetos, a large dark eagle with a golden crown, less widespread in the East than the bald eagle.
Immature birds of the species have brilliant white patches on the wings.
Now obsessively yearning to complete her list, Ms. Freedman continued to scan the horizon.
Then on Wednesday, Dec. 8, less than a week before the official end of the first Central Park Hawkwatch, Ms. Freedman hit the jackpot.
In her words:
"At first I thought the huge bird coming in from the northeast around Sinai was a bald eagle.
Then I saw a black terminal band in the tail, which isn't bald eagle.
Then it banked as it came closer and I could really see the white in the wings -- the white wing patches of an immature . . . golden . . . eagle."
"I was numb," Ms. Freedman concluded.
"I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.
It was just awesome.
Now nothing was missing from the list.
Now Central Park has had everything you can possibly get in the northeast quadrant of the United States."
Postscript: Ms. Freedman has had less success in job-hunting than in hawkwatching; she is still unemployed.
Ms. Winn, a New Yorker, is writing a book on urban wildlife.
