Your Feb. 23 editorial "The Charter Half-Step" misses the significance of Michigan's charter school legislation, the most far-reaching in America.
Charter schools are a driving force in the effort to improve education quality and performance.
People are beginning to realize that charter schools are not merely a trend, but a systemic strategy to revolutionize public education.
Charter schools are infusing public schools with a dynamic that for too long has been missing -- competition.
They are result oriented, and they offer creative teachers, concerned parents and far-sighted employers the opportunity to break free from our overregulated mainstream schools.
Because of their autonomy, accountability and flexibility, they can show Americans what education reform really looks like.
No doubt, as charter schools grow in number, they will become the schools of choice for many parents, and funding will flow with the students who attend them.
The flow of funding, in turn, will leverage public education to seek quality education and cost-containment reforms across the board.
At present, eight states have a charter-school law on the books, and 14 others are debating the issue in their respective legislatures.
But several elements in the Michigan act make it an outstanding example for others to follow.
First, unlike charter-school laws in every other state but Georgia, there is no limit to the number of public schools that can be chartered in Michigan.
Supply can keep pace with demand.
Also in Michigan, existing public schools can be converted to charter schools.
My goal is to see as many as 200 charter schools up and running within the next three years.
Second, there are many paths available to parents and educators who seek to start a charter school in their communities.
Michigan is unique in that there are more than 600 public entities -- including every public university, community college, school district and intermediate school district -- that can issue charters.
Thus, if parents in any given community are frustrated by hurdles on one path, they have real alternatives.
Third, in Michigan even more than in other states, parents can play a decisive role in the charter schools their children attend.
Mothers and fathers can even be directors of the schools.
This is especially important given the state of public education today, whose leadership in recent years has too often shown a callous disregard toward "education consumers" and has relegated parents to a second-class status.
Charter schools give families much-needed choices in public education.
With choices come more parental involvement and commitment than has been possible in the past.
It is critically important to the future of my state -- and, indeed, to our nation -- that charter schools be given every opportunity to flourish and succeed.
They will lead the education reform effort in public education.
Michigan's experience shows that an informed citizenry and good laws will go far to make charter schools a reality.
Despite opposition from self-serving teachers' unions, the charter school genie is out of the bottle.
The public's response has been overwhelmingly positive.
And public education will never be the same.
Lansing, Mich.
