Sure, the markets have been shaky lately, but there are plenty of ways to make money even when stock prices decline and inflation heats up -- so long as you've got the wallet, and the stomach, for the risks involved.
"There are more downside strategies available for individual investors than ever before," says Bernard Schaeffer, editor of the Option Advisor, a Cincinnati newsletter.
"But many can be expensive."
You can profit from falling stock prices by "short selling" individual stocks or even a limited number of mutual funds.
Or you buy "put" options on individual stocks or 36 different market indexes.
If you're convinced inflation is really getting ready to soar, you can buy gold or gold funds or commodity-based stocks, such as aluminum or lumber companies.
And if you'd rather have a manager do all of the above on your behalf, you can buy one of the handful of mutual funds that specialize in making money in a bear market.
But these aren't plays for the faint of heart, or anyone who can't afford to lose money.
The rest of us will be content just to watch.
SHORT SELLING: Short sellers borrow a stock from a broker and immediately sell it, hoping the price will decline.
Eventually, they have to buy shares to replace the ones they borrowed.
But if the price drops enough in the meantime, they make a profit.
The danger is that the price will rise instead of fall -- causing investors to lose money.
And the size of the loss is potentially unlimited.
During the past three years, as the stock market has moved higher and higher, even the pros who specialize in short selling have suffered big losses.
Still, some investment professionals say short selling can be worth a try.
"Even though the Dow Jones Industrial Average is rocking along, lots of stocks have had their private bear markets," says Stan Weinstein, editor of the Professional Tape Reader, a Hollywood, Fla., newsletter.
"There is money to be made here."
In addition to individual stocks, investors can also sell short a limited number of mutual funds.
Jack White Co., a San Diego discount broker, says 50 of the 350 mutual funds it sells can be shorted, but availability of funds varies day by day.
Fidelity Investments also offers short selling on some of its sector funds through its Fidelity Brokerage unit.
But selling short is a long shot.
"On average, the stock market is up 60% of the time," says Tom Stevens, chief investment officer for Wilshire Associates, a Santa Monica, Calif., pension-consulting firm.
"When you go short, you're fighting the upward trend."
PUT OPTIONS: Investors can also make money on a market decline by buying put options on individual stocks or various indexes.
A put option gives the holder the right -- but not the obligation -- to sell a stock or an index of stocks at a fixed "strike price" for a specified period of time.
Put options gain in price when the underlying stocks or indexes decline.
Compared with short selling, one advantage of put options is that all you can lose is the cost of the option itself, the so-called premium.
That premium can be expensive, though.
"Index puts are extremely popular for portfolio protection right now," says Mr. Schaeffer, the Cincinnati options pro.
"And because they are so popular, they are extremely expensive on an absolute and historical basis."
Harrison Roth, senior options strategist for New York broker Cowen & Co., says even aggressive traders shouldn't spend more than 5% of the value of their portfolios on put options.
He also cautions that using puts requires careful monitoring of the underlying stocks by the investor or a broker.
GOLD STOCKS OR GOLD FUNDS: Want to bet that inflation is really heating up?
The experts seem divided, but if you feel inflation is climbing, you could buy gold-mining stocks or gold funds.
In inflationary times, investors have traditionally turned to gold as a way to preserve their purchasing power.
But don't buy gold-mining shares on the assumption gold will automatically rise in a stock-market downturn.
"Gold can go down in bear markets along with stocks," says Stanley Salvigsen, chairman of Comstock Partners, a New York investment firm that specializes in bear-market strategies.
In the 1987 stock-market crash, gold shares fell along with stocks.
BEAR-MARKET FUNDS: A small number of mutual funds have tailored their strategies to making money in a stock-market decline.
The largest are Dreyfus Capital Value Fund A, a load fund, and the no-load Robertson Stephens Contrarian Fund.
These funds hold varying amounts of gold-mining stocks, shorts on highflying U.S. stocks, cash, put options on indexes and inflation plays in stocks like aluminum, lumber and copper companies.
Dreyfus Capital Value Fund A, with $426 million in assets, has the longest track record and proved that a bear-market strategy could work under certain conditions.
In 1987, the year of the crash, the fund, managed by Mr. Salvigsen and others, had a total return of 34% compared with 5% for the Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index.
Since then, the fund for the most part has lagged behind the S&P 500 index; so far this year, it's off 1.4%.
Robertson Stephens Contrarian Fund, which opened in June, has already gathered $350 million in assets.
After rolling up a 17% gain in the fourth quarter, the fund is up 2% so far this year.
Some pros don't like the fact that the two bear funds' future success is based on their sweeping macroeconomic bets on inflation.
But Paul Stephens, portfolio manager of the Robertson Stephens Contrarian Fund, says his biggest risk "is if the market goes to 5000."
Mr. Salvigsen's Dreyfus fund is hedging its bets: It has 40% of its assets in cash.
