BENTSEN INDICATED White House flexibility on regional health alliances.
The Treasury secretary suggested that the Clinton administration is willing to modify its health-care plan in order to make it easier for companies to insure workers themselves instead of being forced into regional insurance pools.
The pools, which are called health alliances, are intended to bring businesses and individuals together to purchase health coverage.
The alliances have become one of the most controversial aspects of the president's health-care proposal.
Bentsen's conciliatory tone coincides with efforts by senior Democrats to narrow differences with industry and build support in Congress for the core of the president's plan.
Russia's former finance chief denounced President Yeltsin, who had asked the reformer to stay in the cabinet, saying government policies could provoke economic collapse and social unrest by reviving a Sovietstyle economy.
Fyodorov's departure was a boost for Prime Minister Chernomyrdin.
The Russian prosecutor general began a criminal investigation into alleged warmongering by an extreme nationalist politician, Zhirinovsky, who leads one of the biggest blocs in parliament.
The probe reportedly was launched in response to complaints that Zhirinovsky had been spreading war propaganda.
He denied the reports.
Ukraine can expect to receive a U.S. commitment to double economic aid to the Kiev government, Washington officials disclosed.
After talks with a delegation of Ukrainian officials seeking help in stabilizing the ex-Soviet republic's economy, U.S. officials said the current commitment of $155 million will double.
Belarus's Soviet-era parliament ousted the country's liberal leader, Stanislav Shushkevich.
His ouster, linked to corruption charges but plainly intended as a rebuff to market reforms and to a foreign policy aligned with Russia, came two weeks after Stanislav received Clinton's backing during his tour of the former Soviet Union.
The U.S. rejected a Russian proposal for a U.N. Security Council meeting on Bosnia and dismissed a French plan to pressure Muslims into a peace deal, calling it "a strange moral calculus."
The official comments came one day after Secretary of State Christopher returned from talks with French officials pressing for urgent measures.
Civilians mobbed a U.N. food aid convoy and wounded six of its Bosnian police escorts, in a grim demonstration of escalating lawlessness driven by hunger and desperation.
The officers, some of whom suffered bullet wounds, were attacked as the 10-truck convoy entered Ticici, a Muslim village northwest of Sarajevo.
A "wait-and-see" strategy is a reasonable alternative to surgery or radiation for treatment of early-stage prostate cancer, according to a new study.
Urologists have argued over the best strategies for treating the early-stage disease, because aggressive treatments are costly and carry significant risks.
Lyme disease researchers developed a gene-based diagnostic test that might solve problems caused by frequent misdiagnosis of the illness.
The research team was led by the doctor who in 1976 discovered the bacterium that causes the disease, which produces flulike symptoms and can lead to chronic arthritis.
A young man lunged at Britain's Prince Charles and fired two blank shots from a starter's pistol during an outdoor ceremony in Sydney marking Australia's national day.
The assailant, a Korean student who said he was upset about the plight of Cambodian boat people, was immediately arrested.
The prince was unharmed.
The House speaker declared there isn't any need for congressional hearings on Clinton's past real-estate dealings in Arkansas.
Foley's comments came a day after House Minority Leader Michel called for hearings into the president's Whitewater investment but backed off his prior request that the House form a special committee.
Jordan's King Hussein voiced his readiness to meet with Israel's Rabin "before too long" and added that such a meeting could take place before full peace was established.
In Cairo, meanwhile, signs of optimism emerged from PLO-Israeli negotiations on plans for Palestinian autonomy in the occupied territories.
