Although they've never met, Chris Harris felt he could bare his ninth-grade soul to the author Howard Fast.
"Just once, I would like for my dad to say `That was an excellent grab at second base,'" Chris confided in a letter to Mr. Fast.
"Most of the time it's `Come on you know you can do better than that.' . . .
Deep down I know that he loves me a lot.
I just can't help to wonder why he doesn't show his emotions."
Chris's letter was among 9,000 written by junior- and senior-high students as part of a contest sponsored by Read Magazine and the Library of Congress.
The topic: How books have changed their lives.
The essays, in the form of letters to authors, deal with everything from molestation to the death of a pet.
They offer a hopeful sign in our video-cluttered culture, says Cathy Gourley, associate editor of Read Magazine.
"Who says kids aren't reading?" she asks.
Chris read Mr. Fast's "April Morning," a novel about a young man trying to win his father's respect during the Revolutionary War, as part of a history assignment.
He expected a boring rehash of a colonial battle.
"It fascinated me how it was a lot like my life," he says.
Joni Boynton, a seventh grader from Lewiston, Minn., had just finished reading Wilson Rawls's "Where the Red Fern Grows," about a boy and the death of his two dogs, when her own dog, Bear, was shot by hunters.
"As he lay -- his head in my lap with such pain and agony it broke my heart," she wrote to the author.
"This episode seemed unreal.
Why or how could anyone be so cruel . . . .
It helps knowing someone else has gone through the same kind of pain."
No one knows for sure whether kids are reading more or not.
There are some positive signs: Sales of juvenile trade books almost doubled to an estimated $2.09 billion in 1993 from $1.05 billion in 1987, according to the Book Industry Study Group.
And book-oriented children's shows like Reading Rainbow are among the most popular public television shows.
Still, kids confess they don't read that much.
If they don't have jobs after school, they have play rehearsals and wrestling practice.
And while reading is considered work, movies and TV are entertainment.
Just look at the 1992 Reading Report Card from the U.S. Department of Education: Fewer than 25% of students in grades 8 and 12 read every day, and the same percentage never or hardly ever read for fun.
Meanwhile, 65% of the 8th graders and 47% of 12th graders watch three or more hours of TV a day.
Teenagers say their parents aren't much better.
They spend all day in front of computers and unwind in front of the TV.
Their reading seems limited to newspapers or magazines.
Avi (who goes by his first name only) is a popular children's book author who says there's no question kids read less.
He adds, however, that books have an undeniably profound impact on kids' lives.
Whenever he visits schools -- some 30 to 40 a year -- he asks kids to name a TV show that is like their own life.
"They can never come up with one," he says.
Daniel Boorstin, Librarian of Congress Emeritus, says books hold power over all generations because the experience of reading is so personal.
"You can possess a book, hold it.
No one knows what you're reading and feeling.
You make your own world," he says.
Movies and television are almost too realistic, he adds.
Indeed, young adults are unexpectedly seeing themselves reflected in the pages of books.
"Your book captured me," wrote Jennifer Marvin to author Hannah Green about "I Never Promised You a Rose Garden," Ms. Green's account of a young girl suffering from mental illness.
"Let me explain.
I am 16 and I have been diagnosed with manic depression and am on several medications.
Luckily my case is mild, but that doesn't mean it isn't hard . . . .
I fight living in a world of my own also," she wrote, closing with "My deepest gratitude and love."
The books have changed the students, and the contest has changed the teachers.
Linda Vegh, an English teacher in Corpus Christi, Texas, says she used to make all book selections herself and assign homework on everything students read.
As a result, students often read solely in search of answers about character development and theme.
Now she lets students pick their own books.
Ms. Vegh says she would never have assigned "The Courage to Heal," for example, a chronicle of sexual abuse, which explains how victims resolved their fear and guilt.
But Lula Jones, a 12th grader at the public high school where Ms. Vegh works, picked it up.
She wrote that she had been molested for several years, was afraid of being home alone and of the dark.
"I felt as if there were something wrong with me because I can't stand for people to touch me," she wrote to authors Ellen Bass and Laura Davis.
"Just reading the stories of all those women eases the pain and maybe one of these days with the help of your book, that little girl inside of me will be at peace with herself," wrote Ms. Jones.
As much as books change for every reader and generation, they also offer a reassuring constant: the hero, who unlike many of today's role models, will never change or disappoint.
Aslum Khan, a senior in Rolling Meadows, Ill., lost his mother to cancer, felt alienated from his father and, as an Indian and Muslim, from most of society as well.
He picked up "The Autobiography of Malcolm X" because he heard Malcolm X's name in a couple of rap songs.
Before he read the book, he was like every other high school kid: "I was afraid of everything.
I really doubted myself," he says.
All of those feelings, he says, changed after reading the book.
In his contest-winning letter to Alex Haley he wrote, "I realize now that I am a talented, good person and nobody can tell me otherwise . . . .
Suddenly everything my mother had told me about honesty, doing well in school and not following the crowd had new meaning to me."
Not every letter was a thank you note.
Some offered advice.
Suzanne Lanzafame, of Park Ridge, Ill., suggests that author Michael Crichton lighten up.
The setting, characters, action and dinosaurs in "Jurassic Park" "were perfect," she wrote.
But she could do without the "technical stuff."
"Do you think we're all scientists and study DNA day and night," she wrote.
"What I'm trying to say is make your books so everybody could read them and so you don't have to be a scientist to understand them . . . .
Otherwise I would say this is an excellent book."
