Gunmen carried off the boldest kidnapping in Mexico in more than two decades, snatching a billionaire bank president as he was being driven to work through one of the nation's most exclusive suburbs.
Officials believe the motive is ransom, but the act sent a jolt through already jittery financial markets that have been shaken by political uncertainties, including the Chiapas uprising, since the first of the year.
The kidnappers made off Monday morning with Alfredo Harp Helu, the 50-year-old president of Grupo Financiero Banamex-Accival SA, Mexico's biggest bank and brokerage firm.
Mr. Harp, one of this country's most prominent businessmen, was apparently pulled from his car by at least three gunmen.
Local reports, unconfirmed by authorities, said that neither he nor his driver was injured.
A government official close to the case declined to say whether Mr. Harp's family or the bank had received a ransom note.
But he dismissed the possibility that the kidnappers might have political motives, whether related to the Jan. 1 rebellion in the state of Chiapas, or to the nation's presidential race now under way.
The official said that police already have some suspects but identified them only as professional kidnappers.
Police speculate the attack may have been organized by the same people who two years ago kidnapped cable-television heir Joaquin Vargas Guajardo.
The kidnappers, who reportedly received millions of dollars to release Mr. Vargas, were never caught.
But government officials said at the time that they were apparently former police officials, disgruntled because they were fired during an anticorruption campaign.
The official's statement about monetary motives appeared to be designed partly to allay concerns that social and political unrest is growing in Mexico.
Still, a nervous stock market tumbled 67.85 points yesterday, or 2.79%, following a 3.23% decline in the IPC index Monday.
The market is now down more than 9% since Jan. 1, despite impressive gains early in the year.
The peso fell sharply in early trading yesterday but recovered to close at 3.3050 pesos to the dollar in the spot market, compared with 3.2700 Monday.
The kidnapping added to the uncertainty in the business community here by reminding executives how vulnerable they are to attacks.
Dozens of businessmen, wealthy farmers and cattle ranchers have been kidnapped in recent years.
Because police appear powerless to stop the kidnappings, many such crimes go unreported; often families of victims quietly pay ransom demands.
The high-profile Vargas case was an exception, drawing attention in part because the owner of a large local personal-computer company was kidnapped at almost the same time.
Kidnappers haven't grabbed someone of Mr. Harp's stature since 1973, when leftist terrorists seized and murdered Eugenio Garza Sada, the best-known businessman in Monterey.
Mr. Harp has become one of the major figures in Mexican finance through his partnership with Roberto Hernandez.
While Mr. Hernandez has been known as the visionary who put together the biggest financial group in Mexico, Mr. Harp, a halting public speaker, has been the detail man who has made the group work.
After starting his career as an accountant in 1966, Mr. Harp became a stock trader two years later and met Mr. Hernandez.
They founded Accival, the brokerage firm, and -- following Mr. Harp's suggestions that they invest in Telefonos de Mexico and in banks -- produced an astounding spurt of growth in the late 1980s when the state-owned companies were privatized.
They failed in attempts to buy Telmex and the television monopoly, Televisa, but did manage to acquire control of Banamex from the government for $3.2 billion in 1991.
Mr. Harp, who is of Lebanese descent and speaks fluent Arabic, is a cousin of Carlos Slim, who controls Telmex and the conglomerate Grupo Carso SA.
Both have been referred to as members of the inner circle of business advisers for President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
