On his deathbed last March, John Dolan exacted a promise from his son, Daniel: Don't give up the fight against City Hall.
The Dolans had tangled for five years with the city of Tigard, Ore., a suburb of Portland, over plans to expand their plumbing store.
The city insisted that to get a permit, the Dolans had to surrender a tenth of their 1.7-acre lot for storm drainage and a bike path.
Protesting what they saw as a confiscation of private property, the Dolans sued.
Although they lost in state courts, they became heroes to property-rights advocates around the country.
Now their case will go before the U.S. Supreme Court, which will have the chance to clarify how far government may go in regulating commercial and residential development.
Oral arguments are scheduled for today.
It is potentially "quite an important case," says Carter Phillips, a Washington lawyer who often represents businesses before the high court.
If the Dolans win, he predicts, "the lower courts will be swamped by" similar suits.
The Fifth Amendment prohibits government from "taking" private property without paying owners "just compensation."
When officials put a highway through someone's backyard, for instance, it requires that the homeowner be paid.
But many communities routinely require developers, without compensating them, to turn over pieces of property, allow public rights-of-way or improve streets and sidewalks.
For 60 years the Supreme Court generally has allowed local and federal officials broad leeway as long as owners aren't denied the entire economic value of their property.
But in a 1987 ruling that was something of a departure from that approach, the high court said judges should look skeptically at permit conditions to make sure that they aren't manipulated to "extort" property from private owners.
The Dolans, who live in Portland and own 11 hardware and lighting stores in the area, have feuded with officials in Tigard (pop. 32,000) since the late 1980s, when John Dolan led a successful drive to block city plans to spruce up its downtown.
Mr. Dolan was enraged because the plan would have forced him to move his A-Boy Plumbing Supply store, which employs seven people and is housed in a single-story warehouse-style building.
Voters thwarted its ambitious urban-renewal plans, but the city proceeded with a separate project to create a park along a creek that meanders through the downtown area.
Fanno Creek, as it happens, runs along the west border of the A-Boy lot, and when the Dolans in 1989 proposed replacing their store with a larger one on the same property, they again clashed with City Hall.
Zoning officials approved the expansion on the condition that the Dolans turn over 7,000 square feet abutting the creek.
The city gave two reasons: First, the improved store's larger parking lot would cause more runoff into the creek, requiring a buffer area to reduce flooding risks.
Second, the city wanted the Dolans to put in part of a bike path aimed at easing traffic congestion and attracting people to the new park.
These purposes "take precedence in the community over the desires of an individual property owner to do exactly what he wants to," said Tigard's city planner, Liz Newton.
Anyone proposing new development along Fanno Creek may be required to make similar sacrifices, she added, although she acknowledged that only "one or two" other downtown property owners have been forced to give up land.
John Dolan, a fiesty former captain in the Merchant Marine, complained that the flooding concerns were exaggerated and that his customers wouldn't ride bikes to pick up bathtubs or toilets.
Some of the contested turf closest to the creek is too swampy to be of any commercial use; adding the bike path, though, would require that the new building be redesigned.
But what is important to the Dolans "is the principle of not wanting to give up our property for nothing," says 38-year-old Daniel Dolan, who took over the fight and the family company when his father died of leukemia last year.
Represented by a local lawyer, the Dolans quibbled with the city for a while over its demand.
Then, a sympathetic Tigard citizen urged them to seek support from the burgeoning movement of property-rights activists who have tried in recent years to get the courts to restrict land regulation.
The Dolans switched attorneys and became born-again Fifth Amendment believers.
Previously, "we didn't even know what the Fifth Amendment said," laughs Daniel Dolan.
But once they found out, he says, they exclaimed, "That's us!
That's us!"
Despite the Supreme Court's traditionally deferential view of local government claiming property, the Dolans' new lawyers (provided free by a property-rights group called Oregonians in Action) thought they could take advantage of the 1987 high court ruling that directed judges to examine challenged land-use rules more closely.
The Oregon state courts didn't read that case, Nollan vs. California Coastal Commission, as significantly changing the standard for scrutinizing land regulations, and they rejected the Dolans' claim.
The Oregon Supreme Court concluded that Tigard's announced purposes -- limiting floods and relieving traffic congestion -- were legitimate and sufficiently related to burdens created by the store expansion.
Property-rights activists contend that the Oregon courts' decisions exemplify a pattern of resistance to the Nollan ruling.
"Many lower courts are trying to obfuscate or narrow" the 1987 U.S. Supreme Court precedent, maintains Robin Rivett of the Pacific Legal Foundation in Sacramento, Calif.
The foundation is one of a dozen or so groups that have filed "friend-of-the-court" briefs urging the justices to use the Dolan case to emphatically rein in regulators.
Environmental groups and the Clinton administration have weighed in on Tigard's side.
They say regulators would be paralyzed if they were forced to pay whenever they impose permit conditions such as those at issue in this case.
And they warn that developers, if the Dolans are successful, could end up regretting victory.
That's because regulators acting on plausible environmental concerns might have no alternative but to reject development proposals outright.
Ironically, courts have viewed mandatory transfers of property to the government more skeptically than permit denials.
