Jones International Ltd. said it will start publishing interactive CD-ROM-based lessons this year to accompany classes on its educational cable-TV network, the Mind Extension University.
With a goal of more than a dozen interactive titles by the end of 1995, the effort will accelerate the entry of Jones, one of the largest operators of cable systems in the U.S., into the software business.
Moreover, in a bid to expand the reach of the "video university," Jones said it plans to open five administrative "campuses" world-wide to handle enrollment, billing and program development.
The campuses will be in the U.S., Europe, Asia, Africa and South America.
Mind Extension programming in foreign countries could include videotaped classes from local universities as well as shared programming.
Jones said a launch date for the new centers hasn't been set, but it plans to establish a headquarters for the "University College" in Denver, where Jones is based, to house satellite uplinks and an administration building.
The moves are part of a plan by the company's chairman, Glenn Jones, to electronically connect TV viewers around the world to university teachers and classrooms.
Today the six-year old Mind Extension University: The Education Network reaches 26 million viewers and airs courses from 26 affiliated colleges in the U.S. for credit and degrees.
About 36,000 viewers are enrolled students.
Mr. Jones hopes to expand the line of CD-ROM offerings each year with new study aids and ultimately, stand-alone classes.
"One day you will be able to dissect a digital frog," says Mr. Jones.
"Or you might be able to do a chemistry experiment without blowing up the lab.
It's a new frontier."
Mr. Jones said the company will publish many compact disk titles itself and co-publish others.
The first product the company plans to sell is a CD-ROM version of a dictionary of cable terminology.
The working title: Information Infrastructure Dictionary.
Students would buy the disks and books from Mind Extension University for prices ranging from $30 to $50 -- a price comparable to books, the company says.
But the disks must be played on expensive CDROM-based interactive players.
In the future, as digital technology evolves, such interactive programming will likely be sent over cable systems, too.
Despite the costs, Mr. Jones says, "I can deliver education cheaper (than traditional universities), at a profit, and still pay my taxes."
To help pay for this aggressive plan, Jones will rely partly on capital from its new partner, BCE Telecom International Inc., the Canadian telecommunications giant which paid $400 million for a 30% stake in Jones Intercable Inc., the cable subsidiary, in December.
As part of that deal, BCE will put up an additional $18 million to buy a 15% stake in Jones Educational Networks Ltd., the parent of Mind Extension University.
The company's foray into digital publishing will be headed by Bernard Luskin, who recently left his post as chief executive of Phillips Interactive Media to become chief executive of Jones Interactive Systems Inc.
"A book on disk is the same as a book on paper," says Mr. Luskin.
