Pennzoil Co. said the Internal Revenue Service will seek $956.5 million in taxes and interest on the $3 billion settlement Pennzoil received from Texaco Inc. in 1988.
The long-awaited IRS position on Pennzoil's 1988 taxes came after a lengthy audit that basically rejected Pennzoil's position on how the proceeds of its Texaco settlement should be taxed.
The IRS decision, in essence, requires Pennzoil to restate its 1988 results to include a large portion of the settlement as taxable income for that year.
Texaco paid Pennzoil to settle bitter litigation that had resulted in an historic $11 billion jury award to Pennzoil and a filing for Texaco under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
James Pate, Pennzoil's chief executive officer, said, "Pennzoil has the financial flexibility to deal with any eventuality that may occur in connection with this dispute, including the possibility of paying any tax assessment and suing for a refund if Pennzoil is not able to resolve the matter through discussions with the IRS."
Pennzoil stressed that it doesn't have to make any payments at the moment and that it plans to formally protest the "proposed tax deficiency" within 30 days.
The company said the appeals process within the IRS could take as long as six months.
A Pennzoil spokesman said that although the company has had contact with IRS agents during the audit, the appeal will be Pennzoil's "first opportunity to fully present the legal basis for the company's tax position."
The spokesman said Pennzoil would challenge the IRS position in court, if necessary, adding, "we feel confident about our legal position and feel the matter can be resolved in an acceptable manner."
IRS officials couldn't be reached for comment late yesterday.
Pennzoil disclosed the IRS's position after the markets closed.
Its shares ended at $55.50, up 75 cents, in composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
The amount of the proposed IRS levy is huge for a company Pennzoil's size.
In the first nine months of 1993, Pennzoil had net income of $49.4 million, or $1.21 a share, on revenue of $2 billion.
The dispute stems from Pennzoil's 1984 agreement to acquire a portion of Getty Oil Co., which Texaco ended up buying in its entirety.
Pennzoil sued for tortious interference, won its historic judgment and in 1988 received the $3 billion settlement from Texaco.
Over the next three years, Pennzoil paid taxes on $800 million of the settlement and used the rest, $2.2 billion, to buy Chevron Corp. stock.
Pennzoil said it will argue to the IRS that its investment in Chevron stock is, in effect, an investment in "replacement property similar to the property lost" to Texaco.
Pennzoil maintains that a piece of the IRS tax code, called section 1033, allows Pennzoil to receive cash for its lost property and not have to treat it as taxable income if the company reinvests the proceeds in a similar property.
Pennzoil is expected to argue that since Chevron, like Getty, is a large oil company with sizable assets in California, the purchase of Chevron stock fits the definition.
In its first salvo, the IRS disagreed.
The agency said that Pennzoil should increase its 1988 income by $2.2 billion and that it owes taxes on that sum of $550.9 million.
Pennzoil estimated that interest on the proposed tax would be about $234.3 million.
In addition, the IRS seeks to disallow about $366 million of deductions that Pennzoil took for litigation and related expenses on its 1988 tax return in connection with the Texaco suit, Pennzoil said.
That adds another $124.6 million in deficient taxes, Pennzoil said, with interest of $46.7 million on that deficiency.
Pennzoil has sold and exchanged more than two-thirds of its stake in Chevron, which at one point amounted to a 9.4% interest in the company.
The last transaction was a sale last November of Chevron stock that resulted in proceeds to Pennzoil of $721 million.
At the time, a number of analysts speculated that Pennzoil sold the shares because it feared an adverse IRS ruling.
