Welfare reform is moving to the front burner at the White House.
Scrapping plans to coast on welfare until health-care legislation takes shape, officials have decided that President Clinton's welfare-overhaul proposal must reach Congress as quickly as possible, maybe as early as late February.
The fire was lit, administration officials say, by impatience voiced during the past few weeks by Senate Finance Committee Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who will help shape debate on both issues and threatened to hold health care "hostage" if welfare were delayed.
Comments by the New York Democrat, in a unique role as both a leading scholar and the key Senate power broker on welfare, put "the fear of God into the White House," said one member of Mr. Clinton's 32-member inter-agency work group that will propose reforms to the President.
"They didn't want to lose the lead on this issue."
White House aides said Mr. Clinton will emphasize the need for changing the welfare system in his State of the Union address tonight, a speech that also will stamp his domestic focus firmly on health care, anticrime and worker-retraining programs.
Bruce Reed, the White House deputy policy director overseeing the welfare effort, said that no timetable has been set for moving the proposal to Congress, but adds: "Americans see that health-care and welfare systems are both in a crisis and we need to move quickly to reform both systems at the same time."
Until recently, the White House planned to delay its welfare proposal for fear that it would compete for media attention with health-care reform, as well as clutter the legislative calendar on Capitol Hill: Both issues will be considered by the same Senate and House committees.
Even before Sen. Moynihan's comments, White House aides emphasize, Mr. Clinton was quietly shifting his stance, responding to memos written in late December by top staff and outside friends recommending what issues he needs to focus on this year and highlight in his speech tonight.
Especially compelling, said advisers, were arguments made by Mr. Reed and another policy adviser, William Galston, who stressed that the central goal of health-care reform must be complemented by other social issues, such as crime and welfare reform, to be on beat with the pulse of the American people.
Mr. Clinton is winning kudos for not making an issue out of Sen. Moynihan's rebellion and simply responding with action.
"It is smart to do this," said Tony Coelho, the former Democratic House whip.
"It takes care of convincing the American people that he is a vehicle for change and it is politically shrewd. . . .
It handles the Congress well."
While the heart of the plan is to put a two-year limit on benefits and provide education and training so welfare recipients return to the work force, Mr. Clinton must quickly make a host of delicate decisions, such as how to pay for it, how quickly to phase in the new plan and how to shape a jobs program.
The president, said aides, may begin making those decisions next week.
Al From, the president of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council, believes that the president's shift to high gear on welfare could create problems for Republicans, who have long wielded social issues such as crime and welfare to win presidential elections.
Congressional Republicans disagree.
They say that tough medicine on welfare reform will alienate precisely the political bloc that Mr. Clinton needs for health care: black and liberal Democrats.
President Clinton tonight also will urge Congress to pass legislation designed to combat crime, particularly provisions that would put 100,000 police officers on the beat and provide boot camps as an alternative to prison for nonviolent offenders.
He also favors life imprisonment for those convicted of three violent offenses.
The House and Senate passed differing measures to fight crime late last year.
The House will hold hearings on a number of the penalty provisions in the Senate's legislation that haven't been considered by the House.
Administration officials will urge Congress to kill or modify some provisions in the Senate-passed crime bill that would federalize what are now state crimes.
They will argue, for example, that a measure sponsored by Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (R., N.Y.) to federalize violent crimes committed with a handgun would overload the federal criminal justice system.
Joe Davidson contributed to this article.
