YOU DREAD MONDAY mornings -- and the start of another workweek.
You feel queasy every time you see your boss.
You can't remember your last raise.
You're jealous of a colleague's promotion.
Such occurrences are an annoying but minor part of many individuals' work lives.
But the drumbeat of disappointment sometimes can signal something much more serious: You've stayed too long in your job, a common career affliction.
It isn't easy to hear the sound of your career hitting a dead end, however.
Some people simply hope things will improve and so refuse to accept the need to change jobs, career experts say.
Others recognize reality too late.
"People ignore signals -- and get blindsided when they get laid off or fired," says Lili Pratt, a San Jose, Calif., vice president of EnterChange, an outplacement and career-counseling firm.
Joyce A. Schwarz, a Los Angeles career consultant, adds: "People spend more time planning their vacations than their careers.
They sit and wait for an outside force to motivate them" to leave.
Consider Karen Rubin of Covina, Calif.
Last year, she quit after seven years as food-service director of a 13,000-student California school district.
Ms. Rubin says she realizes she stayed three years too long, despite overwhelming signs that the job no longer made sense for her.
Though it had once challenged her, "I just hated going in" during the last three years, recalls Ms. Rubin, 43 years old.
"They would hold all these management meetings and I would think, `Not another stupid meeting about something I don't care about.'
"I started to resent the place and the people in it.
I resented my boss.
I got irritated with the people I worked with.
I was unhappy at home and my husband said that I was depressed," she says.
FEELING TRAPPED, Ms. Rubin switched professions.
She took a job last July as an editorial assistant with the San Gabriel Valley Tribune, a small daily newspaper.
Despite a huge salary cut -- to less than $17,000 a year from $48,000 -- she says the change has "been worth it in terms of satisfaction."
But losing interest in your job isn't an automatic indicator that you have outgrown your post, career counselors say.
If you're easily bored because your expectations consistently exceed your job's demands, you may be equally unhappy elsewhere, cautions Barry Glassner, head of the University of Southern California's sociology department and author of a recent book about career crises.
"You have to be careful not to overreact to any single problem," Dr. Glassner says.
Exactly how many measures are meaningful?
EnterChange uses a 15-question quiz to help individuals decide whether to change jobs.
Positive answers to 11 or more questions means they should do so.
Some questions probe relatively obvious issues such as: Have you been left out of the decision-making loop regarding a possible reorganization?
But others suggest you may have to look for subtler clues.
Has your recent "promote or fire me" stance made no one flinch?
Has your mentor been sidetracked or fired?
Indeed, some of the most powerful indications that it's time to go may be the hardest for unhappy employees to sense.
As they grew more dissatisfied with their jobs, many professionals interviewed for Dr. Glassner's book found they also became less agitated by otherwise disturbing events.
They no longer became upset, for example, when they were passed over for a promotion.
"When things that should bother you don't, it indicates you've given up," Dr. Glassner says.
"You've been spinning your wheels so long that disturbing things just seem normal."
SARAH BINGHAM experienced a similar detachment less than a year after she began managing a documentary-film production office in New York two years ago.
"I realized I was having entire conversations with staff about important things but that I was simply on automatic pilot," says Ms. Bingham, 32.
"People would ask my opinion of things, how a picture looked, and I would say, `Fine.'
And when I went home, I would realize I actually hated that picture.
Nothing I said was connected to my heart or beliefs."
Ms. Bingham recently resigned.
She says she now is far happier working part-time managing a clothing store in New York's Greenwich Village.
While she is earning less money, "it's a chance to really step back," she notes.
"I am figuring out what I am really good at it."
But a standard list of questions may not adequately measure whether your job has reached a dead end, Dr. Glassner believes.
People can stumble by subscribing to conventional career wisdom, he explains.
For instance, failing to get a raise regularly needn't mean that you should hunt for a new job if you like your work and don't require more money.
Dr. Glassner advises that you create your own short list of specific and realistic job goals.
"I want to help take my company to the next level" is too broad.
"I want to improve the bottom line for my division" is better.
You should assess your list every four to six months.
If you achieve your top two or three priorities most of the time and the rest aren't completely ignored, Dr. Glassner says, then "you're probably in pretty good shape."
You should stay put -- at least for now.
