You never know what's cooking at the supermarket these days, as more stores and manufacturers ply shoppers with free samples of pasta, pizza and assorted other foods.
Not to mention trial sizes of shampoo, antacids, toilet tissue and just about every other product a grocery store sells.
Sampling is a big business, and small wonder.
Two-thirds of all purchasing decisions are made once the consumer is in the store, says Kerry J. Smith, managing editor of Promo, a magazine for the marketing industry.
"People no longer go to stores with shopping lists in hand," he says.
Instead, they come with an empty belly and an open mind, which is why the free-sample approach makes perfect sense.
An added benefit for food companies: Giving out samples, which are often accompanied by coupons, often helps them get better store display space.
As for customers, the benefits are apparent during a visit to a Bigg's "hypermarket" (a combination grocery and general-merchandise store) in Florence, Ky.
After 10-year-old Alex Rolfsen and his little brother, Andrew, gobble free pizza at the Bigg's store, their father tosses a couple of the frozen pies into his shopping cart.
"That's why I bring them along when I go shopping," Chuck Rolfsen says.
"To ask them what they like, because if I buy it without a sample, they won't eat it."
And that's why marketers, who know that children influence their parents' shopping decisions, gear many samples -- like pizza and corn dogs -- toward youngsters.
Free sampling has drawbacks.
It clogs supermarket aisles and creates messes.
Retailers also may be liable if a shopper slips on spilled food or a discarded toothpick.
(Many samplers have abandoned toothpicks and serve food in little paper cups with plastic utensils or on napkins.)
And it isn't all win-win for manufacturers.
Giving out samples is labor-intensive and expensive.
And it can backfire if a customer tries a sample and grimaces or spits it out in front of other shoppers.
Then there are moochers, who sample and sample and sample -- and never buy.
Still, more companies seem to be doing it.
Promo magazine estimates some $125 million was spent last year on supermarket sampling and demonstrations, up 15% from the previous year.
And more supermarkets are getting into the act, handing out free samples of their own to boost sales in deli, meat, fish and bakery departments.
Indeed, for many shoppers, a visit to the food store these days can turn into a free six-plus-course banquet.
"We always come over at lunch.
We're hungry, and the kids are hungry, so we hit all the sample stands," says Pat Moran, as he and his wife, Cindy, and their children stroll by the freezer section of the Florence Bigg's.
The Morans like the free bagel slices and corn dogs and toss packages of both into their overflowing shopping cart.
Most shoppers are willing to try samples, and those who do will likely buy the product, says Bill Sinnott of Ryan Partnership, a marketing-services concern in Westport, Conn.
He notes that the practice has a long history: "It started early in the century with the free pickle, as a way to build business in the deli."
Sue Schoenling, director of communications for Bigg's, says more than 60% of customers sample products and about 37% buy the product.
One Bigg's store tripled its pizza sales after giving out samples, and the increased sales continued long after the giveaways stopped, she says.
Bigg's, a closely held Cincinnati-based chain of two supermarkets and five hypermarkets, tries to have dozens of samples in each store on heavy weekend shopping days.
"It's a good way to make contact with the customers," says Daniel Galinger, the perishables manager at the Florence Bigg's.
In the fish department, he typically puts out three or four platters of crackers and seafood salads to entice shoppers.
In many cases, companies work with stores, jointly offering samples that complement each other.
CPC International Inc., for example, wanted shoppers to try its Thomas' Sandwich Muffins.
So it joined forces last year with retailers in selected markets, who supplied meat, and with companies that supplied condiments.
The sandwiches were prepared in the stores and served on the muffins.
For CPC, this was an opportunity "to say that these muffins are not just for breakfast.
They're also for sandwiches and barbecues," says Bruce Malinowski, director of consumer promotion for CPC's Best Foods grocery-products unit.
He adds that the pitch helped muffin sales in those markets.
Whatever the benefits, some retailers focus on sampling's disadvantages.
"Kroger doesn't do a lot of it," says Paul Bernish, spokesman for Cincinatti-based Kroger Co.
"You get people kind of clogged up in the middle of the store.
It slows traffic."
Most sampling is handled by contract workers employed by small outfits that deal directly with stores or companies.
The growth of in-store sampling is creating a work force of "demo ladies" (most workers are older, retired women looking for extra income) who typically earn between $5.50 and $9 an hour, depending on the market and their experience.
It's not easy work.
The aisles can be chilly -- particularly refrigerated sections where most sampling is done -- and demo ladies wear several layers of clothes.
"I do get a little cold on my south side," says Gail Warner, who is standing next to a big freezer chest giving out toasted bagel slices topped with cream cheese at the Florence Bigg's.
Elsewhere in the store, Miriam Doyle, 62, is giving out paper cups of pasta salad.
"These are all precooked.
All you have to do is heat them through," she tells customer after customer.
Shoppers can be rude.
They complain when the food runs out or grab at samples while they are still being prepared.
"Sometimes I think they're going to eat my arms off," says 56-year-old Maureen Seiter, as she cooks corn dogs in an electric skillet.
Wyoma Kitz, who is baking pizza in a small table-top oven, says her peeves "are the old men and little children who kind of pick over the food.
They start to take one piece and pick another.
I have to throw it all out when they do that."
But demo workers see virtue in free samples.
Marie Maines, giving out pizza, says, "People today don't have a lot of money to spend on a new product when they don't know what it tastes like."
