So the gang that gave us Defense Secretary Inman now offers us, as special counsel to investigate possible impropriety by the President, Clark Clifford's lawyer.
Do not misunderstand (though we suppose that asks too much); this is not intended as a personal attack on Robert Fiske Jr.
Lawyers are entitled to have clients, and in the legal maneuvering Mr. Clifford switched to another lawyer.
Unquestionably, Mr. Fiske carries a reputation as an upstanding member of the New York bar.
On the basis of what we know about him, for most posts he would be an outstanding choice.
Indeed, we ourselves strongly supported his nomination as Deputy Attorney General when he was attacked by 14 U.S. Senators.
The Senate's conservative faction sent a letter to President Bush opposing Mr. Fiske on the grounds that he had been chairman of the American Bar Association judicial selection committee.
While we agreed with their criticism of the increasingly politicized committee, we observed that within the committee Mr. Fiske had been a force for the good.
And on the basis of his own tenure as U.S. Attorney in Manhattan, that he would be a salutary restraining hand on federal prosecutors on issues such as the application of RICO, the racketeering statute being applied to financial institutions.
("Why Justice Needs Fiske," June 22, 1989.)
We failed to persuade the Senators, and Mr. Fiske eventually withdrew.
Mr. Fiske's new appointment, however, is far from an ordinary post, as we elaborated earlier in the week ("Fountain of Trust," January 19).
The whole idea is to find someone whose word most Americans would be inclined to take on trust, which surely means someone not in the least connected to the scandals circling the globe.
There are even certain speculative but still possible connections between Whitewater and the BCCI scandal.
Little Rock's Stephens financial empire helped bankroll Bill Clinton's presidential campaign, and also held a lien on James McDougal's interest in Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
Another part of the same empire handled the brokerage when BCCI surrogates bought Washington's First American Bank -- and installed Mr. Clifford as its head.
Now of course, Mr. Clifford escaped trial in New York on health grounds, perhaps a testimony to Mr. Fiske's efforts on his behalf.
And his acolyte Robert Altman was acquitted of misleading regulators, leaving the intriguing question of how it was BCCI came to own the biggest bank in Washington.
But investigators now have access to a passel of BCCI documents not available during this trial.
In any event, knowingly or not, Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman indisputably worked for BCCI.
Given the extreme sensitivity of the special counsel post, surely it would have been possible to find someone other than a prominent member of Mr. Clifford's defense team.
Yes, Mr. Fiske is widely seen as upstanding; his list of character witnesses would be almost as long as his client's.
But such a list is cool comfort to the growing number of Americans who think that something is wrong in high places.
Why, for that matter, select someone who'd attracted the written opposition of 14 Senators?
If the object is to build trust in the investigation, why then pick someone with prepackaged enemies?
In all, a very curious selection.
Why did Janet Reno make this choice, if she did?
Why did Davis, Polk & Wardwell consent to have an active partner in this role, and what does its client list look like?
(Lawrence Walsh had retired from Davis, Polk before mounting his crusade.)
And since Mr. Fiske must know what baggage he rightly or wrongly carries, why would someone of his integrity accept the appointment?
The ultimate point of these questions, we suppose, is that the very notion of special prosecutors asks too much.
Mr. Fiske promises that at the end of his investigation he will issue a public report.
Why, is that what he did as a U.S. Attorney?
No, either he indicted and put the decision before a judge and jury, or he shut up; that is the way the criminal process is supposed to work.
We clearly do need a public report, but that is the purview of an investigation by the legislative branch, which operates by give and take in the light of day.
We wish Mr. Fiske the best of luck with his investigation, but his curriculum vitae makes a Congressional probe of Whitewater all the more necessary.
Has this Republic really reached the point that a Democratic Congress cannot be expected to openly investigate suspicions involving a Democratic President?
Have we reached the point where it is unreasonable even to ask?
For one guess, not necessarily; but if we have, what we need is a new Congress.
