Sotheby's Holdings Inc. named its chief of marketing, William Ruprecht, to the new position of managing director of North and South American operations.
Mr. Ruprecht, 38 years old, will oversee most day-to-day operations of the New York-based auction house, freeing Diana D. Brooks, now world-wide head of auction operations, from many of her administrative duties in the U.S.
She takes over as Sotheby's president and chief executive officer on April 1, as previously announced.
Mr. Ruprecht's promotion was one of a series that appears to tip the firm's hand to what Sotheby's thinks may be the art market's growth areas of the 1990s.
Five executive vice presidents were named: David Nash, 51, the world-wide head of paintings and sculpture; Robert Woolley, 50, whose theatrical auctioneering style at benefit auctions has garnered the company a great deal of publicity in the fashion and society press; Warren Weitman, 48, head of business development, which oversees Sotheby's trusts and estates division and appraisal divisions; and John Block, 45, head of Sotheby's jewelry department, the company's fastest-growing and most lucrative area.
Mr. Ruprecht, the new managing director, also added the title of executive vice president.
During the art-market boom of the late 1980s and subsequent recession, Mr. Ruprecht oversaw the company's marketing efforts.
He previously headed the oriental-rug and antique-car sales departments and is perhaps best known as the firm's deep-voiced auctioneer of watches, 19th-century paintings, rugs and decorative arts.
After years of a weak art market, "the cup is more than half full," said Mr. Ruprecht.
"There is an energy and enthusiasm and optimism" at Sotheby's now, he says.
Mrs. Brooks, 43, who is succeeding President Michael Ainslie, 51, spends much of her time traveling to the firm's salesrooms around the world and said Mr. Ruprecht's promotion will free her from administrative matters.
However, several department heads will report to Mr. Ruprecht on administrative concerns such as staffing but will report to Mrs. Brooks on strategy and auction issues.
