Enriched by gains on its endowment fund, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute is broadly expanding its team of investigators doing basic biomedical research.
The Chevy Chase, Md., institute, whose financial assets of $7.8 billion make it the biggest private philanthropy in the country, plans to add 49 scientists at a cost of about $30 million a year to its nationwide team of 225 investigators.
The investigators and their work are funded by the institute, but the scientists themselves stay at their home universities and hospitals.
Founded in 1953 by eccentric billionaire aviator Howard Hughes, the private medical research organization's endowment swelled by some $5.2 billion after the 1985 sale of Hughes Aircraft Co. to General Motors Corp.
Last year, its endowment grew by $780 million.
Purnell Choppin, president of the institute, said that "by virtue of the success of our endowment, we can expand at a time when the opportunity for research is enormous and support by the federal government is leveling off."
While the institute didn't reveal the names of the new investigators, it noted 21 are women and six are minorities.
Only 22 of the 225 current investigators are women.
"One of the things we're very concerned about is to increase the number of women in the pipeline," Dr. Choppin said.
Another concern was emphasizing "early-stage careers," he added.
The scientists were chosen after a national competition among more than 200 institutions that began in March.
The contest selected 44 scientists; five were added as normal appointments.
The 22% increase in the number of investigators comes at a time when the breakthroughs in basic science, particularly in genetics and molecular biology, are occurring at an "extraordinary rate," says Jerome P. Kassirer, editor in chief of the New England Journal of Medicine.
At the same time, funding for the expensive work "hasn't increased at a rate sufficient to keep up with what is required in this kind of research," Dr. Kassirer added.
Still, the institute's budget this year of some $333 million is only about 3% of the budget of the National Institutes of Health, which is about $11 billion.
In the fiscal year ending Aug. 31, the institute will spend some $280 million on research and provide $53 million in grants, the institute's Dr. Choppin said.
He added it plans to significantly expand its grants program.
Tax laws require the medical research organization to spend at least 3.5% of its endowment annually.
The investigators' work has emphasized genetics, cell biology, immunology, neuroscience and structural biology with application to diseases such as cancer, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, tuberculosis and genetic diseases.
For instance, some 35 investigators recently were working in one way or another on AIDS, Dr. Choppin said.
The organization supports more than 21% of all private, not-for-profit medical research in the U.S.
About one-third of its scientists work on specific diseases and five of its investigators have won Nobel Prizes.
When the competition for new investigators was held, the institute envisioned adding 12 scientists, but kept increasing the number as its investment portfolio gained ground.
"As the year wore on, we increased it to 30 by August and we made the final stages in mid-January," said Dr. Choppin.
Graham Harrison, the institute's chief investment officer, gives much of the credit for the portfolio's total return of 15.7% to its equity component and particularly to its international holdings.
At year end, the fund, then valued at $7.64 billion, was 54.3% invested in equities, including $665 million in GM stock, with most of the balance in fixed-income securities.
Of the equities, some 25% were foreign with "good visibility and exposure to Mexico" and "very little exposure to Japan," he said.
GM shares dominated the portfolio in 1985 when Mr. Harrison joined the institute after running the former U.S. Steel's pension fund.
At the time, the institute received $2.7 billion in cash and 100 million shares of GM's newly created Class H common stock for the sale of Hughes Aircraft.
Under terms of a complex 1989 restructuring of the Hughes Aircraft sale, the institute currently holds 15 million Class H shares under a $30-a-share put option that expires in March of 1995.
A put option enables a holder to sell a security at a specified price, usually within a limited period.
The institute stands to receive $450 million if it sells the stock to GM in 1995 at $30 a share, but the shares were trading yesterday at $37.875, up 12.5 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
The institute could make more on the shares if GM decides to reclaim the stock under a $37.50-a-share call option the auto maker holds on the shares, which enables the option holder to buy shares at a specified price.
Such a move could give the institute $112 million more.
"That's a conceivable windfall that's waiting out there," said Mr. Harrison.
