Four tax experts agree that Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton appear to have taken nearly $20,000 in improper interest deductions during the 1980s on loans related to Whitewater Development Co.
After analyzing the Clintons' income-tax returns and other financial documents, the tax experts concur that the Internal Revenue Service could probably challenge the Clintons' personal tax deductions for $19,598 in interest paid on corporate loans that the White House acknowledges were Whitewater liabilities.
By one expert's calculations, the deductions reduced the Clintons' taxes by more than $8,700.
In addition, the experts say, IRS auditors could probably object to a $1,275 deduction that the Clintons took on their 1988 returns for paying Whitewater's real-estate taxes.
Bruce Lindsey, a senior White House official, angrily denied that the Clintons had taken any improper deductions.
He argued that the Clintons have documentation to show that they were entitled to all the deductions in question.
The Wall Street Journal had Steven Bankler, a certified public accountant from San Antonio, Texas, analyze the Clintons' tax returns from 1980 through 1992 to assess how they treated tax issues arising from their Whitewater investment.
A group of four other tax experts -- a former senior IRS executive, a partner in a major accounting firm, a senior tax manager with a Big Six accounting firm, and Michael Gallagher, a George Washington University professor of accountancy -- were sounded out on Mr. Bankler's analysis.
Only the senior tax manager could conceive of a tax approach that might allow the Clintons to claim the deductions in question; he says he wouldn't like to defend that approach to IRS auditors.
(Of those participating in the Journal's analysis, Messrs. Bankler and Gallager were the only ones willing to be identified.)
Questions have arisen in recent weeks about the Clintons' interest deductions, and as a result the Journal asked for a thorough analysis.
The Journal inquiry focused on the 1980s.
Time magazine is reporting in this week's edition that questionable interest deductions reduced the Clintons' tax liability by as much as $11,000 in 1978, 1979 and 1980.
The Clintons have acknowledged taking about $40,000 in Whitewater-related interest deductions, which the White House has said made up part of the Clintons' total loss of $68,900 on Whitewater, a real-estate venture they undertook in 1978 with James McDougal, owner of now-defunct Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan in Little Rock, Ark.
Robert Fiske, the newly appointed special counsel, is investigating, among other things, whether Madison Guaranty funds were illegally diverted into the Whitewater Estates development or into the campaign coffers of then-Gov.
Clinton or other politicians.
Where Mr. Lindsey and the tax experts disagree is on the crucial question of whether the Clintons were entitled to deduct interest payents on Whitewater-related loans that were in their names but, by all appearances, had been assumed by Whitewater.
In August 1978, the Clintons and the McDougals bought 230 acres on the White River for $203,000.
They financed the purchase with a $20,000 down payment from Union National Bank of Little Rock and a $183,000 mortgage from Citizens Bank of Flippin, Ark.
The first loan was in the names of Messrs. Clinton and McDougal and the second in the names of both couples.
In June 1979, they formed Whitewater and transferred the land to the corporation.
Four years later, Mr. Clinton borrowed $20,800 from Security Bank of Paragould, Ark., to pay off a high-interest $30,000 note that his wife had obtained from a McDougal-owned bank to put a model home on a lot in Whitewater Estates.
Both notes were considered Whitewater liabilities, according to Mr. Lindsey.
The 1979 land transfer was "subject to the existing mortgage," which means that the Clintons could deduct Whitewater interest payments on their personal tax returns, but only if they also listed as income whatever interest Whitewater paid on the loans.
The loans were designed in a way that the Clintons would have no net increase or decrease in their taxable income, if Whitewater were making its payments on time.
All but one of the experts agree with Mr. Bankler that the Clintons erred in failing to report any interest income from Whitewater during the years that Whitewater was making the payments on the notes.
The Journal's analysis assumes that all the deductions listed on the Clinton's tax returns were accurate.
However, Mr. McDougal told Time that the only money the Clintons ever contributed to Whitewater was $13,350 in interest paid in 1980.
The White House denies this allegation.
Under the original financial plan for Whitewater, the Clintons and McDougals were to borrow money for the corporation and reloan it to Whitewater.
The corporation was to pay them back with interest and they in turn were to pay the banks.
Had the partners adhered to the "form" of that plan, the Clintons' tax returns would show interest income from Whitewater and interest expense paid to the banks.
The net result: Income interest would cancel out interest expense.
Where the Clintons erred, the tax experts concur, is they never followed the "form" of the Whitewater financial plan.
Instead, Whitewater paid the banks directly, without the Clintons or McDougals acting as financial intermediaries, for several years.
In so doing, under case law, Whitewater effectively assumed the loans and eclipsed the Clintons as the primary borrower on the loans.
The Clintons, even though they were still guarantors of the loans and made some payments, couldn't claim any deductions for interest that they paid for Whitewater, according to the experts.
"It's like a father helping his son on home-loan payments for a couple of months," says Mr. Bankler.
"Just because he makes the payments, he can't take the interest deduction."
To buttress his argument, Mr. Bankler cites an enormous body of case law dating from a 1935 Supreme Court decision in the landmark Gregory vs. Helvering case, which asserts that the "substance" of transactions takes precedence over the "form."
Mr. Lindsey contends that even though "Whitewater made payments to banks, it doesn't change the nature of transactions."
He insists that Whitewater didn't assume the loans from the Citizens, Union and Security banks.
There was "no assumption," he says.
"There is no evidence that Whitewater was the primary obligator on those loans."
Mr. Lindsey also dismisses the argument that the first couple erred in not following the form of the Whitewater financial setup.
Mr. Gallagher, the professor of accountancy who specializes in taxes, agrees with Mr. Bankler that the Clintons would face "an uphill fight" arguing against the customary IRS position that substance "controls" form.
Mr. Gallagher cites the authoritative textbook "Fundamentals of Corporate Taxation: Cases and Materials" as saying that the courts long have been willing to set aside the formal documents, such as mortgages and leases, and evaluate the substance of transactions.
"The courts," according to the textbook, "are not inhibited from examining the arrangement and restructuring it for tax purposes to comport with economic reality."
