How do you make money from Japan's huge new economic-stimulus package?
Japanese stocks, which got a broad boost from the $140 billion stimulus program unveiled by the government Tuesday, have rallied 16% this year on hopes of an economic recovery.
Now, investors are scrambling to interpret what the new measures really mean for stocks, and which will be the likely winners and losers.
It's not such an easy task this time around.
The latest policies are more ambitious than any of the government's three previous attempts to prime the economy during the past 17 months.
The measures feature not only conventional public-works spending, but also new initiatives in deregulation and some $56 billion in tax cuts to prod reluctant consumers.
This departure from Japan's old approach to pump-priming -- which simply threw a lot of money at giant projects, such as bullet trains and new highways -- complicates the picture for investors.
No longer can they rely on the old strategy of simply loading up on a few big construction stocks to profit from the government's largess.
While this package does include some old-style public-works spending, a large part of the money is going straight to individuals' pockets.
"This recovery will be three-pronged: higher purchasing power, new-style public works spending and deregulation, particularly multimedia," says Nobumitsu Kagami, executive vice president of Nomura Investment Management Co.
To play the multimedia theme, Nomura has been increasing holdings of Sony Corp. and Fujitsu Ltd., says Mr. Kagami.
The government has announced plans to build a vast telecommunications network, and much of the public-works money may be geared to building a Japanese version of the information highway.
Nomura reasons that both Sony and Fujitsu are well-positioned to benefit from such domestic developments.
Fujitsu, meantime, got a boost of its own Tuesday, when the company's president disclosed projections that pretax profits would more than double during the next fiscal year.
On the software side of Japanese deregulation, there's Tokyo Broadcasting System Inc., which is both a big producer of television shows and a major network broadcaster in Japan.
"They're flexible," says Masayoshi Katsuda, chairman of Kleinwort Benson Investment Management Co.
"Deregulation will give them lots of new businesses, and they can televise lots of movies they own."
To be sure, the Japanese market has promised plenty in the past, only to fall short in the follow-through.
While the announcement of the economic package was a relief, after being delayed by political turmoil and splits over how to finance the tax cuts, most analysts don't have high hopes for an immediate recovery.
Among other things, experts worry that the tax cuts may only last for one year, which could dull their stimulative effect by discouraging people from spending the money.
As a result, analysts are hedging their bets about the strength of an eventual rebound, and investing accordingly.
For instance, one big change in Japan in recent years has been the abrupt aboutface in consumer habits, with once freespending Japanese turning viciously costconscious.
The newly announced tax cuts should put an extra $2,500 in the pocketbooks of upper-income Japanese families.
But while most analysts agree that this should spur more spending, they expect Japanese shoppers to be frugal.
As a result, discounters, such as clothing retailer Aoyama Trading, should continue to benefit from consumers' penny-pinching, after having been strong stock-market performers lately.
The government's announcement Tuesday that it would cut sales taxes on new cars to 3% from 4.5% should further buoy demand in the Japanese domestic car market this year, investment managers say.
Strong auto sales were already anticipated, as higher charges for safety certification on older vehicles encouraged car owners to trade in models they bought in boom times a few years ago.
Toyota Motor Corp. is one of the likeliest beneficiaries, being a leading producer of Japanese subcompact cars -- which are useful for families, and frugal, too.
"Japanese consumers tend to have a high level of loyalty" to their car brand, says Peter Boardman, an analyst at UBS Securities Co.
And since Toyota has one of the highest ratios of domestic sales for total turnover, it's well placed to profit from a consumer rebound, he adds.
On the international front, a weaker yen could make Japanese products cheaper for foreign buyers and should help exports.
Apart from the new stimulus measures, the currency could come under pressure from international interest-rate movements, with U.S. rates edging up and Japanese rates expected to fall.
Foreign investors, who have been snapping up Japanese stocks for weeks, have favored electronics makers for this reason.
Among those stocks, Aiwa Co. plays on the weaker yen and the frugal consumer, says Alexander Wilberforce, an analyst at Smith New Court PLC.
"They're very unique, making low-cost and well-designed products," he says.
"They seem like a very nimble company."
For all the changes in Japan, the latest economic package still contains a sizable dose of old-fashioned construction spending.
But some of the reliable old names, such as Shimizu Corp., haven't experienced their usual boost, possibly because of a taint from last summer's constructionindustry scandals.
Instead, investors are targeting home construction, since earlier government support for home lending has made housing starts one of the few bright spots in the current economy.
Two picks are Mitsui Real Estate Sales Co. and Tokyu Land Corp., both large landholders that specialize in residential building and enjoy strong government connections.
Tokyo stocks rose on the back of the government's compromise on tax reform.
But the compromise failed to inspire overseas investors to continue their recent buying spree, and profit-taking scaled back sharp gains made earlier in the day.
In Europe, markets regained some ground lost Monday in reaction to last week's increase in short-term U.S. interest rates.
The Frankfurt market gained 1.3%.
London shares closed higher, but uncertainty about the market's direction caused profit-takers to weaken early gains.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.19, up 0.36, reflecting higher Asia/Pacific and European markets and lower American markets.
Plantations stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 223.21, up 7.93, or 3.7%, with Asiatic Development of Malaysia posting a 6.8% gain in its local currency.
Tobacco stocks trailed at 85.56, down 1.46, or 1.7%, with Imasco of Canada sliding 5.9% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which dropped 287.03 points Monday, rose 236.83, or 1.2%, to 20251.23.
In trading Wednesday, the Nikkei index fell 339.04 points to close the morning session at 19912.19.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 600 million shares, up from 310.4 million shares Monday.
Advancing issues easily outpaced decliners 824210.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues gained 15.26 points to 1616.70.
The Nikkei jumped more than 200 points at the outset of trading, and then gained steadily through the morning on signs of the impending tax compromise.
But shares drooped in the afternoon following the announcement that an agreement had been reached.
The relatively low level of overseas interest during the morning concerned the market, especially given the Nikkei's steady gains of the past month.
The announcement itself was an anticlimax, as the market widely expected the agreement.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index rose 21.1 points to 3440.2, well off its intraday high, after dropping 1.6% Monday.
The FT-SE 30-stock index gained 8.6 points to 2641.9.
Volume was 1.02 billion shares, up from 894.3 million shares Monday.
Shares took off in the morning after the Bank of England signaled a cut in its minimum lending rate to 5.25% from 5.5%.
But prices began a slow and steady drift downward, though still finishing higher on the day.
After Monday's sharp drop in prices, the market's caution stems mainly from uncertainty about what increasing interest rates in the U.S. might mean for London shares and other stock markets around the world that have seen U.S. money piling into their markets.
In Frankfurt, shares recovered almost half of Monday's 2.8% drop.
The DAX 30-stock index climbed 27.81 points to 2107.21 points.
The market was bolstered by gains Monday on the New York Stock Exchange, but volume was relatively low.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
