The American Civil Liberties Union filed a complaint with the U.S. Department of Education alleging that the test used to award National Merit scholarships is biased against girls.
The complaint asks for a ruling against the nonprofit Educational Testing Service and the College Board, the test's sponsors, under Title IX of federal education laws, which prohibits sex discrimination.
The College Board, a collegiate consortium, contracts with ETS to give the Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test, or PSAT, to pick National Merit semifinalists; about 60% of the winners are boys.
The complaint asks the department to find the tests biased, after which it could halt contracts with the two organizations until they changed the tests.
About $25 million is awarded by corporations and other sponsors through the National Merit program, but a successful complaint would pose problems for many other scholarships based on the Scholastic Achievement Test, or SAT, and other similar tests.
In a 1989 suit, the National Organization for Women successfully challenged the use of standardized tests in awarding Regents scholarships in New York state.
The judge in that case ordered the Regents to also consider grades in making their awards.
The complaint comes amid growing charges of gender bias in U.S. education and testing.
Although test-makers have eliminated most questions that appear to give one race or gender an advantage, some experts say multiple-choice tests themselves are unfair to girls because girls are reluctant to guess.
David Sadker, an American University education professor and co-author of a book on girls' treatment in schools, says "some people define girls as better course-takers and boys as better test-takers."
About 55% of the students who take the PSAT each year are girls.
However, they wound up with less than 38% of the semifinalist's spots in the past seven years, according to National Center for Fair and Open Testing, a Cambridge, Mass., group that helped bring the complaint.
The complaint doesn't cite National Merit Scholarship Corp., the Evanston, Ill., nonprofit organization that administers the scholarships, but which doesn't receive federal money and isn't subject to Title IX.
Fred Moreno, a spokesman for the College Board, said the test is being blamed for other problems.
"The courses girls take in high school, their social and economic backgrounds, whether their sixth-grade teacher said girls can't do math, may all contribute to the different performance."
He added, "It's as if a man and a woman were in a race and the man won 100 times.
They'd say there's something wrong with the race."
The College Board says several independent studies in recent years show that PSAT and SAT scores are good predictors of college performance.
Cinthia Schuman of the Fair and Open group said other studies indicate that girls do better in college than the tests indicated they would.
"The multiple-choice format of the PSAT has real problems in reflecting the true academic performance of females," Ms. Schuman said.
"The emphasis on speed and guessing work to the detriment of females," who may be risk-averse, even though guessing can pay off with higher scores.
Ms. Schuman said that in a study of the California Bar exam by her group, men did better on the multiple-choice portion while women did better with essay questions.
