Traders, cashing in recent profits, sold the dollar yesterday on indications that the Bundesbank isn't yet primed to cut interest rates, while the Federal Reserve could stall on a rate boost.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7465 marks, down from 1.7553 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 110.75 yen, down from 111.06 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4960, up from $1.4932.
About midday Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 110.85 yen and at 1.7457 marks.
The German central bank issued its January report yesterday, strongly questioning any policy of depreciating the mark by cutting key interest rates, and stating that it wasn't an option for solving Germany's economic woes.
Traders said the report suggested that the bank's policymaking council is unlikely to cut its key interest rates when it meets tomorrow.
The dollar's strong rise against the mark in January was largely predicated on speculation that the Bundesbank had to cut rates to foster an economic turnaround for Germany, while the Fed would raise rates soon to stave off U.S. inflation pressures.
High interest rates, because they are alluring to investors, generally help prop up the strength of a currency.
Traders noted statements yesterday by two Federal Reserve governors who suggested that the U.S. economic recovery is proceeding amid subdued inflationary pressures.
That indicated the Fed is less likely to increase interest rates in the short term, traders said.
Robert Forrestal, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, estimated fourth-quarter U.S. economic growth was "5%, maybe even higher."
He added that he was "heartened by the fact that over the past few years we've been able to bring inflation down from the levels of the early 1980s."
Similarly, Alfred Broaddus, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Va., said that the core rate of consumer prices, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, rose only 3.1% in 1993.
Traders said the statements by the two Fed officials did little to suggest that inflation is a near-term threat.
Together with mild consumer price and producer price data released last week, the comments helped overcome much of the recent speculation about a near-term interest-rate increase, traders added.
Long dollar positions "are unraveling a little bit on the interest-rate issue," said Angelo Evangelista, vice president, corporate foreign exchange, at the Bank of Boston.
"The divergence in interest rates that everyone saw earlier in January is now going the other way and that spooked a few people," Mr. Evangelista said.
"There is a perception that the Germans will hold off cutting rates, and that the Fed won't raise its rates," he added.
But in the longer run, Mr. Evangelista suggested, both central banks will have to adjust their rates.
The U.S. economic recovery eventually will fuel inflation and German interest rates are being kept artificially high.
"By the end of the first quarter, the Fed will have to jack up interest rates at least a quarter point, and the Bundesbank will have to cut in February," he said.
