Foreign buying propelled Japanese stocks higher Wednesday, despite a continued political stalemate.
The Nikkei 225-stock index jumped 489.85 points, or 2.6%, to 19138.21.
In trading Thursday in Tokyo, the Nikkei eased 39.60 points to close the morning session at 19098.61.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 360 million shares, up from 281.8 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers swamped decliners, 968-114.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues advanced 30.94, or 2%, to 1550.32.
Foreigners have been dedicated buyers in Tokyo this month, lifting the Nikkei 9.9% for the year.
These buyers were even in the market during a Japanese-dominated selloff Monday that set the Nikkei back 4.9%.
Many Japanese investors were worried that the parliamentary defeat of a political reform program, which occurred after trading closed last Friday, may signal weeks of political turmoil.
"The market is all up to the foreigners now," Hiroyuki Fukushima, a trader at Nikko Securities Co., said, adding that the foreign bullishness "has surprised us."
Efforts Wednesday for a compromise with the opposition Liberal Democratic Party produced nothing.
But many overseas investors seemed to believe that no matter which politician eventually triumphs, Japan still will have generally unassuming and conservative leaders, abetted by the same bureaucrats who have crafted Japanese policy for decades.
"If they think it's time to buy," Mr. Fukushima said, "it doesn't matter what happens in Japanese politics."
Foreign investors apparently believe that the Tokyo market, battered by four bearish years, is overdue for a rise.
But they also may be counting on a couple of benefits that most Japanese won't see.
Currency is one.
Foreign investors tend to own a lot of Japanese electronics and auto exporters.
If the yen weakens, those companies will do relatively well, as their products become less expensive in overseas markets.
If the yen strengthens, those exporters may suffer, but investors get currency gains.
Many U.S. fund managers had a mediocre 1993 in Japanese stocks, but still gained 11% on the stronger yen.
The government may be another benefit.
Government funds have periodically propped up the Japanese market for more than a year, and in April, new money exceeding 2 trillion yen ($18 billion) is to be released for stock purchases.
That isn't enough to bail out large Japanese shareholders, but nimble foreigners, with less total cash in the market, could easily sell their shares to the government if they turned negative on Japan.
On fundamentals, several local analysts believe it is too early to buy Japanese stocks.
"I don't see the business performance improving this year," said Koichiro Beppu, senior market analyst at Deutsche Bank Capital Markets (Asia) Ltd.
"You have to ask yourself why there are almost no Japanese investors following the foreigners into the market," said John Baldwin, research director at Jardine Fleming Securities Ltd.
He said the reason is that Japanese companies know their economic woes will force them to sell more stock.
"I estimate 40 trillion yen in stock that has to be taken off balance sheets."
Overseas investors who aren't buying those arguments -- and are buying stocks -- said huge government spending later this year will kick-start the Japanese economy.
Indeed, one legislator involved in forming the coalition's economic policies said the government hopes to unveil next week long-awaited measures to revive Japan's economy, no matter whether the reform bill is passed.
The package probably will total 13 trillion yen, he said, and include both public-works spending and an income-tax cut of 5 trillion yen or more.
Still, such a package might be too little and too late to spark much business activity.
For months, Japanese industry leaders and investors have been calling for a much bigger tax cut-at least 10 trillion yen.
London shares eased but finished above the day's lows.
Madrid's market posted its fifth record high this year.
Hong Kong stocks lost 2.2% amid a continuing SinoBritish dispute about airport financing.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 114.44, up 1.03, reflecting higher markets in all regions.
Plantations stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 199.16, up 11.66, or 6.2%, with United Plantations of Malaysia posting a 10% gain in its local currency.
Toy stocks trailed at 87.93, down 2.18, or 2.4%, with Sega Enterprises of Japan sliding 6.9% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 7.9 points to 3436.1.
The FT 30-stock index dropped 5.0 points to 2641.2.
Volume was 829.3 million shares, compared with 984.9 million shares a day earlier.
The London market had been expected to fall sharply, continuing the previous day's slide.
Prices dropped in reaction to weak demand at the British government's bond auction but rebounded as buyers emerged to limit the slide and the focus shifted to picking up bargains.
In Frankfurt, the market was quiet and the DAX 30-stock index fell 7.61 points to 2119.17.
In Paris, where corporate earnings provided the focus, equities rose after rebounding from a weak opening.
In Madrid, stocks surged 1.6% to a new high, led by a recovery in the banking sector.
Since Spanish bond yields have fallen, domestic investors continued to pour money into the stock market.
In Stockholm, shares rose, as demand by foreign investors led to a wave of buying.
And in Zurich, prices overcame profit-taking to score solid gains as many funds bought stocks, now more attractive given low bond-market yields.
In Hong Kong, prices skidded in the wake of Chinese complaints about the British colony's huge new airport project.
China, which takes over sovereignty of Hong Kong in 1997, challenged the territory's right to proceed with the airport work without a Sino-British financing agreement.
Some investors used the dispute as an excuse to take profits.
In Singapore, shares finished flat, recovering from a deep plunge stemming from selling of Malaysian shares and a weak Malaysian currency; rumors that the Malaysian government would support the market sparked a buying scramble in Singapore.
In Kuala Lumpur, stocks rebounded vigorously from an intraday tumble to end 1.7% higher.
In Manila, prices slumped 3.4% on an impending oil price rise, which could trigger inflationary pressure.
In Seoul, stocks rose for the fourth session in a row, while deposits with brokerage firms continued to swell, signaling bourse strength.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
