Future Communications Inc. is discussing a proposed settlement of its portion of the fraud lawsuit that the Securities and Exchange Commission filed last year against the company and its top officer.
Under the proposal, the company would agree -- without admitting or denying guilt -- not to violate securities laws, the SEC lawyer, Katherine Addleman, said.
But she said the proposal hasn't been reviewed by the SEC's regional counsel or by the agency's five-member commission, which must approve any settlement.
Company officials and their lawyers didn't return telephone calls seeking comment.
In October, the commission sued the cable television and programming company and its chairman and chief executive officer, Sergio Bosco, for alleged fraud and reporting violations.
The suit charged that Future made hyped claims and squelched negative news to inflate its stock price and that Mr. Bosco benefited from the scheme.
Future's stock quadrupled to $27.50 a share during a two-month period last summer, before trading was halted on Aug. 31.
The National Association of Securities Dealers delisted the stock in October.
Future has been operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy-court protection since November.
The proposed settlement doesn't cover the SEC's claims against Mr. Bosco, who stepped down from his posts after the suit was filed.
The SEC is seeking to obtain any profits Mr. Bosco may have illegally made by trading in the company's stock and to bar him from ever serving as an officer or director of a public company.
An attorney for Mr. Bosco didn't return telephone calls, but he has previously denied the government's charges.
Under the proposed settlement, the parties would agree that civil penalties are appropriate.
But the penalities won't be imposed because the company is financially strained and shareholders would be hurt, Ms. Addleman said.
But she said if the company's claims about its present financial condition are later shown to have been fraudulent, the SEC would then try to collect fines up to a maximum of $500,000, depending on what a court assessed.
Future has filed a Chapter 11 reorganization plan under which it would sell its assets to two tiny companies owned in part by the Bosco family.
