With an endorsement by Mayor Dennis Archer, Mike Ilitch, the owner of the Detroit Tigers and Little Caesar's Pizza, got a big boost for his plans to rescue this city from its status as international symbol of urban blight.
On Friday, the mayor agreed to support Mr. Ilitch's bid for a $375 million downtown stadium project for the baseball club.
The pizza king's long-term vision also encompasses shaded promenades, a revived retail alley and a brightly lit theater district, supplanting trash-strewn lots and abandoned, crumbling buildings.
There's just one catch.
Mr. Ilitch wants $200 million in public money for roads, bridges and land acquisition.
And in Michigan, where antitax sentiment is high and suspicion of tax-financed monuments in Detroit runs deep, that has turned what ought to be a fat pitch into a political hard slider.
"Mr. Ilitch is asking the people of the state of Michigan to go into business with him," says Republican State Rep. Frank Fitzgerald, a key player in the debate.
"If I'm helping to put together a $200 million deal, I want to see what I'm going to get out of it."
While several American cities, including Baltimore and Chicago, have confronted and acceded to demands from professional sports teams for publicly subsidized stadiums, the ball field debate in Detroit is shaping up to be an unusually complex and emotional drama.
The plan now faces an unlikely coalition of tax-wary politicians and preservationists who oppose any public funding for a new Tiger Stadium.
Mr. Archer has allied himself with one of Michigan's wealthiest men and one of the few big-time developers who is willing to put any money into Detroit, let alone the $175 million that he has pledged to build the ballpark itself.
Mr. Ilitch moved his pizza company's headquarters into Detroit and led the successful renovation of the historic downtown Fox Theatre on land adjacent to his proposed stadium site.
Michigan's Republican Gov. John Engler has proposed creation of a so-called Sports and Entertainment Economic Development Authority or SPEEDA, which could issue bonds backed by a tax on Indian-run casinos to subsidize stadium construction.
But the very tax-cutting fervor that has made Gov. Engler a rising star in the GOP is one reason why the SPEEDA proposal is bottled up in a commitee of which Rep. Fitzgerald is co-chairman.
Rep. Fitzgerald warns that the plan won't pass unless Gov. Engler, Mayor Archer and Mr. Ilitch make strong, specific arguments for how public money for a stadium would produce a revitalized Detroit.
"The politics breaks down to whether or not we should commit ourselves to an annual six-to-10-million-dollar expenditure for stadium bonds as opposed to doing something else," Rep. Fitzgerald says.
"I assume there could be some spinoff development" from a stadium, he adds.
"There hasn't been a case made that this will result."
