The South Korean subsidiary of U.S. defense contractor Litton Industries Inc. is preparing to close its doors after failing to find a domestic partner interested in merging with the unprofitable operation.
Litton Korea Ltd. says it will shut its operations by Feb. 25 unless it receives a credible bid from one of the country's established aerospace companies.
Its departure would end a 14-year presence in South Korea that has been hobbled by regulations from both its host and home governments.
The subsidiary also would take with it the kind of technology South Korean industry needs to realize its goal of producing commercial aircraft by the end of this century.
Since it began operations in 1982, Litton has developed existing defense-related avionics systems, under license with local aerospace companies.
It has had losses every year, largely because of South Korean government restrictions that keep it from competing with those same companies.
"To continue to own and operate a defense business here doesn't make sense," said Bruce Whitehead, Litton's president.
"Transferring the company is the only alternative."
Mr. Whitehead said Litton could make a profit of $1 million to $2 million a year if the restraints were lifted.
That margin, he said, would be far exceeded by the value of the technology it could introduce to a local partner.
Early in 1992, Litton set about pursuing a strategic alliance that would combine the U.S. subsidiary's technological resources, support networks and marketing knowhow with a South Korean company's access to local markets.
South Korea's top three aerospace companies -- Daewoo Heavy Industries Ltd., Samsung Aerospace Industries Co. and most recently Korean Air Lines -- considered a merger but balked at the restrictions.
"We are trying to remove the discriminations," said Park Un Suh, assistant minister for trade policy at the Ministry for Trade, Industry and Energy.
"But it will take time."
Mr. Park said he had advised Daewoo, Samsung and Korean Air to form a consortium that would absorb Litton Korea, but no such group has emerged.
Even if the domestic restraints against Litton were lifted, the company still carries another liability, according to Korean Air: regulations from the U.S. Defense Department that restrict the transfer of sensitive technology to other companies.
Such rules have frustrated U.S. defense contractors in South Korea for years, and is a major reason for their declining presence here.
McDonnell Douglas Corp., for example, closed its doors in October, in part because of its inability to offer the type of expertise South Korean companies demand from their foreign partners.
"If the Korean government would change its position, we would take another hard look at Litton," said Shim Yi Taek, executive vice president of Korean Air.
"But we also understand it is hard for Litton to convince the U.S. government to share certain technologies."
Mr. Whitehead said he was puzzled by such apprehensions, adding that the U.S. subsidiary would be free to share the expertise behind such equipment as inertial-navigation systems and electronic-warfare devices, in which Korean Air has expressed keen interest.
