Capital Cities/ABC Inc. will announce today that it has acquired a minority stake in Alpha Software Corp. in exchange for advertising Alpha's products on Capital Cities' network of television and radio stations, newspapers and trade publications.
The agreement marks the second ads-for-equity swap by Capital Cities.
Last March, the New York communications concern took an equity stake in Yes!
Entertainment, a maker of electronic toys based in Pleasanton, Calif.
Capital Cities set up a new unit, Capital Cities Capital, to invest in emerging companies offering consumer products that could grow quickly through advertising on the ABC network.
Alpha Software, of Burlington, Mass., is a closely held maker of database-management and presentation graphics programs for personal computers.
It was the third-ranking maker of database software last year by units sold, after Borland International Inc. and Microsoft Corp., according to Jeffrey Tarter, publisher of the industry monthly Softletter.
Alpha executives wouldn't disclose the company's latest sales figures.
But others in the software industry estimate that Alpha had sales of at least $25 million in 1993.
Alpha's growth rate slowed somewhat last year, analysts said, as the market shifted away from older programs based on the DOS operating system, such as Alpha Four, the company's flagship product, toward programs that are designed to work with Microsoft's Windows operating software.
Alpha is working on a Windows database, which is expected to be shipped to customers this summer.
It was this new product that apparently attracted Capital Cities' interest.
A Capital Cities spokesman wouldn't say how much had been invested, but said, "with the cost of network advertising today, it's got to be a valuable deal."
Richard Rabins, co-chairman of Alpha, says he's betting that software advertising is ready for prime time.
"The age of consumer software marketing is here," he says.
"The number of people buying computers today has gotten so large that you can't reach them simply by buying advertising in the computer trade magazines anymore."
