Investors' hopes for a speedy resolution of Columbia Gas System's bankruptcy proceeding may prove to be pipe dreams, skeptics say.
The natural gas utility and pipeline company announced last week that it had filed a Chapter 11 reorganization plan for its transmission subsidiary, mired along with the parent in bankruptcy court since July 1991.
Investors rushed to buy the parent's stock, which soared more than three points in midweek before settling back Friday to 25 1/4, off 3/4.
But bankruptcy specialists warn that the plan filed in federal bankruptcy-court in Wilmington, Del., doesn't necessarily herald an early end to this litigation-snarled proceeding.
"There is a low probability of this company emerging from bankruptcy court before mid-1995," says T.K. Duggan, a founder of Delaware Bay Co., which specializes in distressed debt.
Columbia Gas is an anomaly among bankruptcies -- a company with the wherewithal to pay its debts that ducked into bankruptcy court to ditch some of them.
It has been trying to shed high-priced supply contracts between its transmission arm and natural-gas producers that were signed before the natural-gas bubble burst.
The value of Columbia Gas's stock depends both on the subsidiary's eventual settlement with producers and on the timing of that peace.
Since the bankruptcy filing, Columbia Gas's war has intensified with the producers, which include Exxon and Union Pacific.
The producers claim they were done out of $10 billion-plus by Columbia's abrogation of contracts.
They also want the secured loan Columbia made to the transmission subsidiary -- now valued at $1.75 billion -- to be treated as an equity infusion, which would rank lower on the credit ladder than their unsecured claim.
And they're trying to reverse about $400 million of payments the transmission subsidiary made to Columbia in years before the filing.
Even sorting out how much the producers can claim has proved thorny.
In October 1992, the bankruptcy court appointed a mediator to decide what methodology to use to calculate producers' claims.
Those hearings ended in November 1993 and probably spurred the transmission company's filing, says Les E. Levy in Merrill Lynch's high-yield research department.
He believes that the company's $900 million settlement offer was shaped by the evidence at the hearings.
The producers say that's too little.
Still, some analysts view the company's talk of a potentially low settlement -- which the transmission company could just about afford on its own -- as an encouraging sign that the mediator will agree with the company's methodology for calculating claims.
David Fleischer of Goldman Sachs Investment Research, already enthusiastic, rushed out a buy recommendation because he believes the stock will be worth $30 in three to six months.
To propel Columbia Gas toward a resolution, producers are beating the bushes for suitors.
The company looks good.
It has reduced its exposure to gas-price zigzags, and can charge higher rates on its pipeline.
Cash flow was a strong $640 million in 1993, says Mr. Levy of Merrill Lynch, and is likely to keep growing at 15%.
But a small change in that settlement and in timing would make a big difference.
If the producers were to get as much as $1.3 billion, Columbia Gas stock probably wouldn't exceed $28, says Mr. Levy.
That's less than 11% from here, not a sizzling return if investors have to wait a year or more for the settlement.
Dreman Value Management became Columbia's third largest holder by accumulating half its stake shortly after the bankruptcy filing and the other half in the quarter through September 1993, when the stock dipped again.
"This is just like Texaco," exults David Dreman.
He is enthusiastic about the company's strong position as natural-gas prices rise, arguing that the stock will be worth $35 "if you can hold out."
Yet he isn't buying more, saying: "It's a strong hold for us right now."
NO-TELL TELMEX: The Mexican government quietly sold about $1 billion in Telefonos de Mexico shares on the New York Stock Exchange during November.
The shares were sold through Nacional Financiera, Mexico's market-savvy development bank.
The sales occurred amid the big post-Nafta rally in Mexican stocks.
The government is packaging the last of its shares into a convertible bond.
Then the supply overhang on the stock will be gone.
Traders figure that's one reason Telmex shares are up 3% since Dec. 31.
Telmex this month also announced a $304 million stock buy-back.
Craig Torres contributed to this article.
Nine months ended Sept. 30, 1993:
Revenue: $2.38 billion
Net Income: $82.8 million; $1.64 a share
Third quarter, Sept. 30, 1993:
Net loss per-share: $1.07 vs. $1.54
Common shares outstanding: 50.6 million
