A new publication out of Little Rock, Ark., is fast becoming a hot seller-despite its $645.50 price.
What might be titled "Bill and Hillary's Whitewater Adventure" is a package of state filings related to the failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan Association.
The thrift -- tiny in comparison to other casualties in the savings and loan debacle -- has drawn big media attention.
Madison's former chairman and his wife were partners with then-Gov.
Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton in an ill-fated land investment through Whitewater Development Co.
An independent counsel is investigating that relationship, and also may look into whether funds from the thrift improperly found their way into Mr. Clinton's gubernatorial campaign coffers.
Late last year, a batch of reporters descended on the Arkansas Securities Department in Little Rock, which oversees thrifts and a variety of businesses, to get documents related to Madison and Whitewater.
The department's files contain copies of Madison Guaranty's correspondence with state regulators, applications for permission to open branch offices and other routine documents.
Reporters have zeroed in on the thrift's request to sell preferred stock, which was handled by Mrs. Clinton's former law firm.
"It takes easily three days to go through the filings," says Bruce Bokony, the department's chief legal counsel.
The documents are on microfilm, "and because not every page is supposed to be public, we have to have an employee sitting by the reporter and going through the microfilm," he says.
When the new year brought more news coverage and reporters, "we panicked," Mr. Bokony says.
So he sent out the microfilm for 20 sets of photocopies and put those on sale at the regular state rate of 25 cents for each of the 2,582 pages.
The agency sold 16 packages in less than two weeks, collecting $10,328.
Despite the income, Mr. Bokony isn't happy with all the attention.
"Why can't you guys band together?" he asks.
"I've got other things I need to be doing.
I'm being sued, and I've got to deal with that."
A suit over Madison?
"Oh," moans an exasperated Mr. Bokony, "it has nothing to do with this.
We regulate funeral homes, and the funeral homes don't like what we're doing."
