Japanese stocks rocketed 5% in morning trading Monday in Tokyo, as investors gave a big vote of confidence to Japan's government, after its weekend political reform victory.
The Nikkei Stock Average stood at 19722.57, up 964.69 points, at the end of the morning session.
Many stocks were delayed in opening because the market was swamped with buy orders.
As in recent sessions, foreign buying led the market, traders said.
Japanese financial institutions and retail investors were also buying, they said, and Japanese brokerage houses were loading up on stocks in anticipation of selling even more shares to their clients.
There had been doubts last week that Japan's rulers could cobble a reform bill that would pass the national parliament, and those doubts had proved a drag on the Nikkei index, which has had a strong 1994 so far.
With political reform provisionally passed, the government is expected to draft an economic stimulus package estimated at more than $120 billion later this week.
Investors hope the package will pull Japan out of its nagging economic downturn.
On Friday, Tokyo stocks ended broadly lower for the second consecutive session, with the Nikkei 225-stock index, which sank 246.42 points Thursday, dropping 133.91 to 18757.88.
Friday's first-section volume was estimated at a thin 250 million shares, down from 431.1 million shares a day earlier.
Decliners far outnumbered gainers, 718-262.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which lost 13.82 points Thursday, fell 8.68 to 1527.82.
The declines followed the failure Thursday night of a joint Japanese parliamentary committee to compromise and rescue proposals for political reform before the Saturday deadline.
The impasse has held up stimulus measures.
Late Friday, politicians reached a compromise on the reform package.
It will come up for a vote in parliament's next session, which begins Monday.
The Nikkei on Friday hit its intraday low on arbitrage-linked selling but recouped some losses as investors sought bargains; though overseas investors remained net buyers, they were less enthusiastic because of the political uncertainty.
London shares, following a disastrous opening, recovered to post gains Friday in reaction to positive U.S. economic data, which boosted Paris stocks 1.4% and sent Madrid and Stockholm equities to new highs.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.13, down 0.32, reflecting an increase in markets in the Americas and drops in European and Asia/Pacific markets.
Health-care stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 157.94, up 3.17, or 2.1%, with Hospital Corp. of America of the U.S. posting a 3.3% gain in its local currency.
Food retail and wholesale stocks trailed, at 107.85 down 2.44, or 2.2%, with J. Sainsbury PLC of the U.K. sliding 11% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index advanced 20.1 points to 3447.4, rebounding from the session's low of 3403.3.
The FT 30-stock index rose 12.6 points to 2639.9.
Volume was a strong 1.14 billion shares, up from 972.6 million shares a day earlier.
Shortly after the opening, the FT 100 plunged, partly on selling of supermarket retailers following a disappointing financial report.
The late rally was sparked by stronger-than-expected U.S. growth figures for last year's fourth quarter and by a U.S. inflation measure that hit a 27-year low.
The data ignited rallies in U.S. stocks and bonds, and dangled the promise of a similar bull run for the London bourse, where investors have been worried about corporate earnings, inflation and interest rates.
In Frankfurt, prices closed mostly higher, with the DAX 30-stock index rising 8.33 points to 2133.47, marking a 2.8% gain for last week's nervous, volatile trading -- the first overall weekly rise this year.
Though foreign investors have been cautious about German equities recently, analysts said high liquidity of German private and institutional investors, as well as continuing hopes for interest-rate easings, will continue to support share prices.
In Paris, stocks jumped as investors were enthusiastic about last year's strong U.S. economic growth with reined-in inflation.
As the French and other European economies have been dragged down by Germany's recessionary woes and France has been struggling with high interest rates, the Paris stock market trolls for good news in the U.S., a French export market and major source of earnings for many French companies with big U.S. units.
In Amsterdam, after a mixed to lower start, stocks staged a late rally to end higher, buoyed by advances in other markets, including Wall Street's strong opening; positive Dutch trade data didn't influence the bourse.
In Milan, shares closed a record-breaking week with a big jump on all-time high volume.
Prices opened lower on profit-taking but buyers moved in, encouraged by an improved outlook for Italian corporate performance, prospects for lower interest rates, coming Italian privatizations, and a liquidity injection from mutual funds.
In Madrid, prices soared to a record, as feverish buying broke out in response to the favorable U.S. economic growth figures.
And in Stockholm, shares rose to a record finish -- the second in a row -- in heavy trading, supported by advances in equity markets abroad and the strong statistics on U.S. gross national product.
In Zurich, stocks rallied in heavy turnover, with chemical and banking issues leading the way up; the banking sector gained on a report that this month's Swiss inflation rate slowed from the December pace, and the broader market was buoyed by strong U.S. and European stock markets.
In Brussels, shares ended narrowly mixed as investors closed out positions ahead of the weekend, but the main index edged up to a second consecutive record finish.
In Mexico City, stocks rose 1.1% to a second consecutive record, again led by growth and solid earnings prospects for the telecommunications sector.
In Sydney, prices in most sectors gained ground, but gold stocks and some metal and mineral issues fell because of a weaker gold price.
In Hong Kong, shares dropped in an extremely volatile session that took prices across a wide range on the expiration day of January stock-index futures; rumors that Hong Kong banks would tighten their mortgage-lending policies weakened prices late in the session.
In Singapore, equities closed higher in slow, cautious buying.
But in Kuala Lumpur, stocks rallied 1.5%, after choppy trading marked by bouts of heavy profit-taking.
In Taipei, following a 3% jump the previous day, shares slipped, falling from early gains on jitteriness about the large volume of margin loans for stocks bought partly on credit; the fall came despite positive economic indicators for Taiwan.
In Manila, equities slumped 2.5% in moderate trading, as participants sold on news of an increase in Philippine oil prices.
In Seoul, prices climbed 2.1% in active trading, led by smaller blue chips, to put the market at its highest closing level in four years.
Investors' deposits with brokerage firms, an indicator of the South Korean bourse's upward potential, have been increasing between $25 million and $62 million a day in recent sessions.
In Wellington, stocks finished with a 1.3% gain despite late profit-taking.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
