THE U.S.
AND ISRAEL SOUGHT to revive the Mideast peace process.
Speaking after an Oval Office meeting, Clinton and Rabin appealed to PLO leader Arafat to return to peace talks, but didn't offer the security guarantees that Palestinians want first.
The Israeli prime minister also said he hoped to sign peace treaties with Syria, Lebanon and Jordan this year.
Though Rabin didn't say whether Israel would be willing to give back the Golan Heights, he said peace with Syria justified "painful decisions."
Israeli troops shot and killed one Palestinian and wounded dozens of others during skirmishes in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
High-level talks likely will be canceled between the U.S. and North Korea following Pyongyang's refusal to honor a pledge to grant international inspectors full access to its declared nuclear sites.
The inspectors were trying to determine whether North Korea is working on a nuclear-weapons program.
Two teams of scientists said they found another mutant gene that can cause colon cancer.
The newly discovered gene could account for one-third of the cases of a type of hereditary colon cancer that strikes about 23,000 Americans a year.
Discovery of the gene might lead to a diagnostic test within a year.
Serb-Croat talks were scheduled for next week concerning a breakaway Serb enclave that comprises about one-third of Croatia, Russian envoy Churkin announced.
While clashes have ebbed in Krajina recently, an accord on its status is seen as vital to the Bosnian peace process.
Armed Serbs took control of the enclave in 1991.
A new excise tax was proposed by the Clinton administration to combat abuses by tax-exempt public charities.
The proposal, which is supported by lawmakers of both parties, would affect insiders, such as officers and directors, who receive what the IRS would consider "excessive compensation."
The benefits of AZT may be outweighed by the disadvantages of its severe side effects, casting doubt on the AIDS drug's value, Harvard researchers concluded.
Their report questions the routine early use of AZT for HIV-infected people who haven't yet become sick.
AZT can cause prolonged nausea, vomiting and fatigue.
Blacks are less likely than whites to receive the drug therapy they need for effective treatment of AIDS and its related illnesses, according to a study of patients at AIDS clinics in Baltimore.
The Harvard and Baltimore studies both appear in today's New England Journal of Medicine.
Kidnappers reportedly contacted the family of a Mexican billionaire they seized at gunpoint early Monday.
No ransom demand has yet been made for Alfredo Harp Helu, the 50-year-old president of Grupo Financiero Banamex-Accival, according to sources close to the case.
Russia expects to reach an agreement with the IMF this week on an economic reform program and a $1.5 billion loan, according to Moscow's representative at the lending agency.
He said the two sides should conclude the pact during weekend talks.
Mandela began a campaign visit in Natal province, charging that people in "high places" were organizing hit squads to disrupt South Africa's first all-race elections.
A spokesman for the rival Inkatha party criticized the African National Congress leader's visit, saying it could set off further violence.
A cholera epidemic has killed over 100 people in Somalia and the toll is rising.
U.N. officials are concerned that efforts to control the disease could be jeopardized by the pullout of peacekeepers.
Cholera was first detected last month in a northern port.
Iraq issued a new demand for the end of U.N.-imposed Gulf War sanctions, warning that if the economic blockade continues, Baghdad would have to "act in a manner" that protects its people against further suffering.
The U.N. has barred Iraq's sale of oil since its August 1990 invasion of Kuwait.
Tonya Harding pleaded guilty to a conspiracy charge in the attack on skater Nancy Kerrigan, and resigned from the U.S. Figure Skating Association.
As part of a plea bargain, Harding was fined $100,000 and agreed to three years' supervised probation.
