Bill Clinton has converted at least one Republican: David Stockman, Ronald Reagan's budget director.
In what Mr. Stockman himself described as "a reversal from the gloom and doom I've last espoused," he is now predicting that the federal deficit will shrink even faster than the White House projects and is praising President Clinton's health-care plan.
Speaking at a forum sponsored by the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, Mr. Stockman projected that the deficit -- which now amounts to about 3.4% of gross domestic product -- will fall to about 1.5% by the end of the decade, primarily because the increase in healthcare costs will slow.
Without dwelling on the specifics, Mr. Stockman praised the thrust of the Clinton health plan because it will "put in place mechanisms" to force Americans into purchasing pools that will force health-care providers to restrain health-care cost increases.
"The fundamental plan is right," Mr. Stockman said.
"When the basic direction of reality changes, you got to get with it."
When last heard from, Mr. Stockman was attacking Republicans who said the deficit could be licked without tax increases.
But now that Mr. Clinton and the Democrats in Congress have raised taxes, Mr. Stockman says there isn't any need for another round of deficit reduction.
Others disagree, among them Robert Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office, and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen.
Mr. Stockman, now an investment banker, said Mr. Clinton owes his present situation to "a gigantic stroke of luck" and "modest . . . legislative heroism."
The U.S. economy is benefiting from a significant improvement in productivity, the result of widespread corporate restructuring, he said.
And federal spending on everything besides health care is flat or declining when measured against GDP, the value of the goods and services produced in the economy.
Mr. Stockman has traced the deficit problem to July 1981 when "a frenzy of excessive and imprudent tax-cutting . . . shattered the nation's fiscal stability."
In his remarks Friday, he said, "We didn't know it at the time, but the 1980s amounted to an epochal race between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. over who could reach fiscal bankruptcy first.
They got there first -- by a hair."
