Japan, Inc. gives much credit for its postwar boom to W. Edwards Deming, the pioneering quality management guru.
But his recent death at age 93, the deep recession in Japan, and the stiff new pressures facing American business now suggest that we take stock.
Much of Mr. Deming's legacy is deservedly secure.
He believed in building quality into products rather than inspecting for it later, in treating workers as assets, and in engaging their minds as well as their hands.
In Japan, his methods helped turn many companies into rich global players.
But Mr. Deming's philosophy always seemed more applicable to the Japanese lock-step style of management.
He exuded the aura of a guru, urged that his system be "enthroned as an institution" in every organization, and brooked no dissent from his executive-disciples.
Such an approach tends to stifle skeptical, contentious and independent-minded American workers.
Florida Power & Light, for instance, went for the Deming Prize and won it in 1989.
But the utility inflicted major damage on its culture in the process, and wound up dismantling much of its quality program.
The reason: It hampered thought, innovation and meaningful results while encouraging group-think, executive meddling and dogmatic faithfulness to quality processes at the expense of corporate performance.
One quality team dutifully applied Mr. Deming's elaborate, seven-step decision-making process -- to move a water cooler.
Mr. Deming's system starts by comprehensively training everyone in the organization in his methods.
Performance improvements might take years to happen.
A troubled Philadelphia Electric generating station sought fast improvement, instead, by eschewing the Deming approach and forming autonomous teams that hunted for self-evident problems to fix, such as leaky valves and drafty furnaces.
They gained confidence not from indoctrination but from tangible success.
They invented a number of highly creative processes that no training program could teach and doubled the original savings goal.
A once tradition-bound and hierarchal organization was loosened up and is now more flexible and open to change.
Companies that go overboard on Demingism often suffer, like FP&L, from top-down meddling.
General Electric combats that with "Work Out" meetings, designed by Chairman Jack Welch to foster local solutions to problems.
Workers at GE confront their bosses openly in "town hall" meetings, making freewheeling suggestions, getting decisions on the spot -- and they get results.
For example, when employees at a Schenectady turbine plant complained about its milling machines, they got authorization to test, approve and purchase $20 million of replacements.
Cycle time for milling steel dropped 80%, cutting inventory costs and boosting customer responsiveness.
None of this detracts from Mr. Deming's achievements.
But no theory or system can fully account for something as complex as a human organization.
Companies like GE appear well poised to succeed not because of their devotion to any management system, but because they build on distinctly American institutions.
Mr. Lee is head of a Dallas-based consulting firm.
