The New York Stock Exchange announced three initial public offerings, while the National Association of Securities Dealers announced 17 listings, including 16 initial offerings and the American Stock Exchange announced two new listings.
The Big Board began trading three New York-based closed-end funds: Jardine Fleming India Fund Inc., under JFI; New South Africa Fund Inc., NSA; and Global Privatization Fund Inc., GPF.
Nasdaq added the following initial offerings to its national market system: Arden Industrial Products Inc., St. Paul, Minn., a distributor of fasteners, AFAS; AES China Generating Co., Central, Hong Kong, organized to operate electric power generation facilities in China, CHGNF; Concord Holding Corp., New York, a distributor of proprietary mutual funds, CNCD; Electric Fuel Corp., New York, a research and development company, EFCX; Emmis Broadcasting Corp., Indianapolis, a radio station operator, EMMS; Effective Management Systems Inc., Milwaukee, a developer of integrated manufacturing and software, EMSI; Equity Inns Inc., Memphis, Tenn., formed to acquire equity interest in eight Hampton Inn hotels, ENNS; FinishMaster Inc., Kentwood, Mich., a distributor of automotive paints and related products, FMST; Global Village Communications Inc., Mountain View, Calif., a developer of computer products, GVIL; Total Containment Inc., Exton, Pa., a maker of motor vehicle fuel containment systems, TCIX; CIDCO Inc., Morgan Hill, Calif., a designer of subscriber telephone equipment, CDCO; Healt
Nasdaq also began trading Delrina Corp., Toronto, Ontario, Canada, a developer of software products, DENAF.
Amex began trading the common stock and both Class A and Class B redeemable common stock purchase warrants of HMG Digital Technologies Corp., Hauppauge, N.Y., an audio and video cassette manufacturing and duplication company, HDT.
The exchange also began trading Red Eagle Resources Corp., Oklahoma City, an energy company, RER.
The exchange also listed Equity-Linked Securities connected to Promus Cos.
Amex also began trading International Finance Corp.
U.S. dollar/yen currency warrants.
The Emerging Company Marketplace began trading Bema Gold Corp.
Amex and the Chicago Board Options Exchange will begin trading options on PacTel Corp.
Thursday and Madge N.V. tomorrow.
The CBOE began trading options on National Gypsum Co., Sage Technologies Inc., and Steris Corp. and will trade options on the CBOE Telecommunications Index today.
