If the mutual-fund explosion of the past decade is the sweet dream of democratic capitalism, involving tens of millions of ordinary people and $2 trillion in active investment, then the nightmare has always been a sudden sour ending.
This might come from a stock-market panic, perhaps prompted by scandal or financial implosion at a privately held giant such as Fidelity Investments, the industry leader.
Fidelity has more than $260 billion under management, a good 20% greater than the assets of Citicorp.
Many folks, yours truly included, have the bulk of their paper wealth stored behind Fidelity's opaque corporate walls.
Trust is the coin of the realm.
Because of its size and aggressive culture, the Boston-based firm is where attention has turned since trouble surfaced at Invesco Group in Denver over the personal stakes of a star fund manager.
The easiest defense against suspicion of self-dealing is a good track record with clients' money, and Fidelity has little worry there.
Indeed, the whole industry's intense and public performance battle is plenty of reason for managers to look after investor yields foremost.
But the inducement is not airtight.
It is easy to construct a scenario in which a money manager has a lot more to gain from her own holding in a speculative stock than she risks from not maximizing the fund's gains in that same investment, given what a tiny share it likely represents in the pool's portfolio.
In fact, "the potential for abuse is high," says Gregg Jarrell, a former chief economist for the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Mr. Jarrell is not one to hype market imperfections.
He was a deregulation soldier for Ronald Reagan.
But the Wall Street dust has been so thick, he confesses, that "I was surprised to learn two years ago that mutual fund managers and analysts for brokerage firms were fairly unrestricted in their ability to trade for individual accounts."
The revelation wasn't reassuring.
Analysts in particular are forgiven a certain access to insider information because they transmit knowledge to the broad market, Mr. Jarrell says.
But the prospect of their capturing the returns themselves blurs any legal distinction between them and the corporate officials they glean details from.
Why should one be able to trade and not the other?
Moreover, the host of ties between research or trading services and fund managers -- the so-called soft-dollar market -- offers additional potential for private enrichment.
Even a company as gargantuan as Fidelity, with its own research and trading operations, lets portfolio chiefs go outside for such services.
An efficient-markets purist might suggest laissez faire and caveat emptor: the more trading, the faster, the better.
Let securities houses enforce their own standards, as desired, with customers having recourse to allege fraud.
That's good theory, but with retail investing (especially in mutual funds) so grounded in easy confidence, participants may share an interest in enforcing a Queensberry code.
The blossoming opportunities for "unfair" activity leave even Mr. Jarrell asking for improved oversight.
Absent technological leaps in screening, that would mean more personnel at the SEC.
The agency's regulatory staff count has grown 36% since 1985 and its spending by far more than that, according to the Center for the Study of American Business.
But bolstering a bureaucracy overseen by a judicious commission would beat seeing new legislation come out of the House Commerce subcommittee chaired by the hyperactive Ed Markey of Massachusetts, who was quick to leap on the issue of trading by fund managers.
No one wants to be caught taking financial-system risk too lightly, not after what happened in the bank and thrift industries a decade ago.
But that was a case of bad law as well as lax oversight.
By contrast, the securities industry has functioned remarkably well, notwithstanding its celebrated prosecutions.
One could argue that it is more honest than ever, given the huge growth in trading volume.
For all his current apprehension, Mr. Jarrell observes: "If you wanted to describe a clean, pro-consumer, well-operated, ethically pristine industry, and realizing of course it will be run by imperfect human beings, probably the mutual-fund business over the last 15 years would be pretty close to what you'd describe."
SEC Commissioner Carter Beese Jr., a Bush appointee whose term runs to 1996, seems to second that.
"Mutual-fund complexes live and die on their standing," he says, and are motivated to self-police.
There's no government guarantee against loss.
His agency will act when "somebody is stepping over the line," but "what you're seeing from Congress is a perception based on selected instances in the press."
To impute deceit in the execution of personal trades "assumes somebody who has larceny in his heart."
For Mr. Beese, a former investment banker, the best innoculation against abuse is disclosure, in this case of the policies of the mutual-fund houses on staff trading.
The SEC has been requiring more information generally for armchair investors.
None of this comes free, but inflexible rulemaking would cost far more.
Disclosure is the rub in another controversy dogging the mutual funds, their sale in and by banks.
Surveys indicate to the satisfaction of Mr. Beese as well as activist legislators that most people who invest in a fund through their bank think their money is protected against loss in the same way a deposit would be.
This has prompted calls to restrain banks from offering mutual funds as conveniently as buyer and seller might like.
Some would prohibit this investment from taking place within a bank branch or at an automatic teller.
That ultimately will be the call of the banking regulators, but for the SEC's part, Mr. Beese is championing truth-in-packaging.
Clearly distinguishing a savings account from an equity or bond fund isn't too much to ask.
Mr. Beese also questions a bank attaching its name to the funds it sells.
But he is not opposed to the pending acquisition of the Dreyfus mutual-fund group by Mellon Bank.
To him, if banks are to be involved in funds, it shouldn't matter whether they purchase them or originate them.
That makes sense.
Any dramatic reversal in the markets would sharply increase the chance of political missteps in the mutual-fund area.
Barring that, however, the most significant questions about this brave new world of retail investing look beyond the immediate worries.
They concern an area of particular interest to Carter Beese: the relationship to retirement planning.
More on that to follow.
