D. Randy Laney, a former Wal-Mart Stores Inc. treasurer, was promoted to chairman and chief executive officer of Rally's Hamburgers Inc., succeeding Burt Sugarman.
Mr. Sugarman, the troubled fast-food chain's biggest shareholder, said he chose to step down from the top jobs at Rally's but remains a director.
"When I saw the professional, managerial skills Randy has, I felt he was more suited to do that than I was," Mr. Sugarman said.
He said he considered staying on as vice chairman, but "it would look like I wasn't letting go.
That's not the case.
He is going to run the company.
Analysts said Mr. Sugarman's fast-growth approach had largely failed.
"He opened stores too fast and didn't focus enough attention on site selection and, even more importantly, hiring, training and providing incentives to unit-level management," said Bryan Elliott, an analyst with Robinson-Humphrey Co., Atlanta.
Mr. Elliott noted that in 1993, Rally's stock went from a high of $24.125 to a low of $8 late last year.
In recent weeks, it has rallied, trading around $11 to $12.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday, Rally's was unchanged at $11.875 a share.
Mr. Laney, 38 years old, was recruited from Wal-Mart in September to turn around Rally's, whose same-store sales and income had been slipping.
Mr. Laney, who joined Rally's as senior executive vice president and chief financial officer, is considered by analysts as softspoken and brainy with extensive retail experience.
Mr. Sugarman, by contrast, "is a promoter, a big-picture rather than detail-oriented executive," said Mr. Elliott, the analyst.
The 54-year-old Mr. Sugarman is chairman and chief executive officer of Giant Group Ltd., Harleyville, S.C., which has cement as well as recycling and resourcerecovery businesses.
Mr. Sugarman, a one-time movie producer, is based in Beverly Hills, Calif., and married to Mary Hart, co-host of the syndicated Entertainment Tonight television program.
Mr. Sugarman, Ms. Hart and Giant Group own more than 41% of Rally's common shares outstanding, said Bruce Ley, executive vice president of marketing.
The problems at Rally's have forced Giant Group to take noncash charges of $1.2 million, according to a report by Stephen D. Weinress of investment banker L.H. Friend, Weinress & Frankson Inc., Irvine, Calif.
Mr. Sugarman said he owns about 40% of Giant Group's stock.
Rally's has been hurt by the burgerchain price wars, poorly chosen locations and inattention to such details as cleanliness -- a problem compounded by nearly doubling the number of restaurants to 521 since 1990, according to analysts.
Unlike traditional burger joints, Rally's caters mainly to take-out customers, with two drive-through windows and patio seating but no indoor seating.
The menu is limited, featuring hamburgers, coated french fries and soft drinks.
