The Clinton administration last week reached new decibel levels in its economic tirade against Japan.
On Thursday, President Clinton signed an executive order reinstating the Super 301 provision, which entitles U.S. government officials to denounce lucky foreign nations as the most unfair foreign traders in the world.
Super 301 is modeled after Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, which authorizes the U.S. government to investigate and retaliate against specific foreign trade barriers judged to be unfair.
Super 301, first authorized in a 1988 trade act, allows the U.S. government to list the foreign nations with the most unfair or most burdensome overall trade barriers and to impose 100% tariffs on exports from those nations unless they satisfy U.S. demands.
Japan is the obvious target of the resurrected trade policy sledgehammer.
Section 301 gives American politicians and officials a chance to appear on television and promise to huff and puff and blow down the barriers.
And many Section 301 cases reveal that U.S. trade policy makers have neither a sense of hypocrisy nor a concern for American consumers.
-- In June 1990, the U.S. launched a Section 301 case against Canada for high tariffs and other restrictions on U.S. beer exports.
Yet state and localities on this side of the border also impose a byzantine web of restrictions and petty prohibitions on alcohol sales and shipments.
-- In 1989, the U.S. filed a Section 301 case against Japan because Motorola was not given as large a geographic market in Japan for its cellular telephones as it thought it deserved.
The U.S. and Japan have different frequencies for cellular phones; while Japanese companies export phones to the U.S. made for American frequencies, Motorola chose not to meet Japanese specifications.
-- In May 1988, the U.S. launched a Section 301 investigation of Japanese citrus quotas.
In the press release announcing the case, then U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter noted, "The Florida Citrus Industry . . . believes that removal of Japan's unfair barriers could cut the price of oranges for Japanese consumers by one-third."
By coincidence, this is roughly the amount the price of orange juice in the U.S. could fall if the U.S. abolished its 40% tariff on Brazilian orange juice imports.
-- In May 1988, the U.S. brought a 301 case against Korea for its beef import quotas, even though the U.S. has beef import quotas that the Agriculture Department estimated cost consumers $873 million in higher prices in 1987.
-- In 1986, the U.S. forced Canada to impose a 15% export tax on its lumber exports supposedly because Canada was unfairly subsidizing its timber sales.
Yet Canadian provincial governments followed many of the same practices as the U.S. Forest Service.
The 15% tax destroyed up to 16,600 jobs in the U.S. construction industry and added more than $1,000 to the price of building a house.
-- In 1985, the U.S. filed a case on Japanese semiconductor trade barriers.
Its settlement allowed the U.S. to impose price controls both on Japanese exports to the U.S. and on exports to third markets.
This was a disaster for the U.S. electronics industry: Semiconductor prices in the U.S. rose as much as 300% and widespread shortages occurred.
Arthur Denzau of the Center for the Study of American Business estimated that the final U.S.-Japan settlement resulted in as many as 11,000 jobs lost in U.S. companies using semiconductors.
-- In 1985, the U.S. settled a Section 301 dispute over Japan's leather import quotas.
Mr. Yeutter declared, "The agreement is a significant victory for the principle of free and fair trade. . . .
This is far preferable to protectionist measures that would restrict imports without increasing U.S. exports."
Yet, as part of this "victory," the U.S. tripled tariffs on Japanese leather imports to 40% from 12% -- with the explicit goal of sharply reducing Japanese exports to the U.S.
-- In 1982, the Footwear Institute of America persuaded the U.S. trade representative to launch 301 cases against Brazilian, Korean and Taiwanese trade barriers on footwear imports -- even though the U.S. itself maintains tariffs as high as 67% on footwear imports.
-- In 1976, the U.S. brought a suit against Taiwan because of "confiscatory tariff levels on imports of major home appliances."
(The Taiwanese tariff on refrigerators was 60%.)
But the U.S. has confiscatory tariff levels on many items, including a 150% tariff on low-priced watch parts exported from Taiwan.
-- In 1975, a Section 301 case targeted Guatemala for requiring that cargo shipped there be carried by Guatemalan ships.
The U.S. also has cargo preference laws, which the General Accounting Office estimated in 1985 add more than $100 million to the cost of providing food donations to foreign countries.
-- Many 301 complaints have involved agricultural export subsidies, including then-European Community poultry export subsidies, EC wheat and wheat flour export subsidies, and Taiwan rice subsidies.
In recent years, the U.S. has also provided export subsidies for all of these items, including paying a subsidy of 111% for poultry exports, a subsidy of 78% for wheat flour and 94% for wheat, and subsidies of more than 100% for rice exports.
-- The U.S. has brought six Section 301 actions to help boost tobacco exports since 1975.
A 1990 General Accounting Office report noted, "Health issues were not considered during negotiations for the removal of foreign trade barriers to the export of U.S. cigarettes."
The U.S. has also provided tens of millions of dollars of export subsidies for cigarettes.
Section 301 has proved a feeble tool for opening foreign markets -- far less effective than multilateral trade negotiations such as the recently concluded General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade talks.
The General Accounting Office concluded in 1987, "During the period of GAO's study, relatively few cases resulted in the elimination of specified unfair foreign trade practices."
Jim Powell, author of "Gnomes of Tokyo," noted in 1989: "Since 1974, when Section 301 first became law, the U.S. has brought 78 cases against foreign governments.
Threats of American retaliation have forced only 13 market openings -- and those were generally trivial."
And Section 301 actions have shown little improvement in subsequent years.
Historically, the U.S. trade representative often acts as if a foreign provocation -- real or imagined -- gives the federal government carte blanche to disregard the rights and interests of American consumers and American companies dependent on imports.
Most trade retaliations amount to throwing boomerangs at foreign governments and then quickly declaring victory before the boomerang returns to thump some domestic interest.
Politicians cannot make trade fairer by making it less free.
Every opportunity to buy at the lowest prices and sell at the highest prices is a benefit to U.S. industry and consumers, regardless of foreign governments' behavior.
Section 301 and Super 301 should be mothballed in the Smithsonian, not enshrined as keys to American economic salvation.
Mr. Bovard writes often on trade policy.
