When Svetlana Ovcharenko, a Ukrainian biochemist, opens a door off a dim basement corridor in the Bronx, strong herbal and earthy scents rush out.
The scents emanate from white muslin sacks piled nearly to the ceiling.
Within are hundreds of plant samples from Wisconsin, Texas, Puerto Rico and the garden's own 250 acres in the Bronx, N.Y., home to about 2,000 native species.
The samples have been collected in a joint project by pharmaceutical giant Pfizer Inc. and the New York Botanical Garden to find plants to test as potential drugs.
Acknowledging that nature may sometimes outstrip chemistry at making medicines, they are guessing that a cancer cure may be growing in your backyard.
Plants have been a bountiful source of medicines for thousands of years: One-quarter of all prescription drugs used in the U.S. have origins in plants.
The rosy periwinkle and the Pacific yew tree have yielded important cancer treatments.
The heart medicine digitalis comes from the foxglove leaf.
From the poisonous belladonna have come compounds used to dilate the pupil.
Yet fewer than 1% of the world's 250,000 flowering plant species have undergone thorough analysis as potential medicines, according to the botanical garden.
Plants are hard to work with, and plant chemistries can change unpredictably depending on the season, soil conditions and the presence of pests, says Gary R. Schulte, the senior research scientist heading up the project for Pfizer.
Drug researchers instead usually prefer to create their own synthetic chemicals, he says.
But the Pfizer plant project seeks to take drug research back to its roots, literally.
In the first year of the $2 million, three-year project, the botanical garden is trying to collect a broad sample of U.S. plants.
Collections in the second and third years will focus more on plant varieties that are known to produce medicinal compounds or that have been used as folk remedies in other cultures.
Michael J. Balick leads the program for the garden.
After establishing a plant's identity, the project's four field botanists separate it into its parts -- leaves, roots, stems, flowers, barks, berries -- each of which may produce different chemical compounds.
Extracting those chemical compounds begins upstairs from the scented room in a laboratory staffed by Ms. Ovcharenko and an assistant, Erica Rodriguez.
On a recent morning, Ms. Rodriguez filled a large, bell-bottomed flask with coarsely ground wood shavings and methanol, a clear liquid that immediately took on a green tint as it began drawing out the plant's chemical compounds.
Eventually the liquid is reduced to roughly a tablespoon of gellike extract.
The hunt for new drugs begins in earnest after the extracts arrive at the newly created natural-products chemistry group at Pfizer's main research facility in Groton, Conn.
The operation is staffed by a group of young scientists drawn from more traditional Pfizer research operations by the appeal of working with natural materials.
But little else resembles nature in the Pfizer laboratory, which hums with computerized robotic arms and other scientific instruments.
A major barrier to working with plants in the past was the tedium of manually separating the dozens of chemical compounds in a plant extract, a process that would often take months.
But new technology now enables the lab to process hundreds of extracts containing thousands of compounds a week, Dr. Schulte says.
In the Pfizer lab, the plant's conglomeration of chemicals is roughly separated into 90 tiny test tubes, each containing a more manageable 10 to 20 compounds.
The extracts are taken to one of two biological screening rooms, where their effect is tested on dozens of diseases, including cancers, diabetes, bacterial infections, Alzheimer's disease and heart disease.
In a machine the size of a desktop copier, called a microtiter plate spectrophotometer, the extracts' effect on "screens," containing bacteria, enzymes and disease-causing DNA, is measured by the color changes or cloudiness that result.
Each year, Pfizer runs hundreds of thousands of chemicals, mostly synthetic, through the screens and gets thousands of "hits," or promising results, says James J. Valentine, a Pfizer senior scientist responsible for screening the natural products.
A synthetic chemical can proceed to more advanced testing because its exact structure is known.
But the compounds contained in plant extracts, their structure and even which one caused the "hit" are unknown.
The researchers search for clues to the compounds' weight and structure by exposing the extract to ultraviolet light, lasers and other tests.
Already, the natural-products lab has found a promising compound from a plant that was used by American Indians to treat heart trouble, fevers, inflammation and impotence.
