A new computer game is bound to raise the temperatures of already feverish NCAA basketball fans -- especially the ones who work on Wall Street.
It's called the First Annual College Basketball Stock Market Challenge.
Sponsored by Sports Markets Inc., an Ann Arbor, Mich.-based firm, the game allows players to manage an imaginary $100,000 portfolio by trading "shares" of the 64 teams playing in the NCAA Basketball Tournament.
Starting March 14, contestants can trade 24 hours a day, including and up to the final seconds of any game.
To play, all you need is the $69.95 entry fee, a computer, a modem -- and a working knowledge of "bid," "ask" and "pick and roll."
The grand prize, given to whomever earns the most money from trading, is $25,000 in real cash.
Sports Markets is hoping to attract Internet hobbyists.
Michael Wolff, author of "Net Guide," a reference manual for the Internet and other online services, says many Internet users come from academia or the business world and have a strong interest in sports and games.
Indeed, Boaz Weinstein, 20 years old and chief executive of Sports Markets, says most of the 550 people who have signed up so far are either students or people who work on Wall Street.
He's expecting at least 1,000 more to join by March 17, when the tournament begins.
Many sports fans are already members of online rotisserie sports leagues, which allow users to assemble fantasy teams by "buying," "selling" and "trading" real players, based on their statistics.
In these cases, the value of a player goes up or down depending on his game performance.
The difference between the Sports Markets and the rotisserie games, says Mr. Weinstein, is that the emphasis is not on which players do well or poorly, but on the value of the entire team.
Astute "traders," in other words, can look at players' stats and game results and "take advantage of price differences," he says.
According to Mr. Weinstein, the best strategists will correctly judge the valuation of a team.
For the future, Sports Markets is looking to expand its simulated stock-market games into World Cup Soccer, professional basketball and the Olympics.
"No real experience is necessary," Mr. Weinstein says.
"You can get into hedging and arbitrage."
Or, he adds, you can put all your money on your favorite team.
