Seagram Co. has boosted its stake in Time Warner Inc. to 13.1% from 11.7%, spurring renewed speculation that the liquor giant may challenge the entertainment company over its recently implemented takeover-defense plan.
Time Warner unveiled the plan, which effectively limits an outside investor's ownership to 15%, last month.
While Seagram has said that it plans to buy only 15% of Time Warner, the liquor company has been sharply critical of the Time Warner "poison pill."
The new round of buying by Seagram was its first since Time Warner put the plan in place.
Some Wall Street analysts say the next few months will prove critical in the outcome of the Seagram-Time Warner saga.
Jessica Reif, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co., said, "If Seagram's intention is to try and take control of the company, they could challenge it the plan directly in court or they could link up with another large shareholder and challenge management that way."
Time Warner and Seagram declined to comment.
People close to Seagram, however, played down the latest investment.
Seagram President Edgar Bronfman Jr. got married last week in Venezuela and went on a long honeymoon, they noted, leaving instructions to continue the buying program to the 15% level at opportune prices.
"We said there is a ceiling and we're just heading towards it," one of the people said.
In the Time Warner camp, meanwhile, insiders said that Seagram appeared to be taking advantage of a drop in the Time Warner share price.
Time Warner shares have slid recently, largely because of uncertainty over recently proposed changes in cable regulations.
Time Warner's shares closed Friday at $37.875, up 25 cents in New York Stock Exchange trading.
Without Seagram's buying however, Ms. Reif estimates that Time Warner shares would have drifted to the low 30s.
Time Warner has traded as high as $44.37 a share in recent months.
Recently, there has been speculation that Barry Diller, the chairman of QVC Network Inc., may join forces with Seagram to make a run at Time Warner.
Mr. Diller, who recently lost the bidding war for Paramount Communications Inc., is a friend of Mr. Bronfman.
But people close to Seagram have dismissed such speculation.
Nonetheless, Ms. Reif says Seagram's swelling stake presents a growing distraction to Time Warner's management and its employees.
"Everybody is wondering who they are going to be working for," she said.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday, Seagram said it spent $193 million to lift its stake in Time Warner from 11.7% to 13.1%.
Seagram is Time Warner's largest shareholder, with 49.3 million common shares.
Seagram most recently purchased five million shares from Feb. 4 and Feb. 25 at prices ranging from $37.75 to $39.37.
Seagram began acquiring Time Warner shares in May, in what it says is a friendly long-term investment.
But many Time Warner shareholders are worried that Seagram eventually will attempt to influence Time Warner management.
So far, however, Seagram hasn't pressed for a board seat, nor has one been offered.
