Billionaire Paul Allen, the co-founder of Microsoft Corp. who holds an 18% stake in Wall Street darling America Online Inc., is believed to be considering pulling out of his investment in the highflying concern.
Mr. Allen began acquiring chunks of America Online stock after it went public two years ago at $11.50 a share and has seen his investment triple in value to more than $120 million.
Now industry insiders say he has signaled that he is looking for a way to dispose of his holdings.
Fueled in part by takeover speculation, America Online shares soared $18.50 in just three days last week to a high of $91.50.
The stock fell $6.875 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading Friday to close at a stilllofty $84.625, giving the company a startling valuation of more than 90 times its per-share earnings.
Through a spokeswoman, Mr. Allen declined requests for comment on whether he may sell, as did Bill Savoy, president of Mr. Allen's investment holding company, Vulcan Ventures.
America Online's president, Stephen Case, also declined to comment on Mr. Allen's stake.
Mr. Allen had originally hoped to win board representation at America Online and to have his other high-tech concerns work closely with the on-line computer service.
America Online, however, has been less than welcoming: It adopted a "poison-pill" plan in May 1993 to discourage him; hasn't granted him board representation; and has pursued fewer alliances with his other companies than he had first sought.
America Online's Mr. Case said the company was leery of Mr. Allen sitting on the board because it might upset strategic alliances.
The concern would be that other partners might worry about their product plans possibly falling into the hands of competing companies in which Mr. Allen has a stake.
Mr. Allen has holdings in various high-tech companies that aim to service the emerging information superhighway.
"We've welcomed his involvement but at the same time want a level playing field," said Mr. Case.
"I think it's pretty fair to say that we're a pretty passive investor.
We're not actively involved in the direction of the company," Mr. Savoy of Vulcan Ventures said in a recent interview.
Spreading the Word Industry executives said Mr. Savoy began quietly letting it be known a few weeks ago that Mr. Allen viewed America Online's capability with some concern.
The fiercely private investor was said to be wary that American Online's service wasn't as flexible and robust as it might need to be to easily adopt new multimedia capabilities.
Indeed, one of Mr. Allen's companies, Starwave Corp., has just passed over America Online in favor of a new and untested on-line service from Ziff Communications Co. to carry a new sports-information offering.
"The current America Online platform isn't adequate," said Starwave President Michael Slade.
According to Mr. Case, America Online is pursuing a ticket-sales venture with Ticketmaster Corp., in which Mr. Allen owns a majority share, and is working with Metricom Inc., a wireless network concern in which Mr. Allen holds a minority stake.
America Online hopes to become the de facto standard for the user "interface" and the "look and feel" of all on-line computer services.
But some newcomers, such as magazine and newspaper publishers, may balk at letting America Online impose its own on-screen appearance on new electronic services.
Beyond such concerns, Mr. Allen also may be weighing the stock's extraordinary run-up.
It isn't clear how he might proceed if he were to choose to sell.
Dumping his more than 1.4 million shares into the market might batter America Online's stock price and reduce the value of the stake before he can sell all of it.
If he sold to an acquirer, the stake may well fetch a premium.
Chicago Corp. analyst Rick Martin has asserted that America Online would sell for $200 a share in a takeover.
Any new acquirer, however, might be hampered by America Online's poison pill.
If anyone acquires 25% or more, it may flood the market with new preferred stock that has 100 times the voting power of common shares.
A new buyer would be forced to pay 100 times the common share price for each new preferred share, according to a filing of the plan with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Mr. Case said the poison-pill measure is designed to "give the board of directors the ultimate control of the company . . . it makes it impractical for anyone to gain more" than 25% without the consent of the board.
The plan would essentially double the takeover price for America Online.
At the $200-a-share takeover value envisioned by Mr. Martin, the company's 7.6 million shares would have a total value of $1.52 billion; but the new preferred would push the price to $3.04 billion.
That could well hinder Mr. Allen should he try to sell to an investor hoping to make an unsolicited bid for the company.
