For the first time in years, Mexican finance officials are embracing a lower and perhaps more volatile peso compared with the dollar.
While denying this marks a distinct policy shift, the finance ministry here clearly sees benefits in the current situation and has done little to alter the currency's course.
Year to date, the peso is down around 7% against the dollar.
In an interview, Pedro Aspe, Mexico's minister of finance, says: "We have the same monetary policy and the same fiscal policy.
The volatility in the markets is from other affairs," notably political uncertainty on the part of foreign investors.
Mr. Aspe explains that the economic pact between Mexican labor and the government states the peso can float in a 10.27% range compared with the dollar currently.
An advantage of such a broad range, he notes, is that it discourages speculation.
If the peso fluctuates within the band as it has, he says, drawing a downward line on a slip of paper, well, "that's the market."
This hands-off policy has important implications for Mexico during this election year, and does indeed indicate a new attitude by finance officials here about foreign investment after the North American Free Trade Agreement's approval.
Whether it's an explicit policy or not, a more volatile peso does discourage speculation.
And a lower peso "encourages longer-term capital flows into export-oriented industries," says Marilyn Skiles, an economist at J.P. Morgan.
Finance Ministry officials can see such a benefit only as positive now.
An economic consulting firm here estimates that direct foreign investment in Mexican projects reached $4.7 billion in 1993 while investment in stocks and other financial instruments could be about three times that figure at $14.7 billion.
This has sparked criticism against the Salinas reforms by the main opposition here, the Party of the Democratic Revolution, led by Cuauhtemoc Cardenas.
Mr. Cardenas's chief economic adviser, Jorge Calderon Salazar, said in a meeting Friday: "There is a profound dis-industrialization that has taken place in Mexico during the tenure of Carlos Salinas."
He adds that foreign investors "are not directly investing in productive industries that create jobs."
Speculative investment in stocks "is a perversion" he says; "We are in a social crisis here."
Even mainstream economists are starting to wonder if investment in Mexico is being used for productive projects given the country's weak economic growth.
For the past three years, the stability of the peso was a hallmark of economic reforms here.
From 1991 to the end of 1993, the currency traded at low volatilities in a fairly narrow range.
This was partly due to daily interventions by the central bank to smooth out abnormal fluctuations.
This policy was deliberate and had the desired effect of winning investor confidence in Mexican securities.
By the end of 1993, foreign investors owned $21.9 billion, or nearly 40%, of all outstanding Mexican treasury certificates and other government obligations, up from $5.4 billion, or 9.7%, at the end of 1991.
The stable exchange-rate policy was an important pre-Nafta tool for President Carlos Salinas.
Faced with an increasingly open economy, Mexican businesses needed to invest to compete.
As foreign investment rushed into the stock market, Mexican corporations were able to raise more capital.
In 1993 alone, Mexican companies sold some $4.12 billion in stocks.
Also, large foreign investment showed confidence in Mexico's economic reforms as Nafta was being debated.
But the big dollar inflows had a cost.
Interest rates remained high to keep inflation down and foreign investment up.
After the approval of Nafta, foreign investment into Mexican markets soared, creating a headache for the Finance Ministry.
The peso strengthened sharply against the dollar, and the central bank's dollar reserves rose around $10.5 billion to about $30 billion.
Mexican bankers who speak with Mr. Aspe and the central bank say they are increasingly frowning on inflows of "hot money," or short-term speculative investments.
But John Liegey, president of New York peso broker and merchant bank, the Weston Group , worries that the new hands-off policy could backfire.
"Foreign investors have always invested in Mexico on the back of a strong and stable currency," Mr. Liegey says.
"We are now at volatilities in the peso approaching the German mark.
Mutual-fund managers are not accustomed to these volatilities."
That's true, as can easily be shown by the stock market's 17.2% decline from its record high in February.
What does Mexico want?
"A lower peso motivates direct investment and scares away hot money" says Jorge Alonso, head of capital markets at Chase Manhattan Bank, Mexico City.
"That's why they aren't doing anything to get the peso back to where it was."
