Today, the National Assessment Governing Board is likely to be shot through the heart by a vengeful House Education and Labor Committee.
The board's sin: insisting that the nation's most important test of student achievement and school performance be constructed (and its results reported) around clear standards of what American youngsters ought to know and be able to do.
But standards, tests and accountability are keys to education reform.
How are our children and schools doing compared with how they ought to be doing?
Compared with those in the next state?
With five years ago?
Parents, voters, governors, legislators and business leaders appreciate the importance of such information.
So do many educators.
Yet political allies of the school establishment do their best to eliminate all who would supply such data.
The board came into existence six years ago, the product of a rare bipartisan consensus.
Though the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) had been around since the 1960s, the accountability-shy school establishment had insisted that test results be kept opaque, out-of-date, unavailable for individual states and communities, and divorced from any norms or standards.
The data produced within these strictures were sound, but their main users were scholars and policy wonks -- not parents.
And in the absence of national benchmarks, nearly every state and locality blithely reported that its students were scoring "above average" on whatever tests it used.
By the mid-1980s, acute anxiety about the nation's mediocre educational performance had created an appetite for faster and more useful test results, anchored to an unbiased judgment about "how good is good enough."
Education Secretary William Bennett appointed a blue-ribbon committee to consider NAEP's future.
It included two well-known state-level education reformers of the day: Hillary Rodham Clinton of Arkansas and Lamar Alexander of Tennessee.
That panel recommended that NAEP be expanded and accelerated, that state-level data be routinely provided, and that an independent Governing Board be created to set its policies.
It was vital, the panel insisted, that the "nation's report card" not be entrusted to bureaucrats or colored by the political needs of any administration.
The 24-member Governing Board debuted in late 1988.
Its membership is varied, bipartisan and especially sensitive to state concerns: two governors, two legislators, two state school superintendents, and an array of teachers, local school officials, testing experts, business leaders and "public" representatives.
They're appointed by the secretary of education from candidates proposed by the board itself.
Served by a small, expert staff, this is a board -- rare in Washington -- that makes decisions bureaucrats must heed and is not obliged to trim its sails to every political breeze.
It has proved to be both tough and impartial.
When, for instance, an election-minded Bush administration pressed for premature release of some NAEP data, the board slapped the White House's hand.
Such independence, of course, is part of the reason that several House staffers and their employers set about to kill the board.
Quietly conniving with the senior careerists who would control NAEP if there were no board, they drafted a measure to terminate this sometimes-feisty panel.
Erasing the board is the surest way to repeal its most important action, one that never sat well with old-style liberals, parts of the school establishment and anti-testing advocacy groups: the decision to organize NAEP around clear standards of what young Americans should know and be able to do.
Amid the many tests on the market, only NAEP -- when reported according to such standards -- permits comparisons of performance among states and tracks changes.
Here are two examples from the 1992 assessment:
-- Math.
After an elaborate "consensus process" involving hundreds of educators and laymen, the board concluded that eighth-graders "proficient" in math should "apply mathematical concepts and procedures consistently to complex problems . . . understand the connections between fractions, percents, decimals and other mathematical topics such as algebra and functions . . . have a thorough understanding of basic level arithmetic operations . . . make inferences from data and graphs; and apply properties of informal geometry."
How many eighth-graders in public school actually reached that level in 1992?
The answer was 25% for the nation as a whole, compared with 20% two years earlier.
In Minnesota and Iowa, proficiency rates reached 37%, while in Georgia and Hawaii they were only 16%.
And so forth.
-- Reading.
After a similar consultative process, the board determined that proficient fourth-grade readers should "demonstrate an overall understanding of the text . . . by making inferences, drawing . . . reasonable conclusions, and recognizing relationships such as cause and effect."
Nationwide, 25% of fourth-graders reached that level in 1992, including 7% of black youngsters, 13% of Hispanics, 21% of Asians and 31% of whites.
Private school pupils did somewhat better than public, and girls outscored boys.
Even in "advantaged" suburban schools, however, fewer than half the students met this standard.
Now the legislative cycle presents a chance to shoot the messenger.
Never mind that, for the rest of the decade at least, we will have no other practical way to monitor progress toward the ambitious targets set by the president and governors.
Never mind that there's no other way to fulfill Mr. Clinton's State of the Union challenge to measure every school "by one high standard: Are our children learning what they need to know to compete and win in the global economy?"
Can a few veteran House staffers, territorial civil servants, persnickety academics and anti-testing advocates return NAEP to its dim, nonjudgmental backwater, there to be run by time-servers and statisticians, jerked around by Congress, vulnerable to interest-group pressures and susceptible to "policy direction" by whoever happens to be education secretary?
(Incumbent Dick Riley, himself a former board member, values today's NAEP and its standards, but politics will inevitably tempt others to shade the content, timing or emphasis of test results.)
Trying to forestall that fate, the National Governors Association adopted a unanimous resolution last week, calling for retention of the board -- and its standards.
Rep. Mike Castle (R., Del.) -- another former board member -- has mounted a spirited defense.
The Clinton administration's own NAEP bill is solid -- and the Senate may pay it greater heed this spring.
Hence the final outcome won't be clear for a while.
But if those who dislike NAEP's message -- and the messenger's autonomy -- prevail, a sensitive "national" testing venture will become just another federal program.
And we'll know less about the performance of our children and our schools tomorrow than we do today.
Mr. Finn, a Vanderbilt professor and former assistant secretary of education, chaired the National Assessment Governing Board from 1988 to 1990.
