Grain futures prices are expected to rally sharply today in response to the U.S. Agriculture Department's bleakest estimate yet of the flood-ravaged 1993-94 U.S. grain crop.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, early estimates were that corn futures prices would rise three to five cents a bushel; soybean prices would climb seven to 12 cents a bushel; and wheat prices would be up two to four cents a bushel.
The USDA pegged the U.S. corn crop at 6.34 billion bushels, down 164 million bushels from the Department's November estimate of 6.5 billion.
The USDA said low test weights of corn, especially corn grown in the western Corn Belt, were to blame for the decline.
The normal test weight for corn is about 56 pounds per bushel.
However, the saturation of Midwest farmland by drenching rains throughout the growing season last summer hampered development of starch inside corn kernels.
As a result, the test weight for much of the summer's corn crop was unusually low -- 46 pounds to 52 pounds a bushel.
For soybeans, the USDA estimated the crop at 1.8 billion bushels, down about 25 million bushels from the November estimate of 1.83 billion bushels.
The flooding also hampered development of soybean plants in the western Corn Belt and upper Midwest, resulting in smaller soybean size on plants.
For wheat, the Department pegged the crop at 2.4 billion bushels, down about 20 million bushels from the November estimate of 2.42 billion bushels.
Another significant part of the USDA report was the Department's estimate of feed usage of U.S. grain during the September-through-November period in 1993.
Because of the scarcity of high-quality U.S. grain, analysts say, farmers ultimately must diminish their use of grain as feed for livestock to ensure that enough grain is left for human consumption, and prices must rise to levels high enough that farmers can't afford to use grain as feed.
The USDA estimated residual use of corn as feed at 1.72 billion bushels during the September-through-November period, down 102 million bushels from 1992's record usage of 1.83 billion bushels.
Yet although feed usage is down a bit, it hasn't fallen far enough to ensure abundance of grain for human use, analysts said.
"The report shows that price still has not done its job of curtailing domestic feed use," said Daniel W. Basse, market research director for AgResource Co., Chicago.
"We must reach higher prices to start the rationing process."
The USDA pegged corn ending stocks, or the amount of corn it expects to be on hand this summer, at 802 million bushels, the lowest level since the mid-1970s.
It forecast soybean ending stocks at 150 million bushels, also the lowest since the mid-70s.
ENERGY: Despite a bullish industry report on U.S. petroleum inventories late Tuesday, February crude-oil futures prices fell 52 cents a barrel to $14.33 in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Much of the market optimism to be found in the American Petroleum Institute statistics already had been factored into prices, some traders said.
The rest was overshadowed by a report from the International Energy Agency in Paris saying that world oil demand continues to be weak and will likely remain so through the first quarter.
The IEA cut its forecast for world demand for crude oil by 300,000 barrels a day to 68.1 million barrels for the first quarter.
At the same time, some market players continue to be nervous about the precarious financial situation surrounding Metallgesellschaft AG, the German company whose MG Corp. is a big futures-market participant.
Meanwhile, natural-gas futures prices continued to advance, buoyed by weather-related buying as yet another wave of winter storms hit the eastern part of the U.S.
ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices plummeted after weather forecasts predicted warmer-than-expected temperatures this weekend in Florida.
At New York's Cotton Exchange, orange juice for March delivery was down $4.10 a pound to $110.75 a pound.
On Tuesday, forecasters had predicted a cold wave in Florida, with temperatures falling as low as 29 degrees.
But most forecasts were revised to show a low of 33 degrees.
Traders reacted to diminished frost fears by bidding down orange-juice futures prices.
"A low of 29 degrees wouldn't have been low enough to cause damage to the Florida crop anyway," said Judith Ganes, senior analyst for Merrill Lynch.
"It's just that psychologically, we're now that much farther away from a frost."
Late yesterday, the Agriculture Department raised its estimate of the Florida orange crop to 176 million boxes from 172 million.
But that prospective increase in juice supplies was more than offset by a decrease in Brazil's outlook for its 1994-95 orange crop.
Brazil estimated that because of blossom blight and hot weather its crop could be reduced to 240 million boxes from 282 million.
"If the Brazilian crop is in fact that small, I think this market is going to turn around and remain in an uptrend throughout spring," Ms. Ganes said.
