In response to Heather Richardson's Jan. 24 editorial-page essay "Bobbitt: A Verdict that Kills Justice": Bobbitt didn't kill justice, the system did that long ago.
Ms. Richardson's commentary on the Lorena Bobbitt verdict is based on the naive assumption that in this country "there are civilized procedures for dealing with our problems with one another," specifically referring to procedures in our civil-justice system.
That is far from the truth.
It is apparent that the Bobbitt jury in particular already knew that our civil-justice system has become a farce that fools the masses into thinking there are legitimate alternatives to self-help.
The truth is that our civil-court system is in a state of collapse.
The only thing that one can be sure of after getting involved with it is that he or she will be bankrupted by the time the case is finished.
As a practicing attorney I have had the misfortune to be involved in the civil-court system both professionally and personally, and I can attest that the system doesn't work.
Lying under oath is rampant in civil cases, and many attorneys consider perjury to be a legitimate trial tactic they encourage their clients to adopt.
And why not?
Even fully documented cases of willful perjury go unpunished by the judges, who by their refusal to ensure the integrity of the system invite the lawyers to corrupt it.
In fact, the only time I ever saw a judge get angry about perjury was when I complained about it, and his anger was with me for bringing it up, not with the witness who lied or his attorney who deliberately suborned the false testimony.
Ordinary people who see what goes on in this system frequently comment that if they ever had a serious problem they would seek out "other methods" to take care of it before ever getting involved in the civil-justice system.
This is one issue on which the public at large is a big step ahead of Ms. Richardson and others who either blindly believe in the system or who still think the public is fooled by it.
The Bobbitt jury believed that this battered wife had no real alternative to self-help within the system, and that's what its verdict is based on, not misguided compassion as Ms. Richardson suggests.
Franklin Lakes, N.J.
If there is anyone left who is not convinced that our system of criminal justice has gone 180 degrees awry -- i.e., where it is now preferable, in terms of outcome, to be the criminal rather than the victim -- they need only read Ms. Richardson's article.
Two former prosecutors have told me that the defense's strategy of (a) first admitting Mrs. Bobbitt's guilt in terms of what law was broken and who broke it; and (b) going on to justify that "guilt" on the basis of the exact brutality charges for which Mr. Bobbitt had been previously tried and acquitted would have been the very prosecution arguments each of them would have independently employed had they been prosecuting this case.
It should now be crystal clear that our courts willingly accept emotional circumstances as sufficient justification and vindication for the commission of crimes such as crushing a stranger's head with a brick, severing the penis of a tormenting husband, and for violently killing one's own parents.
How do we as a society justify on the one hand exhibiting distress over rising levels of violent crime when on the other hand we work so hard to reward it?
Livingston, N.J.
