Americans may be growing weary of healthful eating, but they haven't given up entirely.
Many of the fastest-growing products in supermarkets today reflect consumers' continuing appetite for wholesome fare -- as long as it is convenient.
Sales of prepared salad fixings, for instance, grew 111.3% during the fourth quarter, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
Similarly, sales of fresh bagels, a lower-fat alternative to muffins and croissants, increased 41.1%.
And driven largely by Kellogg Co.'s earthy Nutri-Grain cereal bars, sales of granola and other snack bars grew 19.9%.
Sales of individual vitamins, such as beta carotene and vitamin C, increased 19.3%, after studies in medical journals linked the nutritional supplements to lower rates of cancer and other diseases.
And after slimming down for most of 1992, sales of such liquid diet meals as Slim-Fast Food Co.'s Ultra Slim-Fast were also robust.
Not all consumers were immune to temptation, though, especially during the holiday season.
After weak results early in the year, sales of refrigerated cookie dough grew 26.9%.
Market leader Pillsbury Co., a unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC, attributes that growth largely to steppedup promotions for its Pillsbury's Best cookie dough.
To encourage would-be bakers without the necessary time or skills, the company ran a series of ads offering tips for using its dough to make holiday cookies.
New product activity was primarily responsible for the strong showing of some categories such as iced-tea drinks and drain cleaners.
Compiled exclusively for The Wall Street Journal, the list of the fastest-growing products is based on sales data from supermarket scanners.
Each quarter, Information Resources ranks more than 323 product categories with annual sales of at least $100 million by percentage growth, compared with the year-earlier period.
Fastest-growing product categories* based on dollar sales in supermarkets during the 13 weeks ended Jan. 2
Source: Information Resources Inc.
