Political fears sparked by the uprising in Chiapas in southern Mexico continued to depress the prices of developing-nation bonds yesterday.
Although the uprising began more than three weeks ago and the situation appears to be under control in Mexico, investors have begun to look more closely at potential and actual political crises in other developing nations, such as Venezuela.
The result has been the onset of a bearish sentiment in the market for these high-yielding bonds.
The prices of U.S. Treasurys dropped as well, though not as sharply.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond lost more than 1/4 point, or more than $2.50 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to end at 99 7/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, rose to 6.30% from 6.28% on Friday.
Prices of Brady bonds and most developing-nation loans dropped for the fourth consecutive session yesterday as traders and some investors rushed to take defensive positions in case the bearish sentiment pushes the market even lower.
Brady bonds are securities issued by governments as part of a foreign-debt restructuring program designed by former U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
Since they are sovereign debt and tend to be very liquid, Brady bonds are a good benchmark for a nation's bonds.
J.P. Morgan's Emerging Markets Bond Index, which tracks Brady bond prices, has fallen nearly seven points since Jan. 12, to 210.50.
A number of major developing nations' bonds lost a point or more, including Brady bonds of Mexico, Venezuela, Argentina and Brazil.
The declines later spilled over into the market for defaulted government loan paper.
The spill-over prompted a few traders to question whether the entire developing-nation sovereign-debt market is actually more interdependent than they had thought.
"In part, the linkage between seemingly unconnected assets is due to the fact that this market is still very young," one trader said.
"While a drop in oil prices can be expected to affect Nigeria and Venezuela, it's harder to understand how a banking crisis in Venezuela could end up hurting Mexico," he said.
One explanation may be that single investors and traders are often active in a wide array of assets, requiring them to be as fluent in the economic restructuring of a country such as Ecuador as they are in the political maneuvering of the former Soviet Union.
"In the minds of some investors, a sudden drop in Vneshekonombank loans of the former Soviet Union can be made up by profit-taking" in Mexican Brady bonds, said another trader.
Another explanation may be worries about looming political problems.
Luis R. Luis, portfolio manager at Scudder, Stevens & Clark Inc., a Boston mutual-fund concern, said the uprising may in fact prove as important to Mexico's political history as the Mexican Revolution.
"Mexico is in new political waters," Mr. Luis said.
"Chiapas, more than Nafta, is going to force Mexican politicians to change their attitudes and policies and direct them toward fiscal-type of solutions."
Mexico is well aware it has to improve its poor human-rights reputation, Mr. Luis added.
Among specific Brady bonds, Mexican discount Brady bonds fell 1 1/2 points, or $15 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 91.875, as investors waited to see whether the government's attempts to mediate a peaceful resolution to the Chiapas uprising would succeed.
The discount bonds are so named because they have been converted from old foreign debt at a discount to face value.
Venezuelan government debt also dropped today, with its par Brady bonds down 2 3/8 points, or $23.75 for a bond with $1,000 face value to 68.62.
The par bonds have been converted from old foreign debt at face value.
The country's fiscal problems "are sad," said one trader who just returned from Caracas, Venezuela's capital.
"It has got a revenue collection problem tied to a work-ethic problem," he said.
"The country got rich quickly in the 1970s with the rise in oil prices.
But now that oil is coming back down, the country has gotten lazy."
Higher inflation, well-subsidized gasoline prices and continued concerns over the populist ideological slant of President-elect Rafael Caldera continue to weigh on Venezuela debt prices as well, traders said.
Mr. Caldera has called for the suspension of the country's value-added tax, which could have a strong effect on the country's fiscal health.
Among the other Bradys, Argentine discount bonds slid 1/2 point to 86.25, while Brazil IDU bonds dropped 1 1/4 points to 84.5.
IDU, which stands for "interest due and unpaid," is a security created from Brazil's unpaid interest on foreign debt.
Concerns about problems at Hanwa Co., the troubled Japanese metal-trading firm, could prompt selling of many of the most liquid Brady bonds by Japanese investors, said James Swanson, a portfolio manager at Massachusetts Financial Services.
Hanwa is believed to have large positions in Brady bonds of several nations.
"However, one thing that makes me think we won't have a true bear market is that there is still a mania for yield," said Mr. Swanson.
"It's still too soon to start shorting the market," he said.
But compared with the recent performance of the bond markets of industrialized nations, the developing-nation bond market is "still doing fine," he explained.
The prices of defaulted government loans also ended lower.
Ecuador MYRAs fell 2 points to 46.5, while Panama refinancing loans sank 2 1/8 to 69.25.
Meanwhile the debt of the former Soviet Union dropped five points to 38.
It remained unclear whether Finance Minister Boris Fyodorov would continue in his position.
Mr. Fyodorov met today with Interprivatization Fund President Vladimir Shcherbakov, the Interfax news agency reported, leading some Russia-watchers to speculate that Mr. Shcherbakov is bidding for the open finance-minister slot.
During the meeting, Mr. Shcherbakov tried to persuade Mr. Fyodorov to remain in the government, Interfax said.
Meanwhile, new Canadian bonds swamped the U.S. corporate-bond market yesterday as Ontario sold 1.25 billion Canadian dollars (US$953 million) of 30-year global bonds.
The deal comes on the heels of Canadian-denominated deals from Hydro-Quebec, which sold C$1 billion of 10-year global bonds, and Rogers Cablesystems Ltd., which sold C$300 million of junk bonds.
Global bonds are designed to be sold and traded in all the world's major markets.
Otherwise, the new-issue market was extremely quiet.
General Motors Corp.'s General Motors Acceptance Corp. sold $300 million of five-year notes, while Imperial Credit Industries Inc. sold $90 million of 10-year junk bonds.
Trading in the U.S. investment-grade corporate-bond market was light with prices down slightly, following U.S. Treasurys.
The extremely light activity in the junk-bond market left prices unchanged.
Many investors will attend high-yield conferences sponsored early in the week by Salomon Brothers Inc. and later in the week by Kidder Peabody & Co.
Ontario's global bonds were priced at 98.42 with a 7.5% coupon to yield 7.635%, a lower-than-expected 0.53 percentage point over the government of Canada's 30-year bond.
The spread is the difference between the yield on the issuer's bond and the yield of the government-issued debt.
By late yesterday, the price of the bond had dropped 0.42 point, or about $4.20 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 98.
The yield rose to 7.67%.
The deal was primarily placed with U.S. and Canadian investors through jointlead managers Goldman Sachs International Ltd., Nesbitt Thomson Ltd. and Scotia-McLeod Inc.
Expecting that they would have more than enough to do in the next several days, most Treasury players were lying low yesterday.
The benchmark 30-year bond dropped more than 1/4 point.
Other securities posted smaller losses.
The 10-year note, for example, dropped less than 1/4 point to 100 8/32 to yield 5.70%, compared with 5.68% on Friday.
With $29 billion of two-year and five-year U.S. Treasury notes to be sold today and tomorrow, respectively, and the government's release of fourth-quarter gross domestic product data due Friday, investors and traders didn't want to take on new positions yesterday.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note yielded 4.11% late yesterday while the five-year note yielded 5.07%.
Next week, the Treasury lays out details of its quarterly refunding package, in which it sells new issues to pay off maturing issues.
That package will include a new 30-year bond.
Yesterday, the U.S. Treasury sold $25.36 billion of three-month and six-month bills at its regular weekly auction.
The three-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 2.96% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.02%.
The six-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.14% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.23%.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated Jan. 27.
The 13-week bills mature April 28, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature July 28, 1994.
Municipal bonds ended where they opened yesterday, little changed and narrowly mixed.
With new issuance only slightly more active than secondary dealings, the focus turned to absorbing the spate of new deals already priced this year and to the week's two largest deals, which are expected today.
This week's calendar is comparatively light.
The bulk of it is anticipated today, with the negotiated pricings of $750 million San Antonio electric and gas system revenue refunding bonds and $660 million Washington Public Power Supply System refunding bonds.
Yesterday's one large offering was the $117.9 million of Colorado Springs, Colo., utility system improvement and refunding bonds.
A Prudential Securities Inc. group, which won the double-A-rated bonds in competitive bidding, set serial bond yields to range from 3.25% in 1996 to 5.22% in 2019.
The $48.16 million 5 1/8% term bonds due 2023 weren't publicly reoffered.
In secondary trading, the Reedy Creek Improvement District's 5% bonds due 2019 rose 1/8 point to 95 3/8, to yield 5.30%.
The New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency's 5 1/2% bonds due 2014 were unchanged at 99, yielding 5.31%.
Citicorp's Citibank took advantage of strong demand for credit-card securities, bringing a $798 million global offering at low cost.
The largest part of the transaction, the $750 million senior class, was priced with a 4.65% coupon at 99.858 to yield 4.70%.
That was only 0.354 point above the Treasury's 4 3/8 % notes due November 1996.
The issue has an average life of three years.
Citibank couldn't have chosen a better moment for an aggressively priced transaction.
Investors, flush with cash, have been clamoring for somewhat scarce credit-card paper.
Charles Wainehouse, treasurer of the credit-card products division of Citibank, noted that the deal was still trading near its pricing level after being freed to trade.
He called that a "neat validation" of the deal's execution.
Meanwhile, mortgage-backed securities drifted through an uneventful session to end largely unchanged.
Ginnie Mae 6.5% securities for February delivery rose 1/32 to 100 3/32, Freddie Mac Gold 6.5% securities were unchanged at 100 6/32 and Fannie Mae 6.5% securities were unchanged at 100.
Still, mortgages are trading at lofty levels, with yields of most sectors of the pass-through market at historically tight spreads over the yields of their Treasury counterparts.
