For weeks, Bernardo Dominguez was barely noticed as he tried to buy most of the Westin Hotels & Resorts chain.
He wrote letters to the owners every three or four days without response.
Finally, on Dec. 28, the virtually unknown Mexican businessman got a fax saying he would get his chance to negotiate with the owner, Aoki Corp. of Japan.
The problem is that Dec. 28 is the Mexican version of April Fool's Day.
"I thought: Should I believe it?"
Mr. Dominguez says in an interview.
He did, and as a result put together an agreement two weeks ago to buy the properties for $708 million.
A group led by Mr. Dominguez will buy Westin operations in North America, South America and Europe.
These include 52 managed hotels, 10 of which are majority or wholly owned by Westin, based in Seattle.
Mr. Dominguez's deal shocked the clubby Mexican business establishment.
He and his privately held DSC SA are so little-known that when initial reports circulated about the planned purchase, many people thought the buyer had to be Desc SA, a large, publicly traded conglomerate.
Mr. Dominguez may yet disappear from view almost as fast as he appeared.
People close to the bidding say most of the final bids were $400 million to $500 million, while Mr. Dominguez made the unusual move of agreeing to pay the asking price.
Many of the other bids included rights to the Westin name in Asia, while Mr. Dominguez's did not.
Mr. Dominguez is also putting himself at risk because he is betting on the future.
He is agreeing to buy a type of business-class hotel that is expected to recover from the industry's recession more slowly than other types of hotels.
He is also assuming he can expand Westin's business faster than Aoki could, even though his entire hotel experience consists of running a modest five-hotel chain.
But Mr. Dominguez, who is just 33 years old, may also come to symbolize a new breed of Mexican businessman who is willing to take big chances to try to reap big rewards.
Ricardo Salinas Pliego, in his late 30s, also drastically outbid his more-established competition to buy two television networks last summer.
The list of such youthful risk-takers seems to be growing.
Mr. Dominguez grew up in the city of Chihuahua, near the Texas border where his father owned a small lumberyard.
Mr. Dominguez says he decided at 13 that he wanted to strike out on his own as an entrepreneur.
He attended the highly regarded Instituto Tecnologico de Estudios Superiores de Monterey on a scholarship, then studied at the London School of Economics and at Wharton Business School.
He returned to Mexico in 1983, just in time for the country's economic crisis.
The soft-spoken, chunky Mr. Dominguez says he began by consulting on corporate restructurings.
One of his early assignments involved working with a construction company, and, he says, "I fell in love with it."
So when the earthquake of 1985 devastated Mexico City, he took his biggest chance and decided to put together a construction company and move to Mexico City.
He and a partner scraped together $100,000, and had a hard time getting taken seriously.
But after losing several bids in 1986, "I got my first contract because nobody else wanted it," Mr. Dominguez says.
His inexperienced company needed to build 160 homes in 90 days, so Mr. Dominguez had his crews work 24 hours a day.
He says they finished the work in 83 days and, while they didn't make any money, established themselves as credible builders.
When the construction business slowed, Mr. Dominguez began moving quickly from one thing to another.
He expanded first into real-estate development, buying distressed, unfinished properties from banks on the assumption that his construction company could complete them quickly and sell the properties for a fast profit.
Real-estate development got him interested in hotels; hotels led to tourism, and Mr. Dominguez bought a travel agency.
Along the way, Mr. Dominguez's DSC also acquired two chains of hardware stores.
The company has grown to what Mr. Dominguez says is close to $200 million of revenue a year.
He acknowledges that the company is restructuring now, but says it's not for lack of cash.
He says Mexico's triple-digit inflation during parts of the 1980s made debt a good thing, because it could be repaid with inflated pesos.
With inflation now down to single digits, though, he is trying to rearrange his finances to turn debt into equity.
In any case, Mr. Dominguez says he is doing the Westin deal personally, not through DSC.
He says he and a few partners will put up more than 20% of the purchase price and finance the rest through preferred stock and various types of debt.
Told that some bankers have questioned whether he can come up with so much money over the next few months, the ever-positive Mr. Dominguez lowers his voice to a whisper and says: "You know, it's amazing.
I've been getting calls from all over the world from people who want to invest.
If I had to, I could come up with the money tomorrow."
Pauline Yoshihashi in Los Angeles contributed to this article.
