Money manager Mario Gabelli is losing Elizabeth Bramwell, a well-known manager of one of his stock funds, because he asked her to move her office out of New York City.
Elizabeth Bramwell is leaving her job as portfolio manager of Gabelli Growth Fund to form Bramwell Capital Management, her own money-management firm.
Ms. Bramwell told Mr. Gabelli yesterday that she was leaving the fund, which she has managed since it began in 1987.
She has been with Gabelli & Co. since 1985, and had met Mr. Gabelli years before at Columbia Business School.
Ms. Bramwell said in an interview that she had wanted to run her own investment firm for a long time.
But the "catalyst" for her departure from Gabelli Funds Inc., she said, was when Mr. Gabelli "decided rather abruptly that he wanted to move everything up to Rye, N.Y.," including her office, in recent weeks.
Ms. Bramwell stayed in New York City when most of Mr. Gabelli's investment organization moved to suburban Rye two years ago.
Ms. Bramwell said she needed to be in New York City to meet with managements of companies in which she invests.
"Going back and forth during trading hours to Rye didn't work for me," she said.
Ms. Bramwell also said she wanted more resources to run the fund than Mr. Gabelli was giving her.
As her fund grew -- it currently has $675 million in assets -- she felt it needed more staff.
"I couldn't hire the people I needed to run this fund," she said.
"I really thought that the performance that my shareholders expect of me I couldn't deliver unless I controlled the budget."
Gabelli Funds said it is searching for a new manager for Gabelli Growth.
In the meantime, Mr. Gabelli and a group of analysts will run the fund.
Mr. Gabelli already manages seven of the 11 Gabelli funds, which have $2.65 billion in assets.
Ms. Bramwell gained some renown during the late 1980s when her fund outperformed those run by her boss, Mr. Gabelli.
While Mr. Gabelli is a "value" investor looking for cheap stocks and takeover plays, Ms. Bramwell tends to invest in stocks of fast-growing companies.
In the past couple of years, the performance of Mr. Gabelli's funds has overtaken Ms. Bramwell's fund.
She says some of her fund's lower performance came from her inability to hire more staff as the fund grew in size.
Ms. Bramwell wouldn't say outright whether her new firm would manage mutual funds, private accounts for institutions or wealthy individuals, or some combination.
Mr. Gabelli, in a statement, said he regretted Ms. Bramwell's departure.
His firm wouldn't comment on Ms. Bramwell's remarks about the conditions that led to her departure.
