Violet Wei slowly hitches up her sweater and places a small plastic speaker against her swollen belly.
The 28-year-old accountant turns on a cassette player, then leans back as the tape begins to play to her womb.
"Let's study English again," a woman's voice chimes brightly in Chinese.
She reels off a list of words and phrases in Chinese and English -- "father," "mammy," "read book," "how do you do?" -- before the lesson segues into "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star."
"Our baby won't necessarily know English when he's born, but at least he'll have heard it before," says Ms. Wei's husband, Li Xiaolei, 31, who is a manager in the electronics company where his wife works.
"He'll be more interested in it so he can learn faster. . . .
But wouldn't it be something if he could call out `Mama' as soon as he's born?"
Such are the hopes of millions of parents in today's China.
Restricted by the government's one-child-per-family policy and enriched by economic reform, these couples cherish high hopes for their one shot at posterity.
Unwilling just to let nature take its course, they go all out to nurture intelligent, beautiful, healthy children, even before they are born.
Taijiao (prenatal education) and zaojiao (early education) are hardly unique to China.
But in this nation, the trend reflects more than parental ambitions: It is also the offspring of a campaign by health officials and hospitals to enhance the masses.
(As part of this campaign, the government is working on a law that, in draft form, calls for abortions and sterilizations to reduce the incidence of birth defects.)
"Controlling population growth and raising the quality of the people are two basic policies of China," says Dr. Sung Weibing of Tiantan Hospital.
"Prenatal education sets a very good foundation for the future education of our children, so of course that's good for China."
The response has been strongest in large cities and along the prosperous coast, where newly moneyed couples are eager to give their children opportunities they never had.
Hospitals hold classes for expecting parents and conscientious grandparents, and sell the taped lessons that women like Ms. Wei use at home.
Newspapers and television run frequent features on fetal and infant scholastics.
For pregnant women and the children they carry, it all means submitting to a rigorous daily regimen of lessons, massages, flashing lights (intended to stimulate eyesight and brain activity when trained on the fetus), and even gazing at portraits of beautiful people.
And that's just the beginning.
Once the baby has graduated from womb to crib, the course load can get weighty -- Tang Dynasty poetry, Chinese-character recognition, music and further language training (English is preferred), among other subjects.
Some Chinese fear that in pursuing perfect progeny, the nation risks creating a me-generation pressured to excel but lacking personal values.
"From the beginning, success is being defined for these kids only as getting high-powered jobs, making lots of money or becoming famous," says Ma Rong, associate director of Beijing University's Institute of Sociology and Anthropology.
"They become depressed if they can't become high-level officials.
This places a heavy burden on them because they don't have any time to act like kids."
For most Chinese, though, the need to breed a better baby outweighs any fear of rearing a neurotic overachiever.
That's the case with Di Lanfeng.
"If my daughter has talent, won't she have everything?" asks the 25-year-old nurse, now in her ninth month.
Ms. Di wants beauty -- "cute, with big eyes" -- as well as brains for the daughter, nicknamed Tiantian, that her doctor told her she will have.
Some prenatal pundits say pregnant women who stare at pictures of alluring people will likely have goodlooking babies, so she has decorated her apartment with posters of wide-eyed Chinese infants, Hong Kong pop singers, and blond couples strolling along beaches.
"I mostly look at the posters when I feel down," she says.
"But I want my child to be pretty, so I've got some cute baby posters up, too."
Ms. Di also wants to develop her daughter's ear for music, so four or five times a day she turns on taped nursery songs or Chinese easy listening on the radio.
To round out her fetus's character, "I tell Tiantian three times before I go to bed each night to `grow up smarter' and `grow up prettier,'" Ms. Di laughs, a little embarrassed.
"Society has changed, and competition is much tougher than it was when I was growing up."
Keeping up with the neighbors is definitely a factor behind the prenatal-ed craze.
Jewelry-shop manager Guo Jingyian proudly relates the superior progress of her daughter, also called Tiantian, thanks to taped lessons, tummy massages and one-way conversations between mother and fetus.
Tiantian, Ms. Guo says, could hold her own bottle at three months and crawl at six months, a full month before the average unschooled baby.
Now, at 11 months, she indicates her age by holding up a fingernot that she has a system for counting higher than 10, but just to show she is almost one year old.
"The babies of my colleagues and friends are especially slow," the 26-year-old says.
"You ask them how old they are, and they have no idea what you're talking about."
Sometimes, the extended family gets involved.
Last year, while 27-year-old Wang Ximeng was pregnant, her husband and her parents would gather round her to talk to the fetus.
"It was like she was sitting here with us," says Ms. Wang, now the mother of four-month-old Mingming.
"When I heard that you should put music on your stomach, I thought it was very weird," says Ms. Wang's mother, Wang Shuling, 53.
"Then later, when I saw Mingming would quiet down when my daughter recited poetry to her on walks, I began to have more confidence.
So I would yell out to Mingming, `This is a pine tree,' `This is a stream.'"
Gao Wendi, a thoughtful nine-month-old with spiky hair, can recognize almost any object in her house, says proud mom Li Wenwen.
Holding Wendi in her arms, Ms. Li names several objects -- door, mirror, humidifier.
Each time, Wendi scans the room until she fixes her gaze on the right one.
Ms. Li, who is taking two years' leave from her job as a computer scientist, has labeled things in her house in Chinese, English and Japanese.
Around the baby's crib hang five Tang Dynasty poems written in big Chinese characters, the Roman alphabet and the numbers one through 10.
Besides going over these several times each day with Wendi, Ms. Li before each meal recites a poem about not wasting food.
During her pregnancy, the emphasis was on baby-betterment through nutrition.
"I ate whatever food people said was good," Ms. Li says.
"Apples and tomatoes for white skin, and vegetables because I heard they're good for putting more waves in the brain."
