Japan supermarket giant Ito-Yokado Co. is joining forces with U.S. retail conglomerate Wal-Mart Stores Inc. in a cost-cutting move that highlights America's ever-increasing presence in the Japanese market.
The venture between the two heavyweights, which an Ito-Yokado spokesman said will be officially signed into being this August, will allow Ito-Yokado to slash its costs by importing low-cost Wal-Mart goods.
The Japanese company has already test-imported Wal-Mart products totaling about 200 million yen ($1.9 million) since last year, a spokesman said.
It has since placed orders for about five billion yen of spring and summer goods, and will likely increase that significantly, although the company wouldn't provide details.
Ito-Yokado also would not confirm which Wal-Mart products it has on order.
But analysts said that they will probably include a wide range of basic clothing, toys, pet food, and some glass tableware, which the company has been importing under the test agreement and is said to be selling well here.
Wal-Mart, based in Bentonville, Ark., declined to confirm or deny the arrangement, its first retailing venture outside North America.
However, William W. Whyte, a retail analyst for Stephens Inc., said the company told him that it is shipping to Ito-Yokado its own private-label goods, through its Sam's Club warehouse club division.
He said the companies initially made contact through Wal-Mart's McLane distribution division, the primary supplier of goods to Southland Corp., Dallas, which operates the 7-Eleven chain and is 64%-owned by Ito-Yokado.
"It's a little announcement that could have a major impact for Wal-Mart down the road," said Janet Mangano, an analyst for Burnham Securities Inc.
"It certainly underscores Wal-Mart's renown for buying and sourcing."
Ito-Yokado's tightening relationship with the world's largest retailer helps it compete in Japan's rapidly changing retail market.
Pummeled by a soaring yen, flagging consumer demand and the high cost of domestic manufacturing, Japan's retailers are increasingly looking abroad to cut costs.
Archrival Daiei Inc., for example, recently roiled Japan's orange-juice and film markets by importing products from South America and Europe and selling them as rock-bottom-priced "private brands," which have since developed a strong following among Japanese consumers.
Both Daiei and Ito-Yokado currently import between 12% and 14% of their products at the parent level, and are predicting that figure will grow.
Analysts expect other companies to follow suit.
"Imports are going to gradually increase.
Its just really uneconomic to buy T-shirts that are made in Japan," says Victoria Melendez, vice president of research at Morgan Stanley Japan Ltd.
That trend creates a unique opportunity for U.S. companies.
For its part, Wal-Mart will gain access to one of Japan's most entrenched and sophisticated retail networks.
Aside from the 143 general-merchandise stores Ito-Yokado runs under its own name, the company also controls Seven-Eleven Japan, one of Japan's most successful convenience-store chains.
Wal-Mart will also be able to tap Ito-Yokado's state-of-the-art product ordering, delivery and inventory management techniques, Ito-Yokado said.
And the opportunities are not limited to Japan: Another big Japanese retailer, Hong Kong-based Yaohan International Group, said it has agreed in principle to sell Wal-Mart products at its regional department outlets throughout Asia, spokesman Masanori Koike said yesterday.
Details of that agreement were not immediately available.
Wal-Mart declined to comment on that accord.
And in a separate development that underscores the potential impact outside players can have on the market here, a survey by Japan's Fair Trade Commission showed that an overwhelming 82.6% of Japan's toy makers attributed a trend of plunging prices to the introduction of mass-scale discount shops in Japan by toy concern Toys "R" Us Inc. of Paramus, N.J.
While the market share of Toys "R" Us in the industry is "slight," it has led to drastic changes in the overall structure of distribution networks, respondents said.
Bob Ortega in Dallas contributed to this article.
