Yesterday Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan gave the world renewed evidence that a subtle but near revolutionary change has taken place in our economy and at the Federal Reserve.
Mr. Greenspan, in testimony before the House Banking Committee, said that to "promote sustainable growth, history suggests that real short-term rates are more likely to have to rise than fall from here."
This indicates his interest in continuing use of the "price rule."
With this device, the Fed uses commodity prices and other real assets as a guide to the federal-funds rate when loosening and tightening.
The price rule contrasts with the more old-fashioned quantity rule, which targets the money supply to control inflation.
The price-rule theory is important because it refutes the traditional relationship between inflation and economic activity.
It also refutes those who believe in the quantity rule but not the inflation-growth trade-off.
The price rule does mean that the U.S. can simultaneously enjoy high growth and low inflation and less volatility of prices.
Throughout the 1980s, the Fed appeared to apply the price rule, and as a result our economy benefited.
But now one of the principal advocates of the price rule, Governor Wayne Angell, has left.
So Chairman Greenspan's remarks yesterday are a fortunate signal that the Angell-less Fed may not revert to printing money to solve economic problems.
To understand the degree to which the price rule has played a role in the economy, it helps to recount a little history.
Back in 1982, this page published an article by Arthur B. Laffer and Charles Kadlec entitled "Has the Fed Already Put Itself on a Price Rule?"
The article was among the first to note that the Federal Reserve appeared to be setting policy by using a guide based on the changing prices of the Dow Jones Spot Commodity Index and other real assets.
At the time the focus of financial market participants nevertheless remained the Dow Jones news tape; they watched it Thursday afternoons to analyze whether the money supply was growing too fast or too slowly.
As part of the price-rule theory, Messrs. Laffer and Kadlec identified a target price range for the Dow Jones spot index.
They observed a band of 119-128.
According to this theory, if prices remained stable, then a stable monetary policy was appropriate because the Fed was creating the right amount of money to keep the economy growing without too much inflation.
If the index fell substantially below the lower band, it was time for the Fed to lower the federal-funds rate and loosen.
If the index went above the upper band for long, it was time to tighten.
Throughout the 1980s evidence built that some of the important minds at the Fed believed and followed the price rule, and that a relationship indeed existed among the Dow Jones Spot Commodity Index, the federal-funds rate, and long-term interest rates.
In the 1980s and early 1990s, the relationship could be used to anticipate changes in Fed policy and interest rates.
This evidence was a wonderful thing, since it seemed to show that low interest rates, low inflation and strong economic growth can coexist if monetary policy is geared to price stability.
There is ample evidence that the Fed followed the price rule successfully in very recent years as well.
During most of 1992, for example, the spot index remained below 119 (the level of the lower band).
As a result, an easier monetary policy was in order and the Fed lowered the federal-funds rate.
The rate declined to a low of 3% by December 1992 from a high of 7% in early 1991.
Once the spot index moved back up into the target range by the fourth quarter of 1992, the Fed stabilized federal funds at the 3% level and kept that level through 1993.
Prices remained stable that year.
The demonstration of a commitment to a price rule encouraged bond market participants to believe that neither inflation nor deflation was a threat.
The result was great confidence in the Fed, a lowering of inflationary expectations and a drop in long-term interest rates.
By autumn 1993, the 30-year government bond yielded less than 5.8%, well below rate forecasts published in this newspaper at the beginning of 1993.
Traditional economic forecasters were still relying on historic relationships between economic growth and long-term interest rates to predict rising rates in 1993.
Even those forecasts that accurately predicted long-term rates for 1993 also forecast a below average rate of growth for the economy.
Which is to say that despite the evidence, many observers still link expectations for low interest rates and weak economic activity.
Yet in 1993 low interest rates had a great impact on economic output.
Shortly after reaching the record low long-term rates of October 1993, the economy grew rapidly -- with interest-sensitive sectors such as housing and auto sales providing the impetus.
A preliminary accounting shows the economy grew at an annualized rate of 5.9% during the fourth quarter of 1993.
For much of the 20th century, the Phillips Curve was viewed as evidence that industrialized nations must always choose between inflation and unemployment.
Yet in 1993, in the face of a strong economic surge, the implicit price deflator (a measure of inflation) increased by only 1.3% at an annual rate.
On a year-over-year basis, it rose only 2.2% in the fourth quarter, the slowest rate since the early 1960s.
Is this the emergence of the Inverse Phillips Curve?
In 1994, we have more evidence that the Fed is committed to the price rule.
At the end of last month, Mr. Greenspan put the kibosh on the traditional Phillips Curve trade-off in testimony before the Joint Economic Committee.
He committed to price stability.
By Feb. 4, when the spot index had risen above the 130 level, the Fed announced a quarter-point increase in the target federal-funds rate.
Once again, the Fed's actions could have been predicted based on an analysis of the price rule.
Historically, Fed tightening persists until the spot index falls back within the target band.
This time, one increase may not be enough to curb the upswing in prices.
In mid-1987, the index rose above the target band.
The Fed was quick to respond but changed direction because of the 1987 stock market crash.
By spring 1988, the spot index approached the 140 level and the Fed reacted, taking the federal-funds rate to 10% from 6% by spring 1989.
As the spot index fell back to the top of the upper band, the Fed lowered the federal-funds rate to 8% from 10%.
The bond market, for its part, has become sensitive to Fed reactions to the spot index.
The first implementation of the price rule during the 1983-84 period witnessed an increase in the long-bond yield of 300 basis points.
During the second implementation of the price rule the long bond increased in yield by 170 basis points.
With the upsurge in the spot index during the last two months of 1993, the yield on the long bond rose to 6.35% from 5.8%.
If history is a guide, the current rise in long-term interest rates will be modest as a result of bond market participants' faith in the price rule.
Indeed, long-term rates' upward move from October 1993 may have reflected bond market nervousness about how committed the Fed would continue to be to the price rule once its chief advocate, Gov. Angell, resigned.
Now we get to the current test.
Yesterday the stock and bond markets showed little reaction to the chairman's remarks.
But will the Fed stick to the price rule?
If the Fed commits to price stability now, long-term interest rates are bound to go lower.
Even in the face of stronger economic growth, bond prices should rise and yields should fall.
If the Fed does not persist in its efforts to maintain the dollar's purchasing power, interest rates will surge.
Yet now the price rule is so established that its abandonment is, fortunately, almost impossible.
Mr. Nugent, vice president of Santa Barbara Bank and Trust, wrote a version of this article for the newsletter of investment consultants A.B. Laffer, V.A. Canto & Associates.
