Here, he is known as the wry cartoonist behind a comic book about trees.
But to many evangelical Christians in the U.S., he is a prophet.
And without even realizing it, he may have heralded the Second Coming of the Messiah.
The unwitting oracle is Ya'akov Kirschen, a Brooklyn-born Jew who is one of Israel's leading political cartoonists -- and he is just as baffled as anyone else about his sudden ascension to prophethood.
Mr. Kirschen is best known for his "Dry Bones" comic strip, which runs in 35 newspapers around the world; its star is Shuldig, an Israeli-style "Ziggy" whose faithful sidekick is a dog named Doobie.
But three months ago, Mr. Kirschen published his first book, a serious cartoon called "Trees . . .
The Green Testament."
The book, written in English and sold primarily in the U.S., tells the story of the Jews and Israel from the viewpoint of trees.
And therein lies the cartoonist's genesis as a prophet.
Born-again Christians quickly seized on the book as a sign from God.
"Trees," narrated largely by a wizened old olive tree, spans Jewish history from the Garden of Eden to Israel's creation in 1948 to a busload of modern tourists planting saplings.
The book's various scenes also happen to illustrate -- albeit unintentionally -- several biblical signs that evangelical Christians believe will presage the Second Coming.
Among them: Jews will return to Israel, Israel's hills will be planted with trees, and its barren land will bloom.
To the evangelical Christians, Mr. Kirschen is a prophet because his book is spreading the word of God in such an easy-to-read way.
"I don't use the word prophet loosely, since it seems that in the Christian community every Tom, Dick, and Harry is a prophet," says Pamela Staley, an evangelical Christian activist from St. Louis.
"But I believe Ya'akov is a prophet."
If so, he is living proof that the Lord works in mysterious ways.
Mr. Kirschen, a white-haired 55-year-old with a bohemian flair, favors paint-splattered blue jeans and sports a smiley-face watch.
Born Jerry Kirschen in Brooklyn, N.Y., he emigrated to Israel in 1971 and shortly afterward started his "Dry Bones" comic strip, featuring sly political commentary on current events.
He starts interviews by announcing that he isn't sure if God exists.
"I told one minister I'm not a believer," he says, "and, tears streaming down his face, he said, `Isn't God wonderful?
If you had been a believer, what you wrote would be ignored.
God needed a cynical unbelieving cartoonist in order to get His message across.'"
Still, Mr. Kirschen is happily taking his new status in stride.
He has appeared on everything from the Christian Television Network to radio shows with names like "Interfaith Connection" and "From the Holy Land."
Christian newspapers have offered to run free ads for the book, which is currently being sold through a toll-free number (about 7,000 of a 20,000 first printing have been sold, 5,000 of them to a Jewish organization).
At Bridges For Peace, an evangelical Christian group in Jerusalem, the organization's international director, Clarence Wagner, says "Trees" has made Mr. Kirschen a top draw as a speaker before Christian pilgrim groups.
He has even been asked for permission to translate the book into Filipino.
Mr. Kirschen decided to write "Trees" partly in reaction to his disappointment over "Maus," Art Spiegelman's retelling of his parents' experiences in Hitler's Europe in a cartoon in which the Jews are mice, the Germans are cats and the Poles are pigs.
Mr. Kirschen felt that "Maus" portrayed Jews as weak and rootless.
He wanted to show that Jews do indeed have strong roots.
And when he thought of roots, Mr. Kirschen just couldn't help but think of trees.
Once he seized on the idea of telling his story through trees, his first step, he says, was to make himself feel like a tree.
He sat in one spot for hours one afternoon, painstakingly sketching every needle on a pine tree near his home.
As the day wore on, the noises, sounds, and colors around him became a blur.
"Suddenly I realized that to a tree, humans look rootless, being blown from place to place," says Mr. Kirschen.
"I realized that I had slipped into thinking like a tree.
I had become the tree."
At first, he had planned to take a page from "Maus" and make his trees Jewish.
But once he felt at one with a tree, he knew that that concept couldn't work.
"The tree part of me said that would be carrying over what we humans suffer from, dividing ourselves into Jews, Christians and other categories," says Mr. Kirschen, adding, in all seriousness, "I think trees are on a higher spiritual level."
Nonetheless, Mr. Kirschen became convinced that the fate of Jews and trees are inextricably intertwined.
The Bible, he points out, is filled with verses comparing Israel with various trees, and under Jewish law, trees have rights, too.
Picking fruit from a tree is forbidden until the tree reaches a certain age.
Fruit trees may not be destroyed during warfare against a city.
If the Messiah comes while trees are being planted, Jews are instructed to let the Messiah wait.
Trees even enjoy a Jewish holiday of their own.
In Israel, planting trees has been a key part of the Zionist drive to reclaim land devastated by overgrazing and deforestation, as well as a way to establish the rights of Jewish settlers.
Over the years, the Jewish National Fund, a private group that is a leader in reforestation efforts, has planted more than 200 million trees in Israel; 20% of the money has been donated by Christians.
The fund, not surprisingly, has already snapped up 5,000 copies of Mr. Kirschen's book, and has agreed to buy as many as 15,000 more.
The book is gaining some favorable attention from Jewish audiences; an Israeli rock-and-roll artist is composing a musical version of "Trees" to be performed in Jerusalem.
Still, Mr. Kirschen's Christian fans are proving far more avid -- so much so that he started a "Trees" newsletter that goes primarily to activists interested in distributing the book and keeping current on new developments.
He also is working on a new version of "Trees" that will provide Biblical and historical commentary on every page.
The "Trees" phenomenon has started to shake even Mr. Kirschen's disbelief.
He points out that he wrote 12 drafts of "Trees," the same number of the Biblical tribes of Israel and of Christ's apostles.
He recently noticed that the name of Tel Aviv's Tamar cafe, where he spends much of his time and composed most of the book, means "date tree" in Hebrew.
His regular table is located directly below a sign with the cafe's logo -- a tree.
Mr. Kirschen still has his doubts about whether he is the right candidate to be delivering God's word.
But his Christian fans try to reassure him by reminding him of the tale of Balaam's talking donkey in the Book of Numbers.
"They keep telling me that if God can make an ass prophetize," says Mr. Kirschen, "then why not a cartoonist?"
