Something new and different seems to have happened to the TV magazine show, or, to be precise, to one magazine show.
CBS's "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung" (Thursdays, 9-10 p.m. EST) has let correspondent Bernard Goldberg loose upon the world to take up matters like the breakdown of civility, the abridgment of free speech on campuses, the plague of welfare, and the like.
A fair number of people watching Mr. Goldberg at work this season must, indeed, have wondered if they could actually be tuned to a network during prime time.
For, alone among TV journalists, the veteran CBS correspondent has set himself the specific task of documenting the decline of American life and culture -- and its main causes, as listed above.
The sharpness and heft of his essays must come as a particular shock to people accustomed to, say, the kind of reportorial inquiry on display in Barbara Walters's recent interview with Katherine Ann Power on "20/20."
Ms. Power, recall, is the former radical activist who drove the getaway car for accomplices who killed police officer Walter Schroeder during a bank robbery in a Boston suburb in 1970.
"Tonight, Barbara has her exclusive story," the promo blared.
And soon we were on our way, with Ms. Walters -- radiating lethal levels of heartfelt sympathy, as is her wont -- asking, "What should I call you, Alice {the fugitive's underground name} or Katherine?"
On we went then, to the more delicate matter of the killing of Officer Schroeder.
The policeman was, Ms. Walters assured us, "a victim of the Vietnam War."
Right here it would have been helpful to have someone like Mr. Goldberg around to point out that the officer was, in fact, a victim of robbers and murderers whom Ms. Power chauffeured from the crime scene.
Never mind.
Interviewer and interviewee were soon on to greater and more important matters.
For instance, we learn that Ms. Power was a member of the Girl Scouts and, in childhood, very outgoing as well as a churchgoer and an honor student.
She was, we were further privileged to learn, very interested in current events.
In due time, various friends and helpers appear on air to bear witness to the former fugitive's pain and depression and goodness.
Ms. Power herself seems to have kept up nicely with all the latest babble-fashion in her years underground.
So it is that we learn that she had the courage to emerge from hiding because her parents gave her unconditional love -- and also because her authenticity demanded it.
Her son informs us, in turn, that his mother had to surrender in order to finish her healing.
As it happens, the radicalized '60s and its heirs are also among the subjects covered in one of Mr. Goldberg's best works on "Eye to Eye."
The piece, titled "Rude Awakening," traces the devastating changes in American society that have taken place over the past 30 years or so.
Packed with a range of intelligent commentators rarely seen anywhere on television, and with conversations in which ideas are exchanged between people who actually have some, the segment trains a cold and steady eye on our cultural breakdown.
Mr. Goldberg points out that in 1963, the top bestseller was "Happiness Is a Warm Puppy" -- a story about Snoopy and Charlie Brown.
Today, one of the biggest bestsellers is "Private Parts" by Howard Stern, a disk jockey who, Mr. Goldberg points out, built his entire reputation on vulgarity.
In 1963, he goes on to show, 6.5% of American people were born out of wedlock.
Today the figure is 30%.
Among blacks in inner cities, the number is closer to 80%.
One adventurous portion of the film has Mr. Goldberg strolling with the writer Pete Hamill past a blighted New York City park filled with addicts and thugs and down streets taken over by other riffraff.
Even as the two journalists exchange views on when and how things began to go so wrong, a bottle, tossed by street people irate at the presence of cameras, sails past their heads.
Having survived this adventure, Mr. Goldberg sets off to see New York's senior senator.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan -- author of a scholarly but widely influential article, "Defining Deviancy Down," that explains with devastating clarity how society came to tolerate so much criminal and aberrant behavior -- minces no words either.
Mr. Goldberg further has former New York Mayor Edward Koch on hand, who observes that the majority of the "homeless" on the street are mentally unstable, alcoholics, drug addicts or all three.
As the former mayor doesn't need to point out, one legacy of the '60s -- with its credo of unfettered freedom for all -- is the disaster we know today as the deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill.
In another, similarly remarkable piece, with the deceptively benign title "Baby Boomer," Mr. Goldberg takes on the subject of illegitimacy.
The sound bites here are not your everyday variety -- not certainly the segment with journalist Charles Krauthammer, who, while explaining that welfare subsidizes illegitimacy, notes that, "When you subsidize a product, whether wheat or babies, you get more of it."
Social historian Charles Murray, who has called for an end to welfare, makes his case again with notable passion.
There are those who disagree with this solution who have their say here as well -- but none so memorably as one welfare mother Mr. Goldberg interviews on a street in West Philadelphia.
Charmingly enough, she allows she may have more than two, then more than three, possibly a number between four and six, and then finally reveals that she has eight children, none of whose fathers she married.
The tone turns rather grimmer when she goes on to promise Mr. Goldberg that if welfare ends, women like herself will be out in the streets hurting people and committing crimes.
Mr. Goldberg has observed that he doesn't want to be wondering 20 years from now what he was doing while American life was undergoing its most radical -- and bleak -- transformation, and asking himself, "Where was I?" It is already clear that he has earned the right to say that he was out there getting the story and delivering it.
