The stereotype of the art and antiques dealer is of a sleek-looking fellow with a fake British accent unrolling a Cuban cigar in his private booth at the 21 Club.
But reality may be more like Marlboros on a porch in Pawtucket.
A survey of 1,460 art and antiques dealers to be released today by the Maine Antique Digest, a trade journal, shows that people's passion for knickknacks just doesn't pay the bills for most dealers.
Of those surveyed, 49% reported annual sales of $50,000 or less, and 30% said they borrowed money in the past year from a bank or backers to finance the business.
Says Samuel Pennington, editor of Maine Antique Digest for 20 years, the survey shows "they're ordinary people.
They may not be getting rich, but job satisfaction is high -- 90% said if they had it to do all over again, they'd become dealers."
The survey was prepared by Michael Gordon, a professor of sociology at the University of Connecticut.
While a large sample, the anonymous survey wasn't a cross section of the industry.
Most of the respondents deal not in fine art, such as Pablo Picassos, but in 19th-century weather vanes, antique guns or 1950s chrome dinette sets.
In fact, the vast majority of the dealers, 89%, valued their entire inventory at less than $250,000 -- the price of a single Andy Warhol silkscreen of Elizabeth Taylor.
However, most dealers reported that sales have been improving since 1991, the nadir of the art market.
And while the dealers may be poor, they are apparently honest.
Only 7% said that they tell potential buyers about damage to or restoration of an object "only if they ask" or "never."
Some 64% of the dealers admitted to having bought more than a quarter of their inventory at public auction.
That means a buyer who had bid there could have cut out the middleman -- and markups of 100% or more.
The business offers surprisingly big discounts to collectors smart enough to haggle.
Half of all dealers said that it was rare for customers to attempt to bargain with them, but 75% of the dealers said that, when customers tried, they would cut the price of an object by as much as 20%.
But buyer beware: The survey also showed that forgeries are rampant, and refunds rare.
Some 42% of the dealers said they give money back "never," or only if an item has been misrepresented.
And almost one-third of the dealers said they come across complete fakes and forgeries "often."
