How could John Scully have made such a poor decision to join Spectrum Technologies, the company he is now suing?
Why did such an apparently effective executive sail into troubled waters when he joined a small firm?
Part of the answer may be that Mr. Scully's judgment was colored by his understandable excitement over Spectrum's fascinating wireless technology.
But part of the answer may also lie in the difference between corporate executives and entrepreneurs.
Prior to his brief tenure as head of a small business, Mr. Scully worked at the top of big companies, such as Apple and Pepsi.
It is not unusual for corporate executives at large companies to fail when they try to become entrepreneurs, and it all has to do with power.
Big corporations have it; small ones don't.
Entrepreneurs learn to use finesse on just about everyone in sight, while executives at large corporations merely need to make up their minds and exercise the abundant power they derive from their corporate base.
This power difference is the direct result of two key ingredients: money and time.
Even in tough times, most large corporations have plenty of assets.
Having a large asset base makes you believe you have plenty of time as well.
It is difficult to quickly end the life of a large corporation, even with plenty of mistakes along the way.
Inertia keeps large corporations rolling along, until someone somewhere finally decides things are far worse than they seem.
Think of the high-wire act in a circus.
The safety net prevents fatal accidents.
The same can be said of the asset base in a large corporation.
But entrepreneurs work without a net.
Their minuscule asset base means they bet their economic lives on success.
Rarely can they make mistakes without losing it all.
Lifetime corporate executives, on the other hand, grow accustomed to walking the high wire with a net.
If they then join a new circus that doesn't use a net, it might, at the very least, cause them to lose their bearings.
It might even give the executive second thoughts about performing out there in front of a crowd.
It must be particularly hard to be powerless after you've held the reins of a large corporation.
This is not to say that it can't be done -- just that it takes an unusual individual to be willing to work without a net after having one for so many years.
Even if Mr. Scully had prepared himself to perform without a net, his decision to pursue a lawsuit uncovers his corporate, rather than entrepreneurial, instincts.
Real entrepreneurs don't start lawsuits.
And it's not because they don't want to have their day in court.
They know that there are some things more important than being right.
Who can afford the legal bills, the time spent, or -- most important -- the energy required to engage in legal combat?
Real entrepreneurs realize that they cannot wait the five, six or even 10 years necessary to resolve a dispute.
Particularly when the outcome is critical, a speedy settlement may be far more important than smashing your opponent to his knees in front of a packed courtroom.
In bringing his lawsuit against Spectrum, Mr. Scully shows us his instincts, and they all run to the power side of the ledger.
It certainly is possible that he was lied to or worse by his former employer.
But he is acting as an executive would -- not as an entrepreneur.
He is looking to outspend and outlast his opponents.
If he were an entrepreneur, he'd be trying to outsmart them instead.
Mr. Schrager is a lecturer at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business and president of Japan Capital Markets Inc., in South Bend, Ind.
