RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. said it plans to raise $2 billion in a preferred-stock offering, in a move widely seen as the precursor to a separation of RJR's food and tobacco businesses, or a merger with another consumer-products giant.
RJR said that it is actively reviewing various "significant corporate transactions" including mergers, divestitures and spinoffs.
"It is likely that the company's tobacco and food businesses would be separated should certain of the foregoing transactions be consummated," the company said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
RJR also said that it could use the $2 billion it raises in the stock offering to make an acquisition.
In recent months RJR has been said to be discussing mergers with British tobacco giant Rothmans International PLC or Hanson PLC.
RJR was also said to be interested in acquiring Borden Inc.
Yesterday, Borden declined comment, and Rothmans and Hanson officials couldn't be reached.
People close to RJR say the company has evaluated several hundred proposals for various deals in the past year, and the company's statement yesterday is likely to generate a fresh round of proposals from investment bankers.
In an interview, Charles M. Harper, chairman and chief executive officer of RJR, said, "This additional financial flexibility impacts on a number of the models that we have run."
But he stressed that "there is no specific transaction currently on the table."
The company's large debt load has made potential merger partners uncomfortable and also made it difficult for the concern to use its stock to pay for an acquisition, according to people familiar with the company.
Any deal under consideration would be more feasible if the $2 billion equity offering were used to improve the company's balance sheet.
RJR's biggest shareholder, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., has been expected to attempt to cash out of its investment this year, and the stock offering indicates a heightened desire to bolster the company's value.
KKR declined comment yesterday.
While RJR's shares have risen considerably in the past six months, overall the RJR buyout has been a disappointment to KKR so far.
In May, RJR is expected to retire $1.7 billion in high-interest debt that contains restrictive covenants making a separation of the company difficult.
Last year, an attempt to create a separate class of stock tied to RJR's Nabisco food business failed when the prices of consumer-products stocks tumbled.
Each share of the $2 billion preferred equity redemption cumulative stock offering (Percs) converts into one share of RJR common stock in three years.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, RJR's shares fell 37.5 cents, or 5.1%, to close at $7, as investors focused on the dilutive impact of the new preferred-stock offering.
RJR owns some of the country's best-known brands, including Camel cigarettes, Oreo cookies and Life Savers candy.
In 1993, RJR's earnings were crushed by the costly cigarette price war in the U.S.
A restructuring charge related to a cost-cutting program resulted in a $145 million loss for the company last year.
Some Wall Street analysts said the preferred-stock offering may facilitate a spinoff of the tobacco company.
"This transaction looks like it could be an effort by KKR to monetize its investment in the tobacco company," said Max Holmes, high-yield bond strategist at Salomon Brothers.
"The way this deal is structured, the owner of these Percs could end up as equity owners of the tobacco company."
In its SEC filing, RJR notes that if the company is separated, the Percs could be converted into shares in the tobacco business.
"They are telling you in red letters that you could end up the proud owners of a very leveraged tobacco company," said Mr. Holmes.
One proposal that has gotten consideration in recent months is a Morgan Stanley & Co. proposal known as Project Flower, which contemplated a two-step transaction splitting RJR's Nabisco food business (code name: milk) from tobacco (honey), and then merging RJR's tobacco business with British tobacco giant Rothmans.
Morgan Stanley crafted RJR's failed stock deal last year and has close ties to KKR.
Morgan, along with Smith Barney Shearson Inc., is running the Percs offering.
RJR and Morgan Stanley won't discuss Project Flower or various other proposals.
A spokeswoman for Rothmans said last month that the company won't comment on "rumor or speculation."
Investment bankers have also suggested Japan Tobacco Inc. and B.A.TT Industries PLC in London as potential acquirers of RJR's tobacco business.
Japan Tobacco said it had no plans to buy the business.
B.A.TT officials couldn't be reached yesterday, but last month denied any interest.
