It's ironic that a group of multimedia prospectors mining the edge of cyberspace would stake their claim on something as low-tech as pinball.
But a tiny software start-up, RoundBook Publishing Group Inc., is hoping that a 1960s rock-opera about a deaf, dumb and blind pinball wizard turned pop messiah will become the Super Mario Brothers of the interactive CD-ROM set.
"We're going after the big names that will keep us on the shelf 18 months from now," RoundBook President Greg Smith says of his company's newest -- and riskiest -- project, a CD-ROM version of "Tommy."
In many ways, RoundBook's efforts are similar to any entertainment endeavorits struggle to be original yet marketable, to get big stars yet keep down costs.
But a look at how the "Tommy" CD-ROM came about also reveals some of the quirks and challenges that come from creating a product "for the new world of interactivity.
Conceived in those psychedelic days when sex, drugs and rock-and-roll were the unholy trinity, "Tommy" was the grandiose attempt of the rock group The Who to break the three-minute-single bounds of pop music.
First released in 1969 as a double album, "Tommy" has appeared in a variety of incarnations -- as a live performance at Woodstock, a Canadian ballet production, a London Symphony Orchestra concert, a Ken Russell film and a current Broadway musical.
So, why not as a new computer program?
"The CD-ROM in a way helps to tie up everything I've done with the project in the last 25 years," composer-guitarist Pete Townshend said at a recent media soiree in Las Vegas announcing the project.
"The idea of `Tommy' suddenly having a future in a data-borne age is an incredible promise.
What excites me is, this is a creative opportunity, both in a graphic sense, in a musical sense, and in a journalistic sense."
Success certainly isn't assured when the disk is released this fall.
While plenty of critics hailed the original album as a pop masterpiece, others were less kind.
And "Tommy" will have to do a lot of elbowing for the attention of consumers, who already have lots of interactive rock options, among them CD-ROM offerings from David Bowie, Peter Gabriel, U2, the Beatles and, yes, even Elvis.
Still, Mr. Townshend is convinced that "this is one of the most exciting manifestations of `Tommy' yet."
RoundBook's Mr. Smith hadn't even considered turning "Tommy" into a title for his fledgling software-publishing company when he visited New York last April to catch "Tommy" on Broadway.
"We weren't thinking of anything but seeing a play," he says.
But after watching the lavish production, with its heavy use of video screens and computer-generated visual effects, he was convinced that "Tommy" had an afterlife in the multimedia world.
A mutual friend arranged a meeting with John Hart, head of the musical's co-producer Kardana Productions Inc. of New York, and soon Mr. Smith was pitching his idea to Mr. Townshend.
As it happens, Mr. Townshend is something of a computer hacker himself, and has been fascinated with interactive technology for years.
"He's remarkably technical," Mr. Smith says.
"The whole time during our first meeting, Pete was taking notes on a little laptop."
To give an idea of what it had in mind, Mr. Smith's company prepared a "proof-of-concept" disk showing what an interactive "Tommy" might look like: Click the computer mouse on a pinball icon at the bottom of the screen, and up pops a video of Elton John in rhinestone glasses and platform shoes singing "Pinball Wizard" in the 1975 film.
Guitar riffs blare from tiny speakers attached to the computer, and lyrics scroll in time with the video -- "That deaf, dumb and blind kid sure plays a mean pinball!"
Another click of the mouse, and the singer's biography appears.
It wasn't until last July, after an extensive review of competing proposals, including ones from Paramount Communications Inc. and Voyager Co., that Kardana gave the job to RoundBook.
"We went about it like an investment banker, and did a due diligence on all the multimedia players," Mr. Hart says.
"What you find is that everybody is in this business as of yesterday, because they've been reading about it and think there's money to be made there.
But when you look at it carefully, you find that very few players are capable of delivering the high-end quality, and if they are, they may not be in a position to distribute the titles."
Although RoundBook had opened its doors only months before, Mr. Smith and his partner, Francis M. Juliano, were as close to multimedia old-timers as they come, having worked together for several years before at Sony Corp.'s electronic-publishing unit and Meridian Data Inc., a Scotts Valley, Calif., maker of CD-ROM networking equipment.
And RoundBook has an $18 million pact with the CD-ROM industry's leading retail distributor, Tribune Co.'s Compton's NewMedia unit.
"We came back from our review with the belief that RoundBook had the track record and the personnel in place to do this," Mr. Hart says.
Working with a development budget of up to $600,000 -- above the average even for a major entertainment-related project -- RoundBook's half-dozen programmers are currently undertaking the daunting task of compressing 25 years of "Tommy" artifacts onto a 4 3/4-inch silvery-plastic disk.
Using current technology, such a disk can hold 280,000 pages of text, or 600 full-screen color photos, or eight hours of sound, or 100 minutes of somewhat jerky video -- or some combination.
There's the Holiday Inn stationery on which Mr. Townshend first scribbled his inspiration for "Pinball Wizard"; the Union Jack-colored poster from the premier performance at Fillmore East in New York; the original script from the Columbia Pictures movie.
One of the toughest parts of any popculture-oriented CD-ROM project is getting the rights to film clips, songs and literature.
The process can be "nightmarish," says Elliott Hoffman, an attorney for Mr. Townshend and Kardana who has negotiated several CD-ROM rights deals.
"There are perhaps 1,000 or more sources of licensed rights that will wind up in a fully developed CD-ROM that deals with some contemporary matter," Mr. Hoffman explains.
"In some instances, you may have to go back to the actors or director in a film who have the right to control the uses of that film in another medium.
You may also have problems with music-licensing entities who have no experience in multimedia and aren't yet comfortable on setting a price for the rights, because they're afraid they may be sorry later."
Purchasing the assorted rights can be an expensive proposition for a small software company, particularly given that with fewer than six million CD-ROM drives up and running in America, a "gold record" on the multimedia charts is a $45 title that sells 25,000 copies.
Only a few breakthrough titles have sold into the hundreds of thousands.
One way software companies are alleviating the rights problem is by convincing licensors that CD-ROM is a form of free advertising.
"Since you're only using clips and portions of information, if handled properly the CD-ROM can have the effect of sending the viewer back to the source, perhaps bringing them back to a book that hasn't sold in 20 years or a song that hasn't played on the radio in 20 years," Mr. Hoffman says.
With "Tommy," the clearing of rights has proved relatively painless, since Mr. Townshend holds most of them and he's a partner with RoundBook in the project.
"The record company is still his, the songs were published by his company, and the spine for this entire CD-ROM construct will be a lengthy interview with Pete himself," Mr. Hoffman says.
The interactive nature of the medium also calls for rethinking the structure of the story.
Tommy's journey will no longer be a linear tale beginning with his birth ("It's a boy, Mrs. Walker . . .") and ending with his redemption ("Listening to you . . .").
As RoundBook touts it in a promotional video to the computer trade, "The `Tommy' CD-ROM lets you create your own amazing journey to see, hear, feel and touch Townshend's revolutionary composition."
"What fascinates me is the fact that you can take different pathways through a dramatic work," Mr. Townshend says.
Just like a pinball bouncing from bumper to bumper on its way down the table, CD-ROM users will be able to rocket back and forth between bundles of "Tommy" trivia.
Want to spend a little more time hallucinating with the Gypsy?
Just click the mouse and listen to Tina Turner belt out "Acid Queen," then compare it with Cheryl Freeman's rendition from the musical.
"Pete wants the audience to be the critic," Mr. Smith says.
From the interview with Mr. Townshend, users will be able to branch off and find nuggets of information that tell a different story from his.
"He really wants to have the contradictory stories on this disk -- `Roger Daltrey remembers it this way, Ken Russell remembers it this way, and so on,'" Mr. Smith says.
To get around the technological limitations that CD-ROM currently has with video clips -- they tend to look jerky, and don't fill the entire screen -- RoundBook will use still photographs, voice-over narration and text to bridge the gaps between brief snippets of video.
The effect, says Mr. Smith, will be similar to the Ken Burns television documentary "The Civil War," which relied heavily on photographs and voice-overs.
With the final selection of raw content for the disk made just three weeks ago, RoundBook is rushing to complete a prototype "Tommy" for the June Computer Electronics Show.
"Doing trade shows and making as much noise with the press -- that's how you get the word out on a CD-ROM," Mr. Smith says.
Compton's wants a consumer-ready version by August, for distribution this fall.
If RoundBook has done its job well, users will line up like Tommy's disciples and pay $79.95 apiece for the CD-ROM.
The disk would seem to have a better-than-average shot at success, given the Broadway revival and the fact that many who grew up listening to The Who have since traded in their love beads for CD-ROM drives.
But a lot depends on whether "Tommy" seems as original on CD-ROM as it did on vinyl.
Says Mr. Smith: "If what you come up with resembles a product that came out two weeks ago, you're going to get your lunch eaten."
Mr. Jefferson is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau.
Item: Performances of "Tommy" by marching bands from the University of Michigan, U.S. Military Academy, and Lovejoy High School, Lovejoy, Fla.
Item: 1975 Pontiac (Mich.)
Silverdome concert, the only time The Who performed "Tommy" live in its entirety
Rights holders: MCA Inc., The Who and authors
