Geographic illiteracy rears its ugly head again.
Or maybe the folks in Atlanta are simply thinking wishfully.
Whatever the cause, Valujet Airlines received some farfetched entries in a recent contest, which put the choice of a new destination to a popular vote.
The start-up carrier, whose base of operations is Atlanta, asked Atlantans to choose a twelfth market for it to serve.
(All of its other 11 markets are in the Southeast.)
The only caveat: that the new destination be within 400 miles of Atlanta, because Valujet specializes in short hauls.
More than half the 7,500 or so entries Valujet received were for cities well beyond that boundary line.
Scores of entries came in for tourist destinations such as San Diego, 1,887 miles away, and for San Francisco, 2,135 miles distant.
At 732 miles, Nassau in the Bahamas was well beyond the mileage limit; it's also outside the U.S., and Valujet is strictly a domestic carrier.
That meant votes for Aruba, Bermuda and Jamaica were also off the map.
Valujet officials don't know whether the voters didn't read the rules correctly, weren't really sure how far away some of those cities were or simply ignored the restrictions and voted their heart's desire.
The latter is quite likely, given that Valujet's fares start at $39 one way.
So if a fare that low is a possibility, why not nominate a route that matters -- if only to one voter?
Like Blairsville, Ga., which is within 400 miles.
Unfortunately, it has only 600 residents and no commercial airport.
In fact, several entries were for cities that have no commercial service, perhaps because they have no commercial airports.
Chillicothe, Ohio, falls in that category as does Fitzgerald, Ga., which has only a short, turf runway more suitable to tiny propjets and cropdusters than Valujet's DC-9s.
After weeding out the outlandish and ineligible, Valujet plans to announce the contest results this morning , naming the city it will add to its schedule starting May 1.
Airline officials said the top three vote getters were Cincinnati, Charlotte, N.C.; and Savannah, Ga.
Not in the running: Macon.
That Georgia town was one of 12 that were too near.
"From the Atlanta airport, Macon's only 45 minutes away," said a Valujet spokeswoman.
"It doesn't make any sense to fly.
You'd spend all your time in traffic getting to the airport."
