Before the Olympics, there was the cheese slicer.
It was the middle of the Roaring '20s, but the only place roaring in little Lillehammer was the house of Thor Bjorklund.
Every morning at breakfast, father Thor served up cheese to his nine children.
And every morning, the offspring bitterly bickered that one was getting a bigger slice than the others.
Fed up with the whining, Thor developed a device that cut in equal proportions.
Behold: the Cheese Slicer.
The world, finally blessed with fairness in cheese, beat a path to Lillehammer's door.
It wasn't long, though, before others figured out the secret of the simple slicer and started making their own.
Lillehammer went back into hibernation.
Now, seven decades later, here come the Winter Olympics, bestowed upon this inland region of Norway to muffle its complaining about being passed over by the offshore oil boom.
Once again, the world is at Lillehammer's feet.
So, what kind of place is this Lillehammer, favored among winter playgrounds with a second chance at immortality?
-- It is tiny.
Think of Lillehammer as Lilliput.
With 23,600 citizens, Lillehammer is the second-smallest city ever to host the Winter Olympics, behind Lake Placid.
But Lake Placid had greater New York.
Lillehammer has greater Oppland County, where 62% of the land is mountains.
The rest is mainly covered with forests and farms, which yield the area's two main products: planks and potatoes.
-- It is brave.
This Lilliput stood up to its Gulliver: Coca-Cola Co.
The giant from Atlanta has been a sponsor of the Olympics since before the cheese slicer, and, normally, what Coke wants, Coke gets.
In Lillehammer, Coke wanted to put up its famous red-and-white signs all over town.
Lillehammer said no.
One newspaper objected to Coke's "painting the city red."
Local environmentalists dubbed it "aesthetic pollution."
The battle, marvels Arne Hove-Odegard, Lillehammer's director of Olympic business, "was front-page news for 14 straight days!"
A compromise was reached: There will still be plenty of Coke signs around town, but generally big billboards are out, particularly along Storgaten, the quaint pedestrian shopping street.
Lillehammer's audacity was catching.
In the neighboring city of Hamar, Coke hung a huge red skate adorned with the Coke logo from the rafters of the speedskating arena.
Local authorities ordered the skate removed on grounds of ugliness.
The only thing they want to see hanging in their arena is a 75-foot-long wooden chain carved from a single birch tree by a solitary man working steadily for six years.
No one really knows what it symbolizes, except, perhaps, the paucity of enticing night life in the region.
"I guess the artist had nothing better to do with his time," says an arena tour guide.
-- It is green.
The location of the arena in Hamar, shaped like an overturned Viking ship, was moved 100 yards so as not to disturb the 210 species of migratory birds who annually rest on nearby wetlands.
Prodded by environmentalists, the builders even rotated the arena so the entrance doesn't face the reserve, sparing the birds the spectacle of thousands of flag-waving, horn-tooting people a day.
After first opposing the Olympics as "a resource-wasting circus," the Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature regrouped to form Project Environment-Friendly Olympics.
It successfully lobbied the Olympic organizers to impose a $7,000 fine for each pine tree damaged during construction of the bobsled and luge runs, oversaw topsoil reclamation at the ski jump and cross-country-biathlon facilities, and challenged Coke to reduce the plastic content of its cups so as to make them more biodegradable.
And, in a culinary breakthrough, the plates and cutlery used in Olympic cafeterias will be made of potato and corn starch and thus will be edible.
But the environmentalists, proud of these victories, aren't entirely satisfied.
"The plates taste like Styrofoam," says Olav Myrholt, manager of the environment-friendly project.
"Needs some lemon drops."
-- It is secure.
In Norway, the police don't carry guns.
And they won't at the Olympics either.
But there will still be plenty of firepower lurking behind the trees and snowbanks.
Lillehammer's puny force of two dozen police will be assisted by 2,200 officers brought in from around Norway, plus some 500 army soldiers.
In addition to crowd control, they will be on guard against a spectrum of terrorist threats, ranging from American antiabortionists (Norway has liberal abortion laws), antiwhaling protesters (Norway persists with its whaling industry), and Palestine Liberation Organization hard-liners (Norway has hosted the breakthrough Middle East peace talks).
-- It is traditional.
For the first time in Olympic annals, the mascot will actually be a person.
In this case, two people: Hakon and Kristin, historical figures from the 13th century who will be played by several pairs of Norwegian children.
Hakon Hakonsson, heir to the throne, was born amid a raging civil war between the Birchlegs and the Baglers.
In 1206, the Birchlegs (so called because they wrapped their legs in birch bark to keep warm) were forced to flee Oslo with the infant.
Heading north on skis, they spent Christmas in Lillehammer and then continued through a blizzard until Hakon was safe.
Hakon's aunt, Kristin, later married the Bagler king, resulting in an amicable end to the war.
In 1217, Hakon was crowned the one true king of Norway, reigning until 1263.
There's more.
The stick-figure pictograms identifying the individual Olympic events are inspired by a 4,000-year-old stone etching of a person skiing.
The gold, silver and bronze medals will be set in locally mined granite.
Giddy with Stone Age tradition, the Olympic organizers even searched the country to find someone able to ignite the torch for the start of its relay around Norway by rubbing two sticks together.
Norwegian culture will also dominate tomorrow's Opening Ceremonies.
There will be folk costumes, folk songs and plenty of reindeer.
The king is scheduled to arrive by horse-drawn sleigh.
Trolls may emerge from under the ski jump.
Throughout Lillehammer, there is even a nod to the town's past gilded age.
Standing among the forest of official products -- skis, sweaters, thermal underwear, mountain rescue sleds -- is the official Olympic cheese slicer.
Some see it as a metaphor for the Games' egalitarianism.
But the locals, particularly those with many children, know better.
It is simply a must at the breakfast table.
