The slide in crude oil prices to five-year lows has caused industry earnings to plunge, drilling plans to be cut and impaired the borrowing ability of a host of companies.
The turmoil was highlighted yesterday when Standard & Poor's Corp., a unit of McGraw-Hill Inc. of New York, said that over the next 90 days it would consider reducing the debt and preferred securities ratings of 11 of the 100 or so oil companies that it follows.
Under review and placed on what the ratings concern calls CreditWatch is roughly $20 billion of securities.
The list includes large U.S. oil companies such as Atlantic Richfield Co. of Los Angeles, big overseas companies such as Norsk Hydro SA of Oslo and small oil production companies such as Gerrity Oil & Gas Corp. of Denver.
Beyond that, S&P negatively revised its outlook on another $25 billion of securities of eight oil companies, an action less drastic than placing these companies on CreditWatch, but one that nevetheless means that if the rating changes it is likely to be lower.
The list included some oil-service companies that would be hurt by reduced drilling such as Halliburton Co. of Dallas and Noble Drilling Corp. of Houston, S&P said.
The industrywide review was prompted by a cut in S&P's oil-price forecast through 1995.
Andrea Esposito, a director in the ratings concern's oil and gas group, said prices will run in a $14 to $18 a barrel range, down from an earlier estimate of $18 to $22.
"Through 1994 and possibly through 1995 the average will hover in the lower end," she says.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil for February delivery yesterday settled at $15.40 a barrel, up 35 cents.
By some measures the oil industry hasn't had a truly good year since the early 1980s, when prices, without adjusting for inflation, were $30 and higher.
Companies have gone through one painful restructuring after another ever since, and comments from the gritty oil fields around the country to this city's skyscrapers reflect a mix of emotions ranging from exasperation to forced pragmatism.
"We have really turned this company around in the past 18 months," says James Payne, chief executive of Santa Fe Energy Resources Inc. in Houston, noting that he had engineered the company to record double-digit growth in cash flow and earnings when oil was at $18 a barrel.
"Here we wake up with $15 oil, and at $15 we hunker down and make sure the company will be here another day," he says.
Oil prices have fallen about one-third since March 1993, with half the decline coming after October.
The sluggish world economy has kept demand fairly flat while supplies have increased.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has not curbed its oil production while oil output has increased in other parts of the world, such as the North Sea and Latin America.
Beyond that, Iraq's eventual re-entry into the world's crude oil markets is bound to further flood already brimming supplies and will make OPEC production cutbacks, always difficult for the cartel to agree on and maintain for any period of time, all the more important to the industry.
Without cutbacks, prices could plunge further, most industry executives agree.
What's changed only recently has been the perception among many companies a few months ago that the price plunge was temporary to a morose belief that an ugly price environment will be here for some time.
For instance, a survey taken in November and December by the New York securities firm Salomon Brothers Inc. of 280 oil companies found that the industry planned to boost its world-wide exploration and production spending to $54.84 billion, up 4.1% from 1993.
Somewhat skeptical of its own survey results at the time, Salomon now says it expects that spending this year will drop 5%.
Earlier this week, Oryx Energy Co. of Dallas said it suspended its quarterly dividend and was cutting its capital spending 20% because of weak crude prices.
Oryx said that at least 70% of its outlays will go to development, rather than exploration, projects that will bring in revenue faster.
With long-term debt of $1.77 billion, the company was one of the 11 cited by S&P for a possible ratings downgrade.
Outside of the oil industry, of course, low prices are welcome news.
Gasoline prices have plunged to their lowest level in nearly two years and regular unleaded can be found at many stations for less than $1 a gallon despite last year's 4.3-cent increase in the federal gasoline tax.
In its monthly survey, the American Automobile Association says the average price nationwide is down to $1.06 a gallon, 3.1 cents below December.
In addition, the Commerce Department said the U.S. trade deficit narrowed to $10.17 billion in November from $10.9 billion in October in large part because of the plunge in energy prices.
The volume of petroleum and related products imported in November fell 4.1%, the agency said.
Santa Fe Energy, with debt of about $560 million, was also placed on CreditWatch, and its reaction to lower oil prices, while more extreme than other companies, is fairly typical.
Mr. Payne, the chief executive, said the company would have spent about $250 million this year drilling oil wells at $18 oil.
But with reduced cash flow from lower prices, Santa Fe expects to spend $90 million to $130 million, he says.
The first priority will be to pay principal and interest on its debt, Mr. Payne says.
"What's left over, we'll spend on the very best projects we have," he says, adding that the company has a number of prospects it can drill where it expects to get a 15% rate of return even at $15 oil.
"The rest," he says, "we'll save them and we'll go get them when prices go up."
About three weeks ago Santa Fe brought in consultants McKinsey & Co. for advice on how to run its administrative functions more efficiently.
Santa Fe also hired Andersen Consulting Group to look for ways to improve its computer information systems.
The plunge in oil prices has reduced energy-company earnings almost across the board.
Eugene Nowak, an oil-stock analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in New York, predicts that operating profits of the dozen or so largest U.S.-based oil companies will drop about 20% in the fourth quarter from a year earlier.
Mobil Corp. of Fairfax, Va., has already said it will record a $250 million noncash charge to reflect the decline in the value of its petroleum inventories in the period.
The largest of the world's oil companies tend to own refineries and service stations in addition to oil fields.
As a result, their profit declines are somewhat tempered because oil is the feedstock for the refineries and marketing networks, and there's usually a delay between a drop in the crude price and a decline in the price of end products such as gasoline.
One of the few industry bright spots in recent months has been the price of natural gas.
Strong demand, accelerated by the current arctic temperatures in much of the U.S., has kept gas prices strong relative to oil.
S&P, for instance, didn't lower its gas price forecast for the next two years like it did oil, expecting prices to run in the range of $1.80 to $2.20 a thousand cubic feet.
