The biggest hoax in American politics is the solemn assertion that Congress will "debate" and pass a "budget" to govern our fiscal affairs.
In truth, there will be no debate or vote about most of your money.
The arcane rules of Congress permit about 25 key members to spend about 25% of the nation's gross domestic product.
The result is fiscal chaos and a growing distrust of Congress.
The federal government is authorized to spend $1.513 trillion in the current fiscal year.
Almost half, $752.7 billion, is spent on "entitlements."
If a congressman or senator wants to reduce this type of spending, he must introduce a bill to alter or abolish the entitlement.
The bill then is referred to a committee.
If the committee chairman opposes the legislation, it usually doesn't get considered.
So $752.7 billion (49.7%) is insulated from democracy by a handful of members who control these key committees.
The $212 billion we are forced to commit to debt service is obviously beyond debate.
That leaves $548.3 billion, or 36%, that comes before Congress in the form of 13 separate appropriations bills.
The only real debate on these huge bills occurs if a member offers an amendment that spends less on an existing program or abolishes it all together.
In the end, these amendments cover only about 10% of the budget, and the huge appropriations bills they are attached to pass by nearly unanimous votes.
In August, Rep. Bill Zeliff and I proposed a special session of Congress devoted to debate over federal spending.
Any member could come to the floor and offer any proposal to change or abolish any program.
Every dollar of the budget could be debated and altered by democratic vote.
Aides from the House leadership have called this idea a "three-ring circus."
But 74 Democrats and 160 Republicans endorsed the plan in an Aug. 6 letter to the speaker.
Rep. Zeliff and I now have filed a bill that would make our plan happen.
What would result from fiscal democracy?
A real budget derived from democratic debate.
Whether this would stem the malignant growth of federal spending is uncertain.
But at least the public would see who wants to spend how much money and for what purpose.
Mr. Andrews, a Democrat from New Jersey, is a member of the House.
