Scientists have made the surprising discovery that inheriting a single gene can increase the risk of developing osteoporosis.
The severe bone-thinning problem afflicts about 25 million elderly U.S. women and costs about $10 billion a year in medical bills nationwide.
Should the finding stand up under scrutiny, researchers said they expect it to lead quickly to a blood test that could predict early in life whether a person is at high risk of developing osteoporosis.
Doctors who treat the disorder said such a predictive test might encourage a lifetime use of nutritional and hormonal supplements known to reduce the problems, such as fractures, commonly associated with the disease.
"If this gene is the real culprit, and the data so far look excellent, then we have a very powerful way of helping to prevent osteoporosis," said Greg Mundy, a bone biologist at University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio.
Osteoporosis causes about 1.3 million bone fractures a year in the elderly and accounts for between 25,000 and 35,000 deaths annually, according to disease experts.
Americans spend about $1 billion a year on prescription and nonprescription medicines believed to counter the disease's impact.
Preventing osteoporosis is one of the major reasons behind the booming sales of estrogen products in the U.S. and abroad.
Dr. Mundy said the linking of osteoporosis to a single gene "is certain to raise eyebrows" and "at first glance . . . may seem unlikely" mainly because scientists think loss of bone density in aging people is due to a complex interplay of numerous genetic and environmental factors.
"One gene," Dr. Mundy said.
"It's very unexpected."
The gene, pinpointed by a team of Australian scientists, produces a protein in the body that helps vitamin D transport bone-enriching calcium into bone cells.
The Australian researchers found that people with a version of the protein produced by a specific variation of the gene had significantly lower bone densities than people born with another version of the gene.
In a report of the research published in the British scientific journal Nature, scientists at Garvan Institute of Medical Research in Sydney said that of 311 women over age 60, 61% with the identified gene had a low bone-density level that put them at risk of having a fracture.
Conversely, the researchers found, 74% of those women with a different version of the same gene had bone-thickness levels that put them at low risk of fractures.
In recent years, research has shown that women who exercise and take calcium supplements and the hormone estrogen are less likely to suffer severe bone thinning and resultant fractures that often worsen after menopause.
Many women still shy away from estrogen therapy, worried by reports that estrogen use may raise their risk of breast cancer.
Even so, sales of American Home Products Corp.'s Premarin, the country's leading prescription estrogen product, rose 32% in 1992 to $642 million.
But some scientists, including John Eisman at the Garvan Institute in Australia, have suspected that genetics also plays a role in bone density.
Dr. Eisman decided to look at the genetics underlying the vitamin D receptor because a hormone made from the vitamin helps ferry calcium to bone cells.
Several years ago he and others found variations in the structure of the protein receptor for vitamin D that sits on the surface of bone cells.
The researchers found that the receptor can vary among individuals based on which version they have of the gene that makes the receptor.
Dr. Eisman's team decided to see whether the genetic variation affects bone density by studying numerous sets of twins.
In the new study, the researchers report that identical twins, who have the same version of the gene, almost always had similar bone densities.
But in nonidentical twins, whose genes differ, bone density levels varied depending on which of several forms of the receptor gene were inherited.
In particular, people with the so-called bb version of the vitamin D receptor gene consistently had much lower bone density than people with another version, dubbed BB.
"Osteoporosis is devastating, but it can be prevented," said Lawrence E. Shulman, director of the National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, which funded Dr. Eisman's study.
"We hope this research will encourage those at very high risk to take action."
He said women should continue taking preventive therapies no matter what gene form they inherit because all aging women experience some degree of bone loss.
In the Nature article, Dr. Eisman and his colleagues concede that the exact biology underlying this difference is uncertain.
Still, they write, a blood test to identify the gene variation "should allow for earlier intervention in those at increased risk of osteoporosis, provide insight into the physiological mechanisms of the wide population variance in bone density and open the way to development of specific targeted therapy."
