You bought a compact-disk drive for your computer and you have just fired up your first CD-ROM program.
You expect something mind-transforming: a virtual-reality trip to a three-dimensional world unlike anything you have ever experienced on your home computer.
Instead, you get reams of text, with a few pictures, video clips and sound bytes dropped in.
Welcome to the world of CD-ROM.
As many consumers are discovering, the reality is nowhere near the hype.
After years of chanting "multimedia" like a mantra, many software publishers have instead published dry patchworks of text, sound and video.
"An awful lot of companies are shuttling stuff onto CDs just because CDs can hold a lot of information," says Nick Arnett, president of Multimedia Computing Corp., a consulting firm in Campbell, Calif.
"As a result, there's a lot of bad quality software."
But there are exceptions -- and we set out to find them.
The Wall Street Journal asked several CD-ROM producers and experts to nominate titles that they think make the best use of the technology.
The executives weren't allowed to nominate anything made or distributed by their own companies.
Here are their picks:
Myst (Broderbund Software Inc., Novato, Calif.): Almost everyone raves about this title.
In it, you search richly detailed 3-D landscapes for clues to find out what has run amok on a chain of surreal islands.
In a major departure from most computer-game formats, there isn't any violence, time limit, or risk that you will die.
You can wander the landscape in any order, and you don't have to gather all the clues to solve the mystery.
Another innovation: You can turn around and view the 3-D landscapes from different angles, instead of watching everything from a fixed, frontal viewpoint.
(Available for Macintosh computers only.)
Macbeth (Voyager Co., New York): With this soon-to-be-released interactive version of the Shakespeare play, you can read Macbeth or Banquo the ghost or any part you want, opposite the computer's prerecorded readings by professional actors of all the other parts.
You can also click on certain words in the text to find out what they mean, or get background information.
"This is how we all should have learned Shakespeare," says Linda Stone, who developed Apple Computer Inc.'s CD-ROM business and is now a director of future technologies for Microsoft Corp. (The Macintosh version is due out this summer; a version that will run on Microsoft's Windows will follow.)
Total Distortion (Electronic Arts Co., San Mateo, Calif.): This is the only game on the list that requires you to make art in order to win.
You romp through space as a rock-video producer, searching for new material that will sell back on Earth.
You shoot video of the characters you meet, do very simple editing and present the results to your bosses via videophone.
Unlike most games, this one allows you to choose your own terms of winning: wealth, fame, or wealth and fame.
(The Macintosh version is due out next month; a Windows version will follow this summer.)
TuneLand (7th Level Inc., Richardson, Texas): The program can play as a cartoon, but changes into a game as soon as you click on the screen.
Click on animals to hear their sounds, or to hear children's songs, recorded, incongruously, by Pink Floyd lead guitarist David Gilmour.
One treat: A character based on comedian Howie Mandel is hiding on the screen at any moment during the program.
Find him and he will teach you magic tricks.
(Available in Windows format only.)
Freak Show (Voyager): This is a CD-ROM offshoot of an album by a San Francisco cult band, the Residents.
Fire it up, and you are outside a circus tent.
Inside are freak-show performers, and if you can find your way backstage, you can go into their trailers to learn about their thoughts.
Click on Harry the Head, who lives in a jar, and hear meditative humming.
"In the end you walked away feeling very warm toward this creature who lives suspended in some liquid in a jar," says Suzanne Stefanac, a contributing editor to MacWorld magazine.
"That's something you could only do with CD-ROM." (Available in Windows version only; a Macintosh version is due out shortly.)
Rodney's Wonder Window (Voyager): This is a silly art toy that Ms. Stone says has "no redeeming value" except that it makes most people laugh.
Among other things, you can call up a pair of shorts that hang over a pair of hairy legs.
You then design the shorts by clicking on patterns -- you can make them of wood, for example, or covered with polka dots.
Or you can choose an animated spoof-documentary on the mating habits of the fictitious Tooli Bugs.
And if you don't remember to tell the program to water an onscreen plant about once every 20 minutes, it dies.
(Available in Macintosh and Windows versions.)
Magic Death (independent software developer Shannon Gilligan of Santa Fe, N.M.): You're a sleuth trying to solve the murder of a woman anthropology student who was specializing in voodoo.
As you search for clues in diaries, answering machines and less obvious places, you learn lots about voodoo.
(Available in both Macintosh and Windows versions.)
Virtual Tarot (Virtual Media Works, Sunnyvale, Calif.): The computer deals your tarot hand, tells you what each card means, and allows you to immediately dig up reference material on any card.
You can learn about the history of the game and read articles on the subject.
Chuck Farnham, a San Jose, Calif., software developer, says he prefers this random access to being stuck in most computer adventure games, where the hero has to complete a series of events in a particular order before progressing to the next stage of the game.
"I want everything at one time," Mr. Farnham says.
(Macintosh version available; a Windows version is due out shortly.)
How Computers Work (Time Warner Interactive Group, Burbank, Calif.): This is another random-access data program that allows you to attack this unwieldy subject in any order.
If you select the section on computer chips, for instance, you can choose just a basic definition, or get a full-blown technical explanation of exactly how the device works.
The program includes exercises that test your knowledge.
(Now available for the Mac; a Windows version is due out in midsummer.)
Prize Fighter (Sega of America Inc., Redwood City, Calif.): This CD-ROM video boxing game, which can only be played on properly equipped Sega game players, also takes advantage of different points of view.
You view the game through your boxer's eyes; when he is hit, your whole view of the world is jarred.
When he is knocked out, all you see is the floor.
Ms. Rigdon is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau.
