Unfazed by the collapse of the Bell Atlantic Corp.-Tele-Communications Inc. acquisition agreement, other Bell companies are pushing ahead with plans to build parts of the information superhighway on their own.
Industry insiders said yesterday that two more regional telephone companies, Nynex Corp. and Ameritech Corp., have picked a supplier for video-server equipment -- the systems that will digitize, store and distribute movies and other interactive fare over phone lines.
The surprise winner is dark horse Digital Equipment Corp., which had won only one other video-server contract, with U S West Inc.
Nynex is expected to announce new plans soon for a test of video-on-demand services in New York, Portland, Maine, and eastern Massachusetts, pending regulatory approvals.
Digital's role will be to provide the computer and data-storage systems for these trials.
Digital also has won a video-server contract with Ameritech, the Chicago-based Baby Bell, people close to the discussions say.
Digital has apparently displaced International Business Machines Corp., which was expected to win the order.
Digital and U S West, the Colorado-based Bell company, are proceeding with a video-on-demand trial beginning this spring in Omaha, Neb.
In California, Pacific Telesis Corp., has teamed up with Hewlett-Packard Co. for video servers.
The company said its plans for a high-capacity interactive network are unaffected by the Bell Atlantic-TCI breakup.
Nynex and Ameritech echoed that sentiment.
The seven Bells are among the largest potential buyers of video servers, as each upgrades its network to handle interactive video programming.
Hardware and software companies are scrambling for a piece of this emerging market, though estimates of its size vary widely: Dataquest Inc., a market researcher, says it could grow to as much as $5.1 billion in three years.
Those in the fray include IBM, American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
Hewlett-Packard, Oracle Corp. and Silicon Graphics Inc.
A Digital spokesman wouldn't comment on pending contracts.
Nynex confirmed that Digital has won server contracts but wouldn't detail the New York, Massachusetts and Maine video-service rollouts.
An Ameritech spokesman would say only that "we're in the final stages of negotiation.
We expect to make an announcement in the near future."
The Ameritech spokesman added, however, that a trial of video-server technology running on an IBM mainframe, which began in late 1992 and was widely reported, "has concluded."
He wouldn't discuss the test's results, calling it "a learning experience."
In Armonk, N.Y., an IBM spokesman declined to comment.
The new business is a boost for Digital and its new product line built around the high-speed Alpha computer chip, which Digital says is uniquely suited to the rapid compression and transmission of large amounts of data required in video servers.
But Barry F. Willman, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co., said that the likely contracts "will have little near-term impact on the company's financial picture.
It's an important positive benefit for the long term, but restoring profitablity is more important right now."
Digital, struggling with a wrenching transition to the new Alpha product lines, reported a $72 million loss, or 53 cents a share, on revenue of $3.25 billion in the fiscal second quarter ended Jan. 1.
Joe deMauro, a Nynex product developer, said the company picked Digital for its initial trials on the strength of its scalable design and the "very attractive" way it handles storage of video data.
"You can start small and grow as large as you need, as your requirements grow," he says.
The system also has a tiered storage architecture that allows the most-popular movies to be held in instantly accessible memory, less-popular movies to be stored on hard-disk arrays and a larger library of films in a tape library.
