A reader perusing a recent issue of the New Yorker could have easily mistaken a full-page color advertisement for one of the magazine's many quirky cartoons.
A run-down Cadillac lies on a country road.
The handwritten text, dated "8 July," borders on gibberish: "The june bug Jackson Pollocked my windshield.
And as I looked at its innards, I saw substance.
Which made me think.
Is there still some room in a society of disposable razors, disposable cars and disposable marriages for something with substance?"
What could possibly be on sale?
Nothing zany, it turns out.
Instead: "Morning Edition" and "All Things Considered," highly respected daily offerings from National Public Radio in Washington.
The ads are a departure from previous campaigns for the network, which relied on slogans that tried to be cute: "To eleven million commuters, this is a think tank," said one ad with a photograph of a driver in a car.
"Twice a day, we explain the facts of life," said another.
The new ads are trying to break through the clutter of other, higher-profile radio stations.
For example, WABC in New York, the top-rated AM station with a format of confrontational talk, promotes itself via posters plastered all over the city of a music note with a red slash through it.
By contrast, National Public Radio's approach is quiet and perceived as distinguished.
"We want to engage the reader," says Tim Williams, president of Williams & Rockwood, the Salt Lake City agency that has been producing NPR's ads for four years.
The need for a new campaign arose because "as government funds and other resources dry up, NPR has had to get more aggressive in terms of promoting itself."
Another ad, for "Talk of the Nation," an NPR call-in program, shows a thick slice of pie and a piping-hot mug of coffee.
The text, dated, "12 August," begins: "Heroic nudes watched with envy from the wall.
And as the smell of rich coffee filled the air, it happened.
Conceptual improv.
Everyone exchanging ideas."
In addition to the New Yorker, the new campaign will be seen in Omni, Forbes, Utne Reader, Health and Archaeology magazines.
They don't charge NPR a cent.
Nor does its ad agency.
In exchange for the ads, the magazines are mentioned at the conclusion of NPR broadcasts.
Not a bad deal for NPR, which relies largely on federal funding and contributions from listeners.
For example, NPR says the New Yorker is giving it $208,000 worth of ads: four color ads and six black and white full-page exposures.
In exchange, the weekly magazine receives more than 200 on-air mentions.
That is far from a commercial for the New Yorker.
Instead, it is lumped with three other major contributors in a ho-hum announcement: "Support for this program is provided by this and other (NPR) radio member stations. .
.CContributors include," and then a tiny plug for the magazine.
Omni's, for instance, is: "A tool for the 21st century."
(The New Yorker is waiting to select a new ad agency before going on the air with a slogan.)
Interestingly, an NPR spokeswoman says, it is the magazines that approach NPR with the idea of trading ad space for a 10-word mention on the air.
"NPR's audience and our readership have similar qualities," says a spokeswoman for the New Yorker.
"It is a way for us to gain awareness among their audience."
The ads, from New York artist Bob Conge, are reminiscent of the zany illustrations of Ralph Steadman, who provided the art work for books by gonzo journalist Hunter S. Thompson, including "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas."
The New Yorker originally objected to the two ads from Mr. Conge because they looked too much like actual New Yorker cartoons.
Mr. Williams says subsequent ads will probably be labeled as advertisements at the top of each page, although details have yet to be worked out.
Mr. Williams says the agency creates the campaigns on a pro bono basis.
"We like working on causes we believe in," he says, adding that the agency also creates pro bono ads for the Utah Symphony.
"I sent a letter to NPR four years ago," he says.
"We get something out of this.
We get exposure and an exceptional degree of creative latitude."
It helps, adds Mr. Williams, that the agency's three partners are all "fans" of NPR.
The illustrated ads may seem puzzling at first.
In fact, one has to read until the end of the "Jackson Pollocked" ad to see how (and if) it all makes sense.
That ad concludes with: "And as another june bug adds to the painting on the windshield, I glance at the radio dial and think, yes.
There are a few places where substance still matters."
The ads' effectiveness hasn't been tested yet because they're so new.
Already, however, the agency is at work to create more puzzling ads for NPR.
"Twin Peaks" anyone?
Ad Notes . . .
TBWA: Omnicom Group's TBWA International opened an office in Athens, Greece.
Producta-TBWA SA was formed by two tiny agencies TBWA acquired and merged, Producta SA and Oxygen SA.
The agency's billings are estimated at $15 million.
Clients include Bayer aspirin and Longines watches.
WHO'S NEWS: Les Mouser, 41 years old, was named president and chief executive officer of the Minneapolis office of CME KHBB, a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co.
He succeeds Howard Liszt, who was named president and chief executive of the Saatchi's CME network earlier this month.
Peter Bach, 39, was named executive vice president and chief financial officer of the CME network. . . .
Bozell, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon & Eckhardt, named Andrew P. Tuck, 41, to the new position of executive vice president and director of strategic planning.
Dr. Tuck was executive vice president at Bozell's KRC Research & Consulting.
