Like a levitation trick in the hands of a skillful magician, the Japanese yen rises in apparent defiance of gravity.
Japan's economy is on its back; Goldman, Sachs & Co. predicts it will contract by 1.1% this year.
Japanese interest rates are among the world's lowest -- its three-month rates are 1 1/2 percentage points below those in the U.S. -- and probably are headed lower.
Yet the yen is the world's strongest currency.
"Normally, a sluggish economy and low interest rates would spell disaster for a currency," says Christopher Golden, an international fixed-income strategist at Lehman Brothers Inc. in London.
Instead, the yen has risen 6% against the dollar so far this year.
On Feb. 14, it climbed as high as 101 yen to the dollar, just a tad below its post-World War II peak of 100.40 yen, set last Aug. 17.
In late trading Friday in New York, the yen rose to 105 yen to the dollar from 105.25 yen late Thursday.
Meanwhile, the dollar was unchanged at 1.6825 marks, and the British pound fell to $1.5005 from $1.5040 a day earlier.
About noon Monday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.50 yen and at 1.6898 marks.
Why is the yen bucking conventional wisdom?
"It has to do with technical factors, political fears and ultimately favorable long-term economic fundamentals," says John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon Brothers Inc. in New York.
"The most recent trigger was the collapse of U.S.-Japanese trade talks on Feb. 11, engendering investor fears that U.S. authorities would take action to push the yen higher."
That, in turn, kicked off massive dollar dumping -- and yen buying -- by hedge funds, bank traders and other big investors who last year had bought dollars on the conviction that the U.S. currency would climb as the American economy strengthened and U.S. interest rates rose.
Add to this mix both a rock-bottom inflation rate in Japan and a stunning surplus in Japan's current account -- a wide measure of each country's international trade in goods and services -- and the factors are in place for a strong currency.
The dollar should be selling at about 170 yen, or 62% above where it currently is, based on some economists' measure of purchasing-power parity, which compares the costs of a similar basket of goods in different countries.
American consumers might be paying 38% less for Japanese-made television sets, cars, computers, cameras and watches if Japan's currency were trading at the level dictated by purchasing-parity theory.
But the yen is bolstered by a current-account surplus that is running at roughly $140 billion a year, of which about $60 billion is attributed to the U.S. Interestingly, the surplus reflects shrinking imports, not booming Japanese exports.
"Japanese exports hit a brick wall in the second half of last year with volumes sliding 6%, and it has been the weakness of imports -- due to soft domestic demand -- that has buoyed the surplus in recent months," says Avinash Persaud, an international economist at J.P. Morgan & Co. in London.
The stronger yen also helps reduce Japan's import bill by cutting the cost of raw materials -- especially oil -- almost all of which are priced in dollars.
Another yen prop comes from the growing reluctance of Japanese investors to purchase foreign securities.
They are upset by the U.S.-Japanese trade tensions, afraid of seeing the value of their overseas assets eroded by weakening currencies and lukewarm on the prospects for foreign markets.
Japanese investors purchased a net $2.8 billion of foreign stock and bonds in January, down from $14.6 billion last October.
More recently, some observers contend the Japanese have actually become net sellers.
"Approaching the end of their fiscal year on March 31, Japanese institutional and corporate investors have been selling foreign securities to take profits and are reinvesting them in the stock of affiliated and friendly Japanese companies," says Mr. Golden of Lehman Brothers.
"The effect of that selling is to strengthen the yen, push down prices on international bonds and push up prices on the Tokyo stock market."
Still, the current strong yen "is a classic case of politics overriding fundamental economics," contends Nicholas P. Sargen, chief strategist at Global Advisors , a fixed-income money management unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America in Newark, N.J.
Adds Mr. Persaud of J.P. Morgan: "There's a perception by the market -- rightly or wrongly -- that the dollar is the stick with which the Americans will try to beat the Japanese to force them to open their markets to American imports."
Although they expect Japanese interest rates to fall, traders and economists say the yen's short-term fortunes will be determined by the pitch of U.S.-Japan trade tensions.
"Generally, low interest rates in a country imply a depreciating currency," says Shigeki Sakaki, an international economist at Nomura Research Institute in London.
"However, Japan's weak economic growth may lead to a stronger yen, since it lends support to the U.S. claim that the Japanese government isn't doing enough to stimulate domestic demand and thus reduce Japan's enormous trade surplus."
Longer-term, economists see the yen weakening -- but not by much.
"Even if we see no settlement on the trade dispute, a turn in Japan's bilateral surplus with the U.S. and continued strong growth in the U.S. economy would curtail much of the protectionist pressure for a strong yen," says Mr. Persaud of J.P. Morgan.
"And the strength we've seen in the yen -- up 50% in four years against the dollar -- guarantees we will see a turn in the current account before the end of the year."
J.P. Morgan economists reckon that Japan's current-account surplus will fall to about a third of its current size in the second half of 1995.
Mr. Persaud sees the yen trading 5% to 7% higher at 110-112 to the dollar by year end.
In addition, "short-term interest-rate differentials will move significantly in favor of the dollar," says Mr. Lipsky of Salomon Brothers.
"But the fundamental factor that will help to underpin the yen in the long term is the absence of inflation in Japan," he says.
"Japanese inflation could be virtually nonexistent for the next few years."
