The National Hockey League is coming out of the Ice Age.
While other professional sports leagues got multibillion-dollar television contracts, the NHL went 14 years between games on network TV.
Other leagues generated $1 billion-plus in annual licensing sales; the NHL did 10% of that.
Other leagues followed U.S. population growth into the Sun Belt; the NHL, as of 1990, had one team outside the Frost Belt.
But as it prepares for its big all-star game in New York next week, the league is well into an aggressive new campaign to attract fans and corporate sponsors.
"There's more upside to hockey, relatively, than any other sport," says John McMullen, owner of the New Jersey Devils.
"We just needed a more progressive type of leadership."
That arrived last February, when Gary Bettman moved across New York's Fifth Avenue from the National Basketball Association to become NHL commissioner.
A longtime aide to NBA Commissioner David Stern, he is now trying to inject some of the marketing savvy that drove the baskeball league's dramatic rise.
The all-star game festivities, starting today with the opening of a hall-of-fame exhibit in Grand Central Station, illustrate in a nutshell the new-age NHL.
The league will present a week-long blitz of hockey activities in an effort that mirrors its national program to broaden participation and interest in the sport.
It will also showcase hockey for a rare national TV audience.
"This is a misunderstood game," says Mr. Bettman.
"These are likable, goodlooking athletes and a fast, hard-hitting sport.
It's just suffered from underexposure."
It's a problem of the NHL's own making.
For years, it mainly catered to rabid fans in the hockey hotbeds of Canada and the northern U.S.
The teams' conservative owners were content to play to 95% capacity in their arenas and turn a modest profit.
League efforts to put expansion teams in other regions were mostly abandoned as the NHL reverted to familiar turf.
Hockey was tagged as a regional sport and couldn't get a network TV contract.
The sport mostly received notice for its spectacular player brawls, reinforcing its image as a game played by gap-toothed goons for blue-collar beer guzzlers.
"I went to a fight," the joke went, "and a hockey game broke out."
In 1985, the NHL did get a three-year deal with ESPN, the ABC/Capital Cities Inc. unit.
But in 1988, it abandoned ESPN for SportsChannel, the Cablevision Systems Inc. unit.
The league got more money but SportsChannel's projected growth didn't materialize, and it had to crawl back to ESPN in 1992 for a five-season $80 million contract.
The league's troglodytes finally stirred.
TV and other nongate revenue started to matter when stars like Wayne Gretzky and Mario Lemieux started getting big contracts ($43 million over seven years for Lemieux), and the average player's salary rose, too, about doubling to more than $500,000 over the past four seasons.
"Hockey was the last sport to see its salary structure explode," says Neil Smith, the New York Rangers' president.
"It needed a person who's sharp in marketing, who could get sources of revenue to keep pace with the pay."
Mr. Bettman has augmented his own know-how with key hires.
Stephen J. Solomon, recruited from ABC Sports as the NHL's chief operating officer, is in turn recruiting new corporate sponsors.
His emphasis: the big audience of 18-to-34-year-olds who are drawn to hockey, according to Nielsen ratings for hockey's rare national TV appearances.
The NHL has also hired Richard Dudley from Major League Baseball Properties, pro sports' top-grossing licensing outlet, to head NHL Enterprises, the lowest.
As recently as 1990, when baseball generated $1.5 billion in licensed merchandise, hockey produced only $150 million.
The NHL's drive to do more with licensing actually preceded Mr. Bettman.
In 1992 and 1993, the hottest logos in sports licensing belonged to the San Jose, Calif., Sharks, and the Anaheim, Calif., Mighty Ducks, respectively.
The NHL's licensed-goods sales rose to $800 million in 1993, according to Sporting Goods Dealer, a trade publication.
The NHL's breakout from the Frost Belt also preceded Mr. Bettman: the Sharks arrived in 1991, the Tampa Bay Lightning in 1992 and the Mighty Ducks, owned by Walt Disney Co., and the Florida Panthers, owned by Blockbuster Video chief H. Wayne Huizenga, in 1993.
But it has been left to Mr. Bettman to turn those toeholds into what he calls a lasting "national footprint" for the NHL.
One priority is a grassroots effort to create young hockey enthusiasts in the new territories.
The NHL is sponsoring streethockey and roller-hockey leagues in eight markets and plans to add more.
"You have a hoop in every driveway but not enough kids playing hockey," Mr. Bettman says.
The league's all-star week blitz, called "New York Skates," will also be big on participation.
The league will stage free hockey clinics in all five boroughs.
One day, it will close off a block just outside Madison Square Garden for a streethockey festival.
It will allow average skaters onto a Central Park rink to cruise the ice with retired NHL greats, and it will have a lunch-hour "shootout" at Rockefeller Center, allowing all comers to test their slapshot speed.
The all-star game itself, to be shown on NBC, will be produced by the NHL.
The league has imported Craig Janoff, the director of ABC's "Monday Night Football," and an all-star crew of technicians to put together a slick show.
There will be lots of ice-level cameras to allow closeup shots, lots of rink-side microphones to enhance the sounds of shots and slams and some between-period features to introduce topnotch but little-known players.
"We want to strip away the helmets," says NHL broadcast chief Glenn Adamo.
