The Federal Communications Commission streamlined its procedures for regulating mobile communications services, and approved a plan to license a new generation of wireless data and message services.
The new regulatory framework essentially requires uniform regulation for "commercial mobile radio services," which include any cellular phone, paging, dispatch, pocket-phone or mobile data service that connects to the public telephone network and is offered to the public for a profit.
The changes were designed to help the agency keep pace with rapid advances in wireless technologies, and "bring all Americans ready access to the information highway," said Ralph Haller, who heads the FCC's private radio bureau.
The changes, he said, replace a patchwork approach that was becoming unworkable as new technologies blurred the lines between various communications services.
Wireless services -- carrying phone calls, two-way data and video programming -- are expected to become an important part of the nation's future communications because they will enable companies to avoid having to lay fiber-optic or wire lines to reach remote areas.
While mobile services will be subject to a host of FCC regulations to protect consumers, companies generally won't be required to make their rates public by filing them with the agency.
The agency also agreed to take a new look at competition between cellular phone services; the agency has licensed two cellular carriers in each of hundreds of local markets across the nation, and wants to make sure the "duopoly" approach is working.
In other action, the FCC carved up the country into specific licensing territories for a new category of services known as "narrow-band personal communications services."
The services, which could be offered in select markets within the next two years, use a slim portion of the airwaves.
They are likely to include paging services that allow the recipient to acknowledge a message, and perhaps mobile answering machines.
The new licenses may be the first ones the agency puts up for bid this summer under its new auction authority.
But first, the FCC must come up with rules spelling out how it will conduct the auctions.
The FCC established 11 nationwide licenses, six more licenses in each of five regions, seven others in "major trading areas" (regions defined by Rand McNally), and two in each "basic trading area," (cities or metropolitan areas).
The FCC said it would allow individual companies to own as many as three licenses.
The commission also affirmed its decision to grant Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Inc., known as Mtel, one of the 11 nationwide license based on the company's pioneering technology.
