Tax time is hard enough for most people, but even thinking about what you owe Uncle Sam can be almost too much to bear if you know you can't pay it.
A divorce, a serious illness, a business failure or layoff can decimate an individual's finances, leaving no money to pay taxes.
But for many people whose backs are against the wall, there is some good news: Faced with an estimated 7.5 million Americans who should but don't file income tax returns, the Internal Revenue Service is increasingly willing to make a deal.
"I feel the pressure is gone, and I can start living again," says Dawn Moton, a 50-year-old computer specialist from Columbus, Ohio.
Last November, she settled an IRS claim of $124,000 in taxes and penalties for $14,000.
"I had to prove I couldn't take out a loan on my life insurance and that I didn't have a 401 (k) plan to take money out of," she says.
"But it was worth it."
Ms. Moton, who found herself in trouble because of bad tax-shelter investments, made use of an IRS procedure called an "offer-in-compromise."
Such offers are for people who have racked up large tax delinquencies and have dim hopes of ever getting the money to pay the IRS.
For many other taxpayers, the IRS has a simpler procedure that allows use of installment payments.
In the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, 1993, 2.5 million Americans paid their taxes by installment agreement, almost double the number in fiscal 1992.
If your tax bill is under $10,000, and you can't pay it, all you have to do is fill out one-page Form 9465, Installment Agreement Request, and attach it to your tax return; the IRS promises to respond within 30 days.
If you owe more than $10,000, you'll have to fill out a financial statement, and provide more documentation.
The IRS usually allows payments to go on for two or three years if the tax owed is under $10,000, accountants say.
The IRS says the average installment agreement runs one to 1 1/2 years.
When you pay in installments, interest and penalties on the unpaid tax continue to accumulate.
Interest currently runs 7% annually, and then there is the late penalty, which is 0.5% a month, for a total of 13%.
The penalty for not filing an income tax form is 5% a month up to a total maximum of 25%.
Because of the costs, it may make more sense for taxpayers who can do so to get a less expensive home-equity loan or to borrow against stocks and bonds.
"You're usually better off that way," says Robert A. LaBaube, director of IRS Problem Resolution for accountants Coopers & Lybrand in Washington.
But if your back taxes are so large that you're never going to be able to pay them off, it's worthwhile filing for an offer-in-compromise.
The number of offers filed increased to 40,843 in the first 10 months of the 1993 fiscal year, more than double the number filed in all of fiscal 1992.
According to the IRS, you generally have more than a 50-50 chance of getting your offer approved.
But acceptance rates vary widely among the IRS's 63 districts, according to IRS figures provided for the General Accounting Office.
For example, the IRS office in Laguna Niguel, Calif., accepted only 17% of offers in fiscal 1993, while the IRS office in Boise, Idaho, accepted 79%.
Why the big difference?
David Keating, executive vice president of the National Taxpayers Union, says it's because local IRS offices "develop their own culture and don't necessarily follow national IRS policy" to the degree that Washington wants.
The IRS says the difference reflects variations of the quality of taxpayer offers in different regions.
How much the IRS will settle for also varies, depending on the individual case.
Overall, the IRS says that in the first 10 months of fiscal 1993, it settled for an average of 15% of the tax owed.
Tax pros say that to get the IRS to accept your offer, it must be for more money than can be realized if all your assets were converted to cash.
If your money is in a bank account, stocks or bonds or in property that can be sold, the government can reach out and seize it anytime, so it doesn't need to cut you a special deal, says William A. Roberts, a Dallas attorney who specializes in tax litigation.
If the IRS accepts your offer, the documents are public records for one year.
In addition, you must agree not to contest in court or appeal the amount of your tax settlement.
If the offer fails, the IRS has a detailed file on your finances.
You must also comply with all income tax filing requirements for the next five years.
If you slip up, the IRS can come back to you for the full amount of your previous tax liability, says David Kaye, partner in Kaye, Kotts & Co., a Sherman Oaks, Calif., firm of accountants and attorneys who specialize in resolving tax settlements.
With so much at stake, it makes sense to enlist the services of a professional adviser who has experience in dealing in tax controversy with the IRS.
"Pick someone who knows their way around IRS collection procedures," says Samuel J. Friedman, senior partner in the New York law firm Hall, Dickler, Lawler, Kent & Friedman.
The cost of such depends on the amount of the tax liability, time involved and the complexity of the case.
Mr. Kaye says the average fee for full service at his firm is $4,500.
But he adds that it's possible for a simple case under $10,000 to be handled for as little as $600.
Former Malaysian Finance Minister Razaleigh Hamzah said he played no role in state-owned Bank Bumiputra Malaysia Bhd.'s disastrous lending spree to Hong Kong's Carrian Group more than a decade ago.
Tengku Razaleigh, testifying in a Malaysian court Thursday, also said he had "no recollection" of ever meeting George Tan, who, as Carrian's chairman, presided over one of the biggest financial collapses in Hong Kong's history.
Tengku Razaleigh was Malaysia's finance minister when Bumiputra Malaysia Finance Ltd., a Hong Kong unit of Bank Bumiputra, suffered massive losses on bad loans made to Carrian Group companies between 1979 and 1983.
The former official's testimony -- the first he has ever given on the affair -- came at an evidence-gathering hearing before Malaysian High Court Judge Datuk Abdul Mansor Ali.
The evidence is to be used at the pending trial in Hong Kong of Mr. Tan and a former Bank Bumiputra officer, Rais Saniman.
Mr. Tan and Mr. Rais face Hong Kong government charges of corruption, theft and conspiracy to defraud related to financial transactions between Carrian companies and Bumiputra Malaysia Finance, known as BMF.
Mr. Tan currently is free on HK$50 million (US$6.5 million) bail pending trial.
Mr. Rais was extradited to Hong Kong from France last month.
Tengku Razaleigh's testimony, scheduled to continue Monday, is being followed closely in Malaysia.
The former minister -- who now leads a political party opposed to Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad -- has periodically been the target of undocumented allegations that he played a role in channeling BMF loans to Mr. Tan's companies and that he received financial favors in return.
Such allegations surfaced in the final days of a 1990 Malaysian national election campaign, in which Tengku Razaleigh's Semangat '46 (or Spirit of '46) party was running against Dr. Mahathir's United Malays National Organization.
At that time, pro-government Malaysian newspapers and television stations reported on statements and documents purporting to link Tengku Razaleigh to Mr. Tan and Carrian.
The Malaysian news organizations said at the time that the statements and documents were provided by former BMF Chairman Lorrain Osman.
Carrian, which had interests in property, insurance and shipping, collapsed in late 1983, leaving debts estimated at about US$1.23 billion.
BMF was Carrian's biggest creditor, with loans to Mr. Tan's companies of more than US$700 million.
In 1984, Bank Bumiputra wrote off almost M$1 billion (US$358.3 million) in bad loans, effectively wiping out its total capital and reserves.
In 1986, an independent Malaysian government-appointed panel concluded that high-ranking BMF executives had joined in a "concerted plan" to channel Bank Bumiputra funds to Mr. Tan and Carrian.
The panel's final report didn't give Tengku Razaleigh a central role in the affair.
But the panel noted that several former Bank Bumiputra executives had made undocumented oral allegations that Tengku Razaleigh had helped arrange BMF's financing for Mr. Tan.
In court Thursday, Tengku Razaleigh said he didn't have any part in or prior knowledge of BMF's lending to Carrian companies, which began in late 1979.
Answering questions from the Hong Kong government's attorney, Clive Nicholls, Tengku Razaleigh added that he first learned of the Malaysian bank's heavy exposure to Carrian Group "when it was reported in the press" in late 1982.
Tengku Razaleigh denied ever discussing with Mr. Tan the sale of Carrian-owned Hong Kong property to the Malaysian government, calling any such suggestion "a blatant lie."
Mr. Nicholls also questioned Tengku Razaleigh at length on the purported documents linking him to Mr. Tan, which surfaced in the Malaysian media in October 1990.
The documents are copies of four letters supposedly sent to Tengku Razaleigh at various times between 1979 and 1983.
Three of the letters purport to be written by George Tan; the remaining letter purportedly came from a former BMF assistant general manager, Jalil Ibrahim.
The letter purportedly sent by Mr. Jalil on July 4, 1983, asks Tengku Razaleigh whether he was the "beneficial owner" of 25 million shares in Carrian Investments Ltd., Mr. Tan's flagship company.
In one of the other letters purportedly written by Mr. Tan, the Carrian chairman states: ". . . as agreed, I'll arrange for 25 million CIL shares to be made available."
The letter goes on to thank Tengku Razaleigh for his "backing" of Carrian Group.
Tengku Razaleigh denied having received any of the letters and branded them "false and fabricated documents."
He said he had never held a direct or indirect interest in any Carrian Group company.
He also said he had never helped Mr. Tan or Carrian companies in any way.
Tengku Razaleigh was finance minister from 1976 to the middle of 1984, when he left the post to take another ministerial job.
