All eyes are on the stock market.
But while investors look to the Fed, Wall Street analysts and the stars for guidance, perhaps they should pay some attention to a slightly lower-profile group: The Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB.
That's right, the FASB.
While the FASB's work doesn't seem as lofty as setting the nation's monetary policy, the practical effect of an accounting rule currently under consideration is just as serious as Friday's rise in the federal funds rate.
The hit to investors would be just as predictable.
At issue are FASB proposals to force companies to expense the value of employee stock options when the options are issued.
Criticism of this idea, subject to public hearings next month, has come from all sides.
Nevertheless, shareholders and investors may eventually end up joining the FASB as casualties in this conflict.
Because the FASB is committed to rendering its final decision without regard to any of the social, economic or public policy considerations involved.
For shareholders and investors, the FASB's failure to consider these nonaccounting factors masks the true cost of its proposals.
Unless all the relevant issues are addressed, we may find ourselves paying the price for blindly using the high-cost alternative when a low-cost selection would have performed equally well.
Since its inception, the Securities and Exchange Commission has maintained ultimate authority over the content of corporate financial statements.
In 1973, the SEC began looking to the FASB to establish accounting principles "with the expectation that the body's conclusions will promote the interests of investors."
In the context of the stock-option accounting debate, promoting investors' interests boils down to answering one question: Should the estimated value of employee stock options be charged as an expense against earnings, as proposed by the FASB, or should it be reflected in the notes to the company's financial statements, a compromise suggested by the Big Six accounting firms, the Council of Institutional Investors and the Business Roundtable?
Our financial markets, of course, value substance over form.
Whether deducted from earnings or disclosed in a footnote, the estimated value accorded to the options will be quickly and efficiently analyzed, checked, re-estimated and assigned its appropriate weight, as only our markets can do so well.
On the other hand, shareholders and the companies in which they invest care a great deal about form, and for good reason.
The collateral consequences of the FASB's proposals go far beyond the potential effect on stock prices.
The charge to income will be based on highly debatable estimates produced by complex option-pricing models.
By turning a soft estimate into a hard expense, we will immediately raise the up-front cost of using stock options, even though the real cost to the company -- the potential dilutive effect to shareholder equity -- remains unchanged.
Moreover, in today's hostile legal environment -- where class-action suits are instantly filed if earnings fall too fast, rise too slowly or remain too steady -- the fear of inviting yet more litigation by including "soft" information directly on income statements is a very real concern.
Additionally, employee stock options are a uniquely American phenomenon that allows thousands of U.S. workers to share in their companies' success.
As such, employee stock options provide a distinct competitive advantage to U.S. companies competing globally for talented employees.
The companies and industries most heavily dependent on stock options are also creating the real job growth in our economy.
If, to avoid adverse side-effects, U.S. companies limit their use of stock options, we all lose.
Faced with these arguments, the FASB's rebuttal is simple: When it comes to accounting principles, economic consequences be damned; the truth will set investors free.
But the truth be told, finding the true value of stock options is an impossible task; and by using estimates, the FASB is not empowering investors with more credible financial statements, only theoretically improved ones.
The merit of these so-called improvements is not clear.
Option-pricing models use complicated formulas based on various assumptions, including predictions on interest rates and stock volatility 10 years into the future, and produce widely divergent results.
The FASB hopes its proposals will enhance the comparability of earnings among companies; but achieving this limited goal is doubtful when the estimates underlying earnings lack comparability.
For example, compensation consultants reportedly estimated the current value of the options package provided to Kodak's new CEO last December at between $13 million and $17 million, a range of 30%.
If this range exists for options on Kodak, a mature company with an established trading history and actively traded options for its stock, imagine the range for a new high-tech company in a new industry with no existing market history or options markets.
The estimated value of the latter company's options would be all over the board -- and, if recorded as an expense, would render its earnings meaningless to investors for comparative purposes.
Moreover, it's unlikely that the FASB's actions are needed to curb excessive executive salaries, as others argue.
No pay package goes unnoticed under the SEC's copious new executive compensation disclosures, and by linking pay to performance, stock options reward executives only if shareholders win too.
The bottom line is that by using footnote disclosures, investors will receive the same information that the FASB seeks to present.
More important, the income statement will not reflect guesstimates of option values, and the damaging side-effects of the FASB's proposals will be eliminated.
All with no discernible harm to shareholders and investors.
Yet the FASB is unable to fully evaluate this alternative approach.
As it recently admitted at oversight hearings before the SEC, the FASB lacks the competence to judge nonaccounting issues, and therefore does not consider them when reaching its conclusions.
Promoting investors' interests demands that we not blindly derail the engine of growth that employee stock options so clearly represent.
For everyone's sake, the FASB should amend its proposals, or the SEC should act now to avert a disastrous train wreck.
Mr. Beese is a commissioner on the Securities and Exchange Commission.
