Trading in the shares of Banco Espanol de Credito, suspended Dec. 28 after the Bank of Spain ousted its chairman and board, will resume Tuesday with no limit on how much it can fall.
Some analysts and dealers said Banesto shares could plummet between 60% and 75% when trading resumes.
The bank's stock stood at 1,995 pesetas ($14.11) when trading was suspended.
Spanish stocks aren't allowed to fall more than 15% a day, but that rule has been waived for Banesto.
In a written statement to the National Stock Market Commission announcing the decision, Banesto Chairman Alfredo Saenz also outlined the general rescue plan that Spain's five biggest banks will be asked to support today.
The bank hopes to cover the 605 billion peseta ($4.28 billion) hole in its books with a 320 billion peseta write-down of capital and reserves.
That would require reducing the nominal value of the bank's shares to less than 500 pesetas from 700 pesetas each.
Spain's banking system, the statement said, will be asked to provide Banesto with 285 billion pesetas through acquisition of assets.
Bankers noted, however, that Banesto probably will need to sell assets worth far more in order to generate that amount in profit -- unless it sells loans and other assets with zero book value.
Because of the write-down, Banesto's capital and reserves will be severely depleted, Mr. Saenz said.
To recapitalize, the bank will need a cash injection of no more than 200 billion pesetas.
At a meeting with Banesto on Tuesday, the chairmen of the five big banks reportedly rejected a preliminary version of the rescue plan because it asked them to assume most of the burden for Banesto's bailout.
Mr. Saenz appears to have made an overture to the banks by offering to reduce the nominal value of the shares by more than the 200 pesetas that most analysts had expected.
Manuel Martin, the executive in charge of economic analysis at Banco Popular, the smallest and most profitable of Spain's big banks, said that fresh capital is likely to be channeled into Banesto through the deposit-guarantee fund, which will be financed through a combination of bank loans and contributions.
The fee banks currently pay to the fund probably will be raised again this year after having been cut in 1993.
In the case of Banco Popular, Mr. Martin said, this will mean an increase in its annual contribution of about 900 million pesetas to 3.4 billion pesetas.
Banks, along with the central bank, are likely to lend the rest of the money that the deposit-guarantee fund requires to refloat Banesto, in the hope that it may be recovered at a later date.
Mr. Saenz said the 605 billion peseta shortfall, which he described as a provisional estimate, can be broken down as follows: 281 billion pesetas to cover provisions for nonperforming loans, 185 billion pesetas to cover provisions for capital losses on its investment portfolio, 77 billion pesetas to cover provisions for pension funds, 42 billion for other adjustments on its balance sheet and a write-off of 20 billion pesetas to cover 1993 losses.
The proposed plan was filed with the commission in order to help shareholders assess what might happen when trading in Banesto's shares resumes on Feb 1.
More than just shareholders will be tripped up by the seizure of Banesto.
U.S. Central Credit Union had deposited $255 million in Banesto, the U.S. House Banking Committee said Wednesday.
The deposits of U.S. Central, which handles investment and services for America's 13,000 credit unions, weren't insured.
However, the central bank of Spain says it intends to guarantee all foreign and domestic deposits in Banesto.
The banking panel's discovery that U.S. Central, based in Overland Park, Kan., was involved with Banesto has spurred the panel to find out whether other banks had deposits there.
J.P. Morgan & Co., the New York banking company, stands to lose a major investment it made in Banesto.
