Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman, the acting chief of the Resolution Trust Corp., this week opened a meeting of the agency's oversight board by saying, "Usually I say how happy I am to be here.
That's a little harder right now."
For the past year, President Clinton's college chum has been widely considered to be Treasury secretary-in-waiting.
But next week, he is scheduled to appear before a grand jury looking into the Whitewater affair to answer the old Watergate question: What did he know and when did he know it?
And, just as important, what did he do about what he knew?
In an interview, Mr. Altman pleads guilty to "a piece of awful judgment" -- arranging a Feb. 2 meeting at the White House at which he says he gave the White House a "heads-up" on RTC procedures -- but nothing more.
But Republicans are openly skeptical that that is all Mr. Altman did.
"It does not meet the test of reasonableness," says New York Sen. Al D'Amato.
"If they just needed information he could have sent a perfunctory letter."
He charges that Mr. Altman's briefing was "for political considerations," either to boost himself or help the White House strategy in dealing with the crisis.
All this is deeply embarrassing to the 47-year-old former Carter administration official and investment banker, who until now has enjoyed a golden reputation as a sharp economic mind with considerable political savvy.
"This is a pretty traumatizing experience," says Mr. Altman.
"It's very difficult for your family.
My children ages 10, eight and five are old enough to read the newspaper, and you have to explain it to them."
More broadly, it points up some of the risks in Mr. Clinton's habit of appointing such old friends as Mr. Altman, Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott and health-care guru Ira Magaziner to high-level jobs.
"These people will feel they have a special relationship," says Fred Greenstein, a presidential scholar at Princeton University.
"It clouds the lines of authority."
Brookings Institution political scientist Thomas Mann adds that the inherent conflict between career civil servants and political appointees "is complicated further when there is a sense of personal relationships."
In Mr. Altman's case, the problems were further exacerbated by his dual role as both deputy Treasury secretary and acting chief of the RTC, the agency formed partly to go after those who looted the savings and loan industry.
The Bush Treasury, eager to avoid getting sucked further into the S&L mire, convinced Congress to establish the RTC as an independent entity, with an oversight board on which the Treasury secretary sits.
But Mr. Altman's dual role obliterated the distinction.
Mr. Altman didn't want the RTC job; he hung Mr. Clinton's March 1993 letter of appointment in the small bathroom off his office.
Now, he says: "Hindsight is always perfect.
But holding two jobs is probably a mistake."
Although he is Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen's deputy, Mr. Altman spends so much time at the White Househe is there three times a day, by his account -- that he is a de facto member of the White House staff.
His sudden decision last week to announce that he was recusing himself from any further involvement with the Arkansas savings-and-loan matter both startled and angered the White House, which at that point was hoping that the worst of the controversy was past.
White House press secretary Dee Dee Myers said, "The president has full confidence in Roger Altman."
Mr. Bentsen hasn't elaborated on a statement -- issued while his aides were huddling about what he should say -- that he didn't know about any of the meetings his aides had with the White House.
Meanwhile, Mr. Altman offers this account of his behavior:
Last fall, in his capacity as acting head of the RTC, he learned that the agency was contemplating referring to the Justice Department for possible criminal prosecution a case involving an Arkansas thrift that mentioned Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
He didn't tell Secretary Bentsen, the president or the first lady, he said in the interview.
He says he didn't learn until late last week that Treasury General Counsel Jean Hanson had warned White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum on Sept. 29 of the RTC's plan to seek a Justice Department investigation.
(The formal referral was made Oct. 8; the first press reports appeared Oct. 31.)
Nor, Mr. Altman says, did he know that Treasury staff met again with Mr. Nussbaum on Oct. 14.
Among the other participants at that meeting was Mr. Bentsen's chief of staff, Josh Steiner, who until August had held the same job for Mr. Altman.
This year, Mr. Altman disclosed to the Senate Banking Committee last week, he told White House Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty that he wanted to come over to explain the procedures the RTC would follow in pursuing a civil case given that the statute of limitations was about to expire.
Working from talking points prepared by Ms. Hanson, who accompanied him, Mr. Altman says he did just that in the Feb. 2 meeting with Mr. Nussbaum, Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes and Margaret Williams, Mrs. Clinton's chief of staff.
Lessons "I'd describe it as a `heads-up' and a very stiff conversation," Mr. Altman told the Banking Committee last week.
In a subsequent letter to the committee, he said, "There was no discussion whatsoever on the substance. . . .
That's because I have never had, nor have, any knowledge of the substance."
Ms. Hanson -- who worked closely with Mr. Altman, often joining him for his twice-a-week staff meetings at the RTC -- sat behind Mr. Altman at the Banking Committee hearing, but he says she never told him that there had been other meetings between the Treasury and the White House.
He says he didn't learn of them until reporters began inquiring last week.
Ms. Hanson didn't return a reporter's call on the matter.
This isn't the first time the White House has dabbled in a thrift issue involving the first family.
In a book published last year, former Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. chairman William Seidman recounted how, during the Bush administration, the FDIC's chief counsel relayed to thrift regulators a question from White House counsel Boyden Gray about whether there was any way to move the case against the president's son Neil Bush, the director of a failed Colorado thrift, from the administrative process into the courts.
After regulators complained to the Treasury inspector general, the FDIC official was reprimanded and his bonus withheld.
"The entire incident is of no consequence," Mr. Seidman observed, "except for what it can teach us about how Washington works and the ill-advised knee-jerk repsonse that is too often caused by White House requests."
Mr. Altman says he hasn't read the Seidman book.
Paulette Thomas contributed to this article.
