While 1994 opens with considerable optimism about U.S. economic prospects, with 3% growth widely expected, apparently it is to be a year when governments in the industrial world will be under more pressure to do something about unemployment.
This is, of course, late in the day.
While the liberal, market-organized economies and their governments have been extolling the virtues of their economic system to Eastern Europe, in fact the capitalist economies have been seeming to validate the chief criticism by the communists of capitalism -- namely, that capitalism generates high unemployment.
In its year-end economic report last month, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development estimated that for these advanced industrial countries as a whole unemployment this year might reach 35 million.
Last year for many countries in Western Europe the unemployment rate was in the 11% zone, and in some (e.g., Spain and Finland) the rate was about 20%.
The U.S. economy was relatively stronger, and will be stronger than Europe and Japan in 1994, but even here employment last year was roughly 10 million below the basic labor force.
That economic policies need to be focused on measures to encourage a more rapid expansion of output and employment would seem to be self-evident.
It is only remarkable that the year for this focus on policies to get more people back to work is 1994 and not 1993 or even 1992 or 1991.
We are now in a large and protracted shortfall from anything that could be called a normal return to reasonably full employment from the 1990-91 recession.
Those entering the work forces in Western Europe and even in the U.S. confront labor market conditions more nearly resembling those of the late 1930s than those prevailing during the four decades or so following World War II.
This absence of needed economic vigor stems from a complex mosaic of causes.
Governments of the European Community were so preoccupied with EC matters that they neglected attention to the fundamentals that determine the basic capability of their economies back home to create new jobs and deliver rising real incomes to a wider share of the population.
Germany had the large and difficult problem of absorbing the antiquated economy of East Germany.
For whatever reason, an important part of the world economy (Western Europe) that for decades demonstrated a persisting capability to operate with lower unemployment rates than in North America now has the distinction of being the world's major unemployment problem.
These governments are like a football coach so intrigued with his computer's capacity to generate ingenious plays that he neglects blocking and tackling.
Moreover, a major part of this effort was an attempt to weld currencies together, which involved a surrender of economic sovereignty to Brussels (or Frankfurt) that people understandably were not willing to accept -- and they certainly were not willing to accept the high unemployment that inevitably followed.
In the U.S. the flirtation with really rampant inflation at the end of the 1970s has continued to haunt the management of economic policy.
Broad-based measures of the money stock in real terms closed out 1993 still below the levels at the end of 1990.
Employment and output do not move precisely with these measures of liquidity, but no other expansion after a recession since World War II has had to struggle against a shrinking monetary stock in real terms, and the lethargic pace of the U.S. expansion has been consistent with the economic policies we have pursued.
Japan's bubble problem has also had an adverse effect on the U.S. economy.
Japan is our second-largest export market, and our exports to Japan have been running below year-earlier levels -- though the decline in our exports to Western Europe has been relatively more severe.
By contrast, U.S. exports to the Asian tigers (Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan) have been running well ahead of year-earlier volumes.
If governments are seriously going to deploy policies to get the 35 million people now unemployed back to work, what might the elements of such a strategy for economic policy be?
Governments should draw their basic slogan from the medical profession: "First, do no harm."
A pace of monetary expansion adequate not only to accommodate but even to encourage the needed more rapid rate of growth would certainly "do no harm."
The more rapid expansion in output and employment that is needed will not be forthcoming otherwise.
Few things will give central bankers a bad case of nerves more certainly than evidence that a little prosperity might break out, but this agony will have to be endured.
What about fiscal policy?
For more than a half-century, managing the fiscal operations of government has been assumed to be the effective way to guide the economy along the right path.
We may be in the early stages of a turning point of historic proportions on this matter.
Two convictions seem to be emerging.
One is that a so-called expansive fiscal or budget policy does not seem in practice to have the favorable effect on the economy's output and employment that the theory would lead us to expect.
In its year-end review of the outlook, the OECD observed that "where discretionary fiscal measures have been taken to support demand, the effects on activity appear to have been disappointing."
The second conviction is that the removal of the discipline on spending, formerly imposed by the requirement that the budget be balanced, has enabled interest groups to exert pressures that have overloaded society with government.
For at least a dozen of the advanced industrial countries government outlays now exceed 50% of their gross domestic product.
They are led by Sweden, whose general government outlays in 1993 were equal to 73.5% of GDP.
The industrial countries, in short, seem to be moving inexorably down a trail to where the national income will all go to government, with government doling it back out to people according to their needs or, more probably, according to political pressures.
Slowly the view is coalescing that this is not the right way to run things, and that much stronger barriers against spending pressures must now be erected.
The general conviction that budgets should be balanced once served that role, and it worked.
From 1789 to 1929, excluding war years, surplus years outnumbered deficit years three to one.
One of the most difficult questions for public policy today is whether much of the unemployment we now see is structural -- and therefore would not be responsive to a generally more vigorous rate of economic expansion.
Are the unemployed who need jobs not where the new jobs would be opening up?
Would there be such a mismatch between the education and skill levels of the unemployed and those required by the new employment opportunities that a large proportion of these people would remain stranded?
Have government programs, in and of themselves politically attractive, built so many impediments into job creation that it will be difficult to get back to something like what we used to call reasonably full employment -- say, the 5 1/2% unemployment rate that characterized much of this century until recent years?
These were worries in the early 1980s and a major concern after the 1960-61 recession, and "structural problems" are frequently cited as the basic reason for Europe's exceptionally high unemployment rates today.
Worries about structural mismatches in these earlier periods, we found, were overdone.
With expansive economic policies in the 1960s and again in the 1980s the economy moved back to reasonably full employment.
Now, however, there may be reason for more concern about structural unemployment.
And it is increasingly evident that the impediments to regaining reasonably full employment are government programs themselves.
The reluctance of businesses to take on the large, uncertain and possibly open-ended liabilities with each added employee is evident in U.S. manufacturing employment.
While the number employed in manufacturing last year was less than in 1990, the average number of overtime hours worked was higher -- in fact, higher than for any other year in the prior decade except for 1988.
Yet there is no shortage of people who would like to have a job in manufacturing.
This all comes into focus with what will probably be this year's major U.S. public policy issue -- namely, health care.
Whatever the specifics of the program adopted, mandating a heavy cost on employers to finance the program would be essentially levying a heavy excise tax on employment, and an excise tax on anything reduces demand for it.
This will be the sword of Damocles hanging over the hopes of the unemployed in 1994.
Mr. McCracken, a former chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, is a University of Michigan professor emeritus.
