Next Monday, Apple Computer Inc. will fire the first salvo in a multisided battle for the heart, soul and profits of the burgeoning personal-computer industry.
Apple will introduce a powerful line of Macintosh machines built around a new kind of microprocessor (the brains of a computer) called the PowerPC.
International Business Machines Corp. has allied with Apple, and will introduce its own PowerPC line this summer.
The world's two biggest personal-computer makers and another ally, chip-maker Motorola Inc., have spent billions of dollars developing the PowerPC or enhanced operating systems for it, all with the aim of breaking up the lucrative hegemony of Intel Corp. and Microsoft Corp.
The stakes are huge.
About 85% of the personal computers in the U.S. run on Intel's microprocessors and on Microsoft's operating systems, the software controlling a computer's basic functions.
By generating gigantic volumes and controlling prices, they appear to be reaping the highest net profit margins among U.S. companies their size, and are expected to report combined earnings of more than $4 billion this year.
Meanwhile, Apple, IBM and most other computer makers struggle along on painfully thin margins.
The struggle to wrest those riches away is going to be costly and complicated.
The president of IBM's PowerPC division, Nobuo Mii, tries to figure things out by relating strategy to Go, the ancient and multifarious game of his native Japan.
In combative brainstorming sessions with other IBMers, the intense, pudgy executive has taken to the blackboard, drawing IBM as a white stone.
Archrivals Intel and Microsoft are black stones because they own the microprocessors and operating systems.
The object: Take territory from the black stones.
Unfortunately for Mr. Mii, Intel and Microsoft won't stand still.
They are spending some of their profits on new chips and operating systems of their own that will sharply reduce, if not nullify, the PowerPC alliance's technical edge.
Moreover, the motives of the alliance members are decidedly mixed, partly because Apple and Motorola also compete with IBM in the marketplace.
And IBM itself is a house divided.
Last year -- unbeknownst to Mr. Mii, to other top IBM executives or to Apple -- a small part of the IBM team was authorized by higher-ups to forge a pact with Microsoft that splintered the PowerPC group and threatens IBM's operating-systems business.
A separate unit, the IBM Personal Computer Co., is another black stone for Mr. Mii to contemplate.
It is the biggest maker of Intel-based computers, and the unit's president, Robert Corrigan, has doubts about the PowerPC.
He believes Intel will keep churning out chips that run the vast universe of PC software "better than everyone else."
PowerPC "isn't going to easily usurp that space," Mr. Corrigan warns.
Most of the industry agrees.
Robert W. Stearns, vice president of corporate development for Compaq Computer Corp., the third-biggest personal-computer maker and an Intel customer, says the PowerPC allies "are smoking dope.
There's no way it's going to work."
It seems increasingly probable that the PowerPC alliance won't make a major dent in the Intel-Microsoft duopoly for several years.
After that, improvements in the PowerPC chip and the availability of more-universal operating systems could allow the alliance to make significant inroads.
"It's really a question of 1999," says Michael Slater, publisher of Microprocessor Report, a newsletter.
The most likely near-term effect will be an outbreak of price wars among the makers of very powerful microprocessors and personal computers, and fierce competition to develop innovative features and software, such as three-dimensional-quality graphics and the ability to operate computers with voice commands.
The biggest and only sure winner is the computer user.
Microsoft is likely to wind up prospering no matter who else wins, and Motorola doesn't have much to lose.
But the already meager profit margins of Apple, IBM and other PC makers may be further sapped, and even the swollen profits of Intel will be threatened.
Apple, in fact, makes no bones about its willingness to slash prices relentlessly.
"I welcome the price wars," says Ian W. Diery, executive vice president of Apple's personal-computer division, who vows to keep Macintosh PowerPCs "more than $200" below computers running on Intel's most powerful line of microprocessors.
The PowerPC effort was born of bad blood and mutual need.
IBM all but handed market dominance to Microsoft and Intel when it chose their central products for its first PC in 1981.
By 1990, IBM saw that they were reaping most of the profit.
In the same year, IBM split bitterly with Microsoft over an agreement to jointly develop IBM's OS/2 operating system, which was getting trounced by Microsoft's simpler Windows.
Then Apple's profit margins came under assault from IBM clones, while Motorola, whose only large computer customer is Apple, saw itself shut out from the rest of the market.
So when IBM approached Apple in 1990 and Apple in turn talked to its partner Motorola, all three parties were only too happy to proceed in order to regain the high ground, or at least some profits.
The main goal was to create better, cheaper computers around a new, streamlined microprocessor.
The chip was expected to run programs an average of two to four times the speed of the best Motorola and Intel chips at that time.
And, theoretically, the PowerPC could be made at a fraction of Intel's costs because it has a simpler, smaller design.
Motorola and IBM agreed to bear the costs of developing the chip, which was of IBM design.
Apple said it would modify its well-regarded operating software, called System 7, to run on the PowerPC, and IBM would use OS/2, which can run software written for Windows.
So PowerPC machines would be able to run all the applications software, such as spreadsheets and word processors, designed for either the Mac or Intel world.
As it turns out, the PowerPC chip is indeed a tiny wonder.
The first version, the 601 made by IBM, costs as little as $70 each to make, compared with roughly $400 for Intel's top Pentium chip, estimates Mr. Slater, the chip expert.
The PowerPC line is expected to maintain a cost advantage of several hundred dollars per chip over future Intel microprocessors, an edge Apple and IBM intend to use in underpricing Intel-based PCs.
For example, Apple plans to sell Macintosh 601s as low as $1,750 each, compared with a current $2,500 to $3,000 for the cheapest Pentium PCs.
As for speed, demonstrations of Macintosh 601s show them racing through rewritten programs such as Adobe Systems Inc.'s Illustrator at two to five times the speed of Apple's current top line.
The next generation PowerPC for desktop computers, the 604, will be shipped by Motorola and IBM late this year and is expected to run at least twice as fast as the 601 and current Pentium chips.
The PowerPC's raw performance has the competitive juices flowing among the allies.
Some PowerPC demonstration machines at Apple's headquarters in Cupertino, Calif., respond with "Hasta la vista, baby" when asked about Pentium through a speech-recognition feature.
Recently, the 604 development crew in Austin, Texas, staged a celebration in which a roomful of IBM and Motorola engineers cheered wildly as a mock PowerPC battleship sank Battleship Intel.
There are, however, some glaring weaknesses in the allies' strategies that render the PowerPC's price advantage almost irrelevant for the short term.
Foremost is a software problem.
Existing Macintosh, DOS or Windows applications can't run at the PowerPC machines' "native" speed, because the Mac operating software was designed for a different kind of Motorola microprocessor, and DOS and Windows systems for Intel chips.
Like Adobe's Illustrator, all of those applications have to be rewritten to take advantage of the PowerPC's strengths.
Their current versions don't run any faster on PowerPC computers than on older Macs or computers using Intel's older 386 and 486 chip lines.
In contrast, unmodified DOS and Windows programs run considerably faster on Pentium chips.
Why then, should a computer user buy a PowerPC for $2,000 when far cheaper machines will run programs just as fast?
IBM asserts that software improvements will boost the speed at which its PowerPcs run Windows programs.
But the key to the PowerPC's future is the alacrity with which software developers rewrite their programs to take advantage of its speed.
Users of older Mac and Intel-based machines won't flock to PowerPCs until then.
The problem is nine out of 10 developers produce their software first for the Intel-Microsoft camp.
"For the most part, we will get on Pentium first, and then look at PowerPC," says Alex Morrow, a general manager at Lotus Development Corp., maker of the bestselling 1-2-3 spreadsheet and Lotus Notes.
"That is where the installed base is today."
Fears about becoming increasingly isolated from the huge Windows camp of developers helped lead to the secret pact with Microsoft that so disrupted IBM's PowerPC group.
In the fall of 1992, a faction within IBM's PowerPC team concluded that Microsoft's next blockbuster success would be a powerful new operating system called Windows NT.
Getting the rights to NT would give PowerPC sales a powerful boost, the faction believed, and would provide access to all the best-selling software that developers would painstakingly modify to take advantage of NT.
The faction concluded the PowerPC venture wouldn't succeed against Intel's might without it.
They wanted to make a deal with Microsoft and pay for the considerable costs of modifying NT to run on the PowerPC.
In fierce debate, other IBMers angrily opposed the move, saying it would undermine IBM's estimated $1 billion investment in OS/2.
Many also still felt betrayed by Microsoft's earlier decision to abandon the joint development of OS/2.
But in late 1992 the pro-NT faction received permission from IBM's top technology officer, Jack Kuehler, to negotiate secretly with Microsoft in partnership with Motorola.
Because of the bad blood between IBM and Microsoft, Motorola executives would do the negotiating.
For Microsoft's cagey chairman, William Gates, the deal was a can't-lose proposition: NT would have another computer chip to run on, and he wouldn't have to pay for modifying it.
He quickly came to terms.
When engineers at IBM and Motorola began the work in late January 1993 in Austin, only a few people knew about the plan.
Mr. Mii, who didn't become president of PowerPC until July 1993, found out only after the fact.
Even today, he only grudgingly acknowledges the effort and says that NT isn't a priority for IBM because "it isn't a very good system."
Apple, which could only lose if NT took off on the PowerPC platform, was never told at all.
As the secret project became more widely known at IBM, "it created absolute turmoil," says one former IBM executive involved in the fight.
To the critics, it was another example of IBM's confusion and indecision.
"We were feeding the enemy," says another IBM officer.
Before IBM announced its NT deal in November, a few engineers linked to PowerPC resigned.
As it now turns out, Mr. Mii's reservations about NT could turn out to be right.
While well-suited for tying networks of computers together, NT has proved too complex and cumbersome to become an operating system for individual desktop computers, at least for the next several years.
Microsoft has sold only 300,000 NT copies in eight months.
The next blockbuster operating system, most industry executives believe, will be an upgrade of Windows, code-named Chicago -- and it runs only on Intel chips.
IBM officials say they will find a way to get Chicago applications to work well on OS/2, but Mr. Corrigan, the chief of Big Blue's Intel-based business, obviously has his reservations.
"You can't walk away from the fact that people are making Intel-based applications," he says.
His group will manufacture the PowerPC, but won't spend any money or effort marketing and distributing it.
That's up to Mr. Mii's division.
IBM's strategy is the riskiest and most conflicted one of the PowerPC partners, because its success depends solely on taking business away from makers of Intel-based computers running on Windows -- including IBM.
Apple doesn't have to do that to thrive.
In fact, Apple's main goal is simply to protect its current 14% share of the U.S. market.
Macintosh's System 7 software is considered superior to Windows, which is often criticized by computer cognoscenti as a clunky rip-off of the Mac look and feel.
But Apple has been hard-pressed to match the price and variety of Intel-based machines.
A continuous price war has cut its operating margins by half in the past 18 months.
Officials at Apple say the PowerPC finally gives it room to consistently offer prices for Macs below those for comparable Intel-based machines.
Moreover, it has less of a problem with its software developers, because many of them depend heavily on the Macintosh and are rapidly rewriting their applications to take advantage of the PowerPC's speed.
Microsoft is the leading developer of Macintosh software, and plans to have versions ready for the PowerPC in a matter of months.
So the PowerPC looks as if it might work as a defensive strategy.
Apple also wants to go on the offensive, increasing its world-wide market share over the next three to five years by more than five percentage points, according to Mr. Diery.
Toward that end, Apple is heavily marketing some new software that allows its PowerPC Macs to run Windows applications at the speed of older, slower Intel-based machines.
The idea is to attract new computer users who want more flexibility, or people and businesses using both Mac and Intel-based machines.
Apple could also enlist new allies by licensing its Macintosh operating system for the first time.
It has vowed to do that.
"It's just a matter of when and with whom," says James S. Gable, the product manager for the Mac PowerPC.
But Apple still seems imprisoned in a box.
While blazing-fast versions of Mac applications will also be available on Intel-based machines, hundreds of applications modified for Windows on Pentium won't be available for Macs.
Apple's compatibility software for Windows is too slow and expensive.
Other major computer makers don't have much interest in making Macs, and say Apple is asking for too many licensing restrictions.
For all three PowerPC allies, the worst news is that Intel is aggressively cutting prices on Pentiums and spending billions of dollars on new microprocessor designs and new plants, to reduce the once-commanding lead of the PowerPC.
On Monday, Intel introduced new versions of the Pentium that are 50% faster than the first generation, and slightly faster than the PowerPC line.
The move started a blizzard of announcements by PC makers that they will ship within a month high-end machines for $3,500 to $5,000, roughly the same as Apple's most powerful Macintoshes.
Andrew Grove, Intel's feisty CEO, says he is even grateful to the PowerPC alliance for making his company more aggressive.
"Things like PowerPC don't let you sit on your" rear end, he says.
Source: International Data Corp.
Source: Dataquest Inc.
