Sales of previously owned homes continued their record climb in December, rising 6.7% from the previous month.
Even sales in hard-hit California rebounded to the highest level in nearly four years.
Analysts attributed the record to greater consumer confidence and a rush to purchase homes on fears that interest rates were moving up.
The continued improvement in consumer spirits was also reflected in the latest survey by the Conference Board.
The business research group's consumer confidence index rose to 83.2 in January from 79.8 in December.
Since October, this measure of consumer optimism has risen roughly 23 points.
Despite the increase, there are still nagging worries about the job market.
More than a third of the 5,000 survey participants felt that jobs were hard to get during January and only a small percentage expect labor conditions to improve in the coming months.
Still, optimism increased in all regions of the country this month, except for "West North Central," which includes Minnesota, Iowa and Kansas.
Sales of existing single-family homes soared to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 4,490,000 from a revised pace of 4,210,000 in November, according to the National Association of Realtors.
The December sales pace jumped 11.1% from a year earlier.
Last year, home sales totaled 3.8 million, a 7.9% increase from 1992 and the most since 1979, when the figure was 3,830,000.
"Demand is good, interest rates are very friendly, we're looking at a continued good market," said John Tuccillo, the chief economist for the National Association of Realtors.
The West, which has some of the best markets in the country but had been dragged down because of poor sales in California, posted the second-best gains in December.
While prices remained virtually flat, the resale rate for the West climbed 13.8% in December from a year earlier.
California's existing-home sales jumped 12.1% from November and 13.2% from a year earlier, according to the California Association of Realtors.
That was the highest level of activity since February 1990.
"Before the quake, the California markets were really stabilizing, especially in the north," said Mr. Tuccillo.
Mr. Tuccillo said the cold spell that hit most of the country in January and the earthquake that shook Los Angeles would drive down January's home-sales pace.
"I'm not real optimistic about getting housing to this number next month," he said.
"The January numbers will be significantly depressed."
In December, the Midwest led the country with a 15.2% increase in the pace of sales.
The South grew 9.4%.
The Northeast, which had also been lagging behind in the national recovery because of poor job growth, rose 4.8%.
Analysts said the strong sales were expected, given the robust activity spurred by mortgage rates that are hovering at a 20-year low.
But Ingo Winzer, publisher of the Local Market Monitor, which tracks housing activity, said the strength of the housing recovery in many parts of the country is still being undermined by the relative weakness of California and New England.
"Without California and if New England had an earthquake and dropped into the Atlantic, the economy would look much better than many people think," he said.
While California sales are coming back, Mr. Winzer said prices aren't, unlike the rest of the nation, which is seeing a more robust rebound powered by job growth.
