More evidence of a shrinking of the world oil glut helped to push petroleum prices higher.
The gains were relatively modest.
But they were in sharp contrast to the plunge in prices earlier this week.
That sell-off had been triggered by the oil-market's disappointment over the failure of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to signal whether it will cut second-quarter output.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil for April delivery, which had dropped 40 cents a barrel on Monday, rose eight cents yesterday to settle at $14.18 a barrel.
The rise in New York contributed to price advances in crude-oil futures in London, traders said.
On London's International Petroleum Exchange, Brent blend crude for April delivery closed 13 cents higher at $13.20 a barrel.
The increases came after industry and government reports of further reductions in petroleum inventories in the U.S. as well as in the other major oil-consuming regions of Europe and Asia.
"Basically, this confirms the cold weather has wiped out the big inventory overhang." said John Saucer, energy analyst at Smith Barney Shearson.
In the U.S., statistics released late Tuesday by the American Petroleum Institute and yesterday by the Department of Energy showed major declines last week in inventories of leading fuels such as distillates, which include home-heating oil, and gasoline.
According to the API, distillate stocks declined 3.6 million barrels while gasoline inventories were down 2.7 million.
Robert Boslego, a Winchester, Mass., consultant who provides analysis of the API figures to his clients, said the latest statistics underscore this winter's increased use of petroleum in the U.S. "Demand in the U.S., based on the API statistics, was up 5.1% in the latest four weeks" from the comparable year-earlier period, Mr. Boslego said.
The International Energy Agency also issued its Monthly Oil Market Report yesterday, and it showed significant reductions in world oil inventories in recent weeks.
The IEA, which represents the members of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, said its preliminary estimate of petroleum inventories at the end of January in these industrial nations was 5% lower than that of a year earlier.
Also, the IEA revised upward its estimate of December drawdowns of inventories in the OECD nations to three million barrels a day from the 1.7 million a day estimated earlier.
The IEA figures suggest, however, that OPEC still needs to cut crude production at its March 25 meeting if world oil supplies and demand are to be balanced in the second quarter.
Currently, according to the IEA and industry estimates, OPEC is producing some 24.8 million barrels a day.
That is above the predictions of secondquarter demand for OPEC oil of 24 million barrels a day or less.
"The IEA report may have given OPEC a little more breathing room, but this market is going to remain jittery," said Mr. Saucer of Smith Barney Shearson.
PRECIOUS METALS: Platinum-futures prices rose.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, platinum for April delivery was up $2.50 to $397 an ounce.
Throughout 1993, platinum traded in a range of about $330 to $420 an ounce.
But Ayrton Metals Ltd., a London platinum merchant, is forecasting that platinum's price range will rise this year.
The platinum merchant, which is owned by Impala Platinum, a South African producer, says that healthy auto sales in the U.S. and strong demand from the Japanese jewelry industry will help to support prices.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean-futures prices rose on news reports suggesting that some of Brazil's soybeans may be contaminated with fungus.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, soybeans for July delivery were up 7.25 cents to $6.7625 a bushel.
News reports said fungus had been found on some soybeans coming out of the Parana region of Brazil, which is the South American country's second largest soybean-producing state.
Traders interpreted the reports as bullish, in part because expectations of record production of soybeans in Brazil this year has depressed futures prices lately.
But some U.S. analysts were skeptical about the report.
"I don't think any fungus problem will be widespread enough to counteract the big size of the crop," said Richard Loewy, president of AgResource Co., Chicago.
