President Clinton lifted the 19-year-old trade embargo on Vietnam, setting off a race by U.S. companies to catch up with their foreign competitors in that potentially lucrative market in Southeast Asia.
Some U.S. companies, which have been positioning themselves for more than a year for the embargo's end, will jump out of the starting block.
American Express Co., for example, is expected to immediately sign an agreement with Vietnam that will permit the use of its credit cards there, according to Eugene Mathews, a U.S. consultant to the company who has lived in Vietnam since 1990.
Although Asian and European business competitors have ignored the U.S. embargo for years, Mr. Mathews believes that some U.S. companies, particularly in the consumer products field, will catch up quickly.
Many American products, such as Coca-Cola, have been smuggled into Vietnam for years.
Other products, ranging from toothpaste to computers made by International Business Machines Corp., are remembered from the war years by that generation of Vietnamese.
President Clinton, who avoided military service during the Vietnam War, deliberately played down the commercial opportunities in deference to the families of soldiers who remain unaccounted for.
Many family and veterans groups strongly opposed his decision to lift the embargo.
Instead, Mr. Clinton and senior U.S. officials emphasized Hanoi's cooperation over the past year in helping to resolve some of these cases, and said a reciprocal gesture was called for.
"I am absolutely convinced it offers the best way to resolve the fate of those who remain missing and about those about whom we are not sure," Mr. Clinton said.
"I wanted to make sure that the trade questions did not enter into this decision," Mr. Clinton said.
"I never had a briefing on it, and we never had a discussion about it."
Mr. Clinton also authorized the establishment of liaison offices in Washington and Hanoi to help with the process of accounting for missing soldiers and also to provide support services for U.S. companies and citizens in Vietnam.
But the U.S. won't establish full diplomatic relations with Hanoi at this time, holding back that step as leverage to ensure further progress on the issue of missing soldiers.
Furthermore, there will still be impediments in the way of U.S.-Vietnam trade.
Hanoi, for instance, won't have most favored nation trade status, which means that products made there for the U.S. market will be subject to substantially higher U.S. tariffs than goods from nearly all other U.S. trading partners.
And the Overseas Private Investment Corp., which supports major U.S. investments in developing companies, can't sign an agreement to operate in Vietnam until full diplomatic relations are established.
There also are various U.S. laws on the books that bar trade or aid to Vietnam, such as the 1993 foreign aid appropriations bill, and amendments to laws concerning the U.S. Export-Import Bank, which aids U.S. exporters.
U.S. officials also said that it would take weeks, at least, to work out federal regulations that would govern trade with Vietnam.
On Capitol Hill, Republican Sen. John McCain of Arizona, the former Vietnam prisoner of war who cosponsored a recent Senate resolution for lifting the embargo, said the decision would "honor the nation's commitment to our POW/MIAs and their families, protect our national interests and advance our values abroad."
But bitterness will linger over the president's decision.
Sen. Bob Smith (R., N.H.), another Vietnam veteran, questioned the president's very right to make the decision when Mr. Clinton "refused to serve in Vietnam, protested the war, and has no military experience."
As President Clinton announced his decision, a lone protester, dressed in black and holding a black POW/MIA flag, stood like a sentry outside the White House gate.
The decision is a big victory for Vietnam.
Nearly two decades after forcing the U.S. to withdraw, Hanoi, which fears military domination by China and commercial domination by Japan, now wants a major U.S. presence as a counterweight.
And even though the U.S. embargo had little affect on other nations, Mr. Clinton's decision gives a boost to the process of welcoming Vietnam, which has undergone major economic reform, back into the international financial community.
Trying to close the circle yesterday, Mr. Clinton said, "Whatever the Vietnam War may have done in dividing our country in the past, today our nation is one in honoring those who served and pressing for answers about all those who did not return."
He added: "I remain personally committed to continuing the search for the answers and the peace of mind that the families of the missing deserve."
Jackie Calmes contributed to this article.
