Small-company stocks sent a key index to its sixth high in as many sessions despite weak earnings from several technology leaders that pummeled their share prices.
The Russell 2000 Index set its sixth straight record close, but weak earnings from technology concerns pulled the Nasdaq Composite Index lower after Tuesday's record.
The Russell 2000 inched up 0.2 point, or 0.08%, to end at 262.6, a sixth straight record.
The index, which showed losses earlier in the day, tracks the performance of small-capitalization stocks traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market and other major exchanges.
But the Nasdaq Composite Index, which is heavily weighted with large technology issues, dropped 3.74 points, or 0.47%, to 789.28, after setting a new high Tuesday.
Among the stocks that fell after posting disappointing results were Intel, down 4 3/4 to 62 1/2; Borland International, down 1 1/2 to 13 7/8; and SynOptics Communications, down 3 1/2 to 27 3/4.
Advancing Nasdaq issues trailed decliners 1,477 to 1,542 on Nasdaq National Market volume of 280.9 million shares, compared with Tuesday's 275.4 million.
Overall volume rose to 336.2 million shares from the previous day's 319.4 million.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 14.08 points, or 0.36%, to 3,884.37, past its Monday record close.
Yesterday, the index finished unchanged.
News from individual companies was the biggest impetus behind stock movement, and earnings reports provided much of the push.
Haggar jumped 4 to 32 1/4 following improved fiscal first-quarter earnings.
The Dallas designer and maker of men's apparel said net income for the period rose to 51 cents a share from a year-earlier eight cents a share.
Nuclear Support Services Inc. rose 7/8 to 5 after reporting that fiscal first-quarter earnings rose to 13 cents a share from a year-earlier six cents a share.
The Campbelltown, Pa., company provides technical personnel to electric utilities.
Tetra Tech, Pasadena, Calif., improved 1 to 19 3/4.
The provider of environmental engineering and consulting services reported fiscal first-quarter per-share earnings of 17 cents, up from a year-earlier 13 cents.
But Santa Cruz Operation, a Santa Cruz, Calif., networking and software concern, dropped 3/4 to 5 1/8 after saying late Tuesday that its fiscal first-quarter per-share net income fell to five cents from 13 cents.
Goldman Sachs downgraded Santa Cruz to "market performer" from "moderate outperformer" and lowered its fiscal-1994 earnings estimate.
Kerr Group, Los Angeles, jumped 7/8 to 9 1/2 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company said it plans to relocate its homecanning lid-manufacturing operations to Jackson, Tenn., permanently ceasing operations in its leased facility in Chicago.
Kerr said it will record a 1993 fourth-quarter reserve of 75 cents a share related to the relocation.
Improved efficiency due to the move should result in pretax per-year cost reductions of about 50 cents a share.
OrthoLogic gained 1 to 5 7/8.
The Phoenix company said it has received an approvable letter from the Food and Drug Administration regarding its premarket approval application for OrthoLogic 1000, a noninvasive electronic bone-growth stimulator for treatment of fractures.
Deckers Outdoor, Carpinteria, Calif., climbed 2 to 17.
The company said it formed a joint venture with Robert Eason, owner of the U.S. distribution rights for Heirlooms, a line of casual apparel, to sell the line through Deckers' distribution channels.
Terms weren't disclosed.
Smith Barney Shearson upgraded Deckers to "outperform" from "neutral."
Recoton advanced 1 1/8 to 24 3/8 following an initial "buy" recommendation from Furman Selz.
The Long Island City, N.Y., company makes and markets a line of accessories for consumer electronics equipment.
Trans Leasing International fell 1 3/16 to 4 3/16 after saying its talks ended on a proposed business combination with an unidentified, publicly traded financial-services company.
Trans Leasing, Northbrook, Ill., leases medical, scientific and other equipment to health-care providers.
LCS Industries gained 1 to 8.
The Clifton, N.J., company said it reached a $5.5 million agreement to design, develop and implement a marketing database for "a major non-U.S. telecommunications company," extending through February 1995.
Nasdaq National Market stocks that hit new highs for the year to date totaled 106, while 18 hit new lows.
Expectations of good earnings for smaller issues helped them to advance, as did the Big Board's late move into record territory, said Paul Stanton, head of over-the-counter trading at Johnson Lemon.
Mary Farrell, a market strategist at PaineWebber, added that market players are beginning to take much more of a case-by-case approach to investing, rather than letting bigger stocks dictate attitudes toward an entire group.
In past quarters, Farrell said, one earnings disaster in a group could humble the whole sector.
However, "if you look at the companies that got hit today, such as Intel, increasingly as the large-cap stocks fall by the wayside, the small-caps look better."
Earnings forecasts for smaller companies "have been more modest" Farrell said, while Wall Street has had very high expectations for the larger companies because of the economic recovery.
The combination of strong earnings growth without tremendous price-to-earnings expansion should keep the smaller issues that show superior earnings growth ahead of the game this year, Farrell said.
KERR GROUP Inc., of Los Angeles, expects its net income to be boosted by about 50 cents a share per year through 1996 because of cost reductions from the company's relocation of its home-canning lid-manufacturing operations from Chicago to a new facility in Jackson, Tenn.
In Thursday's Small Stock Focus column, it was incorrectly reported that the 50-cent-ashare boost would be on a pretax basis.
(WSJ Jan. 26, 1994)
