SERBS AND MUSLIMS SIGNED an accord to ease Sarajevo's 23-month siege.
The U.N.-brokered agreement would allow civilians to travel along certain roads in and around the city, and could open a route out of Sarajevo for people who have been trapped there for two years.
However, commercial traffic wouldn't be permitted, and people wishing to travel from one side's territory to the other's would have to receive permission from Serb or Muslim authorities.
The accord is the latest step in moves to normalize life in the Bosnian capital, where a cease-fire has been generally holding for five weeks.
The Senate Budget Committee voted to require another $26 billion in spending cuts from Clinton's five-year budget plan.
The additional cuts, adopted on a bipartisan 13-8 vote, would place severe pressure on Clinton's "investment" spending initiatives.
Republicans won a Senate commitment to hold hearings on the Whitewater affair.
However, the resolution passed last night states that the timing and the format of the hearings won't interfere with the investigation being conducted by special counsel Fiske, so hearings may not occur for some time.
Nussbaum appeared before a Whitewater grand jury.
The departing White House counsel, who was forced to resign over Whitewater, said he answered every question.
White House aide Ickes also testified.
Later, special counsel Fiske subpoenaed senior White House adviser Stephanopoulos to appear before the grand jury.
Two Israeli soldiers testified that they fired directly at a mosque's doorway and not just into the air during the pandemonium of last month's Hebron massacre.
The soldiers, appearing before an Israeli panel investigating the slayings, also raised the possibility that the Jewish settler blamed for the attack had an accomplice.
Israeli forces killed two Palestinians in a gunfight in the Gaza Strip, and 14 other Arabs were wounded in clashes with troops throughout the occupied lands.
With tensions high, Islamic officials closed Muslim monuments in Jerusalem to tourists.
Occidental Chemical won't have to pay punitive damages in the dumping of toxic waste at the Love Canal subdivision in Niagara Falls, N.Y., a judge ruled.
New York state sought as much as $250 million from Occidental.
Federal prosecutors plan to meet next week with lawyers for Rep. Rostenkowski to review allegations that could lead to the Illinois Democrat's indictment on corruption charges.
Anticrime legislation was approved by the House Judiciary Committee that would provide life sentences for people convicted of three serious crimes.
Unlike three-strikes measures in a bill passed in the Senate, the House panel's version would allow an early release from prison of some aged inmates.
Michigan's school-funding vote makes other states more likely to weigh similar proposals that call for higher sales taxes to finance public schools and a lowering of property taxes.
Interior Secretary Babbitt unveiled a scaled-back version of a grazing proposal that he has been trying to implement.
The new version would shift decision-making on federal land use toward the local level.
The SEC is investigating several Arkansas investors, including a group once headed by White House aide Patsy Thomasson, in connection with possible insider trading.
The inquiry is said to involve trading in Arctic Alaska Fisheries stock in 1992 before Tyson Foods announced an acquisiton of the firm.
A landmark trial opened in Versailles for Nazi collaborator Paul Touvier, the first Frenchman to be tried for crimes against humanity.
Touvier, 78, who was intelligence chief for the French militia in occupied Lyon, is charged with complicity in the killings of seven Jews in June 1944.
Mandela called off a visit to the capital of South Africa's Zulu region because aides feared there would be an assassination attempt on the African National Congress president.
Meanwhile, Zulu leader Buthelezi warned of a fierce battle if his party is forced to take part in all-race elections.
