Environmental regulators in the Northeast voted in favor of adopting stringent California-style vehicle-emissions rules that would, in effect, require the sale of electric cars, dealing a setback to the auto industry.
As a result of a vote by regulators meeting in Washington, an organization representing 12 states and the District of Columbia will petition the Environmental Protection Agency to impose a regional vehicle-emissions program similar to that adopted independently by California.
Among other things, the California program requires major auto makers to sell zero-emission vehicles, such as those powered by electricity, beginning in 1998.
The auto industry, led by Detroit's Big Three, has been fighting the Northeast regulators' move toward filing such a petition, arguing chiefly against the zero-emission-vehicle aspects.
Yesterday, the American Automobile Manufacturers Association said it stands by an alternative proposal that it outlined late last year.
That proposal calls for introducing vehicles that are cleaner than currently required under the Clean Air Act, but not electric vehicles.
"We stand ready to work with the state regulators toward the end of adopting something that means something to consumers," an industry spokesman said yesterday.
The Northeast regulators together make up the Ozone Transport Commission, a policy board created under the Clean Air Act to address the region's air-quality problems.
Eight states and the District of Columbia voted for the proposal, more than enough votes for it to move ahead.
Now the recommendation moves to the EPA for a nine-month evaluation period during which some of the regulators hope to hear different alternative proposals from Detroit.
"Even though it focuses on the benefits of the California program, the recommendation offers the full flexibility to come up with an alternative," said Tim Keeney, the commission's vice chairman and Connecticut's commissioner for environmental protection.
Still, staunch supporters of California's zero-emission mandate hailed the 9-4 vote as a strong victory.
Those voting in favor included states such as New York and Massachusetts.
Those two states already have programs modeled on California's that have incurred lawsuits from the industry.
"I think this really moves the debate over the car of the 21st century forward," said Daniel Greenbaum, commissioner for environmental protection in Massachusetts.
The Big Three have opposed the Northeast effort because of its sales mandate for zero-emission vehicles, an initiative they have been working to squelch in California.
Detroit even offered a counterproposal that excluded zero-emission vehicles, but it failed to garner widespread support.
