A pitched battle will be waged this week for the allegiance of so-called independent stations -- television stations not affiliated with a network -- at a convention of television programming executives in Miami Beach.
For years, independent stations have operated in the shadow of the bigger networks, filling their prime-time hours with reruns of theatrical movies.
Now, however, they are being presented with an array of alternatives, including big-budget series with big-name stars, and the choice of linking up with one of two networks that are trying to launch.
Driving the change is the decreasing popularity of movies.
Before independent stations get them, movies have appeared on many other outlets, including pay cable, pay-per-view, home video and sometimes broadcast and basic cable networks.
"By the time they get to us, it becomes harder and harder" to get viewers, says Al DeVaney, senior vice president of WPWR-TV in Chicago, whose station airs movies on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays.
So the 270 or so independents not affiliated with one of the four major broadcast networks -- CBS Inc., General Electric Co.'s NBC, Capital Cities/ABC Inc. or News Corp.'s Fox -- are looking for alternatives.
What they want are big-budget original series, preferably action-adventure shows that viewers can't find on the networks.
Coincidentally, those are the shows that also sell best overseas, which means more money for production budgets.
So program syndicators are trying to accommodate, with a record dozen-plus one-hour shows for prime time.
All will be on display starting tomorrow when the annual convention of the National Association of Television Program Executives, which links program sellers with buyers, gets underway.
More than 10,000 attendees are expected.
One of the most sought-after is a series version of "Lonesome Dove," the CBS miniseries about the Wild West; there's also a series version of the futuristic movie "RoboCop."
Aaron Spelling, the creator of such popular network fare as Fox's soap opera "Beverly Hills 90210," is offering two series targeted to female viewers, "Robin's Hoods" and "Heaven Help Us."
The short-lived ABC police series "Sirens" is being brought back with new episodes.
And former "Wonder Woman" Lynda Carter is co-starring in a frontier adventure, "Hawkeye."
But the stations also are being aggressively wooed by Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Bros. and a joint venture of Paramount Communications Inc. and Chris-Craft Industries Inc.
Both want to change independents into network affiliates.
Both entities are trying to create new broadcast networks, hoping to emulate the success of the fourth network, Fox.
But many analysts believe only one will get off the ground.
The new networks must sign up stations reaching at least 70%, but preferably 85%, of the country.
In some large cities there are two independents, so each network can sign up an affiliate.
But in smaller markets where there is just one independent, the bidding has become intense.
So far, the Paramount Network, whose only announced show is an action-adventure, "Star Trek: Voyager," has lined up 21 stations, reaching 40% of the country, including two stations that signed on last week.
It would launch in January 1995.
The WB network, to begin next fall with the participation of Tribune Co.'s seven independent stations, has signed up 19, reaching 42% of the country.
Tribune's Chicago station, WGN-TV, which is carried nationally via cable, also has signed on, extending the new network's reach to 72%.
WB hasn't announced any programs.
Many stations are hesitating to sign with either, awaiting the outcome of the takeover battle for the Paramount Network's parent.
Barry Diller, chairman of one bidder, QVC Network Inc., has said he doesn't see the need for another general-interest broadcast network.
"Our position is certainly to delay any decision" until Paramount's fate is settled, says L. Lowry Mays, president of Clear Channel Communications Inc., which controls the programming of a handful of independent stations in such cities as Memphis, Tenn.; Little Rock, Ark.; and Tucson, Ariz.
Kerry McCluggage, chairman of the Paramount Television Group, says he's "not at all surprised that stations take that decision very seriously," but adds that others are signing up.
The race to launch a new network, he says "certainly isn't over yet," and likely will drag on another couple months.
By this time next year, only a dozen of the 270 or so general-interest independent stations will be without a network affiliation, predicts James Hedlund, president of INTV, the Association of Independent Television Stations.
One INTV member jokes that the new name should be the Association of Emerging Network Affiliates.
Mr. DeVaney, whose WPWR has aligned with the Paramount Network, says he's interested in what a new network can offer in fresh prime-time programming.
But he says he has enough shows, including "Lonesome Dove: The Series" and the two Spelling shows, to "cover ourselves if" the network doesn't launch.
"The fifth and sixth networks are still very much in question," contends Dick Kurlander, a vice president at Petry Inc., which advises stations on buying shows.
And even if one or both launch, they will start slowly on a few nights, leaving stations with programming holes to fill.
Keith Samples, president of Rysher Entertainment -- which is distributing "Lonesome Dove," "RoboCop" and "Thunder in Paradise" -- says he's "not convinced either network will necessarily succeed."
But he welcomes "anything that encourages more original programs in time periods that traditionally" carried reruns.
Although "Lonesome Dove" has recognition with viewers, it must meet the high standards of the CBS miniseries, on a smaller budget.
"There's always a big risk taking something with an established identity," he notes.
But he adds that unaffiliated stations need something that can "break through the clutter" of multiple channels "and make people aware that you exist."
