Utilities researchers still beat their drums for clean, renewable energy sources, but the voices of their cost-conscious colleagues are growing louder.
The steep drop in crude oil prices -- 25% since November -- and slow-growing demand for electricity have made the futuristic world of biofuels, photovoltaic cells and high-tech wind turbines seem less relevant.
As a result, the scientists who were hired to clean up utilities' smokestacks are feeling the heat themselves.
Edward F. Neuhauser, senior research specialist for Niagara Mohawk Power Corp., and his peers are the industry's idealists, the green-thinking intellectuals who were brought in -- often grudgingly -- to help utilities satisfy environmental regulators.
"The department I'm in is the pie-in-the-sky part of the company," Dr. Neuhauser says.
It's "looked upon with skepticism by everyone else."
Trudging through a snowy valley, the bearded, 42-year-old Dr. Neuhauser inspects a field of willow trees that he's helping to grow as an alternative fuel for coal-burning electric power plants.
With a doctorate in biology and publications on such subjects as how earthworms convert sludge into topsoil, Dr. Neuhauser would seem more at home in academia than working for a utility.
In fact, he spent several years as a Cornell University researcher.
But since 1986, he has put his environmental ideals to what he sees as a tougher test: "The utilities are big potential polluters.
So if you're going to clean things up for the next generation, going to work for the source of the problem may be a better way to effect change than from the outside."
But increasingly, there's also pressure inside.
Dr. Neuhauser's boss, Andrew Vesey, a Niagara Mohawk vice president, says he's telling the utility's researchers, "You have to become more valuable to the people who make decisions on funding you or you won't be here."
All around the nation's $165 billion electric utilities industry, research-and-development budgets for low-polluting energy sources are under pressure.
Research spending has been flat for about five years and is expected to drop 2% in 1994, according to industry estimates.
At stake is the utilities researcher who could potentially save companies money on such expenses as regulatory fines and stopgap equipment.
"We risk wiping out a generation of technological breakthroughs," says Jane Turnbull, project manager at the Electric Power Research Institute, a group of 700 utilities in Palo Alto, Calif.
"Utilities research may become a lost child."
Mr. Vesey, who has nine Niagara Mohawk departments reporting to him, says that the research and development group ranks "ninth in its contribution to the bottom line."
Nonetheless, the utility has increased its annual budget for research on alternative energy tenfold since 1988 to $1.3 million in 1993.
This year, however, Niagara Mohawk's 1994 R&D budget probably won't grow, says Mr. Vesey, who concedes that he's conflicted about the future of such projects as Dr. Neuhauser's experimental willows.
"I have days when I wish I didn't have to look 15 years down the road," he says.
Meanwhile, some other utilities are scrapping plans for major renewable fuel projects.
Arizona Public Service Co., based in Phoenix, recently canceled plans for a joint venture with Mobil Corp. to make solar energy panels.
"No matter how you got the pencil out, the numbers just didn't work out," says Richard MacLean, Arizona Public Service's vice president of environmental health and safety.
Solar power from photovoltaic panels was stalled by high purchase and maintenance costs.
Electricity produced by the panels costs three times as much as power from oil or natural gas.
That's why Mobil is trying to sell off its research data and equipment after investing some $100 million over 19 years.
Tom Lepley, an electrical engineer on Arizona Public Service's research staff, has seen it all before.
Since 1978, his department has been reduced to four people from 12.
In 1985, he received a termination letter himself.
He recalls that it said, "Your services are no longer needed; please look for another position."
But he ignored the notice and managed to stay on the payroll.
"They just sort of forgot about it," he says, "and things eased up."
Luckily for Mr. Lepley, the utility soon received a grant for solar cell research, and he was just about the last person left who knew much about it.
Dodging such bullets is a growing concern among utilities researchers.
William Muston, the R&D manager at Texas Utilities Co. in Dallas, says that although his company has increased spending on his department over the last three years, "our regulators are forcing us to hold the line on costs.
Our latest rate increase is smaller than we had hoped, and somebody's budget is going to get cut."
Better to trim research spending than real muscle and bone, argues Sanford Cohen, a utilities analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co.
"What I have seen of renewables research results so far doesn't impress me as to its economic value," he adds.
"No utility should eliminate R&D completely, but every decision should be made balanced with near-term issues."
Dr. Neuhauser tries to ignore the trend.
As one of 11 electricity researchers at Niagara Mohawk, he spends most days in planning sessions on projects that would take a decade or longer.
He attempts to persuade officials at other utilities to join Niagara Mohawk in various experiments, and he prepares detailed written requests for federal research grants.
A burly man who raises pigs at home and makes his own sausage, Dr. Neuhauser insists that utilities research isn't just for dreamers.
"We're looking for practical and cost-effective solutions to our customers' energy requirements," he says.
Growing enough willows near Niagara Mohawk's Syracuse headquarters, for example, could cut down on the utility's coal use.
That would eliminate the need to spend hundreds of millions of dollars on chemical scrubbing devices to satisfy tightening federal Clear Air Act rules.
But Dr. Neuhauser fears that the purse strings for research at many utilities will continue to draw tighter.
"Very few want to risk being out there in front," he says.
"Almost everyone wants to be second."
