Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's forces have announced their intention to sponsor a bill that would require all private businesses in France to conduct their operations in French.
This calls for retaliation.
Just as nations retaliate against French trade protectionism by slapping punitive duties on French wine, maybe it's time to retaliate against linguistic chauvinism by boycotting the use in the U.S. of savoir faire, je ne sais quoi, R.S.V.P. and cherchez la femme.
For that matter, we might even bar the word chauvinism, derived from Napoleon's bellicose soldier Nicolas Chauvin.
Non-French schoolchildren who are caught singing "Frere Jacques" will be punished severely.
If the French think la patrie est en danger from all those American idioms and technical terms, think of the mispronunciation risks the non-French run trying to buy a ticket to Caen instead of Cannes.
Well, actually no nation is in danger.
We won't deny that language is an emotional issue, but with this absurd measure the French government has confused national pride with cultural intolerance.
Indeed, this legislation feeds off parochialism and will do nothing much but encourage more parochialism.
If it has any effect at all, which is highly unlikely, it will cause foreign businesspeople to shun France in favor of more tolerant precincts in Europe.
Previous attempts by France to defend its cultural purity, such as its refusal to include American movies among the goods that would benefit from the GATT, have been met mostly with smirks.
That Mr. Balladur has chosen to throw his weight behind such a bill does not come as a total surprise.
A battle is shaping up for next year's presidential election, and every French politician knows the usefulness of cultural politics.
The French language does indeed have beauty, but there also is some beauty to the concept of freedom of speech.
There already is chatter that limiting business affairs to French could violate the 1957 Treaty of Rome as well as numerous other European Union regulations.
Before descending into the halls of jurisprudence, however, it's important to highlight the implications of what the government has proposed.
Consider first that violations of this legislation, as written, could result in monetary fines and even incarceration.
Enforcement conjures up comical images of a new layer of state bureaucracy, the Language Police, patrolling the business quarter in Paris in search of violations.
This also raises the question of just what would constitute a breach of the law.
A bad accent?
A misplaced modifier?
But it's also appropriate to ask whether it is the responsibility of government to intervene in this realm of private life.
French institutions have long sought to regulate language from the top.
That's proving more difficult in the information age, when global influences come from everywhere.
Language in fact serves as one of the classic examples of spontaneous, nonregulated cooperation.
People create and reform languages out of a series of voluntary decisions.
The result is a beautiful body of words and meanings created by an invisible hand.
Which reminds us, even if this language war gets hot, there is one French expression we will never boycott: laissez faire.
