After 18 months of looking, Beth Rogers couldn't find a new house in the Dallas area that appealed to her.
"Everything looked alike," she says.
Mrs. Rogers' complaint was being echoed by other house hunters bored with the cookie-cutter, red-brick offerings of home builders, say officials at Dallas-based Centex Corp., the nation's largest home builder.
So the company decided to try something different: synthetic stone and stucco facades with curved, high-pitched roofs copied from older, wealthier Dallas neighborhoods.
Mrs. Rogers jumped at the new, more traditional "Stone Manor" design and picked out a lot in The Colony, a planned community that started in the early 1980s.
"There's more personality to the outside," she says.
"If you use your imagination, you can almost picture yourself in England."
Consumer backlash against copycat home design has begun to show up in focus groups in several Western markets, home builders say.
As a result, new styles are creeping into markets in California, Arizona, Nevada and Texas.
In suburban Philadelphia, Toll Brothers Inc., a major East Coast builder, is now using an equal mix of brick, wood, stucco and stone exteriors instead of the once-dominant Pennsylvania stone design.
"People want something different," says Michael Woodley, senior vice president of architecture at California-based Kaufman & Broad Home Corp.
Market analysts in Southern California say that home buyers are more concerned about their homes' design now because they expect to live in their houses longer and spend more time at home.
"It's going back to the way it was in the '50s and '60s.
It's a return to basics," says Bob Mirman, president of National Survey Systems, a California market-research firm.
When customers in Dallas began saying they wanted a new look, Centex sent its architects to fancy neighborhoods looking for popular features.
Now its entry arches are pulled down to appear more cozy than the bold, imposing spans popular through the 1980s.
The stone on the facade is manufactured with "imperfections" to give it a natural appearance.
And steeper pitches to the roofs give more of a custom-home effect, while windows in the attic, curved roofs and sloped cornices give the homes Mrs. Rogers' English look.
Home interiors are changing, too.
Many home builders are opening up floor plans by adding windows and raising ceilings.
Mr. Mirman says buyers are willing to sacrifice space in the living room, dining room and master bedroom for larger family rooms and kitchens.
They also want bigger secondary bedrooms because they figure their children may grow into teenagers in the house and they may need a home office.
"They don't want the glitz and glamour of the '80s anymore," he says.
"In the '80s, we built big master-bedroom suites.
Now the requirement is function over style."
Beyond keeping up with fashion trends, builders see the new designs as profit-margin boosters, says R.L. Brown, publisher of the Phoenix Housing Market Letter.
When builders construct essentially the same house and pay roughly the same amount for materials and labor, "the consumer goes for the cheapest, and that's the one that the guy is making the least money on," he explains.
In addition, home builders, while basking in record profits because of the newly robust housing market, have begun positioning themselves for the inevitable downturn.
"You want to avoid a direct comparison" with other homes, Mr. Brown says.
"You want to offer a reason other than price to buy your home."
But the new designs may not remain unique for long in a business where successes are quickly copied.
Richard Sconyers, head of Centex's Southwest home-building division, points to local newspaper ads as evidence that other companies are already copying the company's designs.
Centex says the initial response to Stone Manor has been so positive that it will replace all its Texas offerings with the 15-model line, though a red-brick version will always be available.
Stone Manor prices range from $113,000 for a three-bedroom, 1,869-square-foot house in a distant, eastern Dallas suburb to $187,950 for a four-bedroom, 3,135-square-foot house with a bonus family room in the hot areas north of the city.
Since the line's introduction in late January, Mr. Sconyers says, preliminary sales figures show 35% of buyers are choosing the new designs when they're available.
The company is also redoing its Phoenix offerings, offering a new "Prairie Series" inspired by Frank Lloyd Wright and the "prairie school" of architecture.
The rambling one-story houses are designed with flatter roofs for a more horizontal, contemporary look.
"It's more classically simple than all that Spanish stuff," says Centex's chief architect, David Wheatley, who spent 16 years in the Wright organization.
Kaufman & Broad has added stone and brick accents to its stucco homes in Phoenix.
Other builders there are changing the color of the stucco, moving away from white and peach toward earthier tones.
In California, Kaufman & Broad offers an East Coast-style home with wood siding, wood shutters and a raised front porch big enough for sitting out and chatting in the evening.
"That's what houses in New Haven, Conn., have," says Mr. Woodley, K&B's chief architect.
But in Antelope Valley, the design is new and popular.
"It's like an extra room," he says.
"You expect to see someone spitting watermelon seeds while the screen door slams."
Some analysts wonder whether home buyers' fascination with the new designs will last.
Builders have "tried to get away from the `north Dallas special' before" with little success, notes Ron Witten of M/PF Real Estate Research in Dallas.
"The question is, will it sell?"
At one Centex subdivision, where the stucco has already chipped off around the top of a model-home front window, a saleswoman says only 20% of customers are looking at the new series, which typically costs $2,000 to $3,000 more.
And real-estate agents believe buyer concerns about resale values may keep some customers from breaking away from the pack.
"I had one client who liked the stone, but there was so much brick around they were intimidated and chose brick," says Ellen Verlanic of Murray Realtors.
Those fears -- and the market's recent torrid pace -- have prompted some builders to go slow in changing their designs.
Kaufman & Broad set up shop in Denver last year and found that consumers were perfectly happy with copycat wood-sided homes.
Continental Homes Holding Corp., the biggest builder in Phoenix, says it plans no changes there.
Sales are so good, says Randy Thovson, head of product development, that "basically, we're just an order taker in this market."
But standing pat may be dangerous.
"Today's home buyer is certainly more particular than ever before," says Mr. Brown, the Phoenix-based market researcher.
"The builder who wants to stick with plain vanilla will get left in the dust."
