The Federal Reserve Board said it needs more time to decide whether to reconsider its rejection of a petition by Shawmut National Corp. to acquire New Dartmouth Bank in Manchester, N.H.
Last November, the Fed shocked the banking world by denying Shawmut's application to acquire New Dartmouth, citing questions about Shawmut's minority-lending record.
Shawmut Mortgage Corp., a unit of Shawmut National, settled lending-discrimination charges with the Justice Department in December, agreeing to set up a $960 million fund to compensate blacks and Hispanics who may have been unfairly denied mortgages.
Shawmut said last week that it had asked the Fed to reconsider the bank's application for New Dartmouth.
Yesterday, the board said it needs additional information, including results of examinations by the Fed itself and the comptroller of the currency on lending practices of Shawmut and its subsidiaries.
The board said it also will allow for public comment on the proposed acquisition through March 31.
A Fed spokesman said the deferral is "mostly procedural," and "there shouldn't be any red flags raised on this."
Shawmut, a bank holding company based in Hartford, Conn., said yesterday it is confident that the Fed eventually will approve the merger.
Robert Guenther, a Shawmut spokesman, said the bank just last week submitted new data tracking its mortgage loans by the race and income of borrowers.
A compilation of data by The Wall Street Journal last December showed that Shawmut Mortgage rejected on average 2.47 mortgage applications by blacks in 1992 for each white applicant who was turned down.
That ratio had declined from 2.92 in 1990 and 2.72 in 1991.
Nationwide, the ratio was 2.06 in 1992 compared with 1.91 in 1991.
SHAWMUT MORTGAGE Corp., a unit of Shawmut National Corp., agreed in December to establish a $960,000 fund to compensate blacks and Hispanics whose mortgage applications it may have unfairly denied.
An article yesterday incorrectly stated the size of the fund as $960 million.
