The average young American adult gained a "shocking" 10 pounds in the past seven years despite a low-cholesterol, low-fat diet, the government reported.
"This is bad news," said Cora E. Lewis, an epidemiologist at the University of Alabama in Birmingham.
"It's not just people getting older and heavier, but the population is getting heavier," she told a meeting of the American Heart Association.
The director of the federal study, Diane Bild of the National Institutes of Health, said the weight gain "was totally unexpected."
It was particularly surprising because the American diet has improved in recent years, and cholesterol levels have been dropping.
In 1992-93, Dr. Lewis found that the average weight of adults ages 25-30 was 171 pounds.
In 1985-86, the average weight was 161 pounds for people that age.
People's weight normally rises as they age, but the effect Dr. Lewis was talking about wasn't the result of aging.
It was seen in two groups of young adults of the same ages.
"That amount of change in that time period is shocking," Dr. Lewis said.
The study did not address the cause of the weight gain, but Dr. Lewis speculated that a decline in physical activity was likely responsible.
However, a forthcoming study from the National Center for Health Statistics concludes that Americans are consuming more calories, though the amount of cholesterol and fat in the American diet is dropping.
A summary of that study appeared Feb. 25 in The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly report, a CDC publication.
Becky Huff Lankenau, a nutritionist at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, said the new study illustrates the need for educating and encouraging young people to exercise.
"Probably the safest and most positive thing would be to nurture the idea of physical activity," she said.
The study by Dr. Lewis and Dr. Bild and their colleagues was based on data on 5,115 people, equally divided among blacks and whites and men and women.
The participants came from Chicago, Minneapolis, Birmingham and Oakland, Calif.
While weight climbed in the group in 1992-93, cholesterol levels dropped nine points, probably because the diets contained less cholesterol and saturated fat, Dr. Bild said.
That improvement in diet should reduce the heart-disease risks of those young adults, but it's not known whether the weight gain will counteract that benefit, she said.
The drop in cholesterol levels was especially strong in the black participants.
The decrease was about six to seven points in whites, and about 12 points in blacks, Dr. Bild said.
Dr. Lewis attributed the apparent decline in physical activity to the growing number of Americans working in offices, where they are less likely to be physically active than they might be in manufacturing jobs or other work.
The growth of the suburbs also has made people more likely to drive cars and less likely to walk several blocks to a train station or a bus stop.
