You would think that Lancer Corp. had a rotten financial track record.
A recent phone call to the San Antonio manufacturer of beverage-dispensing equipment elicited this irritated response from the woman who answered: "Well, what makes you think we want to talk about that?
Don't you think it should be our decision if we want our company in the newspaper or not?"
Reporters aren't the only ones who get the cold shoulder.
Investors and stock analysts say it's nearly impossible to squeeze anything out of secretive Lancer, save for the quarterly and yearly filings it must make as a publicly traded entity.
One money manager even called Coca-Cola, Lancer's main customer, in search of insight.
Coke, instead of making any comments, called Lancer.
Lancer phoned the money manager and warned him to stop snooping.
"This is just a bizarre little company; you'd think they're on a spy mission," says yet another money manager, who, like most people contacted for this article, says he doesn't want to be named for fear of angering Lancer.
Funny thing is, Lancer doesn't appear to be rotten at all.
In fact, it has been racking up the kinds of numbers that would make most companies crow: For the latest nine months, Lancer had profit of $1.9 million, or 81 cents a share, an 87% increase over the $1 million, or 44 cents a share, earned in the year-earlier period, excluding extraordinary items.
Revenue is growing at about a 30% annual clip.
The stock price has more than doubled in the past year -- including a 30% jump since Dec. 31; Lancer currently trades around $18.
"They've got incredible growth ahead of them -- just incredible," says Dallas money manager Frederick "Shad" Rowe, the only voice willing to be quoted, and who, in the same breath, notes that Lancer is run by "just a bunch of cranky, grumpy old men."
The secret to Lancer's success -- and its popularity with Wall Street, despite management's demeanor -- is its expertise at the surprisingly complicated task of making soda-fountain dispensers.
Founded in 1967 by brothers Alfred and George Schroeder, (who were 56 and 53 years old, respectively, last year, according to a company proxy statement), the family-run business has won reknown for designing state-of-the-art valves that guarantee just the right blend of syrup and carbonated water to make your Coke taste, well, like Coke.
This isn't as easy as it sounds: To ensure consistency, fountain equipment must take into account various factors, such as syrup thickness, carbonation, humidity, temperature and pressure.
As it turns out, "Lancer has the best dispensing valve in the world," reports Mr. Rowe, whose fund owns about 5.8% of the company's shares outstanding.
So superb is this system at mixing the perfect soft drink that Coca-Cola has lassoed Lancer as its dispenser maker of choice, and, according to some money managers, has rebuffed rival PepsiCo's attempts to horn in.
Under agreements with Coca-Cola, Lancer is obligated to make its manufacturing expertise available solely for the benefit of the Atlanta cola concern.
Lancer fixtures reputedly dispense 95% of Coke's fountain business world-wide.
As for the other 5%: The makers of that equipment rely on Lancer components.
As a result, Coca-Cola accounts for about three-fourths of Lancer's net sales.
"Wherever you find a Coke coming out of a fountain," one follower says, "you can bet it's probably coming out of a Lancer dispenser."
The downside of such dependence, of course, comes if another company uncorks a better way of dispensing the perfect fountain Coke; Lancer could see its sales spigot shut off.
No one foresees that, though, namely because Coca-Cola helps fund Lancer's research and development.
The forecasts of continued growth are based largely on the rapidly growing market for fountain-dispensed drinks overseas.
While the U.S. market has gone flat, "foreign markets are going through what the U.S. did 10 and 20 years ago with the growth of fast-food outlets," says Robert Nicolson, chief financial officer at Anoka, Minn.-based IMI Cornelius, the world's largest maker of fountain-dispensing systems, and a unit of British conglomerate IMI PLC.
Mr. Nicolson rates Lancer his employer's most respected competitor.
The only thing more difficult than getting information from Lancer is snapping up shares of its stock.
Only 2.36 million shares exist; of that, management owns just under one million shares, while large-block shareholders control another 500,000 or so.
Even competitors are said to hold stakes.
Thus, the number of tradable shares is thought to be less than 300,000.
When one money manager tried to pick up 5,000 shares recently, he couldn't find enough sellers.
But his efforts caused the stock to rise $5 a share in three days.
One group excited about Lancer's prospects, although it plays down its interest, is Dallas-based GHS Management.
Last month, the money-management firm announced -- only because Securities and Exchange Commission laws mandate as much -- that it had accumulated a 9.2% stake in Lancer stock.
However, that's as far as GHS Management will go with public disclosure; owner Jim Smith declines to discuss Lancer.
Similarly, a call to New York broker/dealer Neuberger and Berman, which owns more than 6% of the company's shares, generates little more than "we don't really don't care to comment on such matters."
Software Spectrum shares dropped $5.75, or nearly 25%, after a Piper Jaffray analyst downgraded the stock to "reasonably priced" from "buy."
The Garland-based reseller of microcomputer business software last week reported third-quarter net income of 41 cents a share, compared with 48 cents a year ago.
Piper Jaffray had estimated 60 cents for the period.
Cooper Industries dropped more than 20% after the company announced that it anticipates a "significant decline in earnings . . . as much as 25%" for 1994.
The Houston-based diversified manufacturing company attributes the expected decline to the recent drop in oil prices, which is affecting the company's Petroleum & Industrial Equipment unit.
As a result, Cooper said operating earnings at Petroleum & Industrial could drop by about 75%.
Pizza Inn and Pilgrim's Pride gained 15% and 8.2%, respectively, thanks to improved earnings.
For the six months ended Dec. 26, Pizza Inn of Dallas reported net income of $988,000, or seven cents a share, compared with $787,000, or six cents a share, a year ago.
The pizza concern also noted that sales at stores open a year or more increased 5% in the first six months.
Pilgrim's Pride of Pittsburg, a producer of chicken products, reported that for the fiscal first quarter ended Jan. 1, net income jumped to $8.4 million, or 31 cents a share, compared with last year's $6.8 million, or 25 cents a share.
Zonagen, with a tiny market capitalization of about $37 million, popped up Monday on the BioWorld Financial Watch list of last week's top gainers.
Zonagen, The Woodlands-based biomedical concern, jumped 21% to $11 a share.
The company named Robert S. Schenken, a nationally recognized female infertility and endometriosis expert, as chief scientific adviser, female infertility.
