The Justice Department cleared Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown of allegations that he sought a bribe to help liberalize U.S.-Vietnam trade relations.
"We have completed a thorough investigation and have concluded that the evidence does not substantiate the allegation that Mr. Brown entered into any such agreement," said Joseph Gangloff, acting chief of the department's public integrity section, in a letter to Mr. Brown's lawyer.
"No further investigation is warranted.
Accordingly, we are closing the investigation."
Federal investigators concluded weeks ago there was no case against Mr. Brown.
But top Justice Department officials wanted to be certain every possible lead had been checked before issuing the clearance letter, so that no credible charge of a coverup could be raised.
Reid Weingarten, Mr. Brown's lawyer, said the Federal Bureau of Investigation "went by the book.
They turned over every rock, as we had expected, and found absolutely nothing to corroborate the allegations."
Mr. Brown's office released a statement saying the commerce secretary "has maintained from the outset that the allegations were baseless."
Mr. Brown, it continued, "is pleased that the inquiry has fully and fairly exonerated him of any wrongdoing."
About a year ago, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., businessman, Ly Thanh Binh -- also known as Binh Ly -- told federal agents and reporters that Mr. Brown requested $700,000, plus oil and gas royalties, to advance Vietnamese trade interests.
Mr. Binh, who admitted that he had never spoken to Mr. Brown, said his information came from Nguyen Van Hao, a former South Vietnamese official who allegedly served as the middle-man between the secretary and Vietnamese officials.
Mr. Hao, who was a business partner with Mr. Binh, denied Mr. Binh's allegations.
Both Mr. Hao and Mr. Binh appeared before a federal grand jury in Miami, which investigated the charges.
Mr. Hao's lawyer released a statement saying Mr. Hao believes closing the case "was just, fair and a complete vindication of his actions, character and truthfulness."
Mr. Binh said "wrongdoing is taking place and is being suppressed by the administration."
Though there never was any support for Mr. Binh's allegations, Mr. Brown's credibility was questioned by some conservative Republicans after a Commerce Department spokesman issued a statement last August saying Mr. Brown never "had any business, financial or professional relationship with any Vietnamese individual, organization or group, or any person claiming to represent Vietnamese government or business interests."
The next month, Mr. Weingarten said the secretary met Mr. Hao three times between November 1992 and January 1993, including once in Mr. Brown's Commerce Department office.
Payments to Mr. Brown were never discussed, Mr. Weingarten said.
Mr. Brown's supporters have speculated that the allegations were raised to derail any Clinton administration effort to normalize relations with Vietnam.
Rep. Dana Rohrabacher (R., Calif.) said he hopes to question Mr. Brown about the allegations sometime when the commerce secretary testifies before Congress.
Mr. Brown said during a hearing last year that he wouldn't answer questions about the allegations during the investigation.
Separately, Justice Department officials have decided they won't prosecute two former State Department employees who searched the personnel files of 160 Bush administration appointees.
The two former employees were Clinton campaign workers who were fired by Secretary of State Warren Christopher for going through the files of GOP appointees temporarily retained by the Clinton administration.
