"Profits of Science: The American Marriage of Business and Technology" (Basic, 272 pages, $23) recounts some of high technology's greatest war stories in a series of compact narratives.
What makes these corporate case histories fascinating is not simply the spectacular "profits of science" of the title, but the tendency of technologies to succeed magnificently just before failing.
The business trajectories of technology products -- televisions, computers, VCRs, packaged software -- have gone off like a succession of roman candles.
It seems the explosion of high-technology success can often obliterate the very business that creates it.
The explosions occur not in the laboratory but in the marketplace.
In Robert Teitelman's model, the technology business proceeds in cycles, and the passage of success into failure, usually through commoditization, would appear to be part of the normal course of things.
He uses his cyclic concept as an organizing principle in presenting case studies of corporations with resonant names from the history of high tech such as AT&T, RCA, Raytheon, Du Pont, Philco, Syntex, Texas Instruments, Fairchild Semiconductor, Intel, Genentech and Microsoft.
He also tells the stories of long-gone players with unfamiliar names such as Transitron and Amelco.
Precisely because they have disappeared, these obscure technology companies also offer lessons.
One way to see where a specific company or industry is in Mr. Teitelman's cycle is to notice the size of the gap between its science and its technology.
Such a gap can be seen between biology and medicine, for example, or between semiconductor physics and semiconductor chip-making.
When a science is new or difficult to translate into marketable products, the gap between science and technology is very wide.
At this early point in the cycle, big companies are favored because of their capital strength and in-house research.
As it becomes easier to develop products, the technology becomes accessible to smaller, more nimble entrepreneurial firms, who typically run away with it.
Runaway success magnetizes the attention of rivals, competition heats up, prices collapse, and the excitement ends in commoditization, shakeouts and the survival of a few formerly entrepreneurial firms -- now grown big.
These survivors will have protected themselves in some way: by economies of scale, by marketing skill, by capital muscle or by proprietary technical standards and patents.
Mr. Teitelman makes it a point to separate the history of the technologies from the history of their hype.
He has a wonderful ear for bombast, and overblown pronouncements of technology revolutions are salted through the book.
He quotes Radio Corp. of America's David Sarnoff, for example, introducing television at the New York World's Fair in 1939 as ". . . an art that shines like a torch of hope in a troubled world . . . a creative force which we must learn to utilize for all mankind."
Then Sarnoff concluded his speech by switching on a boxing match.
The notion is now commonplace that in high-technology industries, the large corporation has permanently given way to small, efficient and heroic entrepreneurial enterprises.
But Mr. Teitelman argues that in fact nothing has changed -- in these industries the pendulum always swings the other way, sooner or later.
Over the past half-century many corporate Goliaths have fallen before the more adroit, entrepreneurial Davids, yes.
But this need not mean technology enterprise has passed through the threshold to a permanent new age of little guys.
Later in the cycle, the Davids become Goliaths.
This is one interpretation of what has happened to companies such as Apple Computer, Microsoft and Intel.
But you do not have to agree with the cyclic concept to enjoy this book.
From his case histories of postwar technology companies you can draw your own lessons.
Mr. Teitelman's parenthetical remarks are a treat.
For example, he notes that Admiral Corp.'s "success was one sign of what really mattered in television -- not innovative technology, which in its gross features was fixed, but the perception of technology."
While RCA boasted its sets had fewer tubes, an engineered advantage, Admiral was gleefully selling a "DynaMagic" radio and a "Magic Mirror" television with gold-plated control knobs and an on-off "jewel light."
Admiral also underpriced its competition, and so began the television-manufacturing industry's slide into commoditization.
The book is flawed by careless technical writing.
Cyclotrons (which weigh as much as 100 tons and do not move) are characterized as "whirling."
DNA, the world's most famous nucleic acid, is presented as a protein.
But never mind.
This is not a book about how technologies work; it is about how technology businesses have worked, and failed to work, and then, in some instances, gone on to prosper.
It is a good resource and a pleasure to read.
Mr. Gianturco is president of The Princeton Portfolios, an asset-management service.
