The Interior Department reached an agreement with one of two large sugar companies on cleaning agricultural runoff from the Florida Everglades.
In the agreement, Flo-Sun Inc., West Palm Beach, Fla., will drop a lawsuit against the department and the Florida state government over environmental regulation of the Everglades.
It also pledged to pay over 20 years as much as $100 million to finance cleanup of phosphorous that has washed off farmland and into the area's waterways.
The area's other major sugar company, U.S. Sugar Corp., declined to join the agreement, and will proceed with plans to fight government regulations on the matter in court.
U.S. Sugar and Flo-Sun each own roughly 30% of the farmland in the Everglades area.
The Interior Department last July announced that it reached an outline agreement with both U.S. Sugar and Flo-Sun that Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt said would result in "the largest, most ambitious ecosystem-restoration project ever undertaken in this country."
But talks with U.S. Sugar broke down in December over an Everglades land-use study prepared for the Army Corps of Engineers by an Interior Department science panel.
At the time, U.S. Sugar said the study, prepared independently of the talks, proposed sweeping additional limits on farmland in the Everglades area.
The company said negotiations couldn't continue unless the Interior Department pledged not to implement them for 20 years.
The Interior Department refused.
But Flo-Sun, which is privately held by members of the Fanjul family, quietly kept negotiating with the department, an effort that culminated in yesterday's agreement.
George Frampton, assistant secretary for fish, wildlife and parks, said it was "actually quite a bit better deal for the government than what we've been negotiating for the last six months."
He added that now that Flo-Sun has dropped out of the lawsuit, U.S. Sugar's "litigation expenses have just doubled. . . .
We're going to increase the pressure on anybody who doesn't sign."
Robert Buker, senior vice president for U.S. Sugar, said the company didn't sign on to the agreement because there was no guarantee that the science panel's plan wouldn't be implemented, and because the state of Florida hasn't yet signed on.
"We're an employee-owned company," he said.
"We don't have the luxury of picking up our capital and moving it overseas."
But Donald Carson, executive vice president of Flo-Sun, said "we are convinced we're doing the right thing, and we hope the other farmers will join us."
In addition to U.S. Sugar, several smaller farmers are pressing the lawsuit.
It is due to come to trial April 25 in federal district court in Tallahassee, Fla.
