South Korea's Finance Ministry, aiming to simplify foreign-investment procedures, unveiled plans to revise a law on bringing foreign capital into the country.
Under the proposal, effective July 1, foreign businesses that don't require government approval could be launched upon filing a report; such clearance now takes as long as a month.
The waiting period for projects needing government approval would be cut to 5 from 30 days.
The revision also would lift a ban on foreign investment in sectors that use lots of energy or imported raw materials, and those that get subsidies.
But curbs will remain on investment in areas that could hurt the environment or are incompatible with national customs.
Meanwhile, starting March 1, the state-run Korea Development Bank and Industrial Bank of Korea may accept investment proposals from foreigners, who now must go through the central bank.
And starting July 1, other foreign-exchange banks will be authorized to participate.
Hungary will auction off as many as 250 unproductive or dilapidated state properties, including castles, city mansions, country homes, mills, inns and hunting lodges.
The privatization effort, also intended to preserve or refurbish some architecturally distinct properties, will begin in the spring, after the government evaluates the assets.
Prices could range from $49,000 to $980,000.
Hungarians, who may use special loans and compensation coupons awarded to victims of property nationalizations, will get preference in the sell-off if they match offers by foreigners.
Deaths of Japanese men from lung cancer totaled 20,036 in last year's first eight months, surpassing stomach-cancer deaths at 19,769.
The stomach disease had been the biggest cause of cancer deaths for the previous 40 years.
The Health and Welfare Ministry said the new trend was certain to apply for the full year.
In the past three decades, the proportion of men's deaths from stomach cancer fell, attributed to eating less-salty foods, while lung-cancer cases increased, 70% of them linked to smoking.
But stomach cancer remained the leading cause of cancer deaths among Japanese women.
Pope John Paul II characterized television as a major threat to family life and urged legally enforceable codes of ethics for the industry.
In a message for the Roman Catholic Church's 38th World Day of Communications, the pontiff said TV programs glorify sex and violence, recklessly spread false values, and distort and manipulate accounts of news events.
Criticizing the use of TV as "an electronic baby-sitter," he challenged parents to turn their sets off when appropriate.
He also urged them to get tough with producers, advertisers and governments to foster morally enriching programming.
Tropical timber exporters supported a new accord to promote forest conservation, after rich countries made an unprecedented pledge to apply similar standards in their logging industries, United Nations officials in Geneva said.
About 50 countries are to approve a new International Tropical Timber Agreement tomorrow.
Under the pact that expires March 31, exporters in the Far East, Africa and Latin America embraced conservation measures in return for reforestation funding from Western countries.
But those producers said the accord put them at a market disadvantage because it imposed forest management standards only on them.
Vietnam's agricultural production last year climbed 14% to $59.3 million from a year earlier, government radio said.
The report cited strides by the food processing industry, which led other sectors with an 11% increase in output to $49.3 million.
Agricultural trade for the year totaled $351.8 million, the Agriculture and Food Industry Ministry said.
Farm exports were valued at $235.7 million, up 6.1%, while imports declined 10% to $116.1 million.
Citing widespread misunderstanding about taxes that took effect Jan. 1, the Chinese government is sending out a million people to explain the new tax laws.
The chief of Beijing's tax agency said tax officials and local government and civic leaders will hit the streets to educate the public, Ta Kung Pao, a Beijing-funded newspaper in Hong Kong, reported.
The new levies, including consumption and value-added taxes, are designed to enlarge the central government's share of revenues and advance its goal of adopting some aspects of a market economy.
Meanwhile, the Beijing-funded Wen Wei Po newspaper in Hong Kong said Chinese media and publishing officials gathered for China's first national propaganda meeting since 1957, to examine how to publicize the country's market reforms through newspapers, broadcasting, publishing and the arts.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Taiwan's 1993 unemployment rate fell to 1.45%, an 11-year low, as many men took early retirement, cutting the ratio of male job holders among those employable to a record low 73%. . . .
The Big Ben clock atop Britain's Parliament mysteriously stopped Sunday for three hours for the second time in eight months.
Last May, amid efforts to identify the problem, the 135-year-old clock restarted itself.
