PepsiCo Inc. said it plans to invest $350 million in China in the next five years, matching equally bullish efforts by Coca-Cola Co. in the largely untapped market.
Pepsi said it received government approval to build 10 bottling plants in China, which will result in a $350 million investment by the company and a $250 million investment by its local joint-venture partners.
PepsiCo, based in Purchase, N.Y., already owns eight bottling plants in China and has invested $100 million there.
"Early in the next century we expect China to be the second-largest market after the U.S.," says James Lawrence, president of Pepsi-Cola International's Asia, Middle East and Africa division.
Michael Branca, analyst with NatWest Securities Corp., says, "In such a rapidly expanding market, all industry participants will be beneficiaries of growth."
Coca-Cola, which runs 13 bottling plants in China, announced plans last year to build an additional 10 plants for a total investment in China by the company and its joint-venture partners of about $500 million by 1996.
Dallas-based Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Cos. has teamed up with a bottler in southern China to build a concentrate plant for Dr Pepper and other flavored sodas, and it is now considering plans to expand bottling operations in the region this year.
Coca-Cola, based in Atlanta, holds about 12% of China's soft-drink market, compared with 5% for Pepsi, according to Beverage Digest, a trade publication.
The companies are competing against about 3,000 local brands, of which orange drinks are the most popular.
The U.S. brands sell for about 10 to 15 cents for an eight-ounce returnable glass bottle, compared with five or 10 cents for local brands, according to Pepsi's Mr. Lawrence.
Now, with distribution of U.S. brands limited primarily to coastal cities, 50-cent cans of Pepsi are being resold by middlemen in the country's interior for 75 cents or more, Mr. Lawrence says.
As part of its investment, Pepsi plans to blanket countryside market stalls with ice chests and coolers for its products, as well as signs.
The Chinese soft-drink market accounted for just 700 million cases last year, or about 13 servings a person, compared with about eight billion cases, or nearly 800 servings a person, in the U.S.
