The economy's extremely strong performance in last year's fourth quarter has raised expectations about this year's first half.
The Commerce Department said economic growth shot up at an annual rate of 5.9% in the December quarter while inflation stayed well in check.
That's the best performance the economy has turned in since the fourth quarter of 1987 -- three years before the country slipped into recession.
Growth was entirely in the private sector, as government spending continued to shrink.
For the year, gross domestic product -- the value of goods and services produced in the U.S. -- expanded 2.9%, up from 2.6% in 1992.
But more important than what that strong growth says about a quarter that is now history is what it suggests about the rest of this year.
And though almost no one expects growth to keep up the breakneck pace of the fourth quarter, some analysts seem to be very encouraged that the economy may be a bit stronger than people have generally thought.
The surprisingly upbeat economic report sent stock and bond prices higher on Friday.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average shot up 19.13 points, to 3945.43, its second straight record last week.
Treasury bond prices rose across the board, primarily because the economy's surge was accompanied with minimal inflation.
Jim Meil, chief economist of Eaton Corp., a maker of auto parts in Cleveland, said that on Thursday, he put the probability of 4%-plus growth in 1994 at about one in five.
On Friday, after he had seen the details of economic growth in the fourth quarter, he said the probability of 4%-plus growth was roughly 33%.
Mr. Meil's forecast is for growth at a 3.5% annual rate in the first quarter and a 3% pace in the second.
"It may be that this economy has stronger legs than we have given it credit for," said Robert Dederick, chief economist of Northern Trust in Chicago.
More important than the mood of economists, however, is that consumers actually seem to believe things are getting better to stay.
The University of Michigan consumer sentiment index is said to have risen to 94.3% in January from 88.2% in December.
The Conference Board's consumer confidence index has been rising since October.
Businesses are a bit more upbeat, too.
"We see business as being strong throughout the entire industrial sector and expect it to stay that way for the next six to eight months," said Patrick Parker, chairman of Parker Hannifin Corp., which supplies major components to industrial-equipment companies.
Mr. Parker says the industrial side of his company is up 15% from year-ago levels.
"The economy seems a little more predictable and sustainable," said David Freeman, chief executive of Loctite Corp., an adhesive company in Hartford, Conn.
"We now see one step forward and no steps back."
The growth in the fourth quarter was strong in areas where low interest rates tend to play a big part.
Housing investment rose at a huge, 31.7% annual rate in the fourth quarter.
Consumer spending on durable goods, such as cars and furniture for their new homes, shot up at a 14.4% pace.
Business investment in capital equipment rose at a 24.6% rate.
And after a deep slump, investment in commercial buildings was up at a 10.7% annual pace during the quarter.
There is mounting evidence that growth will stay at a fairly reasonable pace in the first part of 1994 and not peter out as it did in the first part of last year.
For one thing, home sales and housing starts closed out the year strongly, suggesting that residential construction will remain fairly upbeat this year.
Also, domestic auto makers have said they plan another increase in car assemblies during the first quarter.
Commerce Department chief economist Lewis Alexander said that recent surveys suggest business investment in capital equipment is likely to stay strong and that rising stock prices should help capital investment as well.
What is very exciting about the new growth in the economy is that it has been accompanied by relatively little in the way of price increases.
The fixed-weight price index -- the broadest measure of inflation -- rose at only a 2.2% annual rate in the fourth quarter, the same as in the third period, when the economy grew at a more sluggish 2.9% rate.
What economists are wondering about is the effect the Los Angeles earthquake and the wintry weather will have on economic activity in the first quarter.
Laura Tyson, who heads the president's Council of Economic Advisers, said the earthquake will probably have a negative effect on the economy.
The effect of the weather, she said, was harder to call.
"We can make up our spending from one week in ice-bound houses, but if it's two or three or four weeks, it gets harder to make up during the quarter," Ms. Tyson said.
The cold weather will undoubtedly bump up industrial production and capacity use at utilities.
Exports rose at a strong, 14.7% annual rate in the fourth quarter, even though many large U.S. trading partners are still having economic difficulties.
The trade gap worsened again, however, because imports grew at a faster pace.
Analysts expect exports to improve in 1994.
"The world in which we sell our exports will expand at a faster clip in 1994 than it did in 1993," Ms. Tyson said.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here are some of the major components of the gross domestic product expressed in seasonally adjusted annual rates in billions of constant (1987) dollars: from 1.6% in the previous quarter.
