Herein, we offer a case history of why this White House routinely stumbles into trouble.
It mainly has to do with what now appears to be some lemminglike instinct never to give straight answers to even legitimate questions about its behavior.
By default, the world is left to speculate about what exactly is going on in there.
Last week, Press Secretary Dee Dee Myers acknowledged that she and more than 100 other White House staffers have failed to obtain permanent White House passes.
Rep. Frank Wolf, a Virginia Republican who has been trying unsuccessfully for nine months to get a straight answer on security procedures out of the White House, asks: "What is going on over there?
This is like no other White House I've ever heard of.
Why does this matter?
Ever since Lyndon Johnson tightened White House security procedures, the Secret Service has screened presidential employees for security concerns as well as any "embarrassment or lack of suitability they might pose for an administration.
All staffers must fill out a Form 86 background questionnaire.
This is then used by the FBI to conduct a 45- to 90-day background check, which then goes to the Secret Service.
The Service cannot decide who gets White House passes, but it would be unprecedented for its suggested turndowns to be overridden by the White House counsel's office, whose responsibility it is to rule on who gets a permanent pass.
Such a pass is a prerequisite for a separate determination on who gets a security clearance.
And yes, security still matters around the White House of the United States.
Ms. Myers says the problem is merely "procrastination.
She says only a few senior officials lack permanent passes, but among them are herself and Ricki Seidman, who runs the president's scheduling office.
Ms. Myers currently has routine access to classified material, even though she hasn't finished an FBI clearance.
"I have no excuse, she says of her failure to provide the proper background data, saying she put it off because the process was so laborious.
We talked about this with Phil Larsen, who has worked for five presidents on budget and accounting issues.
He was Jimmy Carter's White House administrative officer.
Under President Bush he ran the White House personnel management office.
"This administration's problems with people lacking permanent passes and security clearances has never happened before, to my knowledge, he told us.
"Others had a problem case or two, but not dozens of people.
Despite Ms. Myers's assurances, several Members of Congress are concerned the security bottlenecks may be due in part to what the FBI discovered.
The Washington Times cites intelligence sources who say that some of the current background checks have turned up the "use of illegal drugs, convictions of drug offenses, alcoholism and failure to pay federal or state income taxes.
Ms. Myers told reporters last Friday that she "wouldn't know about any details involving individual cases, and says she doesn't know if any passes have been pulled by the Secret Service but then reinstated on orders from the White House counsel's office.
Compounding the problem, a former Clinton White House aide told us that several three- or six-month temporary White House passes that are issued in lieu of a permanent pass have been extended with no questions asked.
Paperwork is said to be piling up on the desk of Associate White House Counsel William Kennedy III, the former Rose Law Firm partner and the decision-maker on White House passes and clearances.
Congressman Wolf says he has received zero cooperation from the White House in finding out how many temporary passes exist and how many are held by "visiting FOBs.
Last October, Chief of Staff Mack McLarty wrote him to say that "identities of holders of passes to the White House are confidential.
Last month, Mr. McLarty wrote Rep. Wolf again to assure him that "security clearances are being handled in a timely manner and in accordance with the procedures of previous administrations.
But Mr. Larsen and other former White House staffers say that previous administrations would not have stonewalled Members of Congress over who holds a White House pass.
John Schmitz was deputy White House counsel during the Bush Administration, which was a fierce defender of presidential authority.
"If a Member of Congress on an oversight committee wanted that information, we would have given a personal oral briefing to preserve confidentiality, he told us.
Rep. Wolf speculates that the White House may be stonewalling him because it's unwilling to rein in the many FOBs who don't work for the government yet have free access to the White House.
On Monday, Mr. Wolf wrote to Lloyd Cutler, the interim White House counsel, asking for his help on the matter.
This was after the White House pass issue was raised with Mr. Cutler on "Meet the Press the day before.
"The first time I heard about this, I felt very strongly that there's no justification, he said.
"Now that I've started to fill out my own form, I can see their problem.
But, yes, that will be taken care of.
Rep. Wolf deserved some sort of credible answer to his questions.
But providing something that's always short of that seems to be standard operating procedure, whether the questions are about White House passes or Whitewater.
Then they complain that the press is engaging in speculation.
