President Leonid Kravchuk said he is confident that Ukraine will survive its current troubles and begin the economic rebuilding that it so desperately needs.
Even the problem posed by last Sunday's election of Yuri Meshkov as president of Crimea, an autonomous republic in Ukraine, can be settled without conflict, Mr. Kravchuk said in an interview.
Mr. Meshkov vows to secede from Ukraine and join Russia.
But any move by Crimean President Meshkov to join Russia would be strongly resisted, Mr. Kravchuk said.
"The president of Crimea is not the head of a nation," he said.
While Crimea could create its own economic program and trade ties, Mr. Kravchuk said, it would probably decide on its own that secession isn't realistic.
Any discussion about Crimean independence would begin with issues such as the "billions of dollars" that the country would have to pay for water supplies and energy resources, most of which come from Ukraine.
He already has had a phone conversation with Mr. Meshkov and will be meeting with him "in the next few days," he added.
Mr. Kravchuk feels sure that Mr. Meshkov will now end his more extreme campaign rhetoric, he said.
"A person changes right away under the burden of power -- either in a better or worse way.
I expect this will be in a better way."
For Ukraine, there have been many setbacks and uncertainties in trying to establish itself as a self-supporting country, following its split from the former Soviet Union.
Many Ukrainians say that Mr. Kravchuk himself is part of the nation's problem, and that he is now near the end of his long political career.
The 60-year-old former Communist party ideology chief was parliamentary speaker before the country's independence and then won the presidency in the country's first elections in December 1991.
He said he hasn't decided whether he will be a candidate in presidential elections, which he agreed to schedule in June.
Parliamentary elections will be on March 27.
Mr. Kravchuk won the praise of Bill Clinton for agreeing last month to the U.S.-Russia-Ukraine understanding -- highly controversial with Ukraine's parliament -- that will dismantle some 1,800 nuclear weapons in the next seven years.
Mr. Kravchuk said he expects both the U.S. and Russia to live up to their end of the deal, namely to help Ukraine establish more security at a time when political forces in Russia and in Crimea are threatening Ukraine's existence.
Mr. Kravchuk said that settling the nuclear-weapons issue would allow Ukraine to move on to its most pressing problem -- the collapsing economy.
The outgoing parliament agreed on Monday to an austere budget that everyone hopes will help stop the runaway inflation.
And Mr. Kravchuk vowed that Ukraine would move forward with a plan to privatize 8,000 companies this year.
But he bristled at criticism of Ukraine's pace of economic change.
"I'll tell you very openly, this irritates me when Western leaders talk about quick reforms and ask me why they aren't going ahead," he said, his voice rising in anger.
"I would like for these men to come to these enterprises and listen to those people, and to what they will tell them about reforms and how quick they are supposed to go.
That's why we are taking into account the real situation -- so there will be no social explosion."
