U.S. officials issued new guidelines for doctors and patients that could transform treatment for an enlarged prostate, a condition that afflicts about half of men over age 50.
If the guidelines are widely followed, they would likely lead to less surgery and fewer diagnostic tests than are now performed in managing the ailment.
They call for patients to take a primary role in deciding whether surgery, medication, or just monitoring symptoms without treatment is the best course to follow.
Known as benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH, an enlarged prostate restricts or obstructs the flow of urine from the bladder through the penis, causing frequent and urgent urination and related symptoms.
It isn't related to or a cause of prostate cancer.
The most common treatment is surgery, which was performed on more than 220,000 Medicare patients in 1992 at a cost of more than $1 billion.
Both the cost and the fact that doctors vary widely in prescribing treatments prompted U.S. health officials to consider BPH as a major candidate for an initiative to develop guidelines for a variety of common diseases.
At the same time, new treatment alternatives, including drugs marketed by Merck & Co. and Abbott Laboratories have recently been approved by U.S. regulators, adding to options for both doctors and patients.
"There's been a tendency to intervene with surgery too quickly, rather than consider options," said Jarrett Clinton, administrator of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, a division of the Department of Health and Human Services, which announced the guidelines.
"Our analysis clearly demonstrates that surgery is the most effective treatment for BPH," added John D. McConnell, chairman of urology at University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, and chairman of a 13-member expert panel that developed the guidelines.
"But not all patients need or desire the most effective therapy."
The guidelines urge doctors to curtail use of two widely used diagnostic tests and rely instead on a new, seven-item questionnaire yielding a symptom score on a 35-point scale that indicates how severely BPH is affecting a patient's quality of life.
Since some men live comfortably with symptoms that others consider severe, the guidelines say a focus on a patient's view of symptoms rather than clinical tests will lead to more appropriate treatment.
"The symptom score is a very pivotal part of the work-up and is one of the things that brings the patient into the process," said Dr. McConnell.
"This is going to be a new concept for many physicians."
The questionnaire was developed by the American Urological Association, based on research into treatment outcomes for BPH headed by John E. Wennberg, an epidemiologist at Dartmouth Medical School.
The new guidelines say patients with severe symptoms, including an inability to urinate, should be treated with surgery.
But all others should fill out the questionnaire and use the results as a basis for discussing treatment strategies with their physicians.
"The best treatment is the one chosen by an informed patient," Dr. McConnell said.
"A pill is less effective than surgery, but has less risk.
We're trying to get doctors away from making that value judgment themselves.
It's a patient's decision."
The guidelines also say that X-ray or ultrasound examination of the kidneys and cystoscopy, in which doctors look at the urinary tract through a scope, are of little use in deciding whether a patient needs treatment.
A 1989 survey found that two-thirds of urologists routinely use those tests in examining a patient with BPH symptoms.
Other tests to measure the flow and velocity of urine and the pressure in the bladder may be helpful to supplement data obtained from the questionnaire, the guidelines say.
