When it comes to betting millions of dollars on exchange-rate fluctuations, currency traders Andrew Kreiger and Jonathan Berg of KB Currency Inc. defer to no one.
But faced with selecting new office space in Northern New Jersey, they brought in a 93-year-old Chinese professor in a flowing blue robe.
In Hong Kong, residents frequently use such feng shui masters to choose offices and apartments.
Literally "wind and water," feng shui is the ancient study of the proper alignment of objects with natural geographic features to insure good fortune and harmony.
The practice is relatively unknown on the East Coast, though.
"I thought he was kidding," says broker Steven Geltzeiler of Bender & Co., who squired Mr. Berg and the feng shui master around a Fort Lee, N.J., building owned by Metropolitan Life Insurance Co.
"Once I found out they were dead serious -- well, you don't want to step on anyone's beliefs."
Mr. Berg says he learned of the practice after complimenting a Chinese client about the "good feel" of his Manhattan office.
When KB Currency narrowed its search for new space, Mr. Berg retained Mason Chen, his client's sage, to have a look.
"He walked into one building and it was all we could do to make him go up and look at the space, because he had a very bad feeling about it," recalls Mr. Berg.
When Mr. Chen got to the Met Life building, the vibes improved.
He sat in the middle of an office there, consulted a board with numbers and Chinese characters, spun something and did some calculations.
Mr. Berg admits that he didn't understand exactly what Mr. Chen was doing.
It did, however, involve knowing what direction the building faced, the birthdays of the two traders and the location of the elevators and entrances.
Facing a parking lot is bad; facing the Hudson River (water symbolizes prosperity) is good.
His bottom line: Rent the Met Life space.
"You can't knock it if you don't know it," says Arthur Lerner, a veteran New York real estate broker.
"It's about like calling your mother-in-law and asking, `This building or the next building?'"
The unorthodoxy of it isn't lost on Mr. Berg.
"I don't want people to think we're in any way freaky," he says.
"We don't use feng shui to make business decisions.
I just felt if we could get our building properly situated, we might as well harness every bit of energy we can get."
