SEVERING TIES to an employer may lead to tricky tax questions.
Suppose you lost your job last year in a corporate restructuring.
As part of the separation agreement, you signed a waiver releasing your former employer from any potential future claims, and your former employer gave you severance pay.
According to the IRS, some people who already have filed returns this year are calling such payments nontaxable "damages."
Wrong, IRS officials insist.
They say two court cases show that pay is fully taxable.
But it isn't always quite so simple, accountants say.
"If it is severance pay, then it is taxable income," says Peter I. Elinsky of KPMG Peat Marwick.
But if you can prove the payment is for damages or settlement of a lawsuit for personal injuries, including age discrimination, then it may not be taxable, he says.
Whatever the case, never assume that merely signing a waiver automatically means part or all of severance pay is nontaxable, says Sidney Kess, a New York lawyer and consulting editor at CCH Inc.
"It's going to be a rare case" when any such pay can be counted as pain-and-suffering damages, warns Mary B. Hevener, a lawyer at McDermott, Will & Emery in Washington.
BEWARE of other errors that some people are making this year, the IRS warns.
Some taxpayers have omitted a tax on early distributions received from an individual retirement account or deferred-pay plan, IRS officials say.
If a distribution isn't rolled over within 60 days, a 10% tax generally applies to people under the age of 59 1/2.
People who owe this tax should list it on line 51 of Form 1040.
Separately, anyone who itemizes deductions and puts "other taxes" on line 7 of Schedule A must specify what type of tax it is, such as personal-property tax, the IRS says.
Some people are omitting the description and merely entering a deduction amount.
Another common error: Some people who appear to owe self-employment tax aren't including it.
The IRS says people who list self-employment income as "other income" on Form 1040's line 22 should complete Schedule SE if their net profit was $400 or more.
UNCLE SAM WANTS help from other nations in chasing tax dodgers.
Treasury officials are setting tougher conditions before agreeing to tax treaties.
For example, the U.S. wants more tax and bank-account information about Americans suspected of hiding income abroad, says Cynthia Beerbower, Treasury's international tax counsel.
This issue is "very important to us," she says, "and we don't intend to proceed with treaty discussions where that level of cooperation isn't adequate."
Thus, a proposed treaty with Israel is still "on hold" in the U.S. Senate, she says.
The U.S. also may seek to renegotiate old agreements with Switzerland and Luxembourg, among others, she says.
Moreover, the U.S. wants assurances from other countries, including Portugal and Malaysia, that offshore tax havens will not be abused.
She says Treasury wants pledges that any tax-treaty benefits will be limited only to residents and companies of the countries involved.
Although some lawmakers want a treaty with Portugal, Treasury officials fear tax abuses through the Madeira Islands.
Denmark, also worried about the Madeira Islands, terminated its tax treaty with Portugal, effective next year.
FOWL PLAY: Empire Kosher Poultry of Mifflintown, Pa., renews an offer of a free chicken to anyone audited by the IRS this year.
Audit victims who don't owe more taxes also get a free turkey.
"Hey," the company says, "who knows better the benefits of passing a tough test" than a kosher poultry processor?
A STUDY of 688 Hoosiers finds that while 69% say it's generally wrong to cheat on taxes, only 40% say they would definitely report winnings from a raffle or other prize.
Older taxpayers, women and college graduates tended to be more law-abiding, says Peggy Hite of the Indiana University School of Business.
A POWERFUL ALLY: The Justice Department will argue Monday in favor of California in a Supreme Court case involving the state's aggressive method of taxing multinational companies.
At stake: About $4 billion in possible refunds.
CONGRESS RENEWS its drive to rewrite the heavily criticized nanny-tax law.
More than a year after the Zoe Baird affair, Sen. Moynihan (D., N.Y.) and other lawmakers launch a new campaign to rewrite rules on paying Social Security taxes for household workers.
Currently, taxes are due each quarter for employees paid at least $50 a quarter.
The Senate Finance Committee agreed yesterday to effectively raise the threshold to $630 a year in 1995, with higher thresholds in future years to reflect average wage increases.
The bill exempts wages paid to household workers under age 18.
Employers could file annually, instead of quarterly, as part of their federal income-tax return.
The IRS says all the publicity about Clinton nominees and advisers who didn't pay has prompted more people to start filing.
The IRS received 1,597,000 Form 942s last year, up 11% from 1992 -- and the first increase since 1966.
BRIEFS: The IRS's backlog of unwritten regulations projects rose to 576 as of Jan. 31 from 572 on Dec. 31. . . .
Average individual income-tax refund so far this year: $1,077, up 6.6% from last year, the IRS says.
