The antitrust division of the U.S. Department of Justice is investigating whether cigarette manufacturers have illegally agreed to keep certain types of cigarettes off the market.
The investigation centers on so-called fire-safe cigarettes, cigarettes that are less likely to cause fires.
RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. disclosed the investigation in a recent filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Gina Talamona, a spokeswoman for the Justice Department, confirmed that "the antitrust division is conducting an investigation into the possibility of agreement among cigarette companies to suppress product research and development regarding fire-safe cigarettes."
In 1990 there were 1,200 reported deaths from cigarette-ignited fires, and there is congressional support for developing cigarettes that are less likely to cause fires.
Tobacco-industry watchdogs say the industry has resisted such a cigarette because putting a safer cigarette on the market would open other cigarettes to attack on product-liability lawsuits.
"To put a fire-safe cigarette on the market is to awaken even the most somnambulant product-liability lawyer," said Richard Daynard, head of the Tobacco Products Liability Project, an antitobacco legal group.
Mr. Daynard said the government is investigating the industry's "gentleman's agreement that they would not come out with fire-safe cigarettes."
If successful, he said, the federal investigation could lead to similar actions about other ingredients in cigarettes, such as nicotine.
Philip Morris Cos. and RJR, the nation's two largest tobacco companies, confirmed that they had received requests for documents from the Justice Department in the last month or so.
Steve Parrish, general counsel for Philip Morris, said yesterday, "I can confirm that Philip Morris USA has received a civil investigative demand from the antitrust division of the U.S. Department of Justice in an investigation of possible joint activity among United States manufacturers in the production and sale of cigarettes, including possible joint activities to limit new product development, specifically in the area of reduced ignition propensity cigarettes."
Mr. Parrish, asked if Philip Morris suppressed information in development of fire-safe products, replied "absolutely not."
RJR declined comment on the investigation, citing SEC restrictions tied to a stock registration.
The unusual antitrust investigation is the Clinton administration's latest blast at the tobacco industry and has tobacco executives privately complaining about a coordinated attack by the White House.
The administration, which is fighting to triple the federal excise tax on cigarettes to nearly $1 a pack, is by far the most antagonistic that the tobacco industry has faced.
In recent weeks, the Food and Drug Administration said that it is considering evidence that would result in the FDA regulating cigarettes as a drug.
And Surgeon General Dr. Joycelyn Elders urged a ban on cigarette advertising directed at teenagers.
Those actions follow the release last year of an Environmental Protection Agency report asserting that second-hand smoke causes lung cancer.
"These things are not all happening by coincidence," said an executive at a cigarette company who asked not to be identified.
"There is a lot going on, and it's well-planned and well-coordinated.
You can't discount the possibility that it is tied to the proposal to increase the federal excise tax."
Mr. Daynard of the antitobacco group said the flurry of activity would have been "unthinkable in the last administration."
He predicted that the antitrust investigation could lead to a new round of lawsuits against the tobacco companies, noting that the industry hasn't received antitrust scrutiny since large tobacco companies were broken up by the government decades ago.
