President Clinton didn't make a capital gain when he and his partners transferred some Arkansas land to their own Whitewater Development Co. in 1979, according to a person close to the Clintons who is familiar with the transaction.
The comment was made in response to a Time magazine article this week.
The article notes that the land's value -- $882 an acre when it was first purchased by Mr. Clinton and his partners in 1978 -- was pegged by them at a higher price, $1,087 an acre, when it was transferred to Whitewater about a year later.
The Whitewater investment is under federal scrutiny, and, at the president's request, Attorney General Janet Reno plans to appoint a special counsel to look into it and related matters.
Among the issues involved are whether Mr. Clinton earned any profit on the investment and whether he and his wife accurately reported any profits or losses to the Internal Revenue Service and other authorities.
The person close to the Clintons, who declined to be identified otherwise, asserted vigorously that the asset transfer in 1979 wasn't a taxable transaction from which a capital gain or loss could be recorded.
Four people -- Mr. Clinton, Hillary Rodham Clinton and James and Susan McDougal -- bought the land in 1978, and those same four formed the Whitewater partnership into which that asset was placed in 1979.
That kind of transaction is better classified as a reorganization, the person close to the Clintons said, and does not lead to either profit or loss, regardless of what value the owners place on it.
No money actually changed hands.
And, the person asserted, the increased valuation of the land was reasonable because in the year of ownership, work was done on the property, including the building of a road and surveying and marketing of the land for sale.
The Clintons and McDougals bought the land from a company called 101 River Development Inc.
The land was part of a 3,600-acre tract for which 101 River Development had paid about $400 an acre less than a month earlier.
The person close to the Clintons said this price discrepancy was irrelevant because the Clintons and McDougals were buying choice pieces of the larger tract.
The person also said 101 River Development was not owned by either family.
The White House declined to comment on any specific allegations raised by the Time article.
"The Whitewater matter is in the hands of the special counsel, once it is appointed," said George Stephanopoulos, a senior aide to the president.
