As Federated Department Stores Inc. jockeys to merge with R.H. Macy & Co. in an attempt to create the nation's largest department-store chain, apparel vendors are scrambling to refashion their businesses to supply the megastores that have come to dominate the industry.
The mergers and closings of department stores in recent years have concentrated power in the hands of a few major players, including May Department Stores Co., Dillard Department Stores Inc. and Dayton Hudson Corp., who now hold more sway than ever over manufacturers.
Apparel accounts for more than 60% of all department-store merchandise, and for suppliers, staying viable has meant shortening the time it takes to make and deliver merchandise, cutting costs and, in some cases, opening their own outlet stores.
"Retailers have consolidated in order to bring costs down so that they can pass those savings on to consumers," says Marie Beninati, director of retail market strategies at Kurt Salmon Associates, apparel industry consultants.
As a result, she says, apparel makers have had to "be more responsive by shortening their manufacturing cycles to get the right merchandise to the stores as fast as possible."
In contrast to the headier 1980s, when department stores touted high-end merchandise, the retailers are now emphasizing more moderately priced goods to compete with discount and specialty stores.
The trend toward value brands -- which began in the late 1980s -- has favored such apparel marketers as Liz Claiborne Inc., Jones Apparel Group Inc. and Tommy Hilfiger Corp., all of which have gained department-store market share at the expense of smaller suppliers.
Fashion houses with sales under $10 million are being squeezed out because they can't deliver the volume and higher profit margins that the big chains now require.
And without sufficient orders, more apparel makers have been left in the cold.
In 1992, 562 apparel and textile firms went out of business, up from 338 business failures in 1985, according to Dun and Bradstreet Corp.
A recent Kurt Salmon survey of department stores showed that about 55% had either trimmed the number of suppliers they do business with or planned to do so.
During the 1980s, when apparel sales zoomed and department stores expanded, "apparel makers lived a fat life," says Todd Slater, a retail and apparel analyst at UBS Securities.
He adds that as consumer demand has waned, stores "have gotten leaner and tougher.
They can no longer tie up their assets in slow-turning, fringe merchandise."
For instance, to burnish its exclusive image, the 49-store Saks Fifth Avenue chain has been phasing out lines carried by many of its competitors.
In the past year, Saks dropped a number of brands, including Liz Claiborne women's sportswear and Carole Little women's apparel.
Because they prefer to do business with a few big chains rather than chase a shrinking number of independent specialty stores, most apparel makers now vie for positions on a department store's "matrix," or most-favored-vendor list.
This, in effect, makes them the informal partners of their department-store customers, as stores centralize and streamline their buying operations.
But forging strong ties with a few big stores is out of the question for most small vendors.
And, given the whims of the fashion business, it carries risks even for the chosen, according to Mary Ann Wheaton, president of Wheaton International, which manages designer Byron Lars.
"You have to be careful that you aren't eaten up by one store group," she says, "because those relationships aren't forever."
Hard Bargains Such relationships also come at a price.
Retailers, for example, often expect their core suppliers to invest in elaborate computerized inventory systems.
Powerful chains -- May and Dillard in particular -- drive particularly hard bargains with vendors, requiring them to generate higher profit margins and pay a bigger share of advertising and promotional expenses.
But to book huge orders, vendors willingly comply.
"With orders from one of these store groups, you can literally stay in business," says Ms. Wheaton.
VF Corp. says it has made "millions of dollars" in capital investments to update its operations in recent years.
In 1993, about half of the $1 billion in sales of its Lee jeans division were driven through computerized hookups to its departmentstore retail partners.
(That's up from about 5% to 10% a couple of years ago.)
With this computerized system, Lee can track daily retail sales at stores, adjust its production schedules according to demand, and replenish retailers quickly.
The division says the turnaround time from receipt of an order to shipment has been cut in half -- to an average of seven days from 14 days two years ago.
Even world-famous designer labels are rushing to adjust.
Because most department stores no longer sell couture, design houses are stepping up promotion of their less-expensive secondary collections, such as Giorgio Armani's AX, Donna Karan's DKNY and Calvin Klein's CK labels.
And stores like Saks and Bloomingdale's are pushing high-fashion houses to give them more exclusive merchandise.
At Carole Little, a $285 million Los Angeles-based women's apparel maker, department stores now account for nearly 95% of its business, up from 60% a decade ago.
"Doing business with them is a little more complicated than it used to be," concedes Leonard Rabinowitz, Carole Little's president.
Carole Little has invested heavily in computers and manufacturing improvements.
And it has expanded production to greatly diversify its line.
This year, for example, Carole Little took the costly step of adding 70% more stock-keeping units (or different inventory items) to its collection.
"In order to provide exclusives for the big stores, you have to give them a bigger mix, with more to pick from," Mr. Rabinowitz says.
"What apparel makers are moving toward is mass-produced styles, individually customized for specific retailers," says Kurt Salmon's Ms. Beninati.
To stay afloat, some small apparel makers have themselves consolidated.
Just yesterday outerwear maker London Fog Corp., with annual sales of about $350 million, said it signed a letter of intent to merge with Pacific Trail Inc., a 50-year-old Seattle outerwear company with annual sales of $60 million, a move that would create perhaps the biggest outerwear company in the market.
In pooling resources, "We will be able to respond better to the big retailers, with products that are styled better and priced better, giving the best possible value that consumers demand today," says Ronald Epperson, the president of Pacific Trail.
St. Louis-based Kellwood Corp., a $1 billion apparel manufacturer, has acquired 15 apparel businesses since 1985, including Cape Cod-Cricket, Parsons Place, and Robert Scott Ltd.
In each acquisition, the existing management continues to run the division under Kellwood ownership.
Kellwood says it wants to buy still more apparel brands to complement existing lines.
Some suppliers are becoming retailers themselves, opening factory outlets to protect their retail distribution.
And in brazenly locating outlets near malls, they are seemingly unconcerned about irritating their department-store accounts.
Outlets have become major profit centers for shirt maker Phillips-Van Heusen Corp., which operates more than 300 outlet stores, and women's wear maker Harve Benard Ltd., with 40 outlet stores.
