Smith Barney Shearson Inc., in a reshuffling of its big brokerage division, ushered in a series of senior-level changes.
The Travelers Inc. unit will name Jessica M. Bibliowicz, daughter of Travelers Chairman Sanford I. Weill, an executive vice president heading sales and marketing for mutual funds, annuities and insurance, Smith Barney executives say.
Among other shifts, Jay Mandelbaum, a Travelers executive, will become chief administrative officer of the brokerage group.
His predecessor, Richard Schiavo, will become chief financial officer, under Mr. Mandelbaum.
And the firm's legal, compliance and real-estate groups will no longer report directly to Joseph Plumeri, Smith Barney Shearson's president.
The shake-up is the most extensive since the August merger between Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. and the brokerage operations of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.
As previously reported, Smith Barney Shearson is in the process of cutting as many as 1,500 employees and streamling its combined operations.
"The changes are a natural outgrowth of a merger," Jamie Dimon, Travelers president, said in an interview.
"Consolidating the real estate, legal and compliance functions are part of a normal process."
Some Wall Street executives suggested that the moves partially undercut Mr. Plumeri, an assertion shrugged off by senior Smith Barney executives.
"I'm not teed off, I'm not upset.
All of these decisions were my decisions," Mr. Plumeri said in an interview.
The appointment of Ms. Bibliowicz, 34 years old, is expected to be announced as early as today, Smith Barney executives say.
These executives say the firm previously has tried to hire Ms. Bibliowicz, who for the past 2 1/2 years headed mutual-fund sales and marketing for Prudential Securities Inc., a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
Ms. Bibliowicz will assume the duties of Robert Leo, who recently joined Massachusetts Financial Services as director of broker-dealer sales.
But she will also be the head of marketing and sales of insurances and annuities, and Mr. Leo's successor, who hasn't yet been named, will report to her, Smith Barney executives said.
Ms. Bibliowicz isn't the first child of Mr. Weill to assume a senior post at his firm; his son, Marc, is senior vice president and chief investment officer at Travelers.
But her position is among the most significant at the firm, which manages more than $55 billion in proprietary mutual funds and has more than $14 billion in insurance premiums.
Counting sales, "that's a billion dollars of business," says Mr. Plumeri.
Ms. Bibliowicz is "very good with" brokers, Mr. Plumeri says, adding: "Despite the fact of who she is, this lady is terrific."
Mr. Weill, for his part, says the firm "tried to get Jessica here lots of times."
In an interview, he added: "I think she didn't want to do it until she had accomplished enough someplace else."
