Heads up homeowners!
The great low, low mortgage rate bonanza may be coming to an end.
The Federal Reserve Board last week sounded the clarion when it announced its decision to tighten credit policy -- a move that is likely to make home financing and other borrowing more expensive in the future.
"Sometime within the next five years, people looking back will find these rates just as strange and unusual as the 16% of 1984," predicts Hugh Lamle, executive vice president of New York-based M.D. Sass Investors Services Inc.
So, whether you're a long-time resident, a first-time buyer or a trader up to new digs, it's time to give your mortgage strategy a reality check.
For instance, do you have, or are you contemplating, an adjustable-rate mortgage?
In that case, you'll be among the first to feel the kick, as these loans track short-term interest rates, such as one-year Treasury bills, which bear the initial brunt of stiffer monetary policy.
"The hardest hit by the Fed's move are going to be the ARM holders whose rate comes up for adjustment in the next few weeks," says Robert K. Heady, publisher of Bank Rate Monitor, a North Palm Beach, Fla., newsletter.
Mortgage lenders say they expect the Fed's moves to chill the market for new ARMs.
They're also bracing themselves for a rush of refinancings as many holders of the approximately $850 billion of existing ARMs move into fixed rates.
To be sure, some homeowners may still want to consider ARMs.
Many initial "teaser" rates are just over 4% now -- so someone expecting to move in a few years could save enough in the first few years of the loan to offset future increases.
What's more, although most ARMs adjust annually, there are ARMS that adjust only once every three, five or seven years and offer cheaper rates than most fixed-rate loans.
To weigh the potential costs of ARMs, borrowers should calculate the maximum amount their payments can rise; usually, boosts are capped at two percentage points a year and six percentage points over the life of the loan.
Even so, most people shopping for a mortgage on a new home should be looking at fixed-rate loans.
Rates on these mortgages weren't much affected by the Fed's news and still are very attractive.
After creeping up about a quarter percentage point from last autumn's lows, the average rate on 30-year fixed-rate loans is just over 7% and on 15-year mortgages it's nearly half a percentage point lower.
"Unless you really believe that short-term rates are going to stay about where they are now, or you're planning to move or pay off your mortgage within the next year or two, you would do well with a fixed-rate mortgage," says Roger Harrington, a mortgage adviser in White Bear Lake, Minn.
Indeed, some pros say long-term debt may even become a touch cheaper in the weeks to come, as tighter credit reassures the market that inflation will remain in check.
Such a dip in rates would provide an extra incentive to clinch a fixed-rate mortgage deal sooner rather than later, as economists are forecasting that rates will be half a percentage point higher by year end.
Rates are "not going to get much better and could get worse," says Warren Lasko, executive vice president of the Mortgage Bankers Association of America, a trade group in Washington.
"I wouldn't wait too long."
The pros say everyone with a mortgage rate higher than 8.5% should at least be considering refinancing now.
That includes all five million couch potatoes who could have refinanced last year and benefited from the lowest interest rates in 25 years, but didn't.
"Anyone who hasn't at least thought about refinancing must be brain dead," says M.D. Sass's Mr. Lamle.
The Mortgage Bankers Association estimates that more than $600 billion of existing mortgages carry interest rates above 9% -- and that includes about $250 billion above 10%.
On Wall Street, mortgage investors call it "burnout" when borrowers just keep making payments on such high-rate mortgages.
By whatever name, it costs you a bundle.
"I talk to people every week who are paying more than 10%," says Mr. Harrington, the mortgage adviser.
Of course, some people have good reasons not to refinance.
If they plan to move in a few years, or if they have just a small balance left on their loan, the cost and hassle probably aren't worth it.
But others may just not realize how much they can save.
They think because they're 10 or 15 years into a mortgage and starting to pay down principal, refinancing doesn't make sense.
Or, they simply opt for the least ambitious strategy, which is to retire their remaining debt more quickly.
It's true that making one extra payment a year or switching to biweekly payments can shorten a 30-year mortgage by several years and effectively cut interest costs by several thousand dollars without refinancing.
But crunching the numbers shows that refinancing is still the better deal.
That's particularly so for homeowners who opt to refinance their loan balances into 15-year loans.
Rates are so low that not only will their monthly payments probably decline, but what's more, their new debt probably won't last longer than the original loan.
"Work out what you've spent on your mortgage so far and what a new mortgage will cost," advises Keith Gumbinger of HSH Associates, a Butler, N.J., firm that tracks mortgage rates.
"The real decision comes down to overall expense."
Take a couple who borrowed $100,000 in 1979 at the then-prevailing rate of about 10%.
By now, they would have paid off $18,140 in principal, leaving a balance of $81,860, according to PNC Mortgage Corp., a Riverwoods, Ill., unit of PNC Financial Corp.
They would also have paid $140,000 in interest since 1979.
If they now decided to make one extra payment a year, avoiding the costs and hassle of refinancing, they would shorten the mortgage by about 2 1/2 years and save about $15,000 in interest costs over the remaining 15 years.
However, if they refinanced the $81,860 balance into a new 15-year loan at today's rate of about 7%, they would save more than $25,000 over that same period.
Monthly payments, meanwhile, would fall to $735.78 from $877.57.
If they were more ambitious, and kept paying $877.57 a month as they had before, a 15-year refinancing would be a even bigger bargain.
According to calculations by PNC Mortgage, the remaining debt would be paid off in less than 12 years, at a total savings of nearly $40,000 in interest.
Spurred by news from the Fed, many homeowners are at last making such moves.
"There was a significant increase in applications last week," says Rick Cossano, executive vice president of Countrywide Funding Corp., a nationwide lender in Pasadena, Calif.
