Software giant Microsoft Corp. is joining Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corp., the nation's largest paging company, to build an advanced wireless network for sending and receiving data.
The $150 million wireless network, to be built by the middle of next year, will complement Mtel's vast one-way paging system.
Operating under a new company called Nationwide Wireless Network, it will offer two-way data-messaging services to people with laptop computers, special alphanumeric pagers and a new generation of Mtel-developed pocket-data communicators.
"This will be a new network from the ground up, putting us in a leadership position in wireless messaging," said Bernard Puckett, Mtel's president.
Currently, the nearest competitor, BellSouth MobileComm, a unit of BellSouth Corp., is offering one-way text messaging on its paging network.
Microsoft, which has been scrambling to find its place in the convergence of telecommunications and computers, will be a major influence on the new network and the devices that can use it.
Microsoft is investing $30 million in the new venture for an 8% stake and will work with Mtel engineers to develop software applications for the new two-way network.
In addition, Microsoft founders William H. Gates and Paul Allen will each invest an additional $10 million, giving Microsoft and its two co-founders a little more than 13% of NWN, with Jackson, Miss.-based Mtel holding most of the rest.
A third investor, Integral Partners, a venture capital firm, has agreed to put in $2 million for a less than 2% stake.
For Mtel, the new network is a chance to move beyond being just a company that connects beepers.
Paging carriers and two-decade-old beeper technology are in danger of being overtaken by the ubiquitous cellular phone and computers that use the cellular network.
Mtel is already offering expanded services, beaming news, stock quotes and other information to its customers.
The new network will allow customers to receive data at 24,000 bits per second and send data at a 9,600-bps rate.
Microsoft developers are working on applications that will allow the new network to connect desktop computers to Mtel-developed portable data devices.
Other applications will allow mobile work forces to use the new network to share data with their home offices.
"Microsoft will give us a significant shot in the arm," said Mr. Puckett, who recently joined Mtel after resigning as the chief strategist at International Business Machines Corp.
Working with Motorola Inc., Mtel is developing a range of devices for the new network.
New numeric pagers will have a button that lets a user acknowledge a page with, "I got the message."
Another pager will take and send longer messages.
In addition, new credit-card-sized devices called PCMCIA cards will convert laptops to use the new network.
And Motorola and Mtel are working on chips that will integrate these functions inside future portable computers.
These new communicators will be ultra-lightweights with a 30-day battery life.
Mtel must still obtain a license from the Federal Communications Commission to operate the network.
But the license is all but assured, given the FCC's decision in June 1993 to grant Mtel a "pioneer's preference" for a license to operate the network.
The designation was given in recognition for technology developed by Mtel for the new two-way service.
With its pioneer's rights, Mtel gets nationwide rights to use frequency in the 900 Mhz range for the new service without having to participate in the expected brawl for FCC spectrum grants.
The FCC expects to grant 11 licenses to operate these "narrow-band" two-way data-messaging networks.
Earlier this week, it was disclosed that Mr. Gates had set up a company with Craig O. McCaw for an elaborate satellite-communications network.
Mtel had 346,200 units in service worldwide at the end of 1993, making it the largest provider of paging units in service.
