The unemployed are certainly a boon to publishing.
My desk and floor are hiding under 15 books, all published within the last few months, all promising to speed your depressing job search to a happy conclusion.
Jobs '94 (Simon & Schuster, 683 pages, $16) by Kathryn and Ross Petrases promises to make looking for a job quick, easy and efficient.
Efficient certainly: there's a lot of well-organized information in it.
For example, there's a complete list of addresses and phone numbers organized by occupation.
Broadcasting, for instance, includes top television networks and station owners, cable networks and industry directories.
More detail on each prospective employer is provided in The Adams Jobs Almanac 1994 (Bob Adams Inc., 916 pages, $15) than in the Petrases' book.
It provides about a 200-word description on what each of hundreds of companies do, how many people they employ and, in some cases, the projected number of new hires for the year.
Suppose you are less interested in addresses, phone numbers and general comments about the outlook for various employment opportunities, than in methods likely to produce job offers.
Bob Gerberg's An Easier Way to Change Jobs (Princeton/Masters Press, 336 pages, $14.95) offers a plan he claims has had a high degree of success.
One of the book's goals is to improve people's job-searching techniques.
Mr. Gerberg's statistics show that currently most people get new jobs using existing personal contacts and direct referrals from them while 22% use other networking techniques.
A method he strongly advocates for people who come to Princeton/Masters -- the career management and outplacement firm he works for -- is a carefully targeted direct-mail campaign.
Mr. Gerberg says that 29% of his firm's clients get their jobs that way.
Joyce Kennedy and Thomas Morrow want to change job hunting in a different way.
This is not a book for cyberphobes.
In Electronic Job Search Revolution (Wiley, 207 pages, $29.95 hardback, $12.95 paperback), they show you how to get your resume to hundreds of potential employers 24-hours a day, seven days a week, with little effort and low cost.
What has brought about this revolution are the same factors that have caused so many people to be laid off -- cost savings.
The authors state that it costs an employer, on average, $5,400 to hire a professional or managerial person and $35,300 if a private recruiting firm is used.
But if the search is carried out electronically, costs drop to a fraction of those numbers.
It becomes easy for an employer to have a job database firm search thousands of resumes looking for just the right persona left-handed violinist who speaks Portuguese and wants to live in Omaha.
The book describes the costs and how to file your resume with a number of databases.
In their companion book, Electronic Resume Revolution (Wiley, 233 pages, $29.95 hardback, $12.95 paperback), Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Morrow claim resumes have to be written in a different style when they are being prepared to be read by a computer.
For instance, if you are looking for work as an accountant, insert buzzwords like cost accounting, revenue accounting, CPA, leadership, etc., to catch the computer's electronic eye as often as possible.
But suppose you've had it in working for others and would like to try to make your living without a boss -- by trading the markets.
Traders are their own bosses, have unlimited earning potential, and they can take time off any time they like.
Before you are completely seduced by those arguments, pick up two books by Alexander Elder, Trading for a Living (Wiley, 289 pages, $49.95) and Study Guide for Trading for a Living (Wiley, 194 pages, $27.95).
Now a professional trader and practicing psychiatrist, Dr. Elder jumped off a Soviet ship in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, in 1974 and was granted political asylum in the U.S.
His book, which explores both the psychological and technical aspects of trading, is designed to test a person's emotional and psychological makeup for the trading life.
Some of the psychological strategies he proposes have their roots in the 12 steps of Alcoholics Anonymous.
Most of the book is devoted to explaining a large number of technical trading tools, some developed by Dr. Elder, that may be useful in trading stocks, options and futures.
The book's most entertaining aspect are questions designed to see how well you've absorbed your lessons.
Here's one: "It will help you to understand what happens in the market if you think of the marketplace as: a.
A number of rational individuals acting to maximize their gains; b.
A crowd whose members try to pick each other's pockets while being swayed by waves of greed and fear; c.
A constant flow of data -- a mix of useful information and chaos; d.
A carnival packed with drunks offering money to strangers.
Mr. Angrist, a contributor to the Journal's business bookshelf, recently co-authored with Carolyn Kerr a new videotape, "Understanding the Basics -- The Stock Market" ($39.95; 1-800-458-0939).
