Japan and China are warming to each other while each has simmering tensions with the U.S.
Japan's Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa -- in China over the weekend for the first visit by a Japanese premier since 1991 -- got a very different reception from the chilly atmosphere surrounding U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit last week.
Instead of confrontational, the tone of the Japanese leader's trip was cooperative and even relaxed.
The meeting between the two regional giants comes amid rapid economic and political change in Asia and at a time of rising tension over North Korea's suspected nuclear program.
Mr. Hosokawa told China's leaders of the world's "grave concern" about Pyongyang's continuing resistance to international inspections.
The Japanese leader said the world is "losing patience" with Pyongyang, and said U.N. consideration of sanctions is "increasingly likely."
But he apparently failed to win any specific initiatives from Beijing to use its influence on North Korea.
Indeed, Chinese leaders said resolving Korean tensions "will take more time."
The business of this summit was mostly business.
In meetings with China's President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng, Mr. Hosokawa touched -- but didn't focus -- on human rights, and said Japan is concerned with China's surging military expenditures.
But he didn't dispel China's expectations of a big increase in Japan's multibillion-dollar overseas aid and lending package for China.
He said he hopes Japan's money would help China's slower-growing interior to catch up to the explosive growth of its coastal region and south, a disparity that fuels worries about China's economic stability even as its economy booms.
Mr. Hosokawa also wants Japan's money to improve China's environment; the nations signed an environmental protection accord yesterday.
"This bilateral relationship is one of the most important pillars of our external relations," Mr. Hosokawa told his hosts.
He leaves China today with the impression Japan can boost its China ties even more quickly.
"My impression was I saw a lot more Volkswagens" than Japanese cars, he said.
"Perhaps the Japanese aren't doing enough."
The summit's overwhelming image was left unstated: Against the backdrop of disagreements with America -- over human-rights in China's case, and trade in Japan's -- each Asian nation considers the other its second-most important bilateral relation.
The countries are major trading partners.
Japanese loans amount to one-third of official development aid to China.
Japan's investments here are surging.
In 2,000 years of history, Sino-Japanese relations have never been better, says Chinese historian Yang Zhengguang.
For Mr. Yang and many other Chinese, the benefits are both economic and strategic.
Japanese companies, which have hesitated to invest on a large scale in China, are beginning to pour in.
At the same time, peaceful relations mean a more stable political environment for Asia -- crucial for China's developing economy.
Japan's new interest in China is a sign of change afoot in Japan.
After years of following America's lead in foreign policy, Japan is cautiously trying out its own policy and strategy, reflecting its own interests.
On human rights especially, those don't necessarily coincide with Washington's.
Japan made it clear that its agenda isn't to change China.
While Mr. Hosokawa expressed Japan's belief in human rights as a "universal" value, Japan also indicated it doesn't intend to let China's human-rights policy get in the way of business.
Beijing seems willing to play on U.S. fears by teasing the U.S. with hints of a bigger business boom for Japan if America withdraws Most Favored Nation trade status.
It referred to its human-rights dispute with the U.S. as a disagreement with a "third party" that didn't involve Japan.
Tokyo's interest in China reflects the fact that Japan, which currently runs a bigger trade surplus with Asia than it does with the U.S., is increasingly finding itself economically linked to other countries in the region.
China's size and strategic scope means Japan has "no choice but to try to increase our economic ties and our political leverage," says Wataru Hiraizumi, a Japanese legislator and veteran foreign-affairs specialist in the opposition Liberal Democratic Party.
That's not to say that Japan sees eye to eye with China's aging Communist leadership.
Both look at each other warily -- probably the greatest issue of conflict between the nations is how best to limit the other's power.
"To some extent, if China grows too rapidly, that could be a threat to Japan," says Mineo Nakajima, a China specialist at Tokyo's University of Foreign Studies.
Perhaps Japan's biggest concern is China's massive weapons buildup.
Mr. Hosokawa asked China's leaders for "more transparency" in their military spending, which he said would ease tensions throughout Asia.
To Japan, a good Asia is a stable Asia -- with consistent rates of growth, new economic prosperity and no single nation able to dominate any other.
Tokyo's strategy appears to be to carefully raise its regional profile and influence, while trying to avoid arousing fears of a Japan that aspires to political superpower status -- independent of America's security umbrella.
If the U.S. currently offers some foreign-policy problems, Japan fears its next ones could be closer to home -- in Asia.
Kathy Chen contributed to this article.
