(This progress report carries forward a custom begun 17 years ago.
It reflects our belief that publishing a newspaper is a public trust for which we are accountable first of all to you, our readers.)
By any measure 1993 was a good year for this newspaper.
From stories that broke news to editorials that shaped national agendas, from expanded readership to increased advertising, from enhanced news content to new ventures, we look back on 1993 with pleasure and pride.
This progress took place in an uncertain economic environment that continues to challenge us all.
We hope our success proves a leading indicator for 1994, portending progress and prosperity for economies and societies.
Our other hope for 1994 is to provide the news and information you need to manage your companies, careers, investments and daily lives.
In recent years, this letter has focused on pervasive problems of the press -- from pack journalism to excessive negativism -- and also on the values and standards we believe set this newspaper apart from the many media voices competing for your time and attention.
Those will be recurring themes because the qualities that distinguish this newspaper -- its commitment to accuracy, fairness and independence -- demand rededication year after year.
This year, however, I want to focus on people -- my colleagues in widely diverse Journal jobs who report, analyze, comment, edit, compose, print, sell and distribute this newspaper and serve its customers.
The Journal's primary assets aren't warehouses with newsprint and high-speed presses, not satellite transponders and fiber-optic networks.
Rather, our ultimate assets are the creative talent and enterprise of more than 2,500 colleagues; the Journal's reputation that they preserve and enhance; and the resulting trust you repose in their work.
Some of these colleagues you know from bylines on the pages of the paper; many others are more anonymous but no less important in serving nearly two million subscribers and newsstand buyers around the world each business day.
So, let me introduce you to a sampling of them:
Paul Ingrassia and Joe White are two of the many Journal reporters who covered industry beats, providing readers with spot news coverage of corporate developments and features that amass and interpret facts to forecast trends.
Paul and Joe capped 1993 by winning the Pulitzer Prize for beat reporting for their coverage of General Motors and the auto industry.
Senior Editor Laura Landro directs a team of 14 reporters covering the marketing, media and entertainment industries, all much in the news during a year when terms like "interactive" and "multimedia" became business buzzwords and media mergers often dominated the Journal's pages.
Laura and her colleagues anticipated major moves and analyzed how industry changes will affect consumers as well as companies.
Most readers also are investors.
Staff reporter John Dorfman has created some of the paper's most popular investment features, including the "Dartboard," which matches the stock-picking prowess of experts against stocks selected by the random toss of a dart.
(The professionals are narrowly ahead.)
In 1993, John designed the first Journal All-Star Analyst list, which ranks analysts based on quantitative measurements of their accuracy in picking stocks and forecasting earnings.
Another report that offered investors news they could use was the global Journal's December section on "Investing in China."
Edited by John Bussey and Jim McGregor and including articles from 20 Journal reporters, the section laid out the extraordinary opportunities and potential pitfalls of investing in the world's fastest-growing economy.
The Journal also recognizes that economies are composed of people.
Journal reporter Tony Horwitz last fall focused a front-page feature on Brian Deyo, a full-time worker in a Vermont hockey-stick factory whose weekly earnings of $188.40 frequently couldn't cover rent, utilities and groceries for his family.
Tony recounted how Mr. Deyo hunts bear for food, not sport.
"I'm proud to be a working man," said Mr. Deyo.
"I only wish I made a living."
Hundreds of Journal readers responded by donating money, food and other aid to Mr. Deyo and his neighbors.
A San Antonio law firm sent a truckload of children's clothing, a Wall Street brokerage house took up a collection, and the owner of a Vermont maple-sugar plant gave all his own employees a 6% raise.
This kind of response is characteristic of Journal readers.
Journal reporters ranged far afield to cover world events and their effect on people.
Perhaps the most remarkable such trip took Mideast reporter Peter Waldman from the slums of Cairo, where he first heard of a charismatic Egyptian cleric, to Jersey City and Brooklyn, where he interviewed Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman seven weeks before his followers were charged with bombing Manhattan's World Trade Center.
In a remarkably prescient story, Peter wrote that militant Muslims were bringing "the violent struggle against the enemies of Islam into the belly of the `Great Satan' itself."
Much also was going right with the world in 1993, including the spread of political and economic freedom to long-repressed regions.
At The Wall Street Journal Europe, published in Brussels, former foreign correspondent Fred Kempe became managing editor and created a new publication for the emerging markets of countries in Eastern Europe that he once covered as Soviet satellites.
The new Central European Economic Review is now published quarterly in the Journal Europe and also sold on newsstands from Budapest to Bucharest.
It's one of several Journal offspring born last year, including Hong Kong Week, a regular section in The Asian Wall Street Journal, and Texas Journal, a special weekly section for the Journal's 130,000 Texas subscribers.
These join other recent progeny like SmartMoney, the new monthly magazine of personal finance, published by the Journal in partnership with Hearst Corp., and the Journal Classroom Edition, which each month reaches nearly 100,000 high-school students across America.
It is the creation of Melinda Grenier, a former schoolteacher and Journal reporter, who had the dream of making economics and business accessible and relevant to high-school students.
Many Journal editors labor behind the scenes, among them assistant managing editor Dan Hinson and markets editor John Prestbo, with 65 years of Journal experience between them.
They share the task of designing, refining and updating the myriad market statistics Journal readers monitor each morning.
In 1993 they added two new features: enhanced mutual fund tables providing unprecedented detail on the performance of about 3,500 mutual funds, and the Dow Jones World Stock Index that tracks stocks and industry groups on 24 world markets.
Scores of Journal copy editors, copy readers, proofreaders and news production people are instrumental in selecting, prioritizing, editing and transmitting news to our composing rooms with maximum speed and quality.
In the final minutes before presses roll, these pressures fall on people like Larissa Pickens at the Dallas production plant, whose duties include final proofreading, making corrections, compiling the daily Index to Business and supervising final page makeup.
In a newspaper where one wrong number can upset literally millions of readers, Larissa's role is vital.
Another kind of quality control is provided by Paul Martin, an assistant managing editor, whose duties include critiquing each day's Journal for substantive and stylistic mistakes.
Errors of fact and fairness are corrected daily in "Corrections & Amplifications" on page 2.
Paul also helps to educate Journal staffers with an internal newsletter that wages particular war on jargon.
For instance, Paul recently spotted the term "care-giver" in a front-page story about nannies and wrote: "A problem with `care-giver' is that no one who uses the services of one calls her or him by that term.
Will the recipients of the care ultimately be called caretakers?"
The Journal's opinion pages -- editorial, op-ed and Leisure & Arts -- operate independently.
This is appropriate given their different functions.
News pages cover events as factually and fairly as possible.
The opinion pages exist expressly to voice views that spring from a Journal philosophy that champions free people and free markets.
Journal editorial writers articulate this philosophy with guts and gusto, generating controversy, provoking debate and frequently shaping events.
Last year they crusaded for passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, inveighed against political correctness on college campuses and called for further investigation of events surrounding the suicide of White House aide Vincent Foster.
John Fund, a young editorial writer, influenced events with a series of editorials on discharge petitions -- an arcane set of congressional rules that allowed legislators to mislead constituents by posturing in favor of bills while secretly voting to keep the same bills from reaching recorded floor votes.
His editorials sparked a House revolution that ended this farce.
On a broader level, Deputy Editor Dan Henninger's landmark editorial, "No Guardrails," dissected an American society careening off its rails by repeatedly lowering barriers of acceptable political and personal conduct.
Dan argued that having lowered these guardrails to define illegality as civil disobedience and immorality as personal preference, America's elites shouldn't be surprised to see society's more vulnerable members "floating like flotsam through the country's hospitals and streets."
The editorial prompted widespread public debate and derisive denunciation from politically correct media.
Editorial Features Editor Amity Shlaes and four colleagues in the past year considered for publication more than 10,000 articles by outside contributors.
Some were commissioned, but most arrived unsolicited from Journal readers.
Those we published included articles by three former presidents.
But perhaps the most important article was titled "The Coming White Underclass" by Charles Murray, a social scientist.
It challenged the entire welfare concept by noting the key roles of teenage pregnancy and illegitimacy, and in doing so shifted the center of national debate.
Among the most important columns on our opinion pages are the ones devoted to your views -- Letters to the Editor.
These columns are overseen by an unsung hero named Ned Crabb, who receives and reads more than 100,000 letters a year.
The letters arrive from CEOs and secretaries, ambassadors and schoolteachers, admirals and homemakers, from men and women as disparate as Alger Hiss and folk singer Peter Yarrow, Nobel economist Milton Friedman and a man named Peter Block, who wrote of being mauled by a grizzly bear.
The Journal's Leisure & Arts page last fall celebrated its 10th anniversary as a daily feature.
Its most frequent contributor is the Journal's only full-time sports writer, Fred Klein.
Along with covering the year's major moments in sports, from a heart-stopping World Series to Michael Jordan's retirement, Fred continued to demonstrate his soft spot for ordinary athletes.
His picks for outstanding sports achievement were those of the new recordsetter for pushups and a man who won a million dollars by sinking a basket from the far end of a court.
The daily content of the Journal also includes advertising.
Whether announcing corporate achievements or new products, alerting readers to investment opportunities or executive job openings, Journal advertising offers genuine benefits to readers and thus they respond.
Our advertisers range from the world's largest companies and financial institutions to small enterprises like Lane Guest Ranch, a Rocky Mountain resort, and Touring America Guild, a designer of china mugs.
Both credit the Journal with building their businesses.
Journal salespeople work closely with clients and agencies to develop innovative and effective advertising.
Sales representative Steve Werfel collaborated with AT&T and its agency, Young & Rubicam, on a unique campaign for AT&T fax services.
The advertisements feature headlines of 20 stories from the Journal's European and Asian editions and offer full text by fax.
Indicative of Journal reader responsiveness, 20 such ads last year prompted more than 40,000 requests for more than 90,000 articles.
Customer service is an essential component of every sales job.
Eric Jensen for more than two decades has been responsible for many of the Journal's most important financial accounts.
One of these called him on a Sunday seeking to get a full-page letter to shareholders in Monday's Journal.
Eric personally picked up the material at a New York print shop late that afternoon, drove four hours to the Journal's Chicopee, Mass., composing room and got the advertisement into late editions of the Monday paper.
Physical production of the paper is the job of the Journal's production department, which staffs 18 printing plants across the U.S. and oversees another six in Europe and Asia.
Like most Journal staffers, production people work under tough time constraints, balancing the need to provide you the latest news with the need to provide the earliest possible delivery.
Forces of nature, such as last year's Mississippi River floods, sometimes compound these pressures.
Regardless, Foreman Jeff Clingan and his crew at the Journal's Des Moines, Iowa, plant kept printing the Journal each night as flood waters rose and for two weeks also printed the Des Moines Register, whose own plant was flooded.
The Journal's front-line departments, in turn, are backed by technical experts and other support staffers around the world -- people like Terence Ho and Johnny Hung in Hong Kong and Willie Stalpaert in Brussels, who keep computer systems running throughout the night, or Tom Deutsch and his U.S. colleagues, who helped keep Dow Jones computers atop the World Trade Center operating after it was bombed.
The Journal's circulation team is responsible for marketing and selling the Journal to subscribers and ensuring the paper's availability at more than 58,000 retail outlets across America and thousands more overseas.
The department's most critical role, however, is serving subscribers.
Some 180 Journal customer service representatives in Chicopee handled more than two million telephone calls last year and another half million pieces of correspondence.
Every caller is provided personal service.
Subscribers sometimes call with complaints -- a mislabeled subscription or an issue undelivered.
Journal subscribers understandably are upset with any flaw in service and customer representatives like Baukje McCray are on the front lines in solving such problems.
Baukje began a telephone relationship with an irate Texas subscriber, solved his problem and checked back several times to make sure it hadn't recurred.
The impressed subscriber became Baukje's phone friend and even offered her son help getting a college scholarship.
Some subscriber letters surprise even veteran service representatives.
Several months ago a letter arrived from Robert Kobbler of Lenexa, Kan., apologizing for failing to respond sooner to a subscription solicitation letter he received in the 1940s.
Mr. Kobbler had preserved the letter and sought to take up the offer with a check for $18, the annual subscription price prior to 1947.
"I realize you might think I have deliberated to an excessive degree," he wrote, "and I won't be terribly disappointed if you renege."
The letter reached the desk of Dan Austin, the Journal's vice president, circulation, and a fellow Kansan, who noted Mr. Kobbler's subscription offer had no time limit and thus personally processed it.
Journal subscribers around the world constitute a diverse community.
They include presidents of countries and companies, financiers and entrepreneurs, homemakers and college students, people from Peoria to Pyongyang.
President Bill Clinton is a Journal reader and cites its articles publicly and privately.
So, for example, does China's economic czar Zhu Rongji.
Journal subscribers range in age from l5-year-old Matt Seto, who already has started his own brokerage company, to Ralph Hon, a retired business professor in Memphis who recently renewed his subscription for the 66th year.
Getting the Journal to its subscribers is the job of hundreds of Journal colleagues around the world.
In the U.S. more than one million Journals a day are hand-delivered before breakfast by carriers of our own National Delivery Service.
For instance, Troy LeGare, a Journal carrier for more than 15 years, delivers to subscribers in New York City's Fulton Fish Market.
These customers are constantly on the move in the early morning hours, so Mr. LeGare, who knows his peripatetic patrons by sight, tracks each to personally deliver the Journal.
And then there is Claude Chase, an 83-year-old Journal carrier in Phoenix, Ariz., who slipped and broke his nose last year making his rounds.
After a quick stop at a hospital emergency room, he completed his deliveries before returning for further treatment.
All of these Journal colleagues and several thousand more around the world join me in thanking you for your support of the Journal and in wishing you and your families a peaceful and prosperous 1994.
Peter R. Kann,
