An additional 340,569 workers joined Germany's jobless ranks in January, raising the total to more than four million amid the lingering recession.
The government announced that unemployment in western Germany rose to 2,736,068 workers, or 8.8% of the total civilian work force, from 2,513,711 in December, when the jobless rate was 8.1%.
In eastern Germany, 1,293,423, or 17% of the people, were listed as unemployed, up from 1,175,211, or 15.4%.
A rate for all of Germany wasn't provided, but economists put the January figure at near 10% or more, with 4,029,491 out of work.
With the four-million mark breached, the jobs crisis and attendant fears of social unrest and rising crime rates loom as major liabilities for Chancellor Helmut Kohl's bid for re-election in October.
A recent poll conducted by Focus magazine identified unemployment as Germany's primary political issue by far.
Taiwan, eager to enter the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, plans to ease its ban on rice imports, government officials said.
Taiwan will let in a small quantity of rice after its entry into the GATT, which is expected as early as the end of this year, the officials said.
Imports will gradually increase to account for as much as 4% of local consumption in 10 years; Taiwan consumes 1.6 million tons of rice a year.
The import ban exists to protect the country's rice farmers.
Officials also vowed to end Taiwan's ban on Japanese cigarettes and wine.
Russian industrial output fell 16% in 1993 from 1992, deteriorating faster than any other major economic sector, government data indicated.
By comparison, overall gross domestic product declined 12%.
Construction contracted by 7%, while agricultural production dropped 4%.
On a brighter note, Russians' incomes, after adjusting for the effect of rampant inflation, grew 9% in 1993 from a year earlier, the State Statistics Committee said.
European Union foreign ministers, ending a standoff, agreed to replace more than 6,400 national import quotas with a handful of EU-wide quotas designed to protect low-tech industries.
The ministers agreed to replace national quotas with quotas on just seven categories affecting Chinese goods: footwear, glassware, porcelain, other tableware, radios, toys and gloves.
A proposal to place quotas on bicycles was rejected.
Under the agreement, 35 million pairs of rubber-sole shoes can be imported from China, but shoes worth more than about $13 are excluded from the restrictions.
Russia's biggest vodka distillery, reeling under the impact of foreign competition and heavy taxes, said it sent its staff of more than 700 on two weeks' unpaid leave.
Moscow's Kristall plant, which manufactures Stolichnaya, warned that taxes are driving it out of business.
Russian vodka, subject to duties of as much as 90% that took effect in December, has become so expensive that many consumers are turning to cut-rate foreign vodka.
A government commission reportedly is considering a tax cut to help domestic distillers.
Brazil's Congress approved a key part of the government's economic stabilization plan, voting 388-38 to establish a $16 billion emergency fund.
Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso threatened to resign last week when Congress failed to assemble a quorum to vote on the fund.
Mr. Cardoso insists the emergency fund is integral to his economic program because most of the budget is already earmarked, and the government needs sufficient funding to meet pressing social and health needs.
The minister, who is emerging as a possible presidential candidate, still faces battles on other parts of his plan.
Opening of the English Channel tunnel between Britain and France has been delayed-again.
Eurotunnel PLC, the Anglo-French concern building the tunnel, said it won't meet its target opening date of May 8 for passenger service, and has pushed back the start of freight service to late spring from March 7.
Eurotunnel officials said tests on the trains and the rail system were taking longer than expected.
Eurotunnel already has sold several thousand tickets for May and June rides.
The company said passengers may seek refunds or use their tickets when the tunnel finally opens.
The tunnel, originally slated to open in December, has suffered from seemingly endless cost overruns, management problems and contractor infighting.
Costs of the project are believed to be about $12.6 billion, double original estimates.
POSTSCRIPT . . .
The Salvation Army is asking British women to donate their second-hand bras for distribution overseas.
An officer for the international Christian aid organization said the undergarments are very expensive in Russia, and are considered a status symbol in India and Pakistan.
