Raytheon Co., moving to reduce costs in both its defense and commercial businesses, said it will consolidate operations and cut as many as 4,400 jobs, or 7% of its work force, in the next two years.
The plan, which analysts praised, will result in a charge of $162 million, or $1.20 a share, in the first quarter ending April 3.
Raytheon said it still expects to report a first-quarter profit after the charge, as well as record sales, but did not provide estimates.
In the 1993 first quarter, the company had net income of $157.5 million, or $1.16 a share, on sales of $2.2 billion.
Raytheon's announcement of the largest restructuring in its 72-year history is the latest in a series of cutbacks and consolidations sweeping the defense industry, as it adapts to continuing reductions in Pentagon spending.
On Monday, aerospace giant Martin Marietta Corp. agreed to buy aircraft maker Grumman Corp. for $1.9 billion.
But Raytheon also said it was taking a number of consolidation steps to respond to increasing competitive pressures in its nondefense businesses.
They include engineering and construction, electronics, aircraft and appliances.
Several analysts said the restructuring will allow the company to continue its high operating margins.
"Raytheon has been pretty good at avoiding significant problems in this down cycle and you have to believe that this sort of positions them to continue to be not at risk," said Howard A. Rubel, of Goldman, Sachs & Co.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Raytheon shares rose 62.5 cents to close at $64.625.
Raytheon lately has been expanding its nondefense interests.
Last year, it purchased the assets of Ebasco Services Inc., a construction company, and British Aerospace PLC's business-jet unit.
In comments to reporters yesterday, a Raytheon spokeswoman said the company was committed to the defense business, but reiterated a longstanding goal of earning half of profits from its commercial ventures.
At the moment, the company's defense side accounts for 65% of earnings.
As part of its restructuring, Raytheon said it will combine all of its missile manufacturing operations in New England in its facility in Andover, Mass.
It also will create a new materials center in Andover that will service most of the company's defense businesses.
As a result, the company will close three Massachusetts facilities in Lowell, Northboro and Norwood, and transfer defense-electronics sub-assembly work from Manchester, N.H., to Andover.
The company said the restructuring isn't related to the Army's recent recommendation to purchase a new missile-interceptor system being developed by Loral Corp. -- which could ultimately drain substantial business from Raytheon's well-known Patriot system.
A final decision by the Pentagon has not been announced.
Raytheon's Beech Aircraft unit will move some manufacturing operations to Wichita, Kan., resulting in the closing of its plant in Selma, Ala.
Raytheon Marine, which makes recreational marine equipment, will consolidate its U.S. facilities at Manchester, N.H., and European facilities at Portsmouth, England.
Raytheon Engineers & Constructors will realign certain of its engineering operations, establishing an international operations center in Houston.
The company said initial job losses will total 2,125 employees, who will be laid off in the coming months.
An additional 2,275 workers are expected to be let go by early 1995.
That will reduce Raytheon's world-wide work force to about 59,100 from a peak of 77,650 five years ago.
