Home builders are expected to post higher earnings for the fourth quarter, as large contractors, enjoying easier access to credit, continued to gain market share.
"New orders and backlog should be uniformly healthy as we begin 1994 with favorable interest rates and improving consumer confidence," analyst Barbara Allen of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities said.
A perennial bull on home builders, she predicted "powerful" earnings gains from builders and suppliers.
Montgomery Securities analyst James F. Wilson said that on average, quarterly earnings for the companies he covers should increase 34.7% and recommends that investors stay weighted in the housing sector.
"We may see stronger-than-expected order results from a lot of companies," Mr. Wilson said, noting that Ryland Group Inc. and D.R. Horton Inc. in particular are likely to report strong orders.
Operating-profit margins, however, aren't expected to be much better than a year earlier, with the rising lumber costs.
Earnings for manufactured-housing companies, which, according to Merrill Lynch analyst Robert Curran, continue in a cyclical upswing, also should be strong.
Montgomery's Mr. Wilson sees the manufactured-housing companies he covers posting quarterly earnings up 18.3%.
According to Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette's Ms. Allen, home-construction earnings strength in the recent quarter should be led by Lennar Corp., with an estimated 80% gain, and Pulte Corp., with an estimated 40% to 50% gain.
Lennar should report profit between 85 cents a share and 95 cents a share for its fourth quarter, ended Nov. 30, compared with 50 cents a year earlier, Ms. Allen said.
She noted that Lennar's orders remained "comfortably" ahead of 1992.
Pulte, a national builder of single-family homes and condominiums, is expected to report net income between 80 cents a share and 90 cents a share for the final quarter, compared with 61 cents a share a year earlier, Ms. Allen said.
Dallas-based Centex Corp. is expected to report earnings rose to around 69 cents a share from 55 cents a share for the fiscal third quarter ended December.
Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette's Ms. Allen projects earnings between 60 cents a share and 70 cents a share, citing the continued strong performance of Centex's mortgage-banking business.
A spokeswoman said the company expects to report earnings around 69 cents a share for the quarter.
Analysts, including PaineWebber Inc.'s Jeffrey Sprague, noted Kaufman & Broad Home Corp.'s December orders were stronger than anticipated.
For the fourth quarter ended Nov. 30, orders increased 50% from a year earlier, Montgomery Securities' Mr. Wilson estimates.
Analysts expect the Los Angeles home builder to report earnings around 45 cents a share for the final period.
The company reported profit of 41 cents a share in the year-earlier quarter.
Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette's Ms. Allen said Standard Pacific Corp., another California company, can report profit of five cents a share to 10 cents a share for the final quarter.
Standard Pacific reported earnings of three cents a share in the year-earlier quarter and 15 cents a share for 1992.
She said Standard Pacific's orders rose 50% in October and 54% in November, with one less week in the year-over-year comparison.
Montgomery's Mr. Wilson sees Ryland group reporting a 5.3% earnings increase to 40 cents a share.
Orders for the company may exceed his projection of a 25% increase from a year earlier, he said.
Ms. Allen said she sees the company earning between 30 cents and 40 cents a share for the period.
Among smaller-capitalization companies, D.R. Horton is expected to show a 50% increase in orders for the recently ended fiscal first quarter, Mr. Wilson said, and a 9.5% increase in earnings to 23 cents a share.
Ms. Allen said earnings for Horton are likely to be flat.
While October and November orders were strong, she said, deliveries were slower than expected.
Horton, citing strong sales contracts in October and November, said it was confident it could exceed analysts' estimates for fiscal 1994, ending September.
A Zacks Investment Research poll of five analysts projects year-end profit of $1.07 a share.
On the manufactured-housing side, Montgomery's Mr. Wilson sees Clayton Homes Inc. reporting a 33.3% increase in earnings to 23 cents a share for the fiscal second quarter ended December.
Oakwood Homes Inc. should report 27 cents a share for the fiscal first quarter ended December, a 29% increase from the year-earlier 21 cents a share, he said.
Ms. Allen sees the company reporting earnings between 24 cents a share and 27 cents a share.
One report shows the strength analysts expected.
Hovnanian Enterprises Inc. posted earnings of 21 cents a share for the third quarter ended Nov. 30, compared with nine cents a share a year earlier.
The mean analysts' estimate surveyed by Zacks was 29 cents a share.
