A federal judge refused to extend the deadline for energy-limited-partnership investors to decide whether to opt out of a $120 million settlement by Prudential Securities Inc.
The decision, by federal Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr., means that 130,000 investors in a class-action case in New Orleans will have until Saturday to decide whether to accept Prudential's settlement offer, or try to tap into a $330 million restitution fund set up by Prudential as part of an October settlement with regulators.
A fairness hearing on the New Orleans settlement is scheduled for Jan. 19.
The investors have accused the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit of misleading them on the risks and returns of about $1.45 billion in 35 energy partnerships, many of which have soured.
But several states and attorneys had urged Judge Livaudais to postpone the opt-out date and fairness hearing.
Last week, for instance, the California corporations commissioner asked the judge to delay the hearing for 90 days "and order the parties to improve the disclosure to compare the settlement amount the impacted investors may expect in this settlement with the amount they could be expected to receive" under the regulatory accord.
The states technically had no standing to oppose the settlement, however.
That's because they already had signed off on the $120 million settlement, under which each state will receive $500,000, people familiar with the matter say.
"The key thing is that the states themselves had settled and so were not objecting to any substantive aspects of the settlement," says Clinton Krislov, an attorney in Chicago who represents clients with claims against Prudential.
If accepted by Judge Livaudais, the settlement would bring to about $1.27 billion, or an average of 87 cents on the dollar, the amount that investors will end up getting for their original $1.45 billion investment.
The investors already have received distributions of more than $650 million, and will get an additional $491 million from the sale of the partnerships to Parker & Parsley Petroleum Co., a Texas oil and gas company.
This is the second shot that Prudential has made in settling the class-action case.
Last February, Judge Livaudais said he had "serious reservations" about the fairness of Prudential's original settlement proposal, which included about $37 million in cash payments and interests in the partnerships in a reorganized form.
