When young conservatives drove John Chafee out of the Senate Republican leadership in 1990, the Rhode Island patriarch just seemed to get busier with his health-care task force.
Now, after years of Thursday morning meetings, Sen. Chafee occupies perhaps the most critical position on the biggest legislative issue before Congress, leading a bloc of moderate votes that could be President Clinton's last best hope of achieving the administration's ambitious goal of universal coverage.
"The American public wants some changes in the health-care system of the United States," says Mr. Chafee.
"I am very, very anxious to see a health-care bill enacted, and I think there are a substantial number of Republicans who feel exactly as I do."
As task-force chairman, Mr. Chafee has helped craft a bill that takes a much more incremental approach to reform but shares the president's goal of universal coverage.
When the Clinton plan rode high in the polls, the Chafee option was a safe harbor for the GOP, but as the administration has faltered, conservatives want moderates to move further from the president to maximize the party's leverage.
"Everybody is moving to the right," says Arizona Sen. John McCain.
"If we are fractured, we will not play in this process."
A two-day retreat of Senate Republicans, beginning this evening in Maryland, will test this sentiment, and Mr. Chafee's resolve.
If the moderates weaken, it further dims the administration's chances.
But if this center holds, it not only gives the president hope but holds open the door for the GOP leadership to still seek some compromise with the administration.
Next to Mr. Clinton, no one may have more at stake in the outcome than Senate Republican Leader Robert Dole of Kansas, for whom Sen. Chafee is both point man and conscience or "kinder angel."
Born months apart, the two men are very different personalities, but their lives have a certain symmetry.
When Mr. Dole, the poor Kansas boy, went to Europe in World War II as an officer in an elite Army unit, Mr. Chafee, the New England Yalie, went west as a Marine enlisted man at Guadalcanal in the Pacific.
Both served Richard Nixon: Mr. Chafee as secretary of the Navy and Mr. Dole as the Republican National Committee chairman.
And at one of the blackest moments of Mr. Dole's career, the aftermath of his unsuccessful 1976 vice presidential campaign, Mr. Chafee arrived in the Senate as part of a moderate bloc that helped resurrect the Kansan's fortunes and eventually made him Republican leader.
As a wounded veteran and champion of health reform since the early years of the Nixon administration, Sen. Dole could command considerable credibility on the health issue.
But pressure from the right has made him waver.
The harsh tone of his remarks after President Clinton's January State of the Union address -- remarks principally written by Mari Maseng Will, a former Dole campaign press secretary now married to conservative columnist George Will -- provoked strong objections from longtime aide Sheila Burke, an experienced nurse who helped craft the Chafee plan.
As long as Sen. Chafee and his fellow moderates remain united, they provide a counterweight to the pressure on Mr. Dole from the right.
"I believe Bob Dole wants to see health-care reform in our country," says Mr. Chafee.
Mr. Dole himself, speaking on the Senate floor in anticipation of the GOP retreat, said that "the president's plan is slipping away, and it is time for leadership in both parties to see if we cannot deal with this issue this year."
Mr. Chafee's role has made him a target for conservative editorialists who have painted him as less than trustworthy and even unprincipled.
And in his re-election this year, the 71-year-old senator faces a party-primary challenge from an antigun-control businessman, Thomas Post, whose campaign builds on ties to Patrick Buchanan's 1992 presidential campaign and offers a vehicle to put pressure on Mr. Chafee on health-care issues.
The hard-edged tone of some of Mr. Chafee's critics can rankle colleagues.
"You don't want to spend any time trying to detonate John Chafee.
He has too many friends here," says Senate GOP Whip Alan Simpson of Wyoming.
Adds Sen. Bob Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat: "They'll have to put a new party together if Chafee is described as unprincipled."
More broadly, the divisions dramatize a generational shift in a Senate GOP caucus increasingly dominated by a younger breed of conservatives embodied by Texas Sen. Phil Gramm, the faction that engineered Mr. Chafee's 1990 ouster from the party's No. 3 leadership position.
While the new generation is more apt to see many of the 1960s Great Society programs as unalloyed mistakes, Mr. Chafee, like Mr. Dole himself, has Nixon-era roots in trying to come up with alternatives to those programs.
The same divide is evident in the debate over health care.
While Irving Kristol, a neoconservative writer with roots in the same period, argues that currently "Republicans are paying a price for doing nothing -- Nixon tried," Mr. Kristol's son William, a former top aide to Vice President Dan Quayle, is associated with the "no-crisis" health-reform minimalists on the right.
For Mr. Chafee, another driving force in his role is his experience as governor of Rhode Island in the 1960s, and his exposure to the health-care problems of poor and working-class children not covered by Medicaid.
"These children are not getting the preventive care that they should be getting," he says.
"They're not eligible for it.
I was governor and dealt with the problem."
One of Sen. Chafee's goals is to provide subsidies to families making as much as 240% of the poverty level (though critics contend his plans for financing those subsidies fall short).
Within the Senate GOP, Mr. Chafee has drawn on regional ties to such fellow moderates as Sen. William Cohen of Maine.
And he has reached out with some success to the likes of Sen. Robert Bennett, a Utah freshman whose age, 60, and seriousness make him something of a soulmate.
Most important to the fate of Mr. Chafee's efforts are his colleagues on the Senate Finance Committee, including the ranking Republican, Oregon's Bob Packwood, as well as Missouri's John Danforth, Minnesota's David Durenberger -- and Mr. Dole.
The same group was behind the defeat of Mr. Clinton's economic-stimulus bill last year.
But to an extraordinary degree, many of them have reached a point in their lives when achieving health-care reform has taken on singular importance.
Mr. Danforth is slated to retire, and Sens. Durenberger and Packwood are looking for some political redemption after scandals that have tarnished their careers.
All of which fuels Sen. Chafee's determination to hold out against his party's right wing.
"I think every day, everything tilts more and more toward our plan," he says.
"I'm not going to say from on high we were given the golden tablets, but I think we have a very, very good bill.
And it's looking better all the time."
