CBS had few events to choose from Tuesday night and, perhaps because of the slim pickings, produced its best broadcast of the Olympics.
It began with Phil Liggett and Jeff Hastings doing their second fine job with Lillehammer's ski jumping.
Al Trautwig was even better in describing the men's 4x10K cross-country skiing relay race.
Mr. Trautwig had been confined to bitty bites of sound on earlier evenings, but given some air time, he and the well-placed CBS cameras made the relay one of the thrilling TV moments of the Games.
Moments later, Charles Kuralt gave U.S. viewers a riveting history lesson with a microdocumentary on the success of a small squad of Norwegian and Norwegian-American ski commandos in frustrating Nazi production of heavy water, a substance that could have been used in atomic-bomb construction.
At its end, the documentary seemed to claim too much potential for the Nazi bomb program, and it never mentioned Norway's collaborationist government that gave the world the word Quisling, but it was an expertly done program including the words and faces of the surviving commandos.
Greg Gumbel had a bland interview with Nancy Kerrigan followed by an even blander one with Connie Chung.
Tonya Harding refused to be interviewed, so CBS news co-anchor Ms. Chung was her stand-in.
Can't you hear future production meetings at CBS?
"Marla's not available?
Get Connie!"
After failing to explain or argue the results of the ice-dancing competition Monday night (despite hours of available time between the competition and the broadcast), Mr. Gumbel and commentator Tracy Wilson, a former ice dancer, interviewed Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean to chew over what happened.
The CBS pair couldn't quite get Ms. Torvill and Mr. Dean to say "We wuz robbed," but they came close.
Of course, they were robbed, but all Ms. Wilson would concede was that there are a lot of "gray areas" in ice-dancing rules.
Yeah, so many that the sport ought to wear a paper bag over its head.
We still say drop it from the Games.
(We realize we're swimming against the tide; beach volleyball will be in the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.)
The memorable men's cross-country relay combined many elements of sporting drama -- Ulvang, the upset, the silenced multitude at the finish -- but one of the things that made it great viewing in U.S. living rooms was the explanatory care that CBS lavished on the broadcast.
It's a pity that a similar effort wasn't made for the short-track speed skating that followed.
This is a lovable little sport: stock-car racing without the cars, or perhaps skating's answer to the old club fights, in which the winner was the one left standing.
But to the untutored eye, it's mysterious; the relay event looks like concentric human tornadoes.
What fun it might be with some tutoring.
CBS again smashed its competition Tuesday night.
Its Olympic broadcast was watched by 24.9% of the nation's TV households, according to A.C. Nielsen Co.
ABC drew 13.1% and NBC had 10.3%.
