International Business Machines Corp. agreed to make a sophisticated new generation of mainframe chips for its old rival, Unisys Corp., according to industry experts familiar with the deal.
The agreement, to be announced tommorrow, provides IBM with a solid customer for its chip manufacturing business; while Unisys, which has been trying to make fewer parts for its computers, gains a reliable supplier.
Motorola Corp. and Intel Corp. are two of Unisys' biggest suppliers now.
Exact terms of the contract between IBM and Unisys weren't available.
IBM about one year ago increased its drive to make and supply microprocessors for outside customers.
The new chips are based on the CMOS design that runs PCs.
IBM is converting its mainframe line to run on CMOS because those chips are more efficient and less costly to manufacture than bipolar chips that currently drive the mainframe.
Based in Blue Bell, Pa., Unisys, which is ahead of the industry in the CMOS transition, would become the largest outside customer of CMOS chips made by IBM.
Those familiar with the agreement said Unisys would provide the design for its own version of CMOS for IBM to manufacture.
IBM, which has numerous supply agreements with other computer makers, has said it is actively seeking other customers.
The company has been a big manufacturer of Intel chips for its own computers.
But its biggest production effort now is centered on the new PowerPC chip, a high-speed chip based on the RISC architecture, which stands for "reduced instruction set computing."
IBM has an agreement to make PowerPC chips for Apple Computer, which is converting its PCs to run on the PowerPC.
Designed by Motorola, IBM and Apple, PowerPC is independently manufactured by Motorola and IBM.
Based in Armonk, N.Y., IBM makes both the PowerPC and CMOS chips in Burlington, Vt.
Supply agreements for these chips aren't expected to affect employment or manufacturing at the Hudson Valley, N.Y., bipolar chip plants, which have taken huge hits as mainframe production slows and the CMOS transition occurs.
