The chairmen of Spain's five biggest banks huddled yesterday as a first step toward working out a rescue plan for Banco Espanol de Credito.
But leaks from the meeting indicated that the banks weren't happy with the proposal given, because it requires them to shoulder most of the burden for refloating Banesto.
People in the industry said Banesto's new chairman, Alfredo Saenz, who presented the plan, was believed to have asked commercial and savings banks to inject as much as 350 billion pesetas ($2.45 billion) into Banesto through Spain's deposit-guarantee fund.
This money would be used to help meet a financial gap at Banesto estimated to stand at 605 billion pesetas.
The guarantee fund, which currently has about 30 billion pesetas, would acquire assets from Banesto, including nonperforming loans, real estate and industrial shareholdings, for more than 150 billion pesetas.
Then, the fund is expected to subscribe to a 200 billion pesetas capital increase, thereby becoming Banesto's biggest shareholder.
Also said to be included in the plan is a total write-down of the bank's reserves and a reduction in the nominal value of its shares, to 500 pesetas from 700 pesetas each.
That would lead to a write-down of capital and reserves of about 275 billion pesetas.
Banks also apparently objected to Mr. Saenz's plan because it spares shareholders most of the bailout pain.
They said that several banks favored writing off all of the bank's capital -- a move that would wipe out the value of its current shares -- although it is unclear whether they will press for such a drastic solution.
The banks resent being called on to bail out a bank that failed to heed the economy's warning signals after 1989.
While other banks were scaling back lending in anticipation of tough times, Banesto, Spain's fourth-largest bank, adopted an expansionary loan policy that contributed to its current problems, they said.
Banking sources said a news blackout was imposed yesterday to ease pressure on the chairmen who attended the meeting.
The only official comment came from the Spanish Banking Association, which announced that calculations of Banesto's financing needs had been reduced by 70 billion pesetas.
When the Bank of Spain ousted Banesto's chairman and board in December, as its financial plight came to light, the central bank estimated that Banesto had a financial shortfall of 503 billion pesetas, a figure that was raised provisionally last week to 675 billion pesetas by Banesto's new management team.
Mr. Saenz is expected to meet with the chairmen of Spain's leading savings banks tomorrow .
So far, savings banks have proven even more reluctant than commercial banks to participate in a rescue plan for Banesto.
The chairman of the Caixa de Catalunya, Spain's third-biggest savings bank, told the Spanish press earlier this week that "the most logical thing would be for Banesto to close its doors, given the loss of value that it's assets have suffered."
