Just when it began to seem time to stop hoping for much from "The Critic," the animated sitcom from the former executive producers of "The Simpsons" was suddenly in top form on Wednesday.
It is a bit early to talk about "The Critic" in terms of form, of course, given the show's shapelessness and its indecisiveness as to nature of the critic himself -- the tubby film expert and arbiter of culture, Jay Sherman.
Whether he is a dolt, an intellectual, a sniveling toady, a lonely man of principle or just a shorter-than-average version of the various yuppie louts discoursing about movies on real TV screens nowadays depends entirely on which episode of "The Critic" one has been watching.
Over the long haul, this will never do.
Still, when the show is good it is very good.
One reason may have been the relative absence of the characters representing Jay's family -- in particular the two twits who are supposed to be his rich adoptive parents.
We've come to see a good deal of this demented father and virago socialite mother in the six episodes of "The Critic" shown so far.
No aspect of their characters ring remotely true.
There is something about the very rich and the upper classes generally that seems beyond the imagination of modern American writers as a whole, to say nothing of TV writers.
After all, to satirize a class of people one must actually know something about them.
Contempt is not enough.
Compare this implausible couple to the elder Simpsons.
If nothing else, the gross caricatures of Jay's parents serve as reminders of "The Simpsons'" extraordinary strength and ambition.
We are talking about the show that never yields a character that isn't chiseled with care, by writers who know the language and tone of everyone woven into the action, from the pompous school principal to the Pakistani 7-Eleven store owner, Apu, to Homer's detested twin sisters-in-law.
Those big-haired, viperish, Homer-hating wits the world has come to know as Marge's sisters are pure New York -- the culture the writers know in their bones.
Not for nothing do their sneers and insults ring so true.
"The Critic" has its own charms, as was especially clear in the most recent show, written by Tom Brady, in which Jay campaigns for a Pulitzer.
All episodes of "The Critic" begin with a wake-up call for Jay from one tormenter or another in his life -- his dimwitted station-owner boss (a Ted Turner look-alike), his mother, etc.
This show, it is the critic's former wife who calls to complain that her alimony check is 19 minutes late.
Jay has much else on his mind, since this day is the 1,000th airing of his show.
But no one comes to the anniversary party thrown for him at the glamorous Drink N' Drive Inn.
Jay gets tossed out of the movie-critic business, though he still manages to stay on the air -- this time as an instructor on a wonderful early morning TV show titled "English for Cabdrivers."
Here, now, is serious fun: the polyglot theater of the absurd that New Yorkers face every time they get in a taxi and try to communicate in English with a driver whose only tongue is Urdu or Lapp.
The language barrier is, needless to say, the least of the dangers confronting a regular rider of the city's taxis.
Not for nothing does the now former movie critic teach his cabdriver students how to say, "He was already dead when I hit him."
In due time, Jay, who has his heart set on a Pulitzer as a way of reclaiming his career, intersperses the cabbie lessons with attacks on bad movies.
"If the film used to be a TV show," an exhausted and unshaven Jay hoarsely pleads, "don't go."
If the film is a remake of a classic, he implores, "rent the classic."
In short order, Jay does win the Pulitzer and gets his movie critic's job back.
So he triumphs in the end, something that would never happen to that other tubby antihero, Homer Simpson, who remains a consistent and beloved loser.
One of the main troubles with "The Critic's" Jay is, of course, that he is neither consistent nor beloved.
Nor does it help that the artists' conception of Jay -- who has a sawed-off scalp and three hairs -- isn't particularly inspired.
He is, in short, no fun to look at.
And Homer Simpson is?
You bet.
You should have seen him just now in his astronaut suit alongside Buzz Aldrin after being selected for the NASA program.
What followed was Simpsonite comedy at its bilious best.
We learn that NASA, whose televised landings suffer from low ratings, has chosen Homer because agency officials have figured out that high TV ratings are all going to programs about blue-collar slobs.
Up in space, we also watch the astronauts perform their routine jobs, which include jettisoning children's letters to God.
Homer joins the space program because he feels no one respects him at work.
As ever, the devoted Marge is there to assure him she's respected him from the first day she met him, never mind the fact that at the time he didn't know how to use a touch-tone phone.
This sort of unswerving devotion, is, of course, the crucial element that identifies Homer as a hero -- of sorts.
Someone wise, good and true -- if also clearly blind -- loves him (as no one loves Jay).
A real-life movie critic once noted that it was mostly the adoration in Barbra Streisand's eyes when she looked at him that made Robert Redford seem so overwhelmingly gorgeous as Hubbell in "The Way We Were."
All right, Jay is a far cry from Robert Redford, but the creators of "The Critic" might at least want to consider getting him a Marge or otherwise shoring up the appeal of this all-around loser.
It wouldn't hurt, either, to rethink his hair.
