When it comes to finding a candidate to take on Mario Cuomo this year, New York Republicans seem hell-bent to prove the old chestnut that says you can't beat somebody with nobody.
The 62-year-old governor is slumping badly in the polls as he prepares to seek his fourth four-year term to lead this brawling, contentious state.
But the Republicans have an entire field of squalling nobodies hoping to take on Mr. Cuomo, who, in New York if no longer in the nation, is still somebody.
"Let's not discourage them in their disarray," the governor says.
It's deja vu all over again.
In 1990, desperate to find a candidate to take on Mr. Cuomo, the GOP state chairman combed through a friend's address book.
He got to R, and out popped Pierre Rinfret, an economics consultant who turned out to be the sole Republican willing to make what could only charitably be described as a run.
Though Mr. Cuomo managed just 53% of the vote, the GOP candidate was thrashed, barely beating the Conservative Party candidate.
This should be the GOP's big year.
The latest Marist College Institute for Public Opinion poll puts Mr. Cuomo's approval rating at 35.6%, an all-time low.
"Last time he ran, his weakness came as a surprise," says Lee Miringoff, the Marist poll taker.
"This time, the Republicans have no excuses."
A year ago, their best candidate seemed to be the state's top judge, Sol Wachtler.
But he was sent to jail for threatening to kidnap his former lover's daughter.
The next-best hope was Sen. Alfonse D'Amato.
But Mr. D'Amato says, "I'm too busy in Washington.
I can't take the time."
That leaves the field of dreams.
Gov. Cuomo says he has an idea of what the Republicans have been looking for to oppose him: A Catholic with great personal wealth and an eagerness to spend a lot of it for the campaign, and a willingness to oppose his or her own church by supporting both abortion rights and the death penalty.
"I don't know how you do that simultaneously," says the governor, who is also Roman Catholic.
He opposes the death penalty and performs deep public soul-searching on the abortion question.
The governor's analysis isn't far off the mark.
From their focus groups and private polls, Republican leaders really did have in mind such a candidate.
They also wanted him or her to favor tax cuts and come from the suburbs.
The leaders talked on the phone and even had a hide-away dinner at an Italian restaurant on Long Island in their efforts to find that candidate.
"We gave it a good-faith effort," says Sen. D'Amato, the principal kingmaker.
"We just couldn't come to an agreement."
The result is that they've drifted back to the positions they held before the talks.
Sen. D'Amato and party Chairman William Powers, once his chief of operations, are once again boosting an obscure state senator named George Pataki, the former mayor of Peekskill.
The powerful GOP leader in the state Senate, Ralph Marino, still says Mr. Pataki is unacceptable.
He threatens to endorse his own candidate, whose identity remains a mystery.
If that weren't confusing enough, a number of other candidates are already out there campaigning.
They include former Ambassador to France Evan Galbraith; former state party Chairmen J. Patrick Barrett (the man who discovered Mr. Rinfret) and Richard Rosenbaum; and Herbert London, a professor at New York University and the 1990 Conservative candidate.
All of them insist they'll take the fight to a party convention in late May, and if that doesn't work to a primary election in September.
"I'm not sure that's a good idea," says Mr. Powers, the chairman.
For the Republican kingmakers, the frustration is that they've come a long way since the 1990 disaster.
"Rinfret was the low point all right," says Mr. Powers.
"After that campaign, we put together a hostile takeover of what was left of the state party."
He says that when he seized power in early 1991, he found that only 137 people had contributed to the party in the preceding 12 months.
Since then, he's pretty much put the party back together, no mean accomplishment.
More than 58,000 people contributed to the party last year, many of them taking part in the "dime a day to defeat Mario" campaign.
The state party played a key role in electing Rudolph Giuliani mayor of New York.
Republicans also won key elections in Syracuse, Binghamton and Troy, and even took over Albany County, in the governor's backyard, for the first time in 75 years.
In Sen. Pataki, Mr. Powers and Sen. D'Amato have a candidate who meets some of the qualifications they laid down for this year's Cuomo challenge.
The 48-year-old Mr. Pataki may not be wealthy, but he is Catholic, and he supports abortion rights in a limited way and favors the death penalty.
"He's a wonderful young man," says Mr. D'Amato.
"He's got guts and independence and he's voted against all of Cuomo's budgets."
No surprise, he's also strong on cutting taxes, which won him the support of a New York City supply-side group called Change-NY.
That bothers Mr. Marino, the state Senate leader, who has been a target of Change-NY's ire.
A fair number of conservatives, many of whom sometimes bolt to the Conservative Party in election years, aren't exactly excited about Mr. Pataki either.
They worry about his abortion-rights stance.
"Al D'Amato himself is pro-life," says Mr. London, the 1990 Conservative candidate and would-be 1994 GOP nominee.
"Trying to force Pataki down our throats is bizarre."
What the Republicans want to avoid at all costs is another situation when they field one candidate, the Conservatives field another and Mr. Cuomo squeezes out still another victory.
Mr. London insists the Conservative nomination is his for the asking, and he says he will take it if the Republicans try to rally around Mr. Pataki or any other abortion-rights supporter.
But Mike Long, the Conservative Party's chairman, still hopes to work something out with the Republicans.
"We have lots of time, and we don't want to make up our minds tomorrow morning," he says.
Mr. Powers is hopeful too.
"We agree with the Conservatives on 90% of the issues; we can work this out."
For Mr. Powers and his reinvigorated Republicans, there's no mistaking the main prize.
"It's Mario," he says.
"I've mounted his photo on my office wall.
I look at him all the time.
It keeps me focused."
He wanted to mount a second Cuomo photo in his bedroom, he says, but his wife put her foot down.
