A band is playing the latest Greek hits at the Marrakesh nightclub in central Athens, and the action isn't confined to the dance floor.
Some women are dancing on top of tables, while men clap in time or shower their dates with red and white carnations.
It's 4 a.m. on a Monday, but most of these latter-day Dionysians seem as if they can party for a couple of hours more before dragging their bodies to work.
And they aren't the only ones losing sleep over this lifestyle.
Public Order Minister Stelios Papathemelis blames the revelry for Greece's low productivity, and he has succeeded in putting a crimp in the carousing.
Under a new law scheduled to take effect Wednesday, nightclubs and taverns must close at 2 a.m.
Sunday through Thursday and no later than 3:30 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays.
The issue has drawn fire from predictable quarters.
Club owners staged an unprecedented strike for one day last month, and they threaten to shut down again unless Mr. Papathemelis extends the closing times by at least one hour.
Night crawlers complain that something akin to their birthright as Greeks is being challenged.
Meanwhile, the cast at the official level gives this Greek tragedy a dose of comic irony.
For all Mr. Papathemelis's fretting about a debilitated work force, his chief antagonist has been Labor Minister Evangelos Yannopoulos.
Athens's 2,000 or so nightclubs, the crux of the problem, enjoy a thriving business thanks to local customers as well as millions of summertime tourists.
The bouzoukia, so named from the traditional Greek stringed instrument, are packed almost every night despite exorbitant prices.
For cheaper places like Marrakesh, popularly known as "doghouses" because their second-rate singers sound like kennel choristers, you have to book days in advance to get in on a Friday or Saturday.
A night out can cost an average Greek a month's salary.
Scotch or vodka goes for as much as 24,000 drachmas ($97) a bottle, while a fortune can be spent on flowers at $20 a tray.
After his first bottle, a Greek man may feel compelled to dump at least 10 trays on his date.
Nightclub owners say the new law will cost them a lot of business.
Makis Psomiades, owner of Marrakesh and three other clubs, says the law "limits our operation to no more than two hours, as nobody goes for a drink before midnight.
People go to dinner or to the theater and will then come to us."
The owners' strike threat doesn't upset Mr. Papathemelis, who probably wouldn't mind if nightclubs closed for good.
He says his measure, which includes banning teenagers from clubs where alcohol is served, also seeks to reduce crime rates and traffic accidents caused by drinking.
To enforce all this, he is preparing what he calls a "special commando force," which will make sudden raids on nightclubs.
The new police body, dubbed by the Greek press as "the Untouchables," is deemed necessary to avoid under-the-table deals between club owners and local police stations.
That happened the last time a similar ban was in force, in 1977, when an energy crisis forced nightclubs to close early to save electricity.
Mr. Papathemelis has on his side nightclub employees, who wouldn't mind a more reasonable work schedule, and parents, who will no longer have to wait up all night for errant youths to come home.
A recent survey by the private polling company ICAP estimated that 52% of Athenians favored the new law.
But many Greeks feel that not even the Untouchables can make them go to bed early.
"I can't imagine the police raiding bars and discos and throwing people out," says Anna Maratos, a 30-year-old public relations manager at a private television station.
"No minister can tell me when and how long I will have fun."
Ms. Maratos, like many Athenians her age, says she goes on a late-night outing at least once or twice a week.
"Greeks have night life in their blood," says a popular singer who goes by the name of Antypas.
"They don't want any limits when they are having fun."
Mr. Papathemelis believes his measure will change this centuries-old inclination to dine and dance into the wee hours, and bring Greece closer to the rest of Europe.
"It's outrageous that someone can stay up all night, only to fall asleep next day at work," he says in an interview.
He doesn't have any official complaints from employers about poor productivity due to late-night carousing, but he argues that a stroll in Athens is proof enough.
"In Athens after midnight one has the feeling that he is caught in midday's rush hour," Mr. Papathemelis says.
"The night has become day, and the day night.
When do all these people sleep?"
Mr. Papathemelis might have turned to his cabinet colleagues for an answer.
Some fellow ministers and other politicians are often seen enjoying themselves in various nightclubs.
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou liked to dance until dawn until he had open-heart surgery in 1988.
And then there is Mr. Yannopoulos.
Before he became labor minister, he made front-page news last year in pictures that showed him with a female stripper who was waving her bra above his head at Sodom, one of the capital's hottest clubs.
Mr. Yannopoulos has made no secret of his love for Greek night life and recently stirred up a debate over what the press dubbed "the bouzouki vs. Bach and Shakespeare" for giving free tickets to low-income workers for certain nightclubs.
The tickets were included in government subsidies for cultural activities that usually are intended for serious theater and concerts.
Mr. Yannopoulos argued that bouzouki music is part of the Greek culture.
The labor minister tried to negotiate a compromise between Mr. Papathemelis and the nightclub owners, but to no avail.
In any event, some Athenians doubt the law will bring about much change.
"The whole thing reminds me of Prohibition in Chicago.
Liquor was forbidden, but everybody was out drunk with a bottle in his pocket," says Antypas, the singer.
"What is forbidden is always sweeter."
