An elaborate federal sting operation against contract fraud and bribery at the U.S. space agency has led to criminal charges against nine men, including two low-level NASA employees, two former Martin Marietta Corp. employees and a consultant.
Among those charged is James A. Robertson, a partner in a Virginia consulting firm headed by James Beggs, former administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The charges, filed by the U.S. attorney's office in Houston, are the first to result from an inquiry code-named "Lightning Strike," in which a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent posed as a businessman offering bribes, kickbacks and confidential contract documents.
The 20-month undercover operation, which was disclosed in news leaks last December, ended in July 1993.
But federal officials said other phases of the investigation into abuse of government contracts and purchasing practices are continuing.
In an agreement with the government, Martin Marietta is to pay $1 million in reimbursement for costs of the undercover sting, even though federal officials said they planned no action against the company.
"This is not a penalty.
This is not a fine," said Jim Tierney, a spokesman for the Bethesda, Md., company.
"Martin Marietta had no prior knowledge of any of the alleged activities or incidents, and we anticipate no further development around this issue."
The charges say that the FBI agent offered bribes ranging from $2,500 to $5,000, a $10,000 computer and a job for one NASA employee's son, plus promises of thousands of dollars in kickbacks, for help in assisting his fictitious company win contracts.
Part of the sting involved efforts to win a NASA contract to fly a fictitious kidney-stone crushing machine aboard the space shuttle.
Although the FBI agent was able to buy help in forwarding his proposal, the agency ultimately rejected the idea.
While most of the allegations involve contract work at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, the charges show that the investigation also reached outside the space agency.
Mr. Robertson, the consultant and a former vice president for government relations at Morton Thiokol Inc., was charged with accepting what was purported to be confidential information on a competitor's bid for a Defense Department contract while preparing a bid for the FBI sting's fictitious company.
Mr. Robertson couldn't be reached to comment.
Both Martin Marietta and General Electric Co., which employed one of the workers charged until it sold its aerospace businesses to Martin Marietta in April 1993, pledged continued cooperation in the investigation.
The two Martin Marietta employees, a division director and a manager, worked on NASA contracts in Texas, but have since left the company.
Jeff Carr, a NASA spokesman in Houston, said the two NASA employees have been transferred to other jobs that don't involve contracts or purchasing at the space agency.
Also named in the charges were Astro International Corp., a small NASA contractor in League City, Texas, and three of its top employees, who were charged with violating purchasing rules by obtaining internal NASA contracting documents.
In addition, a research scientist for Krug Life Sciences was charged with accepting $5,000 to recruit help in NASA to buy the kidney-stone machine.
Krug Life Sciences is a subsidiary of Krug International Corp., which has a support-service contract with NASA's Houston center.
A spokeswoman for Krug International, Dayton, Ohio, said that neither Krug Life Sciences nor the parent company was indicted and that "the scientist in question no longer works for us, and he hasn't for quite some time."
James S. Hirsch in Houston contributed to this article.
