Since refusing last month to serve in Russia's increasingly conservative cabinet, Yegor Gaidar is frequently asked whether President Boris Yeltsin has abandoned the reform course Mr. Gaidar set for Russia two years ago.
"Why don't you ask him yourself," Mr. Gaidar suggests in an interview.
Advised that this isn't possible, Mr. Gaidar tries to respond, choosing his words carefully.
"Yeltsin hasn't changed his attitude toward market reform," says the 37-year-old economist, who once was Mr. Yeltsin's most trusted adviser.
"But Yeltsin's estimations of Russia's political and social realities have changed."
What that means politically isn't yet clear.
When Mr. Gaidar and reformist Finance Minister Boris Fyodorov quit the cabinet last month, they left economic policy firmly in the hands of Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, who is likely to slow Russia's move toward the free market.
The focus now isn't so much on the market as it is on reviving state industries with old-fashioned state support.
The only chance to block the return to Soviet-style economics seems to reside in Mr. Yeltsin, who retains substantial powers under Russia's newly adopted constitution.
"Yeltsin is the strongest political factor in favor of reform in Russia," says Mr. Gaidar.
But for now, he says, the president is standing on the sidelines, passively waiting for the government to announce its new programs.
What happened to Boris Yeltsin?
Does he still support Russia's radical economic reforms?
These are the million-dollar questions for Russia's economy -- and ones that Mr. Gaidar can't answer.
The president, his aides say, was stung by the results of the Dec. 12 parliamentary election.
In the vote, the pro-reform party, Russia's Choice, headed by Mr. Gaidar, fared far worse than anticipated.
The main beneficiaries were the revived Communist Party and the ultranationalist party of Vladimir Zhirinovsky.
Mr. Gaidar believes voters didn't actually reject market reform.
Rather, he says, they voted against the reformers to protest rising crime and official corruption.
Nonetheless, the political winds have shifted, and Mr. Gaidar became a casualty.
Sensing the conservative shift, he decided to quit the cabinet on Jan. 13, during the visit to Russia of President Bill Clinton.
To avoid awkward timing, Messrs. Yeltsin and Gaidar agreed to postpone the announcement until just after Mr. Clinton departed.
That actually proved embarrassing for Mr. Clinton, since the administration spent most of its time in Moscow lauding the strength of Russia's reform team, only to see it fall apart as soon as the presidential visit ended.
"The timing was unfortunate," concedes Mr. Gaidar, sitting in a spacious office in his economic think tank in central Moscow.
This is Mr. Gaidar's second fall from power.
A year ago, when Mr. Yeltsin proposed him as prime minister, parliament refused to confirm the choice.
Mr. Yeltsin abandoned Mr. Gaidar, and tapped Mr. Chernomyrdin, a former Soviet gas industry boss.
Several months later, Mr. Gaidar rejoined the government, as a first deputy to Mr. Chernomyrdin.
Mr. Yeltsin's recent inactivity has breathed new life into the art of Kremlin watching.
He has been prone in the past to prolonged and unexplained periods of passivity, but it seems noteworthy that he hasn't come to the aid of his beleaguered reform team.
Indeed, Mr. Gaidar notes that Mr. Yeltsin made no effort to block his resignation last month.
Mr. Yeltsin is due finally to weigh in on the debate next week, during his first speech to the state Duma, the lower house of parliament.
Aides to Mr. Yeltsin advise the curious to "watch the speech," but seem unclear as to what Mr. Yeltsin will say.
It may well be that Mr. Yeltsin will bless Mr. Chernomyrdin's efforts to launch a more cautious reform program.
If the program succeeds, Mr. Yeltsin could try to share the credit.
If it produces a muchfeared outbreak of hyperinflation -- defined as monthly inflation of more than 50% -- Mr. Yeltsin may move to remove his prime minister and bring back the reformers.
Would Mr. Gaidar serve in the government for a third time?
"We'll see," he says with a smile.
Unlike Mr. Fyorodov, who blasted the ongoing shift in policy as "an economic coup," Mr. Gaidar is hesitant to criticize the new government, at least until it outlines its plans for this year.
Nonetheless, he warns of the rising power of the lobbies that he once tried, with only partial success, to smash: the agriculture, defense and energy sectors.
Today, these lobbies are represented in the top ranks of government.
In the end, it may be up to Mr. Yeltsin to try to block demands for cheap, inflationary credits to Russia's ailing economic sectors.
"The new constitution puts in the hands of the president ways to fight the lobbyists' pressure," Mr. Gaidar says, methods which include the power to veto legislation and to block expenditures.
