Future Communications Inc. proposed to emerge from bankruptcy court by selling its main assets in exchange for notes issued by two tiny companies owned in part by Future's former chairman.
Future's creditors would get an unspecified combination of cash and stock in the two acquiring companies, though the status of one of them, according to state regulators, is murky.
Future and its former chairman, Sergio Bosco, were accused in October by the Securities and Exchange Commission of fraudulently inflating the company's stock price, which quadrupled during a two-month period last summer before trading was halted.
The company filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in November.
Future also faces a raft of shareholder lawsuits and litigation with creditors and former employees.
Under the reorganization plan, Future would sell the fledgling television network operated by its MSTV Inc. unit to UPM Inc., a unit of Stone Grill International Inc., for a $70 million, 15-year, 7% note convertible to Stone Grill stock.
Stone Grill is a former Future unit that sells stones for tabletop cooking.
Future would also sell its Multifamily Cablevision Inc. unit, which operates cable systems, to Teleworld Enterprises Ltd. in a complex transaction.
Teleworld would pay $12.4 million in notes.
Teleworld reported a net loss of $469,615 on revenue of $197,470 for the fiscal second quarter ended Nov. 30.
Stone Grill posted a net loss of $57,575 on revenue of $23,993 for the third quarter ended Sept. 30.
The family of Mr. Bosco, who stepped aside as Future's chairman and chief executive in October, owns about 20% of Teleworld and Stone Grill, according to Future's bankruptcy attorney.
Future's shareholders would receive what is left of the company, if anything, after the reorganization.
The plan is subject to approval by creditors and the bankruptcy court.
An attorney for the shareholders' committee said he couldn't comment on the plan.
The proposal may encounter stumbling blocks.
According to the New York secretary of state's office, Teleworld, which is incorporated in New York, was dissolved on Sept. 29 because it didn't pay state taxes.
Future's bankruptcy attorney said Teleworld is trying to make amends with state regulators.
