Though best known for its railroad, Kansas City Southern Industries Inc. is getting a lift these days from an unusual source: the explosive growth of mutual funds.
Its railway operation posted 25% nine-month growth in pretax profit, but the biggest factor in KCSI's earnings has been the expansion of its financial-services operations.
KCSI holds an 81% stake in fast-growing mutual-fund manager Janus Capital Corp., and also owns a major provider of transaction-processing services to the fund industry.
The booming fund industry has swollen profit at those units, though some observers have suggested recently that Janus's long-torrid momentum may be slowing slightly.
Nevertheless, assets under management at Janus have jumped more than 12-fold in the past four years, and profit for 1993 is expected to double for the second year in a row.
Indeed, for the year just ended, the financial group's profit is expected to exceed the railway's.
As recently as 1990, the transport segment's operating profit was nearly three times the financial group's.
The coupling of a diesel-powered hauler of chicken feed and coal with a hotshot financial player might seem incongruous, but it appears to work.
"It's a great fit," says Merrill Lynch analyst Douglas Rockel, who finds that the railroad's capital-intensive operations help hold down the tax liability of the financial side.
And Graeme Anne Lidgerwood, a railroad analyst at CS First Boston Corp. and an early observer of the shift in the company's earnings structure, remains "very positive" about its prospects.
The combination "gives them earnings diversification," she says, and the higher multiple its stock is now accorded "could eventually give them a leg up in terms of any possible acquisitions" made for stock.
For more than a year, KCSI's shares have climbed as investors became convinced that its shares should no longer be valued at the lower multiples that railroad stocks command.
The company has "a historical familiarity and comfort level with these two industries," says Landon H. Rowland, the 56-year-old Harvard Law School graduate who, after serving as outside counsel, joined the company as assistant to the president in 1983.
He's now president and chief executive officer.
The move into financial services is the fortuitous outcome -- and, indeed, the only element remaining -- of an earlier diversification effort.
Under a back-to-fundamentals drive launched by Mr. Rowland, the company has shed assorted nontransport operations collected by earlier management -- including a pharmaceutical operation, a telecommunications concern and a host of smaller interests in businesses such as veterinary products.
The company's initial foray into the financial field came in the early 1960s with its acquisition of a small mutual-fund manager.
As that business grew, officials came to realize the record-keeping burden of such a business.
The railroad's data-processing computer team was put to work developing a system to service the mutual-fund accounts.
Out of that project came DST Systems Inc., which KCSI calls the nation's biggest provider of computerized shareholder servicing for mutual funds.
Mutual Funds KCSI's chief financial officer, Joseph Monello, says DST increasingly "views itself as servicing the financial-services industry," including banks and insurers, and not simply the fund industry.
For instance, by month's end DST plans to have increased its stake to nearly 27% in Continuum Co., an Austin, Texas, computer-services concern that specializes in the insurance industry.
The financial segment's earnings were also boosted by Janus, the high-profile, Denver-based mutual-fund concern.
KCSI bought its controlling stake from founder Thomas Bailey in 1984, when Janus had about $400 million in assets under management.
Assets stood at $1.7 billion at the end of 1989, and since have ballooned to about $22.2 billion.
KCSI's 18% stake in Berger Associates, a manager of growth-oriented funds, was acquired in 1992.
Meanwhile, the company's railway isn't standing still.
One of the smallest of the nation's major railroads, Kansas City Southern lugs coal from the West to utilities in south-central U.S. and on the return trip hauls chemicals and petroleum products from the big plants of Louisiana and Texas.
It carries Midwestern grain to poultry farmers in Arkansas and picks up plywood from mills in the South.
Unlike some of its competitors, the rail unit has seen operating profit hold up well despite flat volume.
In last year's first nine months, pretax earnings at the railroad climbed 25%, to $60.6 million from $48.4 million in the year-earlier period.
The performance has been attributed in large part to Mr. Rowland's efforts to trim costs and make the railroad more customer-friendly.
In addition, the company has been spending heavily since 1986 to improve its rail facilities.
A $500 million overhaul of Kansas City Southern's routes is scheduled to be completed in early 1995.
While the company declines to comment, many analysts think the coming dropoff in capital outlays will allow an acceleration of its acquisition strategy.
In addition to a string of smaller purchases aimed at fine-tuning its route structure, Kansas City Southern closed in mid-1993 a $219 million acquisition of MidSouth Corp., a regional rail company headquartered in Jackson, Miss.
The relatively stiff purchase price raised some eyebrows among analysts.
But they point out that the additional 1,200 miles of track permits the railroad to establish a route from Dallas east to Birmingham, Ala., and Meridian, Miss.
That line is the company's ticket to enter the east-west "land bridge," in which hauling intermodal containers and truck trailers is the industry's fastest growing service.
The new route, the company says, cuts a half day to a full day from the transit time for traffic moving from the Southwest to the Southeast, particularly Atlanta.
At the same time, the company thinks its north-south route, and in particular its harbor facility in Port Arthur, Texas, will help it to gain some of the increasing volume expected to result from the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Among other things, the railroad hopes the Port Arthur facility can be used as a shipping point for coal to a number of power plants that are planned on Mexico's seaboard.
