The deal seems straightforward enough: An overseas client of Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp.'s affiliate here has bought about $2 million of shares in an Indian mutual fund.
Before that transaction can be completed, however, the bank's clerks must stamp or write the new owner's name and other information on 50,500 certificates, each representing 50 shares, and on another 50,500 separate share-transfer forms.
Other clerks will have to count hundreds of stamps on the certificates to ensure the stamp duty has been duly paid.
And that's only the beginning of a settlement process that typically takes two or three months.
This archaic system is slowing the flow of foreign investment into India's stock market, which has become a darling of global-fund managers in the past six months.
The three banks that offer custodial services for foreign investors in India simply can't keep up with the paperwork.
Although the government has begun to streamline the process, market analysts say it is likely to be years before an efficient system is in place.
"It's the world's biggest paper chase," says Gerald Dobby, chief executive officer of Hongkong Bank's Indian affiliate.
"We're in danger of being overwhelmed."
Hongkong Bank, a unit of HSBC Holdings PLC, handles the largest share of the custodial business for foreigners and has been hit the hardest by the surge in demand from foreign pension funds, investment funds and other institutions eager to buy Indian shares.
But Citicorp's Citibank NA and Standard Chartered PLC's Standard Chartered Bank, the other two banks providing such services for foreigners here, are feeling the pressure too.
Citibank's vaults bulge with almost 10 million pieces of paper representing securities investments by clients outside India, says Gunit Chadha, a bank vice president.
"We're in control," Mr. Chadha says, "but we're stretched."
The backlog puts another brake on foreigners' buying, already heavily restricted.
Foreign individuals aren't allowed to buy stocks in India directly (although they can buy shares of funds based outside India that invest in Indian equities).
Foreign institutional investors can buy Indian shares directly only if they have approval from the Stock Exchange Board of India, or Sebi, which has approved nearly 140 such institutions.
Once the institutions get that go-ahead, they need to find a bank in India to provide securities custodial services.
But all three of the banks providing such services to foreigners say they temporarily have stopped accepting new clients in an effort to catch up.
Mr. Chadha says Citibank might consider taking new custodial clients later in the year.
A spokesman for Standard Chartered says his bank is expanding its small custody-services department but for now is confining the service to existing clients.
Hongkong Bank, meanwhile, is asking its clients to slow down.
In a letter sent late last month, Mr. Dobby pleaded: "It is imperative that the volume of settlement in Indian equities is reduced immediately to levels which we, and the rest of the Indian market, can process in a timely and orderly fashion."
If anyone is listening, it hasn't shown up in the figures.
According to Sebi, net foreign buying of Indian equities totaled nearly $1.2 billion in the 10 months ended Jan. 31.
In January alone, the buying came to about $400 million.
Demand has far outstripped the predictions of Indian authorities, who expected net purchases of $500 million in the year ending March 31.
The foreigners' sudden enthusiasm has helped propel the Bombay Sensitive index of 30 blue-chip shares to about 3900, nearly double its level in mid-1993.
Brokers believe that at least $2.5 billion more is likely to be invested by foreigners in 1994.
"If the custodial bottleneck is eased, $100 million will come in three days," says Akash Prakash of Morgan Stanley Asset Management India Pvt. Ltd.
"If it continues another three or four months, at least $300 million of potential investment will be left out, either because there's no custodian or existing accounts have had a cap put on them."
Unlike Indian brokers or investors, foreign investors must take physical delivery of shares before gaining the right to sell them.
In the absence of a computerized system for transferring share certificates, such deliveries take months.
A look at the rapidly expanding custodial services department at Hongkong Bank shows why the process is so slow.
At about three minutes for each of 50,500 individual certificates, processing that $2 million order of mutual-fund shares requires 2,525 man-hours.
The staff, which totaled 30 people four months ago, has bloated to 180, working in two shifts, from 7:30 a.m. to 10 p.m.
The bank has had to recall some clerks from retirement.
Banks usually manage to complete their work within 48 hours, but the shares then must be sent to registrars or the issuing companies so records can be updated.
That often eats up two or three months.
But things move much slower when errors or suspected forgeries crop up.
"About 2% to 10% are rejected and have to be recycled," says Steve Page, a senior manager in the custodial department at Hongkong Bank.
Shares refused by registrars must be returned to the brokers who sold them for reprocessing.
"This can take six to 12 months," says Mr. Chadha of Citibank.
When immense wads of paperwork began to clog the system in December, Hongkong Bank's Mr. Dobby and others lobbied with the Indian authorities to streamline procedures.
Last month, the custodians gained two major concessions.
Instead of affixing stamps to each certificate, as required by a law passed in 1899, the custodians now can pay tax on transactions by check in a consolidated amount.
The authorities also permitted them to use "jumbo" transfer deeds, enabling them to record the sale of numerous share certificates on one deed.
These concessions, bankers estimate, have reduced the processing time by around half.
Even so, the banks are seeking further simplifications, such as the right to use facsimile signatures and a reduction in the details they need to record.
"The solution is that we have to move to paperless trading and create central depositories instead of this archaic system of trading pieces of paper," says Mukesh Ambani, vice chairman of Reliance Industries Ltd., a Bombay-based petrochemical, fibers and textiles company.
But M.G. Damani, president of the Bombay Stock Brokers Association, thinks it will be at least five years before India can dispense with physical delivery of share certificates and settle transactions via computer.
In the meantime, some Indian officials hope local depository services will be able to serve foreign institutions, perhaps through subcontracts awarded by Hongkong Bank, Citibank or Standard Chartered.
