Still looking for the ultimate Valentine's Day gift?
Try a 19,000-square-foot pink mansion with a water garden and a fleet of pink Cadillacs.
Mary Kay Ash, founder of the cosmetics company that bears her name, said yesterday she is putting her three-story Dallas home on the auction block.
The house, patterned after the palace in Versailles, includes three front-yard fountains, pink chandeliers from Venice and a sea of other pink furnishings, from pink toilet seats and pink sinks to pink marble floors.
"It looks just like Caesars Palace," says William Bone, an executive at the National Auction Group in Houston.
"It's very tastefully done."
Mr. Bone will conduct the auction, which will be open to the public in April at $25 a person.
It will include interior furnishings and, most likely, some of Ms. Ash's trademark pink Cadillacs.
(The millionaire's first pink Caddie, a 1968 model, sits on the property but won't be included.)
Ms. Ash, who will attend and oversee the auction, moved out of the house years ago and has recently used the mansion as a retreat for customers and employees.
Despite its location in Dallas's tony Preston Hollow neighborhood -- American Airlines chief Robert Crandall lives in the area and Ross Perot is just around the corner -- the Ash estate, on the market for two years, has hardly been a hot property.
Indeed, a slow-to-recover Dallas real estate market and lingering wounds from Texas' 1980s buying binge have made high-profile home auctions somewhat trendy among this city's jet set, just as filing for personal bankruptcy took on a bizarre cachet during the bust.
Norman Brinker, a restaurateur, sold his $1.1 million Dallas mansion at auction last year, and a few weeks later bought a new Preston Hollow home -- also at auction, at double the price of the first.
And yesterday, Mr. Bone's company auctioned off a 1,700-acre ranch once owned by Connie C. "Chip" Armstrong Jr., a one-time Texas highflier whose tax-processing company filed for bankruptcy protection in 1991.
Mr. Bone predicts Ms. Ash's mansion could fetch $3 million, but it's not as though she needs the money.
Texas Monthly magazine pegs the net worth of Ms. Ash and her son, Richard Raymond Rogers, the company's chairman, at $320 million.
