Syrian President Hafez alAssad agreed to seek "normal, peaceful" relations with Israel under certain conditions, marking what U.S. officials called a breaking of significant new ground in Mideast peace talks.
Mr. Assad and President Clinton met yesterday for four hours and 20 minutes with aides before a one-on-one encounter lasting 50 minutes.
The two sessions resulted in statements indicating progress in resolving a major stumbling block in peace negotiations, how Syria would define its peace with Israel.
Asked if Mr. Assad's definition of peace would mean open borders, free trade and diplomatic relations, terms that Israel has sought from a reluctant Syria, Mr. Clinton said at a news conference after the meeting: "The short answer is yes.
I believe that President Assad has made a clear, forthright and very important statement on normal, peaceful relations."
When asked the same question, Mr. Assad, a veteran of war with Israel and a crafty negotiator, wouldn't elaborate, but he stressed the need for a "comprehensive" peace.
"In honor we fought," said Mr. Assad, sounding the cry of a warrior laying down his sword.
"In honor we negotiate, and in honor we shall make peace."
If Israeli leaders respond in kind, the Syrian leader said, "a new era of security and stability in which normal, peaceful relations among all shall dawn on the region."
In the past, when Mr. Assad has spoken about "comprehensive" peace, he has meant a peace between Israel and all its Arab neighbors and negotiating partners; that includes Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the Palestinians.
Further, when Mr. Assad has used the term "just peace," as he did yesterday, he was referring to a peace in which Arabs win back the lands occupied by Israel.
This issue is important because this directly touches on the current stalemate in Syrian-Israeli talks.
Israel wants Mr. Assad to describe the type of peace he is willing to have before Israel answers Mr. Assad's question about whether it will return all of the Golan Heights.
Mr. Assad wants it the other way around.
U.S. officials stressed the fact that Mr. Assad for the first time talked about "normal" relations with Israel, a move they hope will spur talks between the two nations.
Two senior U.S. officials, Dennis Ross, the State Department's Middle East coordinator, and Marty Indyk of the National Security Council, left last night to brief Israeli leaders on the talks.
Neither Mr. Clinton nor his aides would state publicly whether Mr. Assad had detailed in the talks exactly what he meant by normal relations, but officials said privately that the Syrian leader clearly understands what is being asked of him.
At one point, Mr. Assad told reporters that he and Mr. Clinton "agreed on these issues, the requirements for peace.
We will respond to these requirements."
He cautioned, however, that the results would hinge on the peace negotiations.
More broadly, the substance of the talks signaled that Mr. Assad is ready to play ball again in the peace process.
The Syrian leader, long a hard-liner in dealing with Israel, was peeved that Israel had struck a separate peace deal with the Palestine Liberation Organization, feeding his suspicions that Israel was trying to isolate him.
The U.S. this weekend was giving him the chance to get back into the thick of the peace process.
Clearly, Mr. Assad agreed, but on his own terms.
For instance, he still frowned on separate peace agreements with Israel.
"Historical evidence, both past and present," Mr. Assad said, "have proved that separate peace and partial solutions were not conducive to the establishment of real peace in the region.
In this regard, I would like to express my satisfaction that President Clinton himself has committed to the objective of comprehensive peace."
In turn, aides said that Mr. Clinton pressed in the talks on the issue of terrorism, specifically the 1988 bombing of Pan American Flight 103, killing all 259 people aboard and 11 on the ground in Lockerbie, Scotland.
Two suspects in the bombing are believed to be in Libya, which won't extradite them for prosecution.
Mr. Assad, said Clinton aides, indicated that he didn't have any additional information on the bombing, but showed willingness to cooperate.
U.S. officials said they left the talks hopeful there may also be a breakthrough on the wider terrorism question.
Syria has been accused of supporting terrorism, but it often has insisted that what other nations see as terrorists are "freedom fighters."
Mr. Clinton and Mr. Assad talked about establishing a mechanism that could resolve these two viewpoints.
Aides were upbeat that the Syrians also wanted to resolve the question, hoping, perhaps, that it could lead to their removal from the State Department's list of terrorist nations.
Syria has been on the list since 1979, and that status restricts U.S. trade with Syria.
If Mr. Clinton's first face-to-face meeting with Mr. Assad results in a breakthrough in the stalled peace talks, it could wind up as the most significant of the initiatives on his nine-day trek through Europe and Russia, a journey that has largely been long on imagery but short on lasting results.
The president, for instance, received a setback in his Russian policy when First Deputy Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar announced that he was leaving the government because of his fears that he won't have much influence on economic decisions.
Also, Mr. Clinton made a deal with Ukraine to disarm its nuclear weapons, but the deal has run into opposition in the parliament, and fighting in Bosnia has continued, despite new threats from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The history of Mideast politics is that whatever progress was made yesterday may not be seen for weeks or even months.
Next week, however, observers will look for concrete signs of progress when the next round of official talks resume in Washington.
