Many approve of Friday's decision by a jury that Lorena Bobbitt was not guilty of dismembering her husband.
They argue that the news represents a rough kind of "tit for tat" justice.
Yet the Bobbitt jury's judgment that Mrs. Bobbitt had acted while "temporarily insane" is a deeply problematic one.
The verdict reflects a widening cultural divide that is slowly delegitimizing any traditional sense of justice in this country.
By choosing to free Lorena Bobbitt, the Manassas jury set a precedent that will redefine American notions of accuracy.
Think for a moment about the Bobbitt case, and about another case that has been in the news lately -- the Menendez brothers' trial for murdering their parents.
Assume that in fact what the defense in each case has argued is true.
That Lorena Bobbitt was indeed "the pathetic victim of physical abuse, humiliation, and sexual torment."
That the Menendez brothers were abused by their parents and so deserve freedom.
Such abuse is heinous.
But with regard to the question of guilt, the resounding answer in these cases still has to be: So what?
This is not a callous answer.
Of course we sympathize.
Of course other legal and social steps (e.g. leaving home, suing, seeking court injunctions, getting a divorce) are eminently important.
That's the point of a civil society: there are civilized procedures for dealing with our problems with each other.
Lorena Bobbitt and her lawyers however went a different path.
Three psychiatrists and legal experts testified that hers was not "irresistible impulse, but an impulse that she did not resist."
Nevertheless Ms. Bobbitt's supporters found enough members of the legal and social work establishment to build a case.
The Associated Press has reported that a Dr. Susan Fiester, who interviewed Mrs. Bobbitt for 13 hours, described her behavior at the time of the violence as a "brief reactive psychosis."
The jury ended up buying that argument.
The result is that they allowed her to impinge on the rights of others (Mr. Bobbitt) and sanctioned personal vigilantism.
The Bobbitt verdict derides all other spouses, men and women, who have been abused as she was and who nonetheless went through the tedium and hell of court orders instead of resorting to malicious wounding.
It also sends an engraved invitation to bypass such procedure in future.
Given that signal, imagine what a "not guilty" verdict for the Menendez brothers could mean.
Their judge, Stanley Weisberg, has been faced with a case that has been converted from a trial of confessed murderers (the sons) to the trial of the victims (Mr. and Mrs. Menendez) and their parenting skills.
When defense attorney Jill Lansing asked that a psychiatric evaluation of the sons' mother that showed she was diagnosed as a borderline schizoid be entered into evidence, the judge said that "the issue here is how she behaved, not how she was diagnosed."
Nevertheless, according to the Los Angeles Daily News, a University of Washington social work professor told the jury that the kind of abuse the Menendez brothers allege to have endured "explains adult behavior."
American juries are being told that the individual is not responsible for his own actions.
Part of the problem is a genuine American confusion of compassion, a personal virtue, with justice.
We forget that justice is considered the foremost political virtue for a reason: it provides the glue of society.
A sense of justice is what precludes people taking matters into their own hands.
When that sense of justice breaks down, as it did in the Bobbitt trial, you invite social chaos.
What the Bobbitt trial tells Americans is that what matters is no longer what you did, but how others say you made them feel.
As Lorena Bobbitt's attorney said: "We are not disputing where it happened, how it happened, who did it": the normal questions of guilt or innocence.
Instead the case presented becomes: feel sorry for her, the jerk deserved it.
Same with the Menendez brothers: rotten parents, poor abused orphans.
How did Americans come to confuse justice and compassion?
At the root of the problem is what has been called the Culture War.
The traditional view sees people as neither good nor bad, but capable of being either.
It therefore looks to either God or natural law as the ultimate arbiter of what is moral.
This view was the basis, for example, of the Nuremburg trials, since man-made law said the Nazis had done nothing wrong.
The new secular view by contrast sees people as basically good.
It concludes that we each are our own arbiters of right and wrong.
In this view evil is understood as a byproduct of some external force -- poverty, child abuse, guns -- of which man is a victim.
This is a view that excuses victims like Lorena Bobbitt.
It is also a mindset that puts the rights of groups of victims before those of the general individual.
Thus a radical feminist organization reportedly had no qualms about threatening to dismember, Bobbitt-style, 100 men at random if Lorena's jury handed in a guilty verdict.
The bright side of the Bobbitt result is that there are 100 men who can sleep soundly nights.
Or can they?
We are creating a society where any interaction between individuals is fast becoming an open-ended liability.
We have for too long traveled on a juvenile road of abandoning responsibility, of holding everyone and everything accountable but ourselves.
We have forgotten that responsibility is central to a free society.
Without such understanding, a free society cannot be free for long.
Ms. Richardson is a director of the Council on Culture & Community and a fellow at the Progress and Freedom Foundation.
