Small math errors can cost small businesses big bucks.
Just ask West Coast Mills Inc., a real estate concern in Chehalis, Wash., that had revenue of $11 million last year.
Going over its books, an outside firm identified overpayments totaling $24,494 on a variable interest rate loan of $930,000 that West Coast Mills took out in 1987.
The proliferation of complex formulas to set interest rates lately is leading to many inadvertent overcharges, experts say.
As small businesses, with their limited staff support, often don't catch the errors, they blithely keep on paying.
In the West Coast Mills case, the lender had miscalculated the first scheduled interest-rate adjustment on the high side, setting an erroneous base for all future rate changes.
Furthermore, the bank neglected to make one downward adjustment that was due the company.
"We were amazed," says Richard Jones, West Coast's general manager.
"I understand that they have a large volume of loans, but in this day and age of computers, you would think they would do better than that."
Unfortunately for entrepreneurs, Mr. Jones's experience is shared by many other businesses.
When bankers and borrowers and their lawyers sit down to negotiate commercial loan agreements these days, they frequently come up with mind-numbing formulas for adjusting the rate of interest.
When the loan documents are turned over to bank clerks, errors can easily creep in.
And if the bank is acquired by another bank or taken over by a government agency, the errors can multiply undetected.
Some specialists say the cost to business of the miscalculations may run into hundreds of millions of dollars a year.
Commercial Loan Advocates, an organization that played a leading role in publicizing overcharges for adjustable-rate residential mortgages two years ago, says its examination of $281 million in 110 variable-rate commercial-property loans from 80 lenders found a 68% error rate.
And most goofs went in the banks' favor: Two-thirds were overcharges and only one-third were undercharges, CLA says.
The overcharges totaled $767,000; CLA didn't calculate the dollar amount of the undercharges.
Extrapolation from this data suggests a huge overcharge problem nationally, the Lake Bluff, Ill., concern says.
CLA itself identified the error at West Coast Mills.
Consumer Loan Analysts Inc., a for-profit affiliate of the nonprofit CLA, says small businesses are especially vulnerable.
"The errors usually affect small companies that own one or two strip malls or an apartment building," says Larry Powers, Commercial Loan Analysts' president.
"It's the guy with a $4 million loan; for him, a $50,000 overcharge is make or break."
Noting that his company discovered $199,000 in overcharges for a $4 million loan, Mr. Powers added: "People do look at loans but they are not all sophisticated enough to pick up the errors."
Commercial Loan Analysts searches for mistakes for clients in return for fees equal to 7% to 50% of recovered overpayments.
Frank G. Creamer Jr., managing partner of Creamer Realty Consultants and formerly Citibank's executive director of global real estate, blames the problem on the fancy new indexing innovations of recent years.
"Ten years ago, when banks priced off of the prime rate, there wasn't a problem," Mr. Creamer says.
"But as competitive pressures caused bankers to offer menus of indexes from which borrowers could chose, mistakes were inevitable."
Mr. Creamer, who worked at Citibank for 18 years, says the bank initiated loans with as many as nine different indexes from which a borrower could chose on a monthly basis.
"I don't think banks are trying to pull a fast one over their clients," he says.
"They are legitimate errors."
Bank executives say they doubt the mistakes are as widespread as some people suggest.
"There was a problem with residential mortgages that was rectified, but I am not aware of a similar problem with commercial loans," says Paul Settelmeyer, president of the Bank of Great Neck in New York and a member of the American Banking Association's Housing and Real Estate Finance Committee.
CLA, the affiliate of the company that makes money looking for loan-indexing errors, obviously benefits from the perception that such miscalculations are commonplace.
But John M. Geddes, CLA's president, insists he isn't exaggerating the problem, and adds: "Even if it is half as bad as we say it is, it's still a big problem."
While many affected borrowers agree that most mistakes are just that, some people have their doubts.
"I would like to think it's coincidence, but the high percentage of errors favoring banks makes you wonder," says Richard Fell, managing general partner of American Mini Storage, a Newport Beach, Calif., storage-facility company that paid $32,816 too much on a $4.3 million loan from Coast Federal Bank in Los Angeles.
It was a major hit for a company which had only $1.5 million revenue last year.
Coast Federal concedes that it made the error.
Whatever the source of the errors, some small businesses are increasing their vigilance.
Bette Sitler, chief bookkeeper with TK Harris Commercial Real Estate Services, says she spends time each week poring over loan documents and making calculations that the Canton, Ohio, property concern used to leave to its bankers.
The heightened vigilance came after TK Harris learned that the Resolution Trust Corp., which had taken over a loan of $937,500, had used an inappropriate index, resulting in a $4,592 overcharge.
The RTC's loan-servicing agent, MDS Loan Services, Kansas City, Mo., acknowledges the error and says the RTC promptly issued a refund.
But Mrs. Sitler says she can't relax her scrutiny because more mistakes keep popping up.
"They changed the rate four times last year, and it still wasn't right," she says.
Only last month, her company received notification of yet another rate change -- and once again, she is challenging the figures.
"It's a bad time to talk to me about banks," she says.
"I'm fed up with them."
