After a disappointing year, the beer that's "proud to be your Bud" needs to make a lot of new friends.
To help that happen, brewer Anheuser-Busch Cos. is taking steps to keep Budweiser's premium price from putting off consumers.
One tactic: Raising the price of less-expensive beers to make Budweiser's more attractive.
Another: Discount Budweiser where necessary to maintain market share, and keep any increases on the flagship brand below inflation.
Such moves are critical, for Budweiser's premium brand represents the bulk of Anheuser's 1993 sales of $11.5 billion and $594.5 million in earnings.
But last year wasn't a good one for what Anheuser calls the "Budweiser family of beers" -- Bud, Bud Light, Bud Dry and the new Ice Draft from Budweiser -- as its sales slipped nearly 2%.
Budweiser itself was responsible for most of the problem.
Bud Light posted double-digit volume gains, Bud Dry remains an insignificant brand and Ice Draft wasn't rolled out until late in the year.
Much of that decline occurred in California, Anheuser's single most important market, where a sluggish economy and severe price wars slashed Bud sales.
Without California, Bud brand sales would have been flat.
"Budweiser remains our No. 1 priority and will continue to benefit from aggressive marketing support," Jerry E. Ritter, Anheuser's chief financial and administrative officer, told securities analysts at a conference in Scottsdale, Ariz., last week.
To boost Bud, he said Anheuser last month raised beer prices about 3% at the consumer level on more than half its volume, primarily on subpremium brands.
The company selectively held prices in some markets to reduce discounting.
Overall, St. Louis-based Anheuser expects U.S. volume growth of 2% to 3% for its beers this year, and says one result of the pricing strategies could be a 1% increase in net revenue per barrel.
Mr. Ritter also said Anheuser, the world's largest brewer, is "looking at several types of regional microbrewery investment opportunities," in recognition of the growing popularity of some microbrews and their toll on its Budweiser brand.
"We may make a microbrew ourselves or in combination with microbrewers," he said, alluding to new drinking preferences by young professionals and baby boomers.
"Rather than switching to distilled spirits, as did the generation preceding them, the boomers are developing a discriminating taste for beer and are expanding this end of the market."
Overseas, Anheuser plans to invest "significant cash flow" in what Mr. Ritter called "open-ended international brewing opportunities in order to create long-term sustainable growth for our company."
In an interview, he said that although domestic brewing "will drive our earnings for the next few years, international will do it in the next century."
Anheuser now holds 44.3% of the U.S. market and about 9% of the global market.
Mr. Ritter says the company hues to its goal of a 50% domestic market share by the year 2000.
He added, "We are not interested in significantly expanding our food or entertainment businesses, or diversifying into an entirely new business line."
