It's inevitable: After a tragedy such as Monday's Los Angeles earthquake, people look for a silver lining.
And just as inevitably, some see one in the economy.
Sure, the disaster took a terrible toll, the thinking goes, but the cleanup will prove a boon to the local economy: more jobs, lots of insurance money for rebuilding homes and businesses, a chance to construct better highways.
"Within a month, the economy will be booming" in the Los Angeles area, predicts Douglas Woodward, an economist at University of South Carolina, who studied the effect Hurricane Hugo had on South Carolina in 1989.
"They will get a real boost out of it, no question about it."
It is like a shot of adrenaline that momentarily counters the tragic loss of human life and property.
But the operative word is momentarily.
Businesspeople and economists, Mr. Woodward included, agree that the shot has only temporary and unevenly distributed effects.
Yes, natural disasters do unleash a flood of money and investment.
But if the experiences of South Florida after Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and San Francisco after its 1989 earthquake are typical, the flood soon ebbs to a trickle, and the wealth lost by the regional -- and national -- economy is just that: lost.
There is a good reason these events are called disasters.
Eventually the cost of rebuilding broken bridges and highways translates into higher taxes or diminished tax revenues.
The cost of replacing roofs and walls and cars and carpets shows up in higher insurance premiums.
For the uninsured, depleted savings may take years to replenish.
For some, especially the poor, property lost may never be replaced.
"The wealth loss is considerable," says David Hensley, a regional economic analyst with Salomon Brothers in New York.
In Florida, about two-thirds of the private rebuilding costs after Hurricane Andrew were insured, estimates David Wyss of DRI/McGraw Hill, a forecasting firm in Lexington, Mass.
The government picked up about half of the remainder, and people had to dip into their savings for the rest, he says.
The result: In the end, the state was worse off, he figures.
The average overall loss in assets was about $1,500 per household, but reimbursements only made up for about $750 per household, Mr. Wyss says.
What's more, the additional $2 billion in direct government relief that was pumped into the Florida economy didn't provide much permanent benefit, since it went to restoring services people were already getting before.
In fact, few local economies get a long-term boost from natural disasters because repairs essentially just return the communities to where they were before.
In Los Angeles -- where assessments of the damage widened yesterday, with some suggesting it might surpass the $7 billion from the 1989 San Francisco quake -- construction activity has been slack, and the rebuilding effort will surely provide employment for many.
But "while that is a short-term stimulus, they will go back to unemployment" if broader economic conditions don't change, says Anthony Shorris, deputy executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which dealt with the aftershocks of New York's World Trade Center bombing 11 months ago.
Matthew Drennan, a professor of regional planning at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., sees the matter in simple terms.
He recalls that during the Depression, there "were crazies who suggested that if everyone went out and threw a brick through a window, the economy would be stimulated."
His response to those who see too much of a silver lining in today's natural disasters: "Think of all the other useful things the money could be spent on."
Which is the lesson of Hurricane Andrew and the San Francisco earthquake.
Here is a look:
Hurricane Andrew struck South Florida on Aug. 24, 1992, with a fury that made it the nation's costliest natural disaster in terms of property loss.
It inflicted some $16 billion in damage, according to the Insurance Information Institute, an industry group.
It destroyed 28,000 homes and made 45,000 others uninhabitable.
At least 180,000 people were left homeless.
The storm "has not been beneficial" to the area economy, says Tad De Milly, the mayor of Homestead, which felt the full force of Andrew's sustained winds of 140 miles per hour.
A year and a half later, Homestead is still rebuilding.
One of the biggest casualties was Homestead Air Force Base, a vital part of the local economy but a perennial candidate on lists of potential base closings.
Torn apart by the storm, Homestead was shuttered.
With it went 12,000 jobs.
Soon, people were leaving the area.
The city's population since the storm has fallen by a third, to 18,000, and its structures are only 60% to 70% rebuilt, says Mr. De Milly.
Revenue from the city's ad valorem tax, which is based on property values, is about half of what it was before Andrew blew through.
"We are 12 to 18 months away from where we want to be," says the mayor.
Of course, there are always some businesses that see an uptick in demand after a natural disaster.
Fully $16 billion of insurance money was released into the broader economy after Andrew struck.
Some found its way to South Florida construction companies, roofers and auto dealers, among others.
"We benefited from the disaster," says Antonio Fraga, a mall developer who owns Homestead Plaza, the first major shopping center to reopen.
It is 99% leased, Mr. Fraga says, and at higher prices than before the hurricane.
But for a sad underlying reason: His competition was wiped out.
"I'm pretty much it," he says.
"Where there used to be two clothes stores, now there is only one."
Joseph Hayden, owner of Flamingo Ford, one of the largest car dealerships in Homestead, calls Andrew a "net loss."
The storm "wiped out what should have been a good year in 1992," he says.
His business improved in 1993, but not beyond the expectations he had before the hurricane.
And money he got from his insurance company won't cover the cost of rebuilding his dealership, which was "leveled."
Now Mr. Hayden is worried about what will happen when what is left of the population finishes replacing the cars destroyed by Andrew.
"We had a lifetime supply of bodywork, but now that backlog is over," he says.
"It gives you an uneasy feeling."
There is considerable disagreement over the effects of the storm farther north, in Miami.
John Anderson, president of the Beacon Council, a civic-business organization, believes Andrew has been a net benefit to the Miami regional economy.
"We have had 6% growth in employment in the 15 months since the hurricane," he says.
Of the 50,000 new jobs created since Andrew struck, about 20,000 are in construction and retail sales.
Most of these are due to the post-disaster rebuilding effort, he says.
Mr. Anderson says the hurricane has allowed the region to replace outdated infrastructure with state-of-the-art technology, such as fiber optics, positioning it for future growth.
"In a historical perspective, Hurricane Andrew will appear as a blip on the charts," he says.
John Godfrey, chief economist of Barnett Banks Inc. in Jacksonville, scoffs at the idea that Andrew brought any lasting benefit to either Miami or Florida as a whole.
"All the activity reflects replacement," he says.
"It's like being in a very bad car accident," explains Mr. Godfrey.
"Two years after, you might recover and have a new car, but don't call that person a winner."
In the San Francisco area, the Loma Prieta quake that struck on Oct. 17, 1989, killed 67 people and injured about 600.
The quake's epicenter was near Santa Cruz, and it measured 7.1 on the Richter scale.
There was more property loss in dollar terms than from any other earthquake in the nation's history; road repair alone will cost $1.3 billion.
Despite dire early predictions, many Bay Area businesses were back to normal almost immediately.
But the effects of the earthquake were nonetheless widespread and, in many cases, they are still being felt today.
City Hall is still shored up inside because of damage, some buildings are still closed, and there are big holes in the financial district where condemned buildings were torn down and haven't yet been rebuilt.
With roads still under repair, driving into San Francisco is now more difficult, and business in parts of the city has faltered.
Merchants in Chinatown say their sales are down 30%, and many storefronts are vacant for the first time in years.
Chamber of Commerce says: "People still don't come."
Commercial rents, once among the highest in the city, have dropped sharply, in some cases almost 50%.
Commuting into San Francisco from the south still takes longer than it used to because off-ramps and interchanges haven't been fixed.
Traffic has begun to snarl badly at a big interchange connecting Highway 101 and Interstate 280 when work finally started there last week.
It will partially reopen late this year but won't be completed until 1996.
Meanwhile, commuters are being detoured onto city streets.
Property sales and values declined in San Francisco's Marina district, the residential area hardest hit.
Images of Marina apartments tilting and ablaze were repeatedly shown on television at the time.
Real-estate prices still haven't returned to 1989 levels, says Kimberlee Jeans, president of Pacific Union Residential Brokerage, although she says general economic weakness is as much or more to blame.
"At the time you fall apart at the seams because you don't know how much damage was done," says Eileen Dillon, whose Marina home ultimately required $80,000 in foundation repairs after the quake.
She figures her home is still only worth 75% of its 1989 value.
"I never think about it anymore, except if I can't sleep," she says.
"Then the first thing I think about is earthquakes.
But I never would have moved."
The earthquake's destruction left behind a different landscape.
Along the city's Embarcadero waterfront, a freeway overpass damaged by the quake was ultimately torn down, leaving a spectacular view of the Bay.
At Splendido Restaurant, business jumped 15%, says T.J. Jacobberger, general manager.
"Before, you would look out and see cars; now we have a view of the ocean.
Tourists always want a view when they're dining," he says.
The devastation was more complete in Santa Cruz, a community south of San Francisco.
When then-President Bush toured the area, "it stunned him," says Joseph Ferrara, president of the city's Downtown Association.
Its main commercial strip, Pacific Avenue, finally reopened just three months ago, delayed by red tape and financing woes.
Still, weekend traffic remains at 60% of what it was before the quake.
The Santa Cruz area has lost an estimated 3,000 jobs in the intervening four years, about 5% of the work force, says Joseph Wahed, economist at Wells Fargo & Co.
He says various local economic indicators, such as personal income, construction activity and retail sales, are all flat or down.
"By the end of the decade, it may get back to where it was in 1988," Mr. Wahed says.
It took a month to get the Bay Bridge repaired -- considered lightening -- fast for such a big engineering job.
But repairs to the rest of San Francisco's highway system have gone at a snail's pace.
There are new and horrendous traffic bottlenecks.
Many of the most important off-ramps into downtown San Francisco are still closed.
Highway engineers had planned to repair several major exit ramps in the financial district, but found a year after the earthquake that it would cost less to tear them down and rebuild; they have just finished tearing them down and are now only in the study stage on how to rebuild them.
On the other hand, the area south of Market Street became more desirable when the freeway demolition choked off what had been a continuous steam of cars disgorged by an off-ramp.
"Freeways divide neighborhoods and polarize," says William Nork, marketing director at CB Commercial Real Estate Group Inc.
"Their absence tends to have a unifying effect."
Sidewalk cafes have sprouted up in the area and condos that used to look at a freeway now have expansive views of the bay.
"That's become one of the nicest places in town," Mr. Nork says.
Still, Al Kobar, a Southern California real-estate consultant, says all of the rebuilding that has followed the quake is very small consolation for the destruction.
"They're not productive jobs, they're just trying to get us back to where we were," says Mr. Kobar.
"You could go back, to Keynes's idea of hiring people to bury money and other people to dig it up," he says.
"It's kind of a sad way to employ people."
