One of the few small-business groups supporting President Clinton's health-care plan is no longer a Friend of Bill on that issue.
The Small Business Legislative Council, a coalition of nearly 100 trade associations, withdrew its informal support for Mr. Clinton's proposal.
At the same time, many small-business groups are opposing an alternative plan being drafted by a House Ways and Means health subcommittee headed by Rep. Pete Stark (D., Calif.).
The defection is a blow to White House hopes of having some friendly small-business voices for its health-care plan.
These would help offset the chorus of opposition led by the National Federation of Independent Business, the country's largest small-business group.
Until now, the council has been positive about the administration's reform efforts because the group thought the plan was comprehensive and might control costs.
But the coalition's board voted to reject the Clinton plan, as well as those proposed by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.) and Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.).
"We've decided it's time to stop tying ourselves to initiatives that aren't going anywhere," said John Satagaj, the council's president.
"We don't want a pitched battle over these three bills, and then be left without enough time to come up with a comprehensive reform package.
There's no sense in beating a dead horse."
The council's defection comes as the council and several other small-business organizations oppose the alternative plan of Rep. Stark.
His plan would impose a 0.8% payroll tax, expand the Medicare system and make most employers to help pay for their workers' health insurance beginning in 1997.
(On Tuesday, the panel voted by a 6-5 margin to keep the employer mandate in its bill.)
Rep. Stark alienated the small-business lobby even before his panel began writing a health-care bill this week.
On a recent interview on Cable News Network's "Newsmaker Saturday," when the lawmaker was asked about fashioning a health-care compromise, he said: "Small businessmen are going to gripe if they have to pay two cents.
Write them off.
They're small minds. . . .
They're irrelevant to this discussion."
The Stark proposal, responded the council's Mr. Satagaj, is expected to barely pass "his own subcommittee, and I doubt the full House will decide small business is irrelevant."
Jack Faris, president of the NFIB, said Mr. Stark's "tremendous dislike for small business is very clear.
He just knows the Clinton plan won't work and that a single-payer governmentrun system won't work either.
We agree."
Small-business groups, such as National Small Business United, don't like Mr. Stark's plan any more than his rhetoric.
Among other things, many small companies oppose new payroll taxes to pay for health-care overhaul, said John Polk, president of the Cleveland-based Council of Smaller Enterprises, a private health-care purchasing group for small firms.
Yesterday, the House Small Business Committee released a report by Congress's General Accounting Office concluding that Hawaii's health-care system, which requires all employers to help pay for their workers' insurance, hasn't hurt most small businesses in the state and has resulted in lower health insurance premiums.
Hawaii's employer mandate is similar to President Clinton's proposal.
But the study added that a nationwide employer mandate might not reap the same results.
Teena Rasmussen, owner of Paradise Flower Farms in Maui and an NFIB member, told the panel that the employer mandate has slowed wage increases in Hawaii and complained that the state has added coverage for several new kinds of health care without increasing the employees' share of the cost.
Without restrictions, she said, "You'll have incredible pressure to add chiropractors, psychologists, and herbal healers to be providers of health care."
Some small-business lobbyists say the search for a compromise on the key issue of employer mandates has stalled.
"Nobody's willing to blink either on Capitol Hill or the White House," said Tom Cator, a small-business lobbyist for several groups.
But John Motley, NFIB's chief lobbyist, said while there still isn't any workable health-reform compromise in sight, he believes Congress will pass legislation this session.
"Before we can get to the table and find out what the compromise is, we have to prove to the president and his allies like Mr. Stark that they can't bring their legislation to the floor," he said.
