It was impossible not to learn that "I'll Do Anything" began as a musical but had its songs axed and then got major reconstructive surgery.
This strongly affected the way I saw it.
Throughout the picture I kept wondering whether songs would have explained the movie's many inconsistencies, or at least given some logical destination for pauses that now lead nowhere.
"I'll Do Anything" is a mess, but entertaining, and only partly because the director and writer James Brooks has written some funny jokes about the movie business.
The movie's fascination also lies in its weaknesses, in its uncertain tone, its wavering between niceness and bitterness.
Its big ambitions and scattered accomplishments make it perplexing to watch but interesting to think about.
Mr. Brooks has spent most of his adult life in television and movies specializing in quirky endearing characters.
His humor can be edgy, but his characters are almost always likable.
Though he's had his failures (he did write the script for "Starting Over"), success has come more readily to him.
His television shows include "The Mary Tyler Moore Show," "Taxi" and "The Simpsons."
He's made two movies, "Terms of Endearment" and "Broadcast News," both big commercial hits; "Terms of Endearment" won a few Oscars, including best picture.
There may be currents of cynicism in the work, but they are always smoothed over by a good-natured belief in almost every character.
Even Ted Baxter, the dunderhead newsman on "The Mary Tyler Moore Show," was periodically allowed to reveal the good guy he really was.
"Broadcast News" had perceptive things to say about the change of news into entertainment, but the movie offered us no villains.
Its fun came from its smart, witty characters and the charge they got out of work and from each other.
With this record of success behind him, Mr. Brooks could easily persuade himself and filmland's money men that he could do anything, even triumph where other talented people had failed.
The musical form had previously exerted a fatal temptation over Francis Ford Coppola, twice, with "One From the Heart" and "The Cotton Club."
Steven Bochco succumbed to the same death wish on TV ("Cop Rock").
None of these major failures necessarily meant Mr. Brooks wouldn't find a way to make the public sing.
So he made "I'll Do Anything," with musical numbers by Carole King, Sinead O'Connor and Prince, and dances by Twyla Tharp.
It was unmade at a preview screening at which, reportedly, 100 people walked out.
Later, they explained why: They hated the songs.
So "I'll Do Anything" was remade, this time without music.
In this form the story's darkness, its nastiness, is so pronounced that the "happy" ending makes no sense.
What begins as a satire of Hollywood ends as a celebration.
The characterizations, usually the mainstay of a Brooks creation, are surprisingly glib, though Albert Brooks is hilarious as a minor movie mogul.
The story is about a talented but mysteriously unemployable actor (Nick Nolte) who finds himself put in charge of the six-year-old daughter he hasn't seen for two years.
This occurs just as his forever lagging career might be on the upswing because a woman executive at a production company likes him and his acting, too.
He hasn't yet snagged a part, but he has found work as chauffeur to the rude neurotic (Albert Brooks) who runs the company.
He finds himself surrounded by manipulative people who think it's okay to be ruthless so long as you say "thanks."
These include his little girl, played with scary coldness by Whittni Wright and the woman movie executive, played by Joely Richardson.
Julie Kavner is on hand to provide the "humanity"; she's in love with the movie mogul so she feels obliged to point out his shortcomings as a human to him.
There are many clever lines and situations.
Mr. Brooks is very observant and he has been observing the Hollywood scene from the inside for a long time.
He knows about the glibly cruel young executives who have little creativity and lots of power, and the short bald men who show up at "hot" restaurants with their tall blond wives.
But the story's themes and the main relationships never seem to connect.
Maybe they've been short-circuited by the deletion of the songs, maybe not.
We'll find out when and if the original version appears on laser disk.
"Blink" is a thriller about a pretty musician named Emma who regains her sight after 20 years of blindness just in time to witness a murderer leaving his victim.
She becomes his prey, which leads her not only into the usual spasms of thriller-victim, but also into the arms of the handsome detective put on the case.
This may sound unremarkable, but the director Michael Apted has made the picture both scary and emotionally convincing, especially in the first half before the plot wears itself out.
He has been helped considerably by his leading lady, Madeleine Stowe, one of the most exciting young actresses to emerge in the last couple of years (she was one of the lead players in "Last of the Mohicans" and a major force in Robert Altman's "Short Cuts").
She gives the illusion of having all the right things: guts, sexiness and the inner tension of a thinking person.
She is also nicely paired with Aidan Quinn, who may or may not be a convincing street cop but he's a good match for Ms. Stowe in the guts, sexiness and thinking person department.
It helps that they've been given smart things to say by screenwriter Dana Stevens.
VIDEO TIP: Francis Ford Coppola's musicals didn't get very good reviews and failed at the box office, but they are something to see -- even spectacular.
They may not have the heart and soul and coherence of the great movie musicals, but they surely are beautiful to behold.
