NEC Corp., wracked by losses and besieged by U.S. personal-computer makers, tapped one of its most international-minded executives, Hiroshi Kaneko, to succeed President Tadahiro Sekimoto, who will step aside to become chairman.
Analysts said the decision to pass on the presidential reins to Mr. Kaneko, a 60-year-old executive vice president, could give NEC a fresh crack at stemming its flow of red ink and refocusing its PC business in Japan, the world's second-largest PC market.
The announcement that Dr. Sekimoto will move out of the president's post and into the less-involved chairmanship, while abrupt, wasn't totally unexpected, analysts and company officials said.
Dr. Sekimoto's move is "good news for NEC," said Lee Kerk Phua, an analyst with Baring Securities (Japan) Inc.
"Maybe now we'll see NEC starting to change its strategy."
In elevating Mr. Kaneko to president, NEC has made clear it wants a leader with a global outlook.
Japanese executives stationed overseas for long stints are rarely considered for top management positions, but Mr. Kaneko has spent four of the past five years running NEC's U.S. operations.
"We needed someone who can make NEC an even more global company than it already is," Dr. Sekimoto, 67, said at a news conference.
At the conference, Mr. Kaneko gave few indications as to how he intends to lead the Japanese company, saying he had little time to think about it since he had learned of his appointment barely 36 hours earlier.
While he still has some time to put his thoughts in order -- the changes don't take effect until June -- analysts believe he will have to make his mark quickly.
That is partly because NEC is still bleeding red ink from an ill-fated foray into consumer electronics and from the high yen, which makes products manufactured in Japan more expensive overseas.
In the six months ended Sept. 30, 1993, NEC posted a consolidated pretax loss of 8.54 billion yen ($78.5 million), a swing from an 8.26 billion yen pretax profit in the year-earlier period.
However, NEC said it expects to post a small pretax profit for the fiscal year ending March 31, largely because of recent restructuring moves, as well as strong semiconductor sales.
NEC also is facing the most serious threat ever to its 10-year dominance of the Japanese PC market in the form of price competition from U.S. companies such as Compaq Computer Corp. and International Business Machines Corp.
In the view of many analysts, NEC has endangered its 53% market share by clinging stubbornly to PCs of its own design at a time when the world is moving to IBM-style computers.
Mr. Kaneko may have the tools to start turning NEC around.
While in the U.S., he was responsible for a restructuring of NEC's operations, a task that included eliminating the U.S. consumer-electronics business and closing down a handful of surplus manufacturing plants.
