The Clinton administration said British Airways PLC may continue its marketing alliance with USAir for another year, despite frustration over the British government's refusal to widen other U.S. airlines' access to the United Kingdom.
The administration extended an agreement that lets British Air link its international destinations to about 65 of USAir's domestic destinations through shared computer-reservation codes.
But the administration also said it wouldn't allow expansion of the code-sharing deal to more U.S. cities, as the two had sought.
U.S. officials also left open the possibility that President Clinton will renounce the aviation treaty that allows such deals if the British don't work toward a new treaty allowing U.S. airlines easier access to the U.K.
"I have been very disappointed with the lack of progress in the negotiations" over the past year, said Transportation Secretary Federico Pena, who a year ago approved the USAir-British Air alliance for a 12-month trial period.
Both USAir Group Inc. and British Air said they were pleased.
British Air added, "We remain committed to the goal of a progressive liberalization of the bilateral relationship which is fair to the airlines of both countries."
The two carriers are now serving 37 U.S. cities with the joint flights, which allow passengers to fly on two airlines without worrying about separate reservations, schedules and baggage handling.
Negotiators for the U.S. lost leverage with the U.K. this month when British Air suspended plans to pump an additional $450 million into USAir, which is struggling to stem losses from a fare war.
British Air, which has already invested $400 million in USAir, would need U.S. approval for the added investment.
Even if the U.S. renounced the treaty, its provisions would stay in effect for a year.
After that, though, the U.S. could cut back British access to the U.S. through the code-sharing arrangement, and the British could seek to curtail U.S. landing rights in London.
Administration officials said they wanted to be able to review the renunciation option separately from the code-sharing deal.
But no timetable is set for that.
The two countries haven't held formal talks on a new treaty since December.
The U.S. is seeking more landing rights at London's Heathrow Airport and greater freedom to fly passengers from London to other international destinations.
But British officials have insisted Heathrow is already too crowded and have instead offered additional slots at other airports.
Late last week, British authorities informally offered a "minideal" that would have given U.S. airlines a few additional landing slots at London-area airports, but U.S. officials snubbed the offer, saying it didn't go nearly far enough.
Michael J. McCarthy in Chicago contributed to this article.
