A team of investment professionals outperformed the forces of chance in the latest running of this column's stock-picking contest, but the real winner was the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
The four stocks chosen by the pros nearly six months ago gained an average 3.7%, compared with a gain of 1.5% for a four-stock portfolio selected by Wall Street Journal staffers tossing darts at the stock tables.
The industrial average rose 5.5% in the same period, which ran from Sept. 15 to Feb. 28.
For those keeping score, the latest results bring the industrial average within striking distance of overtaking the pros.
After 45 six-month skirmishes since January 1990, the score is 23 for the professional stock pickers and 22 for the industrial average.
Against the forces of chance, the score is 27 for the pros and 18 for the darts.
The pros look better, however, when average six-month gains are compared -- 8.2%, against 4.6% for the Dow industrials and 3.8% for the dartboard portfolios.
The overall tally for all 45 contests is 19 wins for the professional stock pickers, compared with 13 each for the darts and the industrial average.
In the most recent contest, the investment experts came out as well as they did thanks to the excellent performance of two stocks: Best Buy Co., the Minneapolis appliance and electronics retailer, and Cheyenne Software Inc. of Roslyn, N.Y. Best Buy, chosen by Douglas Raborn, rose 22% during the six months; Cheyenne Software, picked by Jonathan Steinberg, was up 20%.
It was Mr. Raborn's second win in the investment dartboard contest.
For Mr. Steinberg, who has competed in 14 dartboard contests under the current rules and finished first in five of them, it was the fourth-consecutive second-place finish.
The two other professionally selected stocks lost money for investors during the period of the latest contest, as did three of the four stocks chosen by a fling of darts.
One pro's pick, Primerica Corp., changed its name to Travelers Inc. at year end after acquiring the 73% of Travelers it didn't own.
That stock fell 21% between Sept. 15 and Feb. 28.
As is the custom of this column, the two top finishers now join two new contestants for another turn against the forces of chance.
Three of the four are betting on companies that have gone public within the past couple of years.
Mr. Raborn, head of Raborn & Co., a Delray Beach, Fla., money-management firm, picks Scientific Games Holding Corp., a maker of instant lottery tickets.
Mr. Steinberg, chief executive of Individual Investor Group Inc. and editor in chief of Individual Investor magazine, usually prefers small-capitalization stocks, this time he likes auto maker Chrysler Corp.
Mr. Raborn says Scientific Games, based in Alpharetta, Ga., isn't well-known -- only two securities analysts follow the company -- but has about 55% of the $9 billion U.S. market for scratch-off lottery tickets.
The company went public last August after being sold by Bally Manufacturing Corp. in 1991.
A secondary offering of about 2.6 million shares was completed last week.
The instant-lottery business is growing, Mr. Raborn says, because "states, like the U.S. government, are busted and looking for new sources of revenue."
Scientific Games also provides lottery monitoring and other services.
He says Scientific Games could rise to $30 a share in the next six months, and that 1994 earnings will be about $1.75 a share.
The stock closed yesterday at $22.625 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading; 1993 earnings were $1.60 a share.
Mr. Steinberg says he likes Chrysler because "it's the most profitable car company in the world" and "one of the most undervalued stocks."
He says its profit margins are twice those of Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. and earnings could grow 50% to 60% this year.
The stock trades at six to seven times earnings, he says.
He expects "that multiple to increase as the company continues to surprise with earnings above analysts' estimates and increases its market share.
I think it's worth $85 today."
Chrysler, of Highland Park, Mich., closed at $59.50 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
"It's the best risk-reward situation out there," says Mr. Steinberg, who is also chief investment officer of Wisdom Tree Associates, Individual Investor Group's new private investment partnership.
The newcomers this time around are John Lesner, president of Lesner & Associates, a private money-management firm in Warren, Mich., and Alexander P. Paris, president of Barrington Research Associates, a research brokerage firm in Barrington, Ill.
Mr. Lesner's choice is Encad Inc., a San Diego maker of large-format color ink-jet printers.
The company, which went public in December, posted a 55% increase in sales in 1993, and projections are for another 50% jump in the current year, Mr. Lesner says.
He expects earnings to grow about 50% as well.
The printers are used for such things as graphic arts, engineering, architectural design and medical illustration.
The $120 million market is expected to triple in size over the next three years, Mr. Lesner says, adding that Encad has about 25% of the market.
"If Encad can maintain a decent market share, it can capitalize on that growth," he says.
Its chief competitor is Hewlett-Packard Co.
Encad closed yesterday in Nasdaq Stock Market trading at $10.125, double its $5-a-share price when it went public.
Mr. Paris picks Perceptron Inc., a Farmington Hills, Mich., company that makes laser-based quality-control systems used by the automobile industry.
It went public in August 1992.
He says that when he began buying the stock last June, he told clients it could quadruple in price in a year.
It already has doubled, trading yesterday in the Nasdaq Stock Market at $13.875, and he says it could double again before this contest concludes at the end of August.
"The '90s will be more competitive internationally," Mr. Paris says.
"Companies will be spending on the factory floor to become more effective."
Perceptron's systems can be built into the auto assembly line, Mr. Paris says, and can measure large-form parts faster and more accurately than by other means.
For the coming six months, ending August 31, the pros' selections will be competing against a Dartboard portfolio composed of Concord EFS Inc., Interdigital Communications Corp., National Semiconductor Corp. and Showscan Corp.
HOW MANY Investment Dartboard contests would it take to give statistically reliable proof of whether professional judgment is a better way to pick stocks than throwing darts at the stock listings?
Steven Lehrer, a cancer researcher at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York who regularly uses statistics in his work, figures it would probably take more than 800 selections for both the pros and the darts.
Dr. Lehrer's study was based on 168 selections each by the pros and the darts from July 1990 through last December.
So, even though the pros are ahead, don't declare a winner yet, Dr. Lehrer says.
John R. Dorfman
Primerica of 73% of Travelers it didn't own. Inc., up 22.9%; Caldor Corp., down 0.9%; Trustmark Corp., down 1.1%; and Cambridge Biotech Corp., down 14.8%.
