THE BAD NEWS IS airlines are raising the price for "free" tickets.
The good news is miles have never been more abundant.
AMR's American Airlines, UAL's United Airlines and USAir, a unit of USAir Group, have all increased redemption levels for domestic coach-class tickets, starting next year, to 25,000 miles from 20,000 miles.
American increased the cost of its domestic first-class tickets to 45,000 miles from 40,000.
Continental Airlines, Northwest Airlines and America West Airlines will all follow suit, predicts Randy Petersen, editor of Insider Flyer.
Why the change?
The number of so-called non-revenue passengers has been rising steadily and stand at about 6%; raising the mileage requirements will presumably result in fewer free trips.
Meantime, passengers are able to accumulate miles without ever stepping on an airplane as airlines increase their partnerships with hotels, cruise lines, telephone companies, credit-card issuers and others.
"We've not had one price increase in 13 years, but look at the value we deliver to customers," says James M. Guyette, United's executive vice president for marketing, noting that the carrier has tie-ins with five cruise lines, four car-rental companies and hotels, including the Ritz-Carlton.
Airlines also are rejiggering programs to target specific markets or customers.
United is lowering the price of two free tickets to Hawaii to 100,000 miles from 120,000 miles.
Northwest has added 500-mile bonuses for passengers who connect at one of the carrier's hubs.
Delta Air Lines is revamping its entire program, tentatively called SkyMiles; it is expected to impose expiration dates on its miles and lower the redemption level for a free domestic ticket to 25,000 miles from 30,000 miles.
EASTERN AIRLINES shut its operations three years ago, but a bitter feud with many travel agents is just heating up.
The dispute lays bare the often uneasy relationship between the airline industry and its distributors.
Eastern, seeking to settle its estate in bankruptcy court, recently sued 7,000 travel agencies, alleging that they withheld payments to the carrier on tickets they sold.
The claims, some of which date to 1988, total $11.6 million.
Eastern said it would settle with each agency for 75% of its claim.
While the average claim is less than $1,700, some agents are crying foul.
They say they can't prove their innocence because they don't keep records for more than a year or two.
They also say Eastern never sent them debit memos for unpaid bills, a point Eastern disputes.
"We gave them thousands and thousands of dollars in business, and to have them bite us in the nose like this is really nasty," says John Szymanski, owner of Paradise Travel Service in Boston, which Eastern says owes $600 to the estate.
Mr. Szymanski says he owes nothing.
So far, about 1,500 agents have settled.
Agents who don't pay and want to avoid court can either submit to binding arbitration or go to mediation.
The Association of Retail Travel Agents, a trade group, is urging members to fight Eastern on principle: If agents pay up, other defunct airlines will come knocking.
Eastern says it is obliged by the court to settle all claims related to the estate.
Moreover, honest agents should be grateful that Eastern is forcing the deadbeats to pay up, the airline says.
"This must be viewed as leveling the playing field," says John Sicilian, executive vice president and general counsel of Eastern.
HIGHER RENTAL rates on 1994 autos may vex car-rental customers, but the cars are probably safer than ever before.
National Car Rental System, a unit of General Motors, reports that 99% of its fleet has antilock brakes and automatic locks, compared with 38% and 48%, respectively, two years ago.
Airbags are popping up, so to speak, all over the place.
Hertz says 80% of its fleet has driver-side bags; they're in two-thirds of the cars at Budget Rent A Car, a unit of Beech Holdings.
"Five years ago, you'd have a difficult time finding airbags" in rental cars, says Tom Hawkes, senior vice president of fleet operations at Budget.
Rental-car companies say they want their customers driving the safest cars possible, and in some cases that means phasing out smaller cars lacking the best safety gizmos.
National, for example, is parting with GM's Geo Metros and Sunbirds because those models don't have antilock brakes.
But more than altruism is at work here for the rental companies.
They typically sell back their cars to the auto makers, who find far greater value in vehicles with safety features.
"The economic analysis is real simple," Mr. Hawkes at Budget says.
"Do we want cars that car makers want to buy back, or do we want cars that we'll have to sell on our own?"
Avis has equipped vehicles in several cities -- including New York, Detroit and Seattle -- with headlights that automatically turn on when the engine is running.
It's also testing in two cities a new glass coating that supposedly helps wipers sweep off water.
And all of Avis's 1994 minivans will have built-in child-safety seats.
IF TWO PEOPLE rent a car, a fee typically is assessed on the second driver unless that person is a spouse or business colleague.
Out and About, a publication for gay travelers, applauds Avis for being the first major rental company to waive the fee for same-sex partners. . . .
American Express mails card members a two-page customer-satisfaction survey, and includes a dollar bill as an expression of gratitude. . . .
Northwest Airlines is dropping out of American Express's Membership Miles program, whereby card members accumulate miles based on expenditures.
