I am very concerned that the article by the Heritage Foundation's Daniel J. Mitchell distorts the position of Office of Management and Budget analysts with regard to the president's health-reform plan ("President's Costly Budget-Buster," editorial page, Dec. 23).
OMB analysts helped develop the plan's financing and have confirmed its soundness.
Moreover, the most authoritative outside study of the Health Security Act -- conducted by Lewin-VHI, an independent consulting group with specific expertise on health care issues -- has verified that the plan's financing works and will reduce the deficit over the period from 1995-2000.
The "secret tables" on which Mr. Mitchell bases his article were nothing more than speculative computer spreadsheets prepared by an analyst at an early stage in the drafting of the Health Security Act.
Purely theoretical, they applied "what-if" scenarios to some of the elements of early versions of the health-reform plan under discussion last summer.
Essentially, the tables answered a series of hypothetical questions: What if we choose this or that policy?
What if our estimates are too high or too low?
Uncertainties identified by this exercise were then thoroughly addressed in the final drafting of the legislation.
Therefore, the tables do not apply to the legislation now before the Congress and are not relevant to any discussion of that plan.
Interestingly, Mr. Mitchell does not mention the fact that the "what-if" scenarios in the table included assumptions that resulted in lower costs and much greater deficit reduction.
Those scenarios were clearly delineated in the tables, but Mr. Mitchell chose to ignore them.
Apparently, they did not fit into his agenda.
The Health Security Act contains a number of specific measures to address cost uncertainties; for example, a 15% "cushion" was added to the estimates of the discounts to be provided to small, low-wage firms and low-income workers.
Beyond that, whatever fiscal risk remains is contained by specific language in the act capping federal expenditures.
In the unlikely event that those caps are breached, a future act of Congress would be necessary to spend more money.
Mr. Mitchell dismisses this, implying that Congress might not enact the disciplines proposed by the president.
But that is no ground for criticizing the plan itself.
Any legislative proposal -- even one endorsed by the Heritage Foundation -- can be altered by Congress in a way the author might disapprove.
