Prudential Securities Inc. is going to unusual lengths to shore up its battered corporate image.
The nation's fourth-largest brokerage firm named John F. Settel, a former college professor who taught courses in business ethics, to the new post of "corporate values officer."
Meanwhile, Prudential launched a new advertising campaign focusing on "straight talk," or as Prudential puts it: "The honesty and candor necessary in the broker/client relationship."
The moves are a bid by the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit to stave off a drumbeat of negative publicity stemming from its limited-partnership scandal.
Prudential has agreed to pay at least $371 million in fines and penalties to settle federal and state charges that it improperly sold $8.15 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.
Prudential "has a responsibility to maintain and enhance the quality and high standards of its services, products and staff," John P. Murray, Prudential's corporate-risk management director, said of the Settel appointment.
Mr. Settel, who also is a former Prudential director who worked at the firm between 1974 and 1989, will oversee the implementation of the firm's policies and daily business.
Among Mr. Settel's prior posts at Prudential was director of corporate training.
He also had served for several years on the New York Stock Exchange Hearing Board.
Prudential's new ads, which debuted over the weekend, will feature the firm's brokers and clients.
In the first print ads, Hardwick Simmons, Prudential Securities' president and chief executive, says: "Straight talk means if we fall short, we'll hear about it.
That's good.
It makes us do better."
Mr. Simmons, standing with head slightly cocked and hands stuffed in his pockets, adds: "Straight talk means our investors hear the upside and downside of every opportunity."
Says Ronna Lichtenberg, Prudential's marketing director: "This represents a significant departure from the traditional brokerage ads of the past."
Indeed, Prudential's prior ad campaign featured the slogan: "The most important thing we earn is your trust."
