Michael Ledeen's Jan. 24 editorial-page article "Damning News in Walsh Report," alleges erroneously that I "admitted false testimony" in the Iran-Contra affair and furthermore that "It appears that Mr. Shultz systematically misled Mr. Walsh and Congress about the extent of his knowledge throughout Iran-Contra."
In fact, I have never "admitted false testimony" and Mr. Walsh has made no such charge.
Nor did I "systematically" mislead Mr. Walsh and Congress.
I have testified to the fullest extent of my knowledge throughout the Iran-Contra proceedings.
In reviewing more than 22,000 pages of notes taken by my executive assistant, Charles Hill, the Independent Counsel's office found references not only confirming the events to which I testified, but also found references to an episode of a planned arms sale in late May 1986 and to a similar brief and aborted effort of which I was informed on Feb. 11, 1986.
I did not refer to these episodes in my testimony because I had not remembered them, and my executive assistant had not found references to them in his review of his notes before I testified.
The Independent Counsel also found a note in the files of Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger referring to a conversation he had with me on May 13, 1986, in which Mr. Weinberger told about another arms sale to Iran.
I did not recall this conversation, and had never seen Mr. Weinberger's note, so its contents were not reflected in my testimony either.
As the report and my response to the report make clear, I informed the Independent Counsel in a February 1992 interview that if I had been given those notes before my 1986-87 testimony, I would have included references to the information they described in my statement to the committee.
These incidents and the additional information about them do not change the picture I presented of my consistent opposition to the arms-for-hostages efforts, my consistent push to get the facts out to the public fully and as soon as possible, and the fragmentary nature of my knowledge of what those on the National Security Council staff and in the CIA were doing on the arms-for-hostages effort.
The report itself states that my testimony was fully consistent with all the notes I have been shown in the process of preparing for my testimony.
The report acknowledges that the contemporaneous notes taken by Charles Hill in November and December 1986 and in 1987 included extensive notes on precisely how I and my staff prepared for my 1986-87 testimony and that, "none of the contemporaneous notes created in November and December 1986 suggest that Shultz in fact remembered more or different information than that to which he testified" (page 372).
Furthermore, the Independent Counsel's Report concedes my "admirable" role in November 1986 both "in stopping the initiative and in urging disclosure of the events of 1985 and 1986" (page 345).
There are important lessons to be learned from the Iran-Contra affair and I have tried to set them forth in four chapters of my memoir "Turmoil and Triumph," which describes, from my angle of view, how this complicated drama unfolded and how difficult it was to stop the arms-for-hostages effort even after the explosive revelation of arms to Iran and the diversion of funds to the Contras.
George P. Shultz
Stanford, Calif.
(Mr. Shultz, a distinguished fellow at the Hoover Institution, was secretary of state under President Reagan.)
