Flamboyant Italian media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi announced he will step down as chairman of his television and retail empire Gruppo Fininvest to head up a new center-right political party.
The decision further enlivens the already frantic contest among a fractured group of center and right-wing parties to form a cohesive alliance before Italy's March 27-28 national elections.
Saying he didn't want to live in a country "governed by immature forces and men closely tied to a politically and economically bankrupt past," the 57-year-old Mr. Berlusconi called for creation of "a new Italian miracle" together with other democratic forces in order to counter the former communist left-wing alliance.
The left alliance emerged victorious in last November's municipal elections.
Mr. Berlusconi, who also owns the popular AC Milan soccer team, gave no specific details of the platform for his new party, which is called Forza Italia, a common soccer cheer meaning "Go, Italy!"
"Our leftists pretend to have changed.
They say they have become liberal democrats.
But it's not true," Mr. Berlusconi said in his prerecorded message, broadcast on one of his channels and later the state RAI TV.
"Their men are still the same, their mentality, their culture, their profound convictions, their behavior are all the same" -- opposed to the free market, private initiative, profit and the individual, he said.
Over the past several months, Mr. Berlusconi has urged party leaders on the center and right to unite against the left.
In the meantime, he set up more than 600 Forza Italia clubs throughout the country, preparing for a possible bid.
Under new laws, the Legislature will be elected through a relative majority system in March, instead of the old system of proportional representation.
As a result, the political arena has become a free-for-all, with old and new fragmented parties scrambling to build left and right blocs ahead of elections.
Mr. Berlusconi's political aspirations have incited criticism from both the left and center, which warn about possible conflicts of interest by a politician who owns nearly half the television broadcasting outlets in the country.
Several leading journalists have defected from his TV and publishing holdings over the past month in protest of his political involvement.
A Fininvest spokeswoman said the company will hold a board meeting shortly to elect a successor to Mr. Berlusconi, who founded the company in 1978.
