Business stockpiles held steady in December, as companies continued to keep a close eye on inventories despite increasing demand.
The Commerce Department said business inventories totaled $874.64 billion in December, virtually unchanged from $874.55 billion in November.
Sales in December rose 0.8% after climbing 1.2% the month before.
The combination caused the inventory-to-sales ratio -- the number of months it would take to deplete inventories at the current sales pace -- to slip to 1.43 from 1.44.
For all 1993, inventories were up 3.0%, while sales increased a more robust 5.4%.
"The whole economy has simply learned to operate on lower inventories," said Joseph Liro, chief economist of S.G. Warburg & Co.
Some industries have mastered the technique better than others.
Factories have done the best job.
Manufacturers' inventories fell 0.6% in December, despite a 1.4% increase in sales.
Merchant wholesaler inventories crept up 0.4% and retail inventories were up 0.5% for the month.
Factories were the only business segment whose inventories declined for the entire year, despite rising sales.
Mr. Liro said that the only thing likely to reverse the trend of lean inventories is high inflation.
Then businesses may buy extra merchandise to avoid paying a lot more for it later.
Right now, with inflation extremely well-behaved, that doesn't seem like a likely scenario.
Separately, in its quarterly forecast, the National Association of Business Economists estimated that the economy will grow 2.9% in 1994, fourth quarter over fourth quarter, and 2.7% in 1995.
That's in line with separate forecasts made by the Clinton administration, the Congressional Budget Office and the Blue Chip Economic Indicators newsletter.
The NABE also forecast that inflation on the same basis will run at a 3.1% rate in 1994 and 3.4% in 1995.
The 1995 forecast for inflation is slightly higher than other estimates, but is still moderate.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here is a summary of the Commerce Department's report on business inventories and sales in December.
The figures are in billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted:
