The dollar slid against most currencies yesterday after two rallies failed to stick on speculation about another U.S. rate increase and on escalating tensions in Korea.
A short-lived rally around midday in New York was prompted by President Clinton's announcement that he will send Patriot missiles to South Korea in response to North Korea's failure to agree to international inspection of its nuclear plants.
Mr. Clinton played down the move as "purely defensive," but the market nevertheless took flight toward the dollar as a safe-haven currency on the initial report.
The U.S. currency then met a wave of sell orders and dropped back to its earlier levels.
A similar retreat occurred even earlier after the dollar rose to intraday highs on speculation that short-term interest rates were almost certain to rise after today's meeting of the Federal Open Markets Committee, or FOMC.
Traders noted that the dollar remains depressed by a strong technical downdraft, in which almost any rally appears to be undermined by a more severe sell-off.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.6885 marks, down from 1.6965 marks late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 106 yen, off from 106.10 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4895, down from $1.4915.
About noon Tuesday in Tokyo the dollar was trading at 106.09 yen.
With Japan seen as vulnerable to any military action over Korea, including attack by North Korean missiles, the news of the U.S. deployment of Patriot air-defense missiles initially boosted the dollar against the Japanese currency.
The dollar returned to its intraday high of 106.45 yen, which also was reached earlier on the interest-rate speculation.
As the dollar rose against the yen on the surging tensions in Korea, it was also carried higher against the mark.
But, here too, the dollar failed to punch through important technical resistance at 1.7020 marks, and fell in a brief but frenzied sell-off.
"The Patriot story was important, but more important to the market was that the dollar again failed to take out 1.7020 marks," said Carl Amendola, vice president of Bayerische Hypotheken-und Wechsel-Bank AG in New York.
"Everyone suddenly realized that Korea wasn't that big a deal," he added, noting the dollar hit stop-loss orders on the way down.
Mr. Amendola said the failure of the dollar's bid to rally on the Korean tensions echoed a similar lack of dollar strength in other recent crises, such as events in Yugoslavia and the former Soviet Union.
"The market has become numb to these little skirmishes throughout the world," Mr. Amendola said, adding: "In the greater scheme of things Korea isn't so important -- just yet."
Other factors also helped to contribute to the dollar's weakness, said Thomas Benfer, director of foreign exchange at the Bank of Montreal.
He noted that retreats in the U.S. stock and bond markets also helped drag down the dollar, as investors appeared to make another flight from U.S. financial markets.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 30.80 points yesterday and the bond market ended lower after making only a minor recovery from an earlier sell-off.
Mr. Benfer added that the market remains skittish over the meeting last Friday between Mr. Clinton and Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
That parley was widely perceived as the administration lobbying against an increase in interest rates when the FOMC meets today.
The White House has denied that interest rates were on the agenda at Friday's meeting, but financial markets remain skeptical.
