Conseco Inc., in a move to generate about $200 million in tax deductions, said it induced five of its top executives to exercise stock options to purchase about 3.6 million common shares of the financial-services concern.
As a result of the transaction, the executives are about $100 million richer in Conseco shares.
The company, based in Carmel, Ind., also said that as an inducement to exercise early their stock options, the officials -- its chief executive officer and four executive vice presidents -- received new options to buy 1.8 million shares at current market prices.
That figure equals the number of shares withheld to pay federal and state taxes owed by the executives because of the deal.
The company actually issued the executives 1.8 million common shares.
Conseco said it plans to use the $200 million tax deduction to offset taxable income, including the gain from the recent sale of its 60% interest in Western National Corp., the newly public parent of Western National Life Insurance Co.
The $200 million is considered executive compensation and therefore is deductible by the company.
The five executives are Stephen C. Hilbert, chairman, president and chief executive officer, and executive vice presidents Rollin M. Dick, Donald F. Gongaware, Walter T. Kirkbride and Lawrence W. Inlow.
Conseco said that because of their exercised stock options, its executives and directors own about 8% of the company's 26.3 million common shares outstanding, up from a 5.7% stake at year-end 1993.
A company spokesman said the average option price for the 3.6 million shares was $3.70 a share.
The options were granted between 1987 and 1990, and the $3.70-a-share option price reflects two 2-for-1 stock splits, in 1991 and 1992.
Conseco shares closed unchanged at $56 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
Judy Fischer, publisher of Executive Compensation Reports, said that while the shares exercised represent "a pretty good amount of money," the arrangement isn't unusual.
"It especially wasn't unusual in 1993 to have companies accelerating the vesting of options for tax purposes," she said.
Ms. Fischer also said that the withholding of shares to pay for the executives' tax liabilities is a common feature of executive stock-option plans.
But she said that Conseco's granting of new options to the executives -- so-called "reload" options, equal to the number of shares used to pay taxes -- is a new feature that companies have begun to put into stock-option plans the past few years.
"That reload option is an answer to critics who contend that executives don't have enough ownership in their companies," she said.
The new options remain exercisable until 1999 and 2000, which was the exercise period available under the old options.
In a related matter, Conseco said it repurchased about 684,000 common shares from the marital estate of Mr. Hilbert and his ex-wife as part of the company's two million common-share buyback program announced last November.
The company said independent directors authorized the repurchase to permit the settlement of the Hilberts' recent divorce proceeding without hurting the market for the stock.
Conseco said that Mr. Hilbert and the other four executives have no intention to sell any shares in the foreseeable future.
