Starting out in business is never easy.
But the impression that it's nothing but a dog-eat-dog world out there for those on their own is greatly exaggerated.
When I started out in my own business, I found, to my surprise, business people, friends and relatives going out of their way to help.
At first I thought that I was getting the permanent cold shoulder from most of our prospective customers -- company presidents and purchasing agents I had called on before I was on my own.
After a year I was amazed to find that they eventually came through: They had merely been waiting for proof of our staying power.
But why did they bother at all?
Our products and service were no better than our best competitors'.
Perhaps they felt that another supplier on the scene would benefit them.
But knowing the individuals, and seeing their delight in giving us orders, I believed that they were motivated, at least in part, by their inherent generosity.
I encountered other such acts during those early years.
Needing a good certified public accountant, I consulted one who was highly recommended, but expensive.
On examining my dismal financials, he pointed out that I couldn't afford him.
Then, after a pause, he added that he would do the work gratis until the company moved into the black.
I was astonished.
Don't be, he said.
As the company progressed through the years, he would expect it to make it up to him.
His firm served my company for the next 20 years, until I sold it.
His gesture is as indelible in my mind as if it had just happened.
Also during those years, when a recession struck and my company fell into such financial straits that I had exhausted all bank credit, I called my wife's wealthy uncle for help.
His first and only question: How much do you need?
When I asked for $50,000 -- equivalent to about $500,000 today -- he never flinched.
Later, when the company still had a negative net worth and my two partners were seeking to sell their shares, he offered to buy them out.
Although I knew he would make an ideal silent partner, I was unsure of the future and feared his risk would be too high; I wouldn't allow it.
Unwittingly I did him a disservice: The company grew to be worth several million dollars.
But both he and I were motivated by something more than personal gain: respect and concern for each other.
My experience in business simply doesn't square with novels and movies in which business people are portrayed as heartless, self-centered and exploiters of others.
One customer whom I called on for five years, to no avail, finally sought our help when our competitor failed him in an emergency.
We performed and became his sole supplier for more than a decade.
He could have shopped around and tried to drive our prices down.
In fact, there was no need.
We charged him no more than we charged his competitors who drove us to the wall.
We were as loyal to his company as he was to ours.
Some years later, we were faced with having to pay off the maturing principal of a large loan.
If the company failed to meet the payment, it would spell disaster for me personally.
Our cash flow was insufficient and our line of credit fully extended.
Expecting the worst, I visited the vice president of the bank and described our problem.
Instead of panicking and taking harsh steps to protect the bank's claim, the vice president calmly examined possible ways to raise additional funds.
He found them in our real estate, which had appreciated considerably over the years.
By mortgaging it, we were able to pay off the loan and convert our short-term debt into long-term debt.
The bank had given us a new lease on life.
I've had a friendly feeling toward banks ever since.
Certainly not all my experiences in business were uplifting.
We had our share of deadbeat customers, some of which took us royally.
But they did it only once.
As a result, we adopted a tough credit policy.
We learned to avoid customers that were unreasonable in their demands or unwilling to let us benefit from the relationship.
Most of our products were custommade.
Customers called in their orders over the phone.
The orders, ranging in value from a few hundred to tens of thousands of dollars, generally required delivery of goods within one or two days.
It meant that we would usually begin producing before receiving a confirming purchase order.
(This was before faxes.)
The customer's word alone was enough.
In my 20-year stint as CEO, not once did a customer go back on it.
Not at all.
Without such trust, business couldn't be conducted.
Similar transactions happen millions of times every day.
Only to that minority: the self-seeking and ruthless.
In each desperate instance as we were starting out, we learned that there are two ways to go: An eye for an eye, or do unto others what you would have them do unto you.
In business, the latter philosophy is far more common, simply because it makes things work better.
Mr. Aaron writes from Belfast, Maine.
