Seeking to break an impasse with Japan on trade, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor traveled to Tokyo to press Japanese cabinet officials to intervene in the talks.
U.S. officials said they wanted to move quickly to see whether Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's success in pushing through electoral reform would prompt Tokyo to compromise in the so-called framework trade talks.
Mr. Hosokawa's victory in Japan's parliament last week "gets political reform behind him, so now he can focus on economic issues with the U.S.," said Robert Rubin, director of the White House's National Economic Council.
But it's unclear how far Japan will move.
U.S. officials have complained that negotiators from Japan's powerful ministries have blocked compromise.
So the U.S. is seeking the involvement of Japanese cabinet officials -- the negotiators' nominal bosses -- who presumably would make concessions rather than face a confrontation with Japan's most powerful ally.
But in public comments, Mr. Hosokawa has backed the bureaucrats' resistance to U.S. demands that Japan agree to numerical targets for import purchases.
On Sunday, President Clinton telephoned Mr. Hosokawa, congratulated him on his victory, and said he was sending Mr. Kantor as his "personal representative" to Tokyo, U.S. officials said.
Bowman Cutter, deputy director of the National Economic Council, who is the lead U.S. negotiator in the framework talks, is accompanying Mr. Kantor.
The pair is expected to meet with Mr. Hosokawa and senior members of his cabinet.
The U.S. side isn't expected to unveil any new trade proposals at these meetings, but will press Japan to show more flexibility.
If the talks go well, the rest of the U.S. negotiating team is expected in Tokyo for talks at the end of the week.
But if the impasse persists, U.S. negotiators may remain at home -- sending a message to Tokyo that the U.S. will walk away from a deal unless Japan bends.
Another possibility is that Japan's trade negotiators will hold follow-up talks in Washington, where they can escape some of the domestic pressure against concessions.
The two sides are supposed to strike a deal by Feb. 11, when Mr. Hosokawa comes to Washington for a summit meeting.
In July, after weeks of wrangling, the U.S. and Japan agreed to use "quantitative" indicators to measure whether Japan is opening its markets.
But the two sides interpret that agreement much differently.
Japan says it is willing to track import data only as a way to diagnose trade problems.
Sozaburo Okamatsu, vice minister of Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, said that a panel of economists, business officials and journalists should interpret the data and make suggestions to the governments for further action.
But the U.S. negotiators complain that would lead to inaction and delay.
Instead, the U.S. wants Japan to commit to import goals as well as indicators to measure progress toward those goals.
In auto parts, for instance, Japanese car makers have said they would buy $19 billion in U.S. parts by the year ending March 31, 1995.
The U.S. wants a Japanese commitment to increase those purchases by about 20% a year for the following three to four years.
In government procurement, U.S. goals are less specific.
Generally, the U.S. wants Japan's import levels to move in the direction of other big industrialized countries.
In telecommunications, the U.S. estimates, the six biggest Western economies import about 25% of their equipment.
Japan's imports total only 5%.
So far, though, the U.S. hasn't told Tokyo specifically what rate of increase it is seeking.
Japan hasn't even agreed to the concept of import goals, and the two sides also are far apart on the question of indicators.
In the area of insurance, for example, U.S. officials said they had proposed measuring the foreign penetration of the Japanese market, the number of applications for new products approved by the Japanese government, and the percentage of those approvals that are granted to foreign companies.
The Japanese responded by proposing to track the number of foreign insurance companies in Japan that have Japanese-speaking executives.
During talks in Washington last week, Mr. Cutter tried to break the stalemate by suggesting that two sides put aside their dispute over import goals for the time being, and concentrate instead on the indicators.
But negotiators said the Japanese turned him down because they feared compromising on the measurements would inevitably lead to an acceptance of import goals.
Japanese negotiators say such import targets would require heavy government intervention, at a time when Japan wants to deregulate the economy.
"The U.S. doesn't trust Japan to do things without numbers," said I.M. Destler, a Japan trade expert at the University of Maryland, "and Japan doesn't trust the U.S. with numbers."
