As starchy corporate dress codes crumble and "casual Fridays" spread to more offices, male wardrobe anxiety is on the rise.
The menswear industry thinks it has the answer: a new category of clothing dubbed "corporate casual," designed to bridge the gap between pinstripes and jeans.
By putting a stylish new spin on everything from sport coats to neckties, menswear marketers hope to regain some of the business they lost as sales of tailored suits dropped 15% from 1989 to 1992.
The trick will be re-educating a customer who is a bit at sea, sartorially speaking.
Many men are befuddled by the relaxation of long-established dress-for-success rules.
Stripped of their suits, they wonder, "how do you present yourself as successful, professional and a hot shot," says Michael Clinton, publisher of GQ magazine.
But indisputably, the business suit has lost some of its versatility.
When invitations to last month's Christmas party at Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y., called for "casual" dress, doctors huddled over suitable attire.
"We agreed that we weren't going to wear suits, but that's about as far as we got," recalls Louis Rose, a 38-year-old orthopedist.
Dr. Rose considered three outfits before settling on a double-breasted navy suit and white silk T-shirt.
Other doctors turned up in everything from blazers and sport coats to jeans.
The two men in suits and ties "really stuck out," Dr. Rose says, adding: "It's always a struggle when they say dress casually.
It's not that you want to dress to kill; you just want to fit in."
Mindful that many men are floundering -- and to spur further sales of its successful Dockers-brand casual line -- Levi Strauss & Co. is urging businesses to give employees more guidance.
It's also cultivating the corporate managers who set dress codes, inviting inquiries from them on a special toll-free telephone line.
Last December, the company mailed a newsletter and questionnaire to thousands of corporate human-resource executives.
The point was "to help companies determine what casual wear is right for them, and how they can go about instituting casual dress codes," a Levi Strauss spokesman says.
The mailing included a pictorial guide to casual business wear featuring -- what else? -- Levi's and Dockers pants and shirts.
(The Dockers division has grown to a $1 billion business in seven years.)
Despite widespread uncertainty over shifting office fashion, more corporate "suits" are loosening up in the workplace.
In a survey last fall of men who regularly wear suits for business, 38% said that they were buying more casual clothes for work, according to Kurt Salmon Associates, apparel consultants.
And at the 80-store Brooks Brothers chain, sport-coat sales grew 24% last year while suit sales were down 3%.
This year, many menswear marketers will capitalize on the trend by introducing entire collections of casual business attire.
The search for an in-between wardrobe harks back to the 1970s, when menswear designers dreamed up the leisure suit, a shirt-style jacket and matching pants that men wore to restaurants and parties.
Although it later became a fashion joke, in its heyday many men liked the leisure suit's loose-fitting jacket, which "covered men's embarrassment over their guts," says Richard Martin, a fashion historian and the curator of the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum in New York.
As the 1990s answer to the leisure suit, the corporate casual look is harder to pull off, because it can't be purchased off the rack.
It requires men to accessorize and to coordinate separate pieces -- to mix tweeds with denim or T-shirts with blazers, and to pair such outfits with the new "fun" ties featuring bold graphics.
In a word, the look takes flair.
Retailers like the idea, because the cost of the various pieces in a casual ensemble can add up to more than the price of a tailored suit.
Many department stores are banking heavily on a new tailored clothing collection being marketed by Hartmarx Corp. in a licensing agreement with designer Tommy Hilfiger, who has boutiques in 500 department stores.
Departing from that old standby, the navy two-button blazer, Mr. Hilfiger has added what he calls "twists" to a fall line of sport coats that will retail for $265 and up.
The three-button or four-button sport coats come in colorful plaids, stripes and patterns, with such flourishes as rounded velveteen collars, sleeves of contrasting colors and printed linings.
Mr. Hilfiger also offers reversible vests, dress slacks and patterned dress shirts manufactured by Oxford Industries.
"This is a collection that is sophisticated and wearable, and at the right price," says John Sadlier, a senior vice president at the 217-store Federated Department Stores Inc. chain.
Federated plans to introduce the collection in its larger stores in July.
A number of menswear companies are bringing out new sportswear labels, designed to remind men of the glaring gap in their wardrobes.
Shirt maker Phillips-Van Heusen Corp., for example, has introduced Corporate Casual Collection by Van Heusen, a line of loose-fitting shirts, many with patch pockets and textured weaves.
The shirts were featured in a five-page "advertorial" headlined "The New Dress Code" that ran in the December issue of GQ magazine.
Casual trousers are making inroads in corporate suites, thanks in part to a new machine-washable cotton treated to resist wrinkles and retain a crease.
Haggar Corp. and Farah Inc. were among the manufacturers that brought out no-iron pants last year.
Haggar, which backed its introduction with a $12 million advertising campaign, sold more than $75 million of the trousers last year.
Even Brooks Brothers is breaking with tradition, promoting the notion that business suits don't always make the man.
In one of its recent ads, headlined "Light on the Starch," a man wearing a cashmere turtleneck and tweed sport coat is shown standing beside a man in a denim shirt and polka-dot tie.
The copy reads: "Is the sport coat a CEO or a new-minted MBA?
Is that the software king in the baggy pants or a corporate VP in Friday trim?
Success today is often out of uniform, but wears the same label it has for 175 years."
At some companies, such messages are already old hat.
The computer software industry, in particular, grew up without ever establishing a buttoned-up tradition.
And Aluminum Co. of America adopted a casual dress code at its Pittsburgh headquarters in 1991.
On any given day, about half the male employees there wear sweaters, blazers and open-collared shirts.
"We don't even think about the dress code anymore," says an Alcoa spokesman.
But elsewhere, doubts persist.
Many budding executives worry that a laid-back look could jeopardize their corporate climb.
Bert Hand, the chairman of Hartmarx, tells of one company that rescinded its casual Friday policy by popular demand.
The company's human resource director told Mr. Hand that male employees "didn't want to be judged because they wore the wrong sweater."
