New Orleans -- Danny Barker made it clear before he died: No jazz funeral, please.
The man who played guitar with everybody from Bunk Johnson to Cab Calloway and then came home to mount a one-man crusade to preserve traditional New Orleans jazz didn't like the way funeral parades had deteriorated.
The bands played rhythm and blues now instead of slow hymns and dirges on the way to the cemetery.
Second liners danced in a cloud of reefer smoke, and youngsters jumped on the roofs of cars, even the hearse.
The jazz funeral had become just another rowdy party in a party town.
No way was Barker, who died on March 13 at age 85, going out like that.
But his wishes put his musician friends in a pickle.
How could they not give Danny Barker a jazz funeral?
Even nonmusicians are entitled to a funeral parade complete with a seven- or eight-piece band and a grand marshal.
How could they let the man who wrote the song "Save the Bones for Henry Jones," made many recordings with his wife, singer Blue Lu, and got elected to the Jazz Hall of Fame go to his grave without a peep?
So of course Barker got a jazz funeral, a great big, beautiful, noisy funeral with a band of 40 musicians or more, six grand marshals and a second line numbering in the many hundreds.
Not as grand as the great clarinetist Alphonse Picou's funeral, which drew 10,000 people in 1961, but close.
More to the point, it was a traditional jazz funeral, or as near to one as organizer Gregg Stafford, a 40-year-old trumpet player in Barker's band, the Jazz Hounds, could make it, given such modern-day hindrances as freeways and Reeboks.
Jazz funerals date back at least as far as 1819, when architect Benjamin Henry Latrobe noted that funeral parades were "peculiar to New Orleans alone among all American cities."
Also peculiar to the "city of pleasure" was a mania for brass instruments.
Every social club and benevolent society had its brass band.
For a funeral, the practice was to assemble at the club in the morning and parade to the church, delivering a steady stream of dirges and slow marches along the way.
After the ceremony the band escorted the body to the cemetery, again playing slow, mournful music.
There is some dispute as to whether the musicians entered the cemetery or stayed respectfully outside.
In any case, after the burial, they burst into spirited marches and popular songs, to represent the joy of everlasting life, and paraded back to the club.
The whole affair might last nine hours, most of which were spent in motion, making music.
Times change.
Freeways dissect the city now, and not even the determined Stafford could persuade band members to trek out to St. Raymond Catholic Church, three miles from the town center.
So they assembled three blocks from the church, paraded to the gates, and after the service, drove to a point seven blocks from St. Louis Cemetery No. 2 for the final cortege.
The musicians gathered with vigorous handshakes all around, even though most had seen each other only minutes before at the service.
The grand marshals adjusted the sashes across their chests bearing the names of their bands (Olympia, Tuxedo) or clubs (Money Wasters), and the paper doves perched on their shoulders, representing the flight to the hereafter.
At the first drumroll, adults and children appeared from who knows where to dance alongside, forming the so-called "second line" that was no line at all but a throbbing mass.
The marshals led with a halting sideways two-step.
One of them waved a picture of Barker.
The colorful scene was not lost on the throng of photographers shooting excitedly away, but the music! -- the music was the thing.
Trumpets, trombones and saxophones locked in harmonic and melodic step formed a thick block of sound, from which countermelodies on a clarinet or soprano sax spiraled up like cigarette smoke.
"In the Sweet By and By," "Lord, Lord, Lord," "What a Friend We Have in Jesus"; second liners sang along.
One could see their open mouths and ecstatic eyes but their voices were all but lost in the mournful march of bass drum and blasts of tuba.
The music is difficult.
It calls for musicians to improvise not as soloists, as they would in later jazz (Louis Armstrong was the first to play solos, in the 1920s), but as a unit.
The individual is encouraged to express himself freely but must not lose step with his fellow musicians and with the tune.
No wonder that most brass bands today prefer the easier route of rhythm and blues, in which improvisation is minimal and melody comes mostly in riffs -- rhythmic snips of music, played over and over.
They normally play in jeans, T-shirts and sandals, too, which would never do for the funeral of Danny Barker, grandson of Isidore Barbarin, a member of the mighty Onward Brass Band in its prime.
Stafford insisted on the standard uniform: black jacket, tie, trousers and shined shoes; clean, pressed white shirt; special black cap with a band's name emblazoned across the front.
The shined shoes were especially important.
Clarinetist Michael White, who is 39, remembers gazing in awe at the senior musicians' "shoes that shone like glass."
White came up through the Fairview Baptist Church bands, which Barker founded in a hugely successful attempt to jump-start the brass band in the '70s.
He is dedicated to carrying the torch for traditional jazz, and he is worried.
"The tradition is in a lot of trouble, because of commercialization and people dying like this," he says.
Catching his breath at parade's end, Stafford, also a Fairview band alumnus, said he was "95%" pleased with his attempt to deliver an authentic jazz funeral.
Included in the 5%, one can assume, were the single pair of black Reeboks and the brief episode of rhythm and blues.
That came near the end, after many, many hymns, minutes before the band marched single file into Trombone Shorty's for liquid refreshment.
A short while later, a few of the musicians could be seen marching up the street to a rocking R&B beat, surrounded by second liners like a swarm of bees.
Ms. Orgill is a writer in Hoboken, N.J.
