People always figured Andy Seybold had a future in radio.
At age seven, he stretched a wire between two tin cans and ran it across several vacant lots to establish voice communications with a friend's house more than 500 feet away.
Later -- much to his parents' dismay -- he cannibalized parts from the family TV to build a transmitter for his first ham radio.
In Philadelphia in the late 1960s, he briefly took to the commercial airwaves under the name Herman J. Fertinwangler, rock-and-roll DJ.
He started every program by spinning "Charlie Brown, He's That Clown," followed by a taped recording of a toilet flushing.
Mr. Seybold's own dreams of a career in conventional radio eventually went down the drain.
But through a curious chain of events, Mr. Seybold, at the age of 47, has hit it big in a modern-day high-tech radio offshoot: wireless communications and computing.
Combining technical know-how and a showman's flair for self-promotion, Mr. Seybold has positioned himself as one of the principal envangelists of the dawning age of mobile computing and wireless communications -- using radio waves to send data and voice from small, portable devices.
His monthly newsletter, Andrew Seybold's Outlook on Mobile Computing, is devoured by techno-wonks and praised by top wireless executives at the likes of Motorola Inc. and General Electric Co. as a bullhorn for getting the wireless gospel out to consumers.
Such companies as Apple Computer Inc. and Hewlett-Packard Co. sometimes send him prototypes of their latest wireless gizmos so he can play with them and report back on any flaws.
His seminars and conference appearances draw packed houses; his daily consulting fees now occasionally approach five figures.
If there are any doubts about the scope of his influence on the wireless movement, just ask him:
"I have a rare combination of expertise in radio and computers, the twin axes of the wireless revolution," Mr. Seybold rumbles, in a deep voice made gravelly by cigarettes.
"That makes me unique in this arena.
In fact, I am a prototypical wireless warrior."
Is this a bunch of hot airwaves?
Well, even Mr. Seybold himself occasionally interrupts conversations to warn listeners they must separate "ego from reality."
Some in the industry dismiss him as a blowhard, or worse.
"Andy is a pain," says Bob Ratliffe, vice president of corporate communications for McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., which has been feuding with Mr. Seybold over his blunt criticism of an avant-garde cellular-phone technology that McCaw is promoting as a possible industry standard.
"He's strictly a self-proclaimed wireless guru," Mr. Ratliffe says.
"We're not impressed."
Still, to a degree rare for a consultant-cum-analyst-cum-gadgethead, Mr. Seybold does appear to be helping to shape the development of the emerging wireless data industry -- its products, its marketing strategies, its fledgling attempts to develop standardized systems.
Richard duFosse, director of development for Lotus Development Corp., says: "Andy isn't in the advance guard of wireless; he is the advance guard of wireless."
Mr. Seybold doesn't try to hide the vindication he feels from this kind of recognition.
The Seybold family is well-known in the world of high-tech consulting and newsletters, but until recently, Andy was considered something of a black sheep.
His father, John, took up high-tech tinkering in his 40s, developed technologies that led to today's computerized typesetting and started several newsletters.
Andy's older brother, Jonathan, and his younger sister Patricia, both were precocious overachievers who years ago became wealthy and influential through their own high-tech newsletters and consulting businesses.
Andy Seybold has had a rougher ride.
Dyslexic and colorblind, he struggled in high school, dropped out of college and became a high-tech gypsy, wandering through jobs, mostly in electronics, mostly as a salesman.
He had some successes: He helped develop some of the earliest two-way radios for paramedics and emergency personnel, and he was an early devotee of Apple computers and consultant to the garage-bound Steve Jobs.
But then a computer newsletter he published swooned.
In 1990, Mr. Seybold's company filed for bankruptcy protection.
Meanwhile, friction between Mr. Seybold and his brother Jonathan -- which some friends and family members attribute to bitter sibling rivalry compounded by business disputes -- has left their relationship strained to this day.
Indeed, they are fighting in court over the use of the Seybold name.
"Andy seems to resent how easily things came for others, particularly Jonathan," a family friend says.
"He's always wanted to do something to prove to the world that he was just as good as any of the Seybolds."
Wireless came along just in time.
Shortly after his company tanked, while regrouping as an analyst for Dataquest Inc.., Mr. Seybold had the vision of becoming the wireless warrior, as he now styles himself.
Cellular phones were already becoming widespread, and wireless local-area networks had been developed, "but not many people had grasped the potential for linking computers and telecommunications wirelessly," Mr. Seybold recalls.
"I saw an opening there."
He began inserting a section on mobile computing in his revived computer newsletter in June 1992; at the start of last year, the standalone mobile-computing newsletter was born.
Since then, from a mountain lair deep in the redwood country east of Santa Cruz, Mr. Seybold has been trying to become the new wireless man.
A radio tower and a satellite dish planted in his yard coax data from the ether.
The shelves of his small office sport a half-dozen cellular phones and walkie-talkies in various states of assembly; he opens a desk drawer to reveal a host of portable computers.
(The 15-by-20-foot office contains no fewer than six desktop PCs, but those are hooked up to phone lines.)
He wears his pager every waking minute -- and keeps it on the nightstand when he sleeps.
A palmtop PC with radio modem, which serves as a wireless electronic-mail gadget, rarely leaves his side.
The home's heating systems, lights and even its coffee maker are controlled by computer, though only partly by wireless means (because, he laments, the technology to do more without wires isn't here yet).
What Mr. Seybold has done here on the mountaintop reflects his vision of what wireless could eventually mean for people: "self-sufficiency, freedom, flexibility."
Lighting a cigarette (Mr. Seybold says he's down to a pack a day), he says, "The day will come when the wireless warrior can be almost self-contained. . . .
Someday, I'll have everything I need to work and live on this mountaintop, and it won't have any wires.
Think of it."
But that day is still distant, something Mr. Seybold knows as well as anyone.
The trees and hills around his house often jam his cellular-phone signals, and prevent him from ever hooking up to the RAM Mobile Data wireless data network, which he has praised in his newsletter.
"It's terrible," he moans.
His tales of mobile communications woes from the road are legion.
At a hotel in Atlanta, he once wandered the halls for hours, mobile phone in front of him like a dowser's water wand, trying to figure out which room would have the strongest radio signal.
Security guards thought he might be planting a bomb and almost threw him out.
At the Hilton hotel in Seoul, South Korea, desperate to file data from his laptop and unable to find a proper phone jack, Mr. Seybold finally installed one he had brought from home.
On subsequent trips, he installed jacks in two other rooms.
"Now when I go to Seoul, I ask for one of those three rooms," he says.
"Works every time."
On many occasions, he has sent large sections of his newsletter and other data into oblivion because of mysterious mobile computer malfunctions.
And, in perhaps his most galling moment, he once had to call a reporter who was seeking comment about a wireless news development from a pay phone -- a pay phone! -- because he had left his cellular phone at home.
"That was embarrassing," he recalls.
Mr. Seybold uses such nightmares to help convey some of his main themes about wireless as we now know it.
One is a point that Mr. Seybold, who back in his Herman J. Fertinwangler days was known for such on-air pranks as urging listeners to give toll-booth attendants the wrong change during morning rush hour, hammers home with carnival flair: At every appearance, he lugs out a bulky satchel, proclaims that "this is what you need to be mobile now," and proceeds to pull out dozens of gadgets, cables, connectors and power sources.
The effect is something like the circus car that spills out clown after clown; the point is that "today's devices still aren't very mobile," he says.
Indeed, Mr. Seybold argues that many companies are focusing too much on pie-in-the-sky future wireless technologies when they should be perfecting today's devices and building markets for wireless technology closer to hand: things like wireless e-mail and improved wireless modems that will allow users to make wireless connections between their portable devices and their desktop computers.
Without rapid progress in such areas, Mr. Seybold says, the wireless movement risks alienating consumers with too much hype about dazzling technology that may never pan out.
Usefulness Now!
"There's too much focus on the one-device scenario," he says.
"The mobile companion that does everything -- phone, e-mail, computer, fax, mows the lawn, gets you dates -- that's way down the line."
To build markets and keep consumers' attention, "we need products that provide useful functionality now."
Some products in the wireless here-and-now fit that description, Mr. Seybold says.
One example is a new offering from Traveling Software Inc. of Bothell, Wash., and National Semiconductor Corp. of Santa Clara, Calif., which have packaged Traveling's LapLink wireless-communications software and National Semi's AirShare transmitter and receiver, and are selling the combination as a wireless "docking station."
It allows a portable computer to communicate wirelessly with a companion desktop PC, automatically triggering any transmissions when the portable comes within 30 feet of the other computer.
"No cables to connect, no logging on, no commands to input," Mr. Seybold notes.
Other products Mr. Seybold is high on include so-called PC-MCIA modems, wireless devices about the size of credit cards that will slide into slots being built into many new portable computers and e-mail devices.
These modems, which probably won't hit the market for another six months, will replace outboard modems that are about the size of a pocket cellular phone.
Intel Corp. and Megahertz Corp. of Salt Lake City have hot prototypes, Mr. Seybold says.
Unless companies come up with more practical products like these, Mr. Seybold says, the industry could face what he calls the "dreaded Newton effect," after Apple's much-ballyhooed personal digital assistant, a palm-sized, pen-controlled computer.
The device's handwriting-recognition software proved to be flawed, and its communications ability nonexistent without expensive add-ons.
"The Newton couldn't possibly live up to the hype Apple put out about it," Mr. Seybold says.
"Consumers felt betrayed.
Things like that will set the wireless movement back every time."
William Frezza, director of marketing and business development for Ericsson GE Mobile Communications Inc., a joint venture of GE and Telefon AB LM Ericsson of Sweden, says Mr. Seybold is right on target.
"What he's saying is that right now, the market we're after" is not the device-in-every-household market, Mr. Frezza says.
"We're after the wireless road warrior -- the businessperson who travels and needs to stay connected and can't lug around eight suitcases full of cables and gear.
Andy has helped define that market."
Of course, not everyone agrees with Mr. Seybold's analyses.
That may be partly because of how he sometimes presents them.
Tim Bajarin, a friend and fellow consultant who has worked on wireless consulting projects with Mr. Seybold, says some people don't buy the message because they can't stomach the messenger.
"I have sat in a room with Andy and watched him tell a CEO point-blank: `That is the stupidest thing I have ever heard,'" Mr. Bajarin recounts.
"That's Andy's style, but some people reject the message when it's put to them that way."
Other clashes are more substantive.
In his newsletters and speeches, Mr. Seybold for months has blasted McCaw's effort to establish a cellular network around technology known as cellular digital packet data, or CDPD.
This technology is meant to overlay existing analog cellular phone networks, enabling them to transmit digital data over unused radio channels.
According to McCaw, CDPD is a major advance that allows integrated voice and data transmission over a single network, permitting customers to use one device for calling their friends or calling their computers.
McCaw has poured more than $300 million into developing it, planned to have New York and four other big cities up and running with CDPD technology by last month, and hopes to establish it as an industry standard.
But Mr. Seybold says the technology is so complicated that it is bound to run into snags and delays.
"It's many years away," he argues.
Moreover, he says, McCaw's "hype" about CDPD is "freezing the market" -- leading potential customers and even software developers to hold off purchasing equipment or committing to other already-available technologies while McCaw talks up CDPD.
"If it flops," he says, "the backlash will be tremendous."
It is a measure of Mr. Seybold's wireless clout that Craig McCaw, McCaw's founder and a wireless titan himself, has called -- or e-mailed -- Mr. Seybold many times to discuss his broadsides against CDPD.
In November, McCaw Vice President Rob Mechaley invited Mr. Seybold for a private demonstration of CDPD; Mr. Seybold was disinvited when he insisted on using elaborate electronics gear to investigate the fidelity of CDPD's signal transmission and other technical matters.
Later that month, at the big Comdex computer trade show in Las Vegas, Mr. Mechaley invited Mr. Seybold into a private tutorial on CDPD.
It was a brief meeting.
Mr. Seybold immediately began trashing McCaw's promotion of CDPD and accused McCaw of, among other things, stealing the technology.
"You've got to deal with the guy because, like it or not, he's influential in the industry," says McCaw's Mr. Ratliffe, who attended the meeting.
"But we're not going to put up with crap like that.
He's confrontational and authoritarian, and he's got all the social skills of an ax murderer."
To which Mr. Seybold responds: "I have never murdered anyone with an ax."
Some of the more successful products in mobile computing and wireless bear Mr. Seybold's imprint.
Hewlett-Packard incorporated many of his suggestions for its 95LX palmtop PC, including fax capability and related features, into its next version, the 100LX.
Both models, which have small keyboards, can be linked to external wireless modems and are popular with businesspeople and professionals eager for wireless power.
Then there's the newsletter.
Mr. Seybold won't disclose specific circulation figures, but says the mobile-computing newsletter's subscriptions rose 400% in the first 11 months of 1993 and already eclipse the subscriptions of his revived general-computing newsletter.
Industry officials say his product reviews can make or break companies -- and provide investors with clues to winners and losers in the wireless race.
He was one of the earliest advocates of RadioMail Corp.'s fast-growing wireless post office, which allows users to tap in to virtually all of today's disparate wireless data networks and link up with wired networks, such as MCI Mail and the Internet.
He also was an early predictor of International Business Machines Corp.'s decline, which was at least partly attributable to Big Blue's big blowoff of the implications of mobile and wireless trends.
When IBM stock was trading at more than $100 a share, Mr. Seybold told the people at one conference that they should "put a buy order in for IBM at $50" -- which is where the stock eventually headed.
(IBM is now a big believer in wireless computing, becoming the first manufacturer to offer a portable computer with a CDPD modem.)
Mr. Seybold's latest project may turn out to be his most important contribution yet to wireless.
He conceived and pulled together the Portable Computer and Communications Association, an organization that includes Ericsson GE, Intel, Lotus, Microsoft Corp., Motorola and a dozen other big names in high tech.
(McCaw is not a member.)
Its mission is to hash out open standards for wireless computing that will enable different manufacturers' products to talk to one another; that's considered crucial to the development of a wireless world.
As president of the PCCA, Mr. Seybold stows his usual confrontational bluster.
He spent months of shuttle diplomacy cajoling the archrivals into cooperating on the project.
At a recent meeting at a hotel near the San Francisco airport, as a roomful of top technologists natter on about "F-class parameters" and "X-28 VRES's" and such, Mr. Seybold prods and pokes, asking a few questions, suggesting a few solutions, trying, he says to keep "the process from bogging down in technobabble."
During a particularly intense half-hour exchange between Motorola and Microsoft executives about dial-string modifiers, a fire alarm goes off; only Mr. Seybold seems to notice, bounding into the corridor to determine that it's a false alarm -- and to grab a smoke.
Whatever comes of wireless, Mr. Seybold seems to have become one of its earliest winners.
He has made his mark -- something that deep down "I find really satisfying," he says.
"Being a Seybold, my family isn't an easy act to follow."
He has also made some money.
And he has even found love.
He met his second wife, Linda, over ham radio five years ago.
For many months, theirs was a wireless romance.
"I knew the voice before I ever met the man," recalls Linda, a lifelong ham-radio buff.
"It was gruff, but I kind of liked it."
Mr. McCoy is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau.
