Determined to cash in on the tourism revival of Burma, a private Singaporean group announced that it will launch in June a charter airline, Air Mandalay, to fly domestic and regional routes.
"There is a severe shortage of aircraft in Burma and they can't keep up with demand at the moment," said Lewis Tan, chief executive officer of Techmat Holdings Pte. Ltd., a trading group with interests in aviation, shipping and defense.
"You have to wait three weeks to get a seat on a domestic flight," Mr. Tan told a news conference Thursday at the Asian Aerospace airshow being held here.
Techmat initiated contacts with Burmese authorities in 1992, but only recently received an operating license from the Burmese government to run an airline.
It will base Air Mandalay in Mandalay, Burma's ancient capital and biggest tourist destination.
Regionally, the carrier will connect Mandalay to Bangkok and Chiang Mai, in Thailand.
Domestically, it will fly to Rangoon and tourist spots such as Pagan, which is known for its temples, and Heho, a mountainous area adjacent to the picturesque Inle Lake in the north.
"Tourists will be the main clients of the airline," Mr. Tan said.
About 70,000 tourists visited Burma last year, and the government is hoping to attract 500,000 by the year 2000.
Air Mandalay's launch will be well-timed for Burma's official Year of Tourism in 1995, Mr. Tan said.
Burma has been anxious to attract foreign investment in the tourism sector as it introduces market reforms and emerges from many years of self-imposed isolation.
International access by air has improved significantly in the last two years because the government has lifted travel restrictions on foreign visitors.
Nowadays, it's possible to fly between Burma and Singapore, Hong Kong and Thailand on foreign carriers.
Problems for flying domestically, however, have persisted.
Due to a dearth of aircraft, state-owned Mynmar Airways has been ill-equipped to deal with the growing tide of tourists, who have difficulty securing a seat on domestic flights to northern Burma.
Moreover, industry sources say, some foreigners have been reluctant to take domestic flights after hearing about the poor safety record of Mynmar Airways, which they say has an old fleet.
Indeed, Techmat Financial Director M. Chang is counting on brisk business.
He predicts Air Mandalay will register revenue of between $12 million and $15 million in its first year of operation.
Techmat plans to initially fly two new 60-seat ATR-72 turboprop planes, which it is acquiring from Franco-Italian company Avions de Transport Regional.
The $35 million aircraft purchase agreement, which was signed between the two parties at the airshow Thursday, is being financed by Italian and French banks.
Both sides declined to name the banks.
The airline, which will be a wholly owned subsidiary of Techmat, has made commitments to the government to hire and train local pilots and cabin crews.
