The efforts of two entrepreneurs to sell tax-sheltered annuity-like products through a small Indian-owned bank in Montana are likely to run into heavy criticism from bank regulators as well as a blizzard of litigation from the insurance industry.
Blackfeet National Bank of Browning, Mont., hopes to sell federally insured certificates of deposit that would allow customers to accumulate interest on a tax-free basis until the money is withdrawn.
The product, which will be promoted in a nationwide marketing effort beginning today, would compete directly with the insurance industry's $40 billion of annual annuity sales.
The two entrepreneurs who persuaded the bank to offer the product, Rick Fasold, a Denver banking consultant, and Dennis M. Gingold, a Washington lawyer, claim that they have found a loophole in regulations that have heretofore restricted banks from offering annuities.
Mr. Fasold said: "What we are offering is a CD for banking-law purposes, and an annuity for tax-law purposes."
But regulators haven't approved any such offering and say they still have plenty of questions about the proposed products.
"They came in with an idea, and we said that looks interesting but that we had some questions," said Leonora Cross, the U.S. deputy comptroller of the currency.
"They then said we aren't asking for a legal opinion."
Although Mr. Gingold was quoted as saying that the Office of the Comptroller of the Currrency told him the account would be covered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., Ms. Cross stated: "I can say with absolute certainty that we didn't tell them that they would be insured by the FDIC.
Only the FDIC can do that."
Ms. Cross said the Comptroller's Office last night advised the bank not to go ahead with plans to introduce the product.
"We are notifying the bank to let them know that we think they might be working under incorrect information.
We have a lot of questions, particularly concerning the financial and legal risk to the bank itself.
We think it is in the best interest of the bank to hold off on doing anything."
A spokesman for the FDIC said neither Mr. Gingold nor Mr. Fasold approached the agency, and that it would work with the Comptroller's Office to look into the matter.
Although Mr. Gingold has been quoted saying he had a letter from the Internal Revenue Service confirming that taxes on the interest earned by the accounts would be deferred until the funds were withdrawn, Mr. Fasold said yesterday that his partner didn't actually have a letter, but that he had a legal opinion supporting his position.
Several banking attorneys were extremely skeptical as to the bank's ability to offer its product.
"It's very hard to believe that a loophole as big as this really exists," said Lee Myerson of Simpson Thatcher & Bartlett, in New York.
A Washington lawyer who specializes in bank regulation said of Blackfeet National's plans: "I think there is a lot more promotion to this than there is substance.
I am not sure they really have a product."
Another attorney said that Messrs. Fasold and Gingold had asked a number of banks to offer their product, but were turned down because of the inevitable legal battles.
Mr. Fasold acknowledged that he and his partner have agreed to assume a portion of Blackfeet's legal costs.
"There is a risk that someone might sue, but the chances that they might prevail are very low," Mr. Fasold asserted.
He also suggested insurers may be unwilling to sue a bank that is owned by American Indians: "If they want to jump all over a $12 million minority-owned bank that's up to them."
The insurance industry, however, seems undeterred.
"We consider the bank's action to be an attempted end-run around current banking and insurance laws," said Dick Schweiker, president of the American Council of Life Insurance in Washington, who added that his organization was "prepared to explore all legal remedies."
