Alan Greenspan took the unusual step Friday of announcing something the markets soon would find out anyway, that the Federal Reserve was letting short-term interest rates climb a little bit.
Since this was only four days after the Fed chairman had told Congress that rates might have to rise "at some point," you might say Mr. Greenspan has been practicing the art of psychological preparation.
So far it's working.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said the Friday decision, which knocked 96 points off the Dow, was "not unexpected" and had indeed already been programmed into the administration's 1994 economic growth estimates.
Does this mean that the United States has entered some new state of bliss in which the Fed can adjust interest rates in response to its best judgments without creating undue excitement in Washington?
Don't bet on it.
The mild reaction was born of the euphoria of economic recovery.
But euphoria is ephemeral.
The Fed, the markets and the Clinton economic team face more difficult tests just ahead.
Mr. Greenspan tipped off his concerns a week ago when he testified that "short-term interest rates are currently abnormally low in real terms.
At some point, absent an unexpected and prolonged weakening of economic activity, we will need to move them to a more neutral stance."
What he meant by "neutral" is that the Fed would have to adjust to rising credit demand by allowing an increase in the banking system's internal market price of short-term money.
If the Fed had kept supplying sufficient reserves to hold this "Fed funds" rate at 3%, it would have risked flooding the economy with money, either creating a dangerous bubble in securities and real estate or touching off inflation.
So it let Fed funds edge up but kept its more politically sensitive "discount rate" on loans to banks at 3%.
Powerful deflationary pressures, brought about primarily by real estate declines, are easing.
While they existed, the Fed was spared the kind of decision it had to take last week.
Early in this decade it brought short rates down sharply without even a glimmer of renewed inflation.
It has held them at a rock bottom 3% for over a year.
Up until Friday, it had not had to raise rates for five years.
The sluggish U.S. economy of the early 1990s casts doubt on the theory, held by all politicians and many economists, that cheap money is an instant cure for recession.
Not only were rates low, but the Fed was also creating basic money at a good clip.
Congress aided this process in the way it loves best, by generating large new mounds of debt for the Fed to buy.
For a central bank chairman, this was hog heaven.
No one could fault Mr. Greenspan for not doing his bit for the economy and Congress, and yet the inflation rate stayed low.
He was warmly received on Capitol Hill and at White House social gatherings and was looked up to as something of a genius.
Maybe he really is, but we'll know more about that if he can get through the next several months unscathed.
There are some troubling straws floating around in the wind with inflation warnings painted on them.
Precious metal prices and commodity futures indexes are pointing upward again.
To add to these faint signals, America's purchasing agents reported last week that they also are seeing upward price action in the goods they buy.
None of this should be especially surprising given the sharp spurt in the economy late last year.
Consumer spending in 1993 was up 6% from the year before.
But as Mr. Greenspan tries to steer around inflation's Scylla, he also has a Charybdis to avoid on his other flank.
It's called a securities market crash.
It is interesting that the drop in stocks Friday was accompanied by a further softening of long bonds, a market that should have welcomed moves against inflation.
The dollar firmed.
In light of this scenario of falling securities and rising cash, it is useful to look at what some market bears have been saying.
They have been asking what a resurgence of credit demand from the real sector will mean for the financial sector.
By their analysis, a lot of the base money the Fed has been so generously creating has been flowing into securities -- importantly by means of an explosion of mutual funds -- and may already have inflated securities values.
Some monetarist types support this theory by noting the contrast between the Fed's high rate of base money creation and the slow growth in "broad money," the highly liquid funds in checking and savings accounts.
But then it is no secret that it has been far more attractive for savers to put their money into securities than to leave it in banks or money market instruments at the low returns the Fed has decreed.
The bottom line of this form of analysis is that the Fed during all that time when it was dwelling in central banking nirvana may have been creating a securities market bubble.
Now that the Fed is being forced to let short-term rates rise, there is a risk that a reverse flow will begin, out of securities and back into banks and money market instruments, thereby letting the air out of securities prices.
If out of fear of just that the Fed refuses to raise short rates sufficiently, will it bring on the inflation that may be lurking in the wings?
The consequences of that could be even more serious for the economy and it won't help the securities market much either, as the experience of the 1970s showed.
But the Fed will face the usual political pressures to keep rate raises modest.
Mr. Clinton, Mr. Bentsen and Congress will not be as sanguine as they were last week if Mr. Greenspan starts raising interest rates sharply this year in advance of a congressional election.
Now maybe all this is just the kind of scary talk you always hear from market bears.
Cassandra-type warnings always sound a bit off-key when so many things are looking right-low inflation, renewed economic growth, a high Dow and maybe even a few signs of stirrings in the economies of Europe and Japan, although don't bet heavily on that yet.
On the surface, the financial sector looks strong.
Certainly banks have made an impressive recovery, thanks in part to Mr. Greenspan's adept management of monetary policy.
But the bond market was faltering just a bit even before last week's little jolt.
There are those wisps of heat emanating from the commodity markets.
And finally, there is Mr. Greenspan himself, administering pscyhological preparation to politicians.
It is to be hoped that the mild response he has received so far will remain so if he has to act more vigorously than some of his fans now expect.
