In reflecting on President Clinton's marvelously beguiling performance the other night, we'd like to lay Whitewater momentarily aside.
There will be plenty of time to plumb whether Hillary really drew the winning number in the commodities lotto.
To ponder whether the President really forgot a $20,000 check for his mother.
To explore what the President knew about the newly revealed interventions by George Stephanopoulos and Harold Ickes.
Instead, we'd like to dwell a bit on what the President called "the real work we are getting done on behalf of the American people."
On the President's assertion "that by common consensus we had the most productive first year of a Presidency last year of anyone in a generation."
Consensus, it seems, can find victory in every stumble.
It's true, of course, that to this moment the economy has overcome the burdens Mr. Clinton piled on it.
It is a victory of sorts that his tax increases, offset by an expansive monetary policy, did not cause an immediate recession.
Mr. Clinton did not browbeat the Federal Reserve on interest rates until just recently, which is to say the first time the Fed acted against impending inflation.
But the real economic test will come over a longer time; did the tax increases undermine the economy's potential to grow without handing the Fed an inflationary dilemma?
The "common consensus" the President detailed, also lists a curious set of foreign policy successes.
Bosnia is now a victory, for example, though what calm exists results mainly from the arrival of Russian troops to defend Serbian conquests.
Other victories include the renewal of yet more talks in the Middle East, after the previously advertised "peace" was interrupted by another massacre, this time from extremists on the Israeli side.
Mr. Clinton's promise "to seek human rights in China" is a laudable effort, but can't be counted a big success after the Chinese snub of Secretary of State Christopher.
The "efforts to stop North Korea's nuclear program" is a howler.
Even if North Korea gave the State Department and the international inspectors everything they demand, it would still be building a bomb.
The only sensible reaction to the demonstrated threat of rogue states with nuclear weapons is not merely to send Patriot missiles to South Korea, but finally to start building a missile defense for the United States.
But under the "common consensus," of course, anything resembling "star wars" is unthinkable.
Similarly, the President also celebrated the return of U.S. troops from Somalia, "a week ahead of schedule."
But then, he celebrated that once before, holding a parade on the White House lawn last May.
That was before his administration lost enough Rangers to discover its notion of a solution, namely to stop fighting General Aidid, and turn the place over to his tender mercies under a face-saving agreement.
Turning to the domestic front, Mr. Clinton bragged that the House passed legislation to limit lobbyists, leaving the favors of a bloated government to be dispensed by Congressmen all on their own.
Real political reform, namely term limits, is outside of the "common consensus," though it wins overwhelmingly whenever tested in a public opinion poll or, more importantly, a referendum.
The administration is "completing work" on welfare reform that will pretend to cut off payments after two years on welfare.
And also a re-employment proposal that will pretend to train workers for pretend jobs.
Both will of course require the services of more government workers who will vote for more government.
There is also something about new educational standards for schools, though of course nothing to diminish the influence of the teachers' union establishment.
Which brings us to the crime bill, the pretenses of which led to the resignation of Deputy Attorney General Philip Heymann, whatever his views one of the few serious people in the Justice Department.
The three-strikes-and-out proposal looks good only because the "common consensus" precludes real reform such as repealing the exclusionary rule, supporting police in street confrontations with suspects of whatever color and reforming the juvenile justice system.
Finally, the Clinton administration is moving to reform the health care system, proof being that a House subcommittee just passed a bill so extreme the administration used to oppose it.
For our part, we sense a budding, if not yet common, consensus that trying to reform 14% of GDP at a stroke is a frivolous exercise, and always was.
The subcommittee bill will not pass, but some sensible incremental reforms might.
Whitewater should not be an excuse for the failure of the Clinton health proposal, which is falling apart all on its own.
Admittedly, most of these issues are more complicated; solutions are seldom complete, the Clinton administration inherited many problems, etc., etc.
Of course our assessment paints with broad strokes, but surely no broader than the grandiose claim Mr. Clinton offered in depicting his bumbling presidency as a triumph.
In all fairness, we should note that his first year did include one historic success, the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Too bad he didn't include it on his press conference list.
