U.S. petroleum futures prices rose sharply to lead oil prices higher worldwide.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil for April delivery rose 36 cents a barrel to settle at $14.77.
Some fuels futures jumped more than one cent a gallon.
There was a similar rally in late trading on London's International Petroleum Exchange.
The April Brent blend crude closed up 28 cents a barrel at $13.61.
The rise in futures prices in the U.S. was behind the move higher in London, according to the Dow Jones International Petroleum Report.
"Brent crude and gasoil heating oil futures were lower ahead of the open in New York and moved up as the market there strengthened," the report said.
Reasons cited for the buoyancy in U.S. futures trading varied among analysts and traders.
But prominently mentioned was the so-called technical buying that resulted in both New York and London after prices broke through psychologically-important levels.
Others suggested oil prices generally rose because of firmness in the heating oil market, which strengthened again after the new bout of frigid weather in the U.S. this week.
The March heating oil contract on the New York Mercantile Exchange accounted for the biggest price jump, rising 1.64 cents to 48.86 cents a gallon.
But gasoline futures also settled sharply higher with the March contract up 1.35 cents to settle at 44.67 cents a gallon.
Still, as reported in this newspaper Wednesday, the harsh U.S. winter is shrinking world oil inventories and helping to end the oil glut, at least temporarily.
"The fundamentals are beginning to look more constructive," said Shahrokh Nikkhah, executive vice president of Refco Inc., "but there is still a very negative political climate in OPEC."
Others also expressed doubt that the fractious Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries will be able to agree to cut production by enough in the spring, when demand weakens seasonally, to firm up weak oil markets.
"We are hearing a lot of statements from the oil ministers about the second quarter, but it's just bullish rhetoric," said Thomas Blakeslee, an oil analyst with Cameron Hanover Inc.
"I'm still bearish," he said.
LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Cattle futures prices surged on indications of growing demand for red meat.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, cattle for April delivery was up .80 cent to 76.37 cents a pound.
The market was responding to news that on Wednesday, 360 boxcars of boxed beef were sold on the wholesale market, said Dan Vaught, livestock analyst for A.G. Edwards & Sons, St. Louis.
It was the best single-day movement of beef on the wholesale market since September.
"That tells us retailers are finally doing some buying," Mr. Vaught said, despite the fact that February is traditionally a time of sluggish wholesale demand for beef.
The Merc's futures market has also received support from strength on the cash market for beef, which has seen prices rise to 74.5 cents a pound from 71.5 cents a pound last week.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Rising domestic use of soybean byproducts helped to push soybean futures prices higher.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, soybeans for May delivery were up 1.25 cents to $6.8925 a bushel.
Soybeans are crushed to produce the byproducts of soybean meal and soybean oil.
Early yesterday, a monthly crush report for January showed domestic use of soybean meal to be at its highest levels ever, while domestic use of soybean oil posted its second-strongest monthly total, said Daniel W. Basse, market research director for AgResource Co., Chicago.
Meanwhile, adding support to the market was a report that China unexpectedly bought 60,000 tons of U.S. soybeans.
