Food Lion Inc. is again the subject of allegations of violating state food and safety regulations by a trade-union group.
Consumers United with Employees, a coalition of trade union and religious organizations, said in a report Thursday that the Salisbury, N.C., grocery chain stocks out-of-date infant formula on its shelves.
The Washington, D.C. union group reviewed state inspection records from 1989 to January 1994 and said 212 Food Lion stores in Georgia, North Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia had been cited for stocking infant formula that was, on average, a month out-of-date.
C.U.E. said state agencies pulled 3,549 cans off store shelves during that period.
Tom E. Smith, Food Lion's president and chief executive officer, said the report was part of the United Food and Commercial Workers Union's "ongoing corporate campaign to discredit Food Lion's reputation."
Food Lion spokesman Mike Mozingo said company policy is to remove expired products from shelves promptly.
But he concedes, "with 1,100 stores in 14 states, you'll occasionally miss a can or two."
Mr. Smith said Food Lion would investigate C.U.E.'s allegations immediately and take whatever steps are necessary to change the situation.
A U.S. Food and Drug Administration spokesman said outdated baby formula doesn't pose a health hazard but that the agency would look into the allegations.
A spokeswoman for the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, said inspectors are required to remove and discard containers of old formula when they are found during an inspection.
But she said that when a supermarket is graded for its safety record, the state considers its overall performance.
She noted that in Virginia, Food Lion's overall compliance rate with state-inspection requirements is among the highest in the state.
Since November 1992, Food Lion, a unit of Delhaize Le Lion SA of Belgium, has been dogged by allegations that its stores aren't sanitary.
The controversy began after "Prime-Time Live," an ABC newsmagazine, claimed Food Lion misled shoppers about the freshness of its meat and fish.
At the time, Food Lion denied the allegations and said the UFCW was behind the report.
