Tonight on CNN's "Larry King Live," the first of a long anticipated series of ads for Volkswagen's Golf and Jetta models is scheduled to air.
Both the automobile manufacturer and its fledgling New York ad agency, Berlin Wright Cameron, have their futures riding on the results.
For Volkswagen AG, it is perhaps the final chance to recapture the American driver, whose affections the German car maker had won throughout the 1960s with the seemingly ubiquitous Beetle.
In the cutthroat competition among compact cars in the 1970s and 1980s, Volkswagen lost the battle to Japanese rivals.
Its reputation for safety took a drubbing from critics.
It resisted putting air bags in cars, while other manufacturers hurried to install them.
And it recorded a dismal sales performance last year, largely because of production and quality problems at its plant in Puebla, Mexico.
For Berlin Wright Cameron, the spinoff agency created last year from Omnicom Group's DDB Needham, it is a critical opportunity to prove itself as a creative force on Madison Avenue and as a valuable marketing partner to Volkswagen, its biggest and most important client.
Giving Volkswagen a jump-start won't be easy.
"Volkswagen didn't keep up with what Americans wanted," says John Rettie, an analyst with J.D. Power & Associates and the editor of the California Report, a monthly newsletter on marketing.
Indeed, sales of the Golf fell 49.9% last year to only 4,693 and dropped 51.2% to 14,583 for the Jetta, according to data supplied by Jacobs Associates in Rutherford, N.J.
Sales picked up in the fourth quarter once problems in the Mexican plant were resolved.
In June, only 97 Golfs were sold.
But by December, 811 vehicles moved out of showrooms.
That dramatic boost, say auto analysts, is evidence that Volkswagen is poised for a comeback.
"Volkswagen has to communicate directly to consumers and get people to shop them," says Susan Jacobs, an analyst with Jacobs Associates, an automotive forecasting and consulting firm.
"Volkswagen doesn't have" high awareness among consumers, she says.
But Mr. Rettie says there is "latent" awareness of Volkswagen among consumers.
Tapping into those memories is one reason Volkswagen is spending upward of $100 million in an unprecedented ad blitz.
The series of 11 commercials, which includes 15-second and half-minute spots, discusses the vehicles' mechanical and safety features in ways that try to be humorous.
While the new ads strive to be clever, they don't match some of Volkswagen's best ads from the 1960s, produced by Doyle Dane Bernbach, such as one showing a Beetle being easily driven after a blizzard to illustrate how the man who drives the snow plow gets to the snow plow.
In a new commercial for the Golf, a knight in shining armor walks head-on toward the camera.
"Any car with air bags will help protect you in a head-on collision," says the voiceover, which is supplied by Kyle MacLachlan, the star of "Twin Peaks," ABC's quirky series from a few years ago.
The new Golf has "air bags, crumble beams and side impact beams, so it can help protect you from any angle, including this one."
As the ad ends, the knight is walking away from the camera, revealing only his front is protected.
His other vertical half shows he is wearing nothing but underwear.
Another commercial is shown from the point of view of a bug on a rural highway.
"To you, the new Golf may not look more areo-dynamic than a Porsche 928," the voiceover begins as one car quickly passes.
"But then, you're not a bug."
Splat, the bug hits the windshield.
"The challenge on doing new Volkswagen advertising," says Andy Berlin, chairman and chief executive officer of Berlin Wright, "is to come up with hard, clear product-focused ads that give car buyers the kind of information they need to make an intelligent choice.
And to compete with the legacy of some of the best advertising ever done."
(Mr. Berlin is the voiceover for each Jetta ad.)
Omitted from the commercials is the slogan that ended each Volkswagen spots recently: "The most loved cars in the world."
"That was meant to build brand awareness that we are alive and well," says Andrew Bergstrom, a Volkswagen advertising executive.
"This next phase is to build interest and awareness in the specific cars," which sell for $11,000 to $16,000 and compete with everything from the Honda Accord to Chrysler's new Neon.
Mr. Bergstrom acknowledges that Volkswagen hasn't been a major presence on broadcast network television lately, but that is changing this week.
It heavily bought such hip shows as "Late Show with David Letterman" on CBS and "Seinfeld" on General Electric's NBC.
It will also be seen on cable networks, including MTV and VH-1. Volkswagen has set an audacious goal for itself of more than doubling its 1993 U.S. sales.
Ulrich Seiffert, the company's head of world-wide research, said recently that Volkswagen is seeking to sell 250,000 vehicles in the U.S., and it needed to reclaim its image for selling "honest, reliable, affordable cars."
That is quite a challenge not only for Volkswagen, but for its advertising messenger Berlin Wright.
The 40-member agency, housed in temporary offices on 38th Street in Manhattan, far from DDB Needham's headquarters on tony Madison Avenue, was born initially to concentrate on Volkswagen.
Its leader, Mr. Berlin, was president of Needham's New York office and one of the founders of the respected San Francisco agency Goodby Berlin Silverstein.
Some ad executives have speculated that Mr. Berlin was shoved aside at DDB Needham, but he and officials at DDB Needham deny such rumors.
If Volkswagen doesn't see improved sales results and blames the agency, Berlin Wright could be dealt a near-fatal blow.
The agency does have other clients, none of them nearly as big as Volkswagen, however.
They include the New Yorker, Viacom's MTV Networks, the Washington Post and H.J. Heinz's Weight Watchers frozen foods.
"Volkswagen is a very pleasant car to drive," says Mr. Rettie of J.D. Power.
"It has a perfect opportunity to succeed.
It has to break through the clutter and get its name back on people's shopping list."
Sterling Winthrop Inc., a unit of Eastman Kodak Co., tapped Omnicom Group's BBDO to handle its advertising for Bayer aspirin, Bayer Select aspirin-free analgesics and Bayer Select Cold & Flu products.
The move came following a review, which included the incumbent agency Ayer.
Billings were estimated at approximately $50 million.
Steven G. Staves, president of Sterling Health USA, said in a statement that it "was not an easy decision to leave {Ayer}.
We greatly appreciate the strong creative and highly effective execution which Ayer demonstrated in handling {Bayer} during the past two years."
The selection of BBDO follows a move last year to consolidate Pan-European ad vertising for the company's Panadol anal gesics with AMV BBDO of London.
Ad Notes. . . .
PEPSI SPOT: PepsiCo's Pepsi-Cola Co. said it has started airing globally the mystery "chimp" spot that also was set to run Sunday during the Super Bowl broadcast.
It's an "anthropological" test, comparing the effects of drinking Coke on one chimp with those of Pepsi on another.
After six weeks, the Coke chimp shows "improvement in motor skills;" the Pepsi chimp has disappeared -- but he phones in from his beach buggy, surrounded by bikini-clad babes.
GREY: Grey Advertising, New York, named John Shannon, chairman and chief executive of its offices in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, to the new post of president, Grey International.
Mr. Shannon, age 56, retains his current titles "for the present," Grey said.
