Warning to penitents: Anything you say to a clergyman can -- and sometimes will -- be used against you in court.
That's the message of a growing number of legal cases in which prosecutors are breaching the wall of secrecy that has surrounded the confessional since medieval times.
The historic change in direction appears to reflect both heightened public interest in punishing criminals and an erosion of the traditional deference accorded religious activity.
Take the Morristown, N.J., murder trial of Craig Szemple.
Two years ago, after the prosecution had already rested its case against Mr. Szemple, a jailhouse minister came forward with the claim that the defendant had confessed to him.
The minister, Paul Bischoff, said he wanted to take the stand against the accused, who had pleaded not guilty to the charges and had claimed he'd been framed.
At first, prosecutors in the case weren't at all sure the minister's testimony could be admitted in court.
But after looking into the state's rule on the so-called clergy-penitent privilege, they concluded that while a minister couldn't be compelled to testify, he apparently could do so voluntarily.
The penitent seemed to have no say in the matter.
The trial judge agreed with the prosecutors' analysis of the rule, and Mr. Bischoff was permitted to testify.
Mr. Szemple's attorney, George T. Daggett, says he believes the case was headed for an acquittal before the minister became involved.
Because of the last-minute evidence, a mistrial was declared before the jury began deliberating, and Mr. Szemple remains in jail awaiting a retrial.
Mr. Bischoff "may have thought he was saving my client's soul, but he was cooking his goose," says Mr. Daggett.
(Mr. Bischoff, minister of visitation for the Trinity Baptist Church in Montville, N.J., declined to comment.)
An intermediate state appeals court last year rejected Mr. Szemple's appeal, and the case is now pending before the state Supreme Court, where a decision is expected soon.
If he loses, Mr. Szemple could be tried again for the 1977 murder of a boyhood friend, the case in which Mr. Bischoff testified.
The minister could also testify in trials for two other murders to which he says Mr. Szemple confessed.
Mr. Szemple denies he confessed anything to the minister, who visited him in jail at least 19 times.
The Szemple appeal comes at a time when courts around the country have begun to take a narrower view of the clergy-penitent privilege.
Nine states -- Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, Vermont, Virginia and Wyoming -- already permit the privilege to be broken by a clergyman without the permission of the worshiper.
And many other states are finding a variety of reasons not to let the privilege apply in particular instances.
Meanwhile, many states are giving significant deference to a relatively new source of solace: the psychotherapist-patient relationship.
If Mr. Szemple had confessed to a therapist, New Jersey prosecutors say, they wouldn't have been able to use the evidence against him: The therapist privilege in New Jersey allows the patient to block such disclosure.
Religious-rights groups and civil-liberties lawyers decry the trend, arguing that putting ministers on the witness stand undermines the sanctity that worshipers expect in their spiritual communications.
"It's getting to the point where people feel they need a Miranda-like warning before they talk to their pastor or rabbi," says Anne-Marie Amiel, an attorney with the Rutherford Institute, which defends religious-rights cases.
Most states still give worshipers some protection in communications with members of the clergy, though seldom as much as attaches to attorney-client, doctor-patient or spouse-to-spouse communications.
Even in those states, courts have found that information given to a minister can be used in court if the worshiper wasn't seeking forgiveness or didn't act to keep the matter secret.
The secrecy concern was addressed in the case of John List, who was arrested in 1989 for the 1971 murder of five of his family members.
Mr. List claimed the privilege should apply to a written confession addressed to his pastor that was left at the scene of the massacre.
But a mid-level appeals court, also in New Jersey, upheld Mr. List's conviction last year, ruling that the confession letter could be admitted as evidence because Mr. List couldn't have expected it to remain confidential.
Expectation-of-privacy was also at issue in a 1992 case in which a Mormon bishop was required to answer questions concerning a parishioner who had killed a nurse.
Before the attack, the assailant's wife had called the bishop and spoken to him about her husband.
The Mormon church argued that such private discussions are protected, but the trial judge said the privilege was waived because the wife had also called a 911 operator about her husband.
The privilege issues are particularly sensitive right now, lawyers say, because of strong public support for tough measures against crime.
Prosecutors argue that privileges unfairly restrict the use of important evidence and testimony that could lead to convictions.
In the New Jersey murder trial, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a brief arguing that Mr. Szemple's right to worship had been violated.
"Most people when they go to their religious advisers assume that what they say will stay there," says Ronald Chen, a Rutgers University law professor representing the ACLU.
"Anyone -- and you don't have to be an accused serial killer to feel this way -- who has something they aren't proud of would be reluctant to tell their minister about it."
Mr. Szemple's lawyer, Mr. Daggett, who years ago studied to be a priest, says he was shocked that any minister would testify about a confidential matter.
"The privilege is meant to allow people to come forward and get some relief by confessing.
We encourage people to make peace with God," says Mr. Daggett, adding that some defense lawyers in New Jersey now warn their clients against talking to jailhouse ministers.
The Morris County, N.J., prosecutors handling the case say Mr. Szemple's supporters are exaggerating the impact the case will have on religious freedom.
"I'd be uncomfortable sending investigators out to symbolically knock on confession-booth doors," says County Prosecutor W. Michael Murphy Jr.
"But we felt duty bound to use the evidence . . . .
I wouldn't do it in a case that had less significance, a case over bad checks, for instance.
But here we had a case involving someone charged with three murders."
Some lawyers say the balancing of religious concerns against the need for evidence at trial is tilting in favor of prosecutors these days.
The most common compromises of the clergy privilege involve cases of suspected child abuse.
Many states require that instances of possible child abuse be reported even by pastors, who may learn of such abuse in confidential dealings with churchgoers.
"Privileges are real obstacles to searching out the truth" at trial, says Michael M. Sharlot, a University of Texas law school professor.
"Whether people would not seek the succor of the clergy if the privilege were cut back is dubious to me."
Federal and state prosecutors said they have dropped their investigation into assertions that Republicans used campaign money to suppress black votes in New Jersey's gubernatorial election last November.
The announcement, by U.S. Attorney Michael Chertoff in Newark, effectively douses the political brushfire ignited after the victory of Gov.-elect Christie Todd Whitman over Democratic incumbent Jim Florio last November.
Mrs. Whitman's campaign manager, Edward J. Rollins, started the controversy after the election by telling reporters that the campaign had donated money to black ministers' favorite charities in return for their pledges not to urge their congregations to vote for Gov. Florio.
Mr. Rollins also asserted that so-called walking-around money was used to persuade Democratic Election Day workers to stay at home and watch television.
But on Wednesday, Mr. Chertoff and two former state attorneys general said their investigation found no evidence to support these assertions, which Mr. Rollins has since retracted.
Prosecutors said they were at a loss to conclude what led Mr. Rollins to make the claim.
"I'm not in the business of psychoanalyzing people," said Mr. Chertoff.
In a 14-page report, investigators said they interviewed 62 individuals, including Mr. Rollins, combed through 5,500 pages of financial records and examined campaign memoranda, correspondence, telephone records, appointment books and computer files.
Three dozen FBI and state investigators shared information and independently reached the same conclusion.
At a news conference, Mrs. Whitman, the first woman elected governor in New Jersey, said she had been confident from the beginning that "nothing was there" and added that she was pleased the matter could be put to rest before her inauguration next Tuesday.
Mr. Rollins declined to speak to reporters.
In a statement, he apologized again to Mrs. Whitman and the black community and clergy in New Jersey.
State Democrats who sued to overturn the election results after Mr. Rollins' comments dropped the case in November.
Neither they nor their lawyers returned phone calls yesterday.
Milo Geyelin contributed to this article.
