Gun show promoters can be sued by shooting victims if the firearms involved were stolen because of poor security, an Ohio state appeal court has ruled.
The decision, handed down earlier this week, is the latest in a series of court rulings stressing gun merchants' responsibility to ensure that firearms don't fall into the wrong hands.
More significantly, said gun-control legal experts, the reasoning in the decision could be applied to gun stores and even to private individuals, requiring them to take stronger security measures against gun theft or face lawsuits from shooting victims.
"To my knowledge this is the first court decision to impose a duty on gun sellers to use adequate security to prevent theft," said Dennis Henigan, director of legal action projects at the Center to Prevent Handgun Violence, a Washington, D.C. advocacy group.
"The important principle to recognize here is that gun dealers and gun owners can no longer disclaim responsibility for violence because someone else pulled the trigger. . . .
They may well be held accountable."
The case involved four teenagers who attended a gun show in the Canton, Ohio, Civic Center in January 1992.
The boys stole four handguns and bought a box of high-powered bullets.
In describing the thefts later, one of the youths said the guns were "just laying around" and we "just picked them up and walked away with them."
According to the opinion by the Ohio Fifth Appellate District Court in Canton, the boys stole a car the next day and went on a joy ride that culminated with the shooting of two men, leaving one paralyzed from the waist down.
Both men sued the show's promoter, Niles Gun Show Inc., in Niles, Ohio, for negligence and willful and wanton misconduct.
Ohio law holds that business owners cannot be sued over criminal acts committed on their property by third parties, according to James F. Mathews, an attorney for Niles Gun.
He noted that crime isn't considered to be a foreseeable act in Ohio, and that in this case the shooting didn't even occur on his client's premises.
While the three-member appeal panel did not explicitly overturn the law, it chipped away at it by finding that a jury should be allowed to decide whether Niles Gun is liable.
"In view of today's society, reasonable minds certainly could conclude that unsecured firearms present an attractive if not irresistible lure to children," the appeals court wrote.
The decision, which also exposes Niles Gun to potential punitive damages, overturned a lower court ruling dismissing the case.
Ralph F. Dublikar, another attorney for Niles Gun, said the decision ignores "a large body of Ohio law" and would be appealed to the state's high court.
The National Rifle Association and other gun groups are monitoring the case, he added.
An NRA spokesman declined comment, saying the organization hadn't yet seen the decision.
Another gun organization reacted favorably to the ruling, however.
"People do have a duty of care; the question is what's reasonable," said Richard Feldman, executive director of the American Shooting Sports Council, an industry group in Atlanta.
"I don't see it as being any different from leaving keys in your car with the motor running in a school yard.
One isn't taking reasonable precautions under that set of circumstances."
Gun shows are extremely popular in the U.S. but difficult to police, said Mr. Henigan, of the Center to Prevent Handgun Violence.
In its decision, the appeals court cited strong criticism from Kentucky gun show promoter Bill Goodman.
In a sworn statement, Mr. Goodman maintained that at his shows he has security guards make sure minors aren't admitted without adults and that guns are either tied down or secured in display cases.
Allan Schulman, Jr., who represented the plaintiffs in the case, said the ruling reflects a growing willingness by courts to hold gun dealers responsible for ensuring that minors, convicted felons and fugitives can't get guns.
(Pavlides vs. Niles Gun Show Inc., Court of Appeals, Canton, Ohio, CA 9443)
The Resolution Trust Corp. sued the law firm of Streich Lang alleging that the Phoenix firm was part of a scheme designed to conceal the poor financial condition of the now-failed Western Savings & Loan Association.
The RTC, after trying for two years to reach a settlement with Streich Lang, filed a lawsuit in federal district court in Phoenix, seeking $400 million in compensation for losses that the agency contends the law firm was responsible for.
The sum would be part of $1.3 billion that the government's savings-and-loan cleanup agency has been seeking from a wide range of defendants in a racketeering and fraud action.
The defendants include Gary Driggs and John Driggs, Western's president and chairman, respectively; other Western officers and directors; and the accounting firm Deloitte & Touche.
That 1992 action was one of the largest filed by the RTC, and the government's losses of $2.7 billion at Phoenix-based Western make it one of the costliest S&L insolvencies.
Last month, Gary Driggs and Timothy Wright, a former Western executive in charge of real-estate loans, were indicted by a grand jury on fraud and other criminal charges related to the RTC lawsuit under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law and Western's collapse in 1989.
The grand jury charged Mr. Driggs with 25 counts, including financial-institution fraud, conspiracy, wire fraud, misapplication of funds and lying to regulatory agencies.
The RTC's Streich Lang suit charges that the firm advanced Gary Driggs's interests in closing sham transactions that were contrary to Western's interests.
In the 1992 RICO lawsuit, the RTC contended that Mr. Driggs engineered a series of sham real-estate and securities deals to conceal Western's poor financial shape.
Yesterday, the RTC alleged that Streich Lang was negligent, breached fiduciary duties owed to Western, and aided Gary Driggs and others in breaching their duties to Western.
It contended that the law firm backdated opinion letters and filed reports with federal agencies that it knew, or should have known, were false.
Yesterday's suit was also filed against Thomas Lang, who was the Streich Lang partner in charge of representing Western S&L, and against 47 other stockholders in the firm and their 35 spouses.
Preston Steenhoeck, managing director of Streich Lang, said the allegations were similar to those filed by the RTC in 1992 against other lawyers, accountants and professionals in connection with the thrift, and said the new suit wouldn't affect the firm's ability to serve its clients.
The RTC said that Streich Lang acted as Western's general counsel, advised the thrift on regulatory and securities matters, and represented it in most of its major loan and real-estate transactions.
Streich Lang was deeply involved in deals such as "swirls," in which Western real estate was supposedly sold at artificially inflated prices, though the transactions were really financed entirely by Western, the RTC alleged.
These were part of a series of maneuvers aimed at creating the false appearance that Western was trimming excessive investments, reaping big profits or at least avoiding losses and boosting its capital, the RTC said.
Some Streich Lang partners personally profited at Western's expense in one such deal, in which they bought, leased back and later resold property to Western at a substantial profit, with no benefit to the thrift, the RTC suit charged.
Former Goldman, Sachs & Co. personnel executive Joanne Flynn has dropped the appeal of her sex discrimination suit against the investment bank.
In November, federal district court Judge Kimba L. Wood in New York threw out a jury verdict in Ms. Flynn's favor after a 10-day trial.
Steven Hyman, Ms. Flynn's attorney, said she believed the appeal would be successful but that the cost and prospect of a new trial had influenced her decision.
"She wants to go forward with her life," Mr. Hyman said.
Goldman Sachs said it made no payment to Ms. Flynn in connection with the termination of the case but declined further comment.
NOTED: An attorney for a World Trade Center bombing defendant acknowledged for the first time the existence of a conspiracy to destroy a "building in the United States," but said that his client, Mohammad Salameh, had been duped into participating.
The attorney, Robert Precht, said in his closing arguments that the "evil . . . genius" behind the plot was Ramzi Yousef, who is also charged in the Feb. 26, 1993, attack.
Mr. Yousef has since fled the country and isn't on trial.
The case is expected to go to the jury next week.
Albert R. Karr and Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
