Talks aimed at salvaging the troubled Euro Disney SCA theme park have run into an unexpected obstacle even before they start: angry French bondholders, who are demanding representation at the negotiations and want Walt Disney Co. to come to their rescue.
Such demands would normally get short shrift in France, where small investors rarely have enough clout to defend their interests.
But because of an odd discrepancy in the terms attached to an issue of Euro Disney bonds, bankers familiar with the situation say the holders in this case pose a particularly complex legal problem that could hamper the restructuring talks.
At the same time, credit-rating agencies and analysts have been examining the exposure of key banks involved in Euro Disney lending.
While the risks generally seem well spread, they are concluding that some French banks, in particular recently privatized Banque Nationale de Paris, could face embarrassing losses.
The discrepancy concerns four billion French francs ($676.4 million) of convertible bonds issued in July 1991.
The English-language text of the prospectus that was used for its launch in the London market stipulates that the terms can only be changed if there is unanimity of the holders.
The French text, however, says that only a majority of holders is needed.
The difference reflects the lack of consistency in European issuing practices.
But unless the bondholders can somehow be left out of the restructuring altogether, which seems unlikely, the dissimilar language could become a legal quagmire, some fear.
"Dealing with the bondholders could be very problematic," admits an official at one big creditor bank involved in the negotiations.
He adds that the restructuring itself promises to be anything but easy, not least because of the high stakes involved and the relatively short time in which the problems have to be resolved.
Euro Disney's 60 creditor banks are scheduled to receive tomorrow a preliminary report from auditors KPMG Peat Marwick assessing both the resort's financial situation and its revamped business strategy.
Formal negotiations with both Euro Disney and Walt Disney are expected to start a few days later, once the banks have agreed on their tactics.
Euro Disney's future viability depends on an agreement between the parties to reduce its 21 billion francs in debt, probably by at least 50%, through an expected mixture of debt write-downs and an injection of fresh capital.
At the moment, the park's revenue is more than eaten up by high interest charges, which amounted to about 1.7 billion francs in the last fiscal year, ended Sept. 30.
Walt Disney, which owns 49% of Euro Disney SCA, the European operating company for the park, has said it is only prepared to continue funding the resort to the end of March.
The bondholders are represented by a French association headed by Colette Neuville, an activist who often campaigns for the rights of minority holders.
A legal report for the bondholders issued yesterday pressed for them to be represented at the talks, and Georges Berlioz, the lawyer who drafted the report, threatened legal action if they were excluded.
"If we are not invited, we will litigate our way in," Mr. Berlioz said in a telephone interview.
On one crucial point, Mr. Berlioz's report echoed demands made by the creditor banks themselves, namely that Walt Disney should carry much of the burden for an eventual restructuring.
Under Euro Disney's complex financial structure, involving a web of shareholdings and cross-holdings, Walt Disney largely limited its direct financial responsibility for the project.
For example, most of the resort's debt isn't owed directly by Euro Disney to the creditor banks, but via a number of finance companies that own the park and its six hotels -- and with which Euro Disney has no direct shareholder links.
While Walt Disney thus has only limited, legally enforceable ties to the resort, the bondholders and the banks insist that it nonetheless remains responsible.
Creditor bankers, in the words of one senior official "want an asymmetrical sharing of the pain" -- with Walt Disney bearing the brunt.
The U.S. company has avoided making public comments on the restructuring talks, and a spokesman wasn't available to comment on specific issues relating either to the bondholders or to a possible sharing of the restructuring burden.
Given the complexities of the talks, banking analysts and credit-rating agencies have been taking a close look at the risks to creditors, especially in the event that talks fail and Euro Disney closes -- the still unlikely worst-case scenario.
French banks account for about 50% of Euro Disney's 14 billion francs in bank debt.
By far the biggest creditor is France's state-owned Caisse des Depots & Consignations, which has outstanding loans in excess of 4 billion francs.
The organization, however, is the government's financing arm, and thus isn't usually scrutinized like other commercial banks.
Of the other lenders, rating agencies identify four main creditors: Banque Nationale de Paris, Credit Agricole, Banque Indosuez and the Banques Populaires group.
Although the banks aren't divulging the extent of their loans, analysts say their exposure ranges between about 500 million francs and one billion francs each.
Behind this group, with a substantially smaller exposure, come several Japanese, British and German banks.
And at least two U.S. banks -- Citicorp's Citibank unit and J.P. Morgan & Co. -- also have outstanding loans.
The banks all declined official comment.
"Obviously we are concerned," says Samuel S. Theodore, vice president of rating agency Moody's France SA, "but for most of the banks we don't feel that this exposure itself is going to be a rating event."
Adds Scott Bugie, an analyst at Standard and Poor's Corp. in Paris: "The risk is well spread.
It's not going to bring any bank down."
Nonetheless, the risk of substantial losses for the main French banks involved is causing some concern.
In particular, analysts say, a possible failure of Euro Disney would be severely embarrassing for Banque Nationale de Paris, which was privatized by the French government late last year.
Just this month, Moody's placed BNP under review for a possible downgrading, for reasons not connected to Euro Disney.
Analysts believe the bank hasn't yet made any provisions for possible Euro Disney losses.
BNP officials say privately that Chairman Michel Pebereau is concerned not to allow Euro Disney to drag down earnings so soon after privatization.
