Northrop Corp. made a little history this month when it launched an unfriendly bid to acquire Grumman Corp.
Now it's Northrop that looks increasingly valuable as a takeover target, say Wall Street analysts who envision two ways to win with this stock.
One way for investors to profit is if some company buys Northrop.
But even if nobody tries to acquire the big maker of the B-2 Stealth bomber, bulls say, all the attention is likely to stir new investor interest in Northrop's strategy for cashing out of the dwindling defense trade.
Speculators, of course, have been clambering in and out of Northrop shares ever since the company's surprise $60-a-share offer a week ago for Grumman, a Bethpage, N.Y., defense-electronics company with a strong base in Navy-aircraft engineering.
Northrop's offer topped a friendly $55-a-share Grumman bid by Martin Marietta Corp.
Some suggest Martin Marietta, a fast-growing defense and space giant, could on its own or in league with other big military contractors try a takeover of Northrop.
Martin Marietta, Bethesda, Md., isn't talking about its plans.
On Thursday and Friday more than 1.8 million Northrop shares changed hands, nine times the average two-day volume for the stock.
The stock jumped $1 Thursday to close at $44.75 after Northrop Chairman Kent Kresa noted publicly he'd consider offers to buy his own company.
But Friday the stock fell back $1 after the company said he was merely referring to his fiduciary duties and doesn't really want to sell out.
No matter.
Northrop looks for the moment to be a company in play.
Interest is on the rise among investment bankers and competitors who figure "if there was a time to look at Northrop, it certainly is now," says PaineWebber Inc. analyst Jack Modzelewski.
Indeed, according to one executive familiar with the developments, other companies have been in touch with Martin Marietta to suggest that if the company "decides to go after Northrop, keep us in mind."
Among Northrop's diverse segments, there seems to be little for Martin Marietta to covet beyond a modest business making electronic-countermeasure devices that allow fighter pilots to jam enemy radar.
But analysts say there would be booty aplenty for other big players in the industry.
While those players aren't talking publicly about their plans, nobody can stop Wall Street from speculating.
Northrop's expertise in making radar-eluding planes -- including a franchise making and supporting the B-2, which defense-merger experts say could fetch $2 billion -- might have particular appeal for buyers such as McDonnell Douglas Corp.
McDonnell already employs Northrop to build 40% of the Navy's mainstay F/A-18 attack jet.
The two companies, as recently reported, have talked in the recent past of their merger potential, although the idea later was shelved.
Boeing Co. flirted briefly with merger prospects in informal talks with Mr. Kresa early last year, according to people familiar with the companies.
But the notion was abandoned, they add.
Boeing is a major Northrop partner on the B-2 and still sees itself as a future leader in military airplanes.
Northrop also holds $600 million in contracts to supply Boeing with the main fuselage "barrels" for the Seattle company's 747 jumbo jetliners.
Boeing, with a large amount of idle manufacturing capacity and a desire to cut costs, may want to take that business back.
Boeing also could have an eye on Northrop's half-interest in Texas-based Vought Aircraft Co., a big Boeing supplier.
Northrop can take over that company completely for $175 million or so, by exercising a purchase option with partner Carlyle Group beginning in August 1995.
Lockheed Corp., already a stronghold of talent in Stealth technologies, could find many synergies in Northrop holdings.
So might Rockwell International Corp., analysts say.
For all of Wall Street's interest in carving up Northrop, though, it isn't clear that Martin Marietta or the others are up for a series of takeover battles that might only serve to drive up corporate debt and defense-goods prices and agitate Congress.
Martin Marietta Chairman Norman Augustine, who is busy early this week with a long-scheduled management retreat, may just decide to walk away from a costly, unseemly fight for Grumman, some believe.
The Grumman pre-eminence in defense electronics could serve Martin Marietta well.
But Mr. Augustine and others would still have the option of trying to swallow up a combined Northrop/Grumman a year or so from now.
Northrop, however, would have time and a legitimate chance to shave acquisition debt and make the most of financial synergies in the combined company.
Northrop's decision to leap into the spotlight with a hostile takeover bid has highlighted Northrop's shrinking outlook for later in the decade, and it has risked presenting the company itself as prey.
But the company also gets a new audience of investors, a chance to show off strong profits ahead in the nearer term and heightened interest in its potential for growth through acquisition.
"They certainly have called attention to themselves," says Jerry Cantwell of Lionheart Research in New York.
He notes that regardless of the long-term outlook for Northrop, the company has been sharply cutting costs, is nearly debt-free and seems likely to show ever-increasing earnings despite at least an 18% revenue drop over four years.
The current stock price of $43.75 is less than 10 times expected 1994 earnings of $4.65 a share, he says.
"Even at $43, this stock is cheap."
It's difficult to put a breakup value on Northrop, analysts say.
Prices as high as $50 to $60 a share have been bandied about on the Street by analysts and investment bankers.
But there's much uncertainty about how to value top-secret programs such as the B-2, not to mention any Northrop deferred tax obligations and the issue of whether the company might do a big stock buyback in the months or years ahead.
Buying Grumman would boost Northrop revenue to more than $7 billion next year.
Mr. Cantwell is among those who believe that even if Northrop ended up paying a higher, $65 a share to win Grumman, the combined companies' earnings could hit $6.01 in 1996 and $7.20 a share in 1998.
By the latter year, a 100%-owned Vought Aircraft could be contributing $1.05 a share to Northrop's annual earnings.
Unexpected setbacks along the path, like further harsh cuts in defense spending, could damp such happy expectations for Northrop, even if it hasn't been broken up and sold off by then.
In composite trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange, Grumman closed at $64.75, up 50 cents.
"Northrop is more attractive without Grumman," contends PaineWebber's Mr. Modzelewski, especially because Northrop is already being judged "on a component basis" for breakup value.
In this environment, he says, long-term horizons mean little to investors in Northrop or other defense stocks.
Values are projected week-to-week, even day-to-day, he adds, and while they aren't yet being judged by the hour, "we may get into that mode."
Year ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Sales: $5.06 billion
Net income: $96 million; $1.99 a share
Fourth quarter, Dec. 31, 1993:
Net loss: 73 cents a share vs. net income: $1.17 a share
Common shares outstanding: 48.9 million
