CLINTON PLEDGED to push legislation on crime and welfare reform.
In his State of the Union address, the president said he would give those two issues near-equal billing with his top priority, health-care reform.
He also issued his first veto threat, saying he would kill any health-care bill that doesn't provide coverage for every American.
The speech was a marked departure for Clinton, who has focused on economic issues, particularly reducing the deficit and expanding trade.
Last night, in effect, he declared victory on the economic front and prepared to move on.
The president signaled that he wants to set a new, socially conscious tone for his administration.
He spoke of the need for family values and vowed to press for an end to violence on the streets.
The president will request an additional $6.6 billion for earthquake-hit California.
Clinton will ask Congress to approve the emergency federal assistance for Southern California, on top of $900 million already released from contingency funds, White House Budget Director Panetta announced.
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin unveiled a Russian farm subsidy program that could cost hundreds of millions of dollars in the next few years, the Interfax news agency said.
Separately, the head of the House foreign affairs panel, Hamilton, warned the Clinton administration he may oppose further Moscow aid unless it curbs inflation.
Mexico's president flew to the southern state of Chiapas for his first visit since a Jan. 1 uprising by guerrillas seeking improved social conditions.
Salinas told representatives of 280 indigenous groups he would work for peace and economic reforms.
The Energy Department is conducting more than 200 radiation experiments involving humans but is following strict ethical procedures and obtaining proper consent, according to Energy Secretary O'Leary.
She said Clinton soon will direct all federal agencies to immediately halt any experiments where consent might be in question.
France renewed its plea for diplomatic action to persuade Bosnia's factions to accept a negotiated settlement, despite an apparent rebuff by the U.S.
At the U.N., Russia called for an urgent Security Council meeting.
U.N. observers were trying to reach a Muslim village, Here, to investigate reports of a massacre by Croats.
Agriculture Secretary Espy is expected to announce food-safety proposals today that call for a tougher meat-inspection system that relies more on scientific testing and less on visual examination of beef.
Aides said he would outline plans for changing the inspection system at all levels.
Pop star Michael Jackson settled a lawsuit that said he molested a young boy.
Terms of the settlement, in which Jackson didn't admit guilt, are confidential, attorneys for both sides said in Santa Monica, Calif.
Various reports said the settlement in the suit, filed in September against the 35-year-old singer, was at least $10 million.
An Israeli delegation arrived in Cairo for an unexpected resumption of negotiations with PLO officials about plans for implementing Palestinian self-rule.
Separately, Lebanon's prime minister said an Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon was a precondition for peace in the area.
A white-collar criminal can't avoid jail just because his incarceration would destroy his business and put people out of work, a U.S. appeals court has ruled.
The ruling overturns a decision by a Pittsburgh judge last year to put a businessman on probation, rather than imprison him, for mail fraud and false tax filings.
Opposition lawmakers agreed to meet today with members of Japan's ruling coalition in an effort to end a stalemate over political reform.
However, the meeting isn't expected to be conclusive.
Prime Minister Hosokawa is struggling to turn his proposed reforms into law before parliament's current session ends Saturday.
Time is running out for North Korea to follow through on its promise to allow nuclear inspections, a Clinton administration official said.
With a meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency scheduled for next month, the U.S. already is making plans to seek U.N. sanctions if Pyongyang-IAEA talks remain deadlocked, he said.
