In the early 1970s, Bruce Bastian was director of the Brigham Young University marching band and Alan Ashton was a computer-science professor who gave him advice on writing a program to show the effects of different choreography.
A few years later the two men formed their own company, and it began growing dramatically after they invented a bestselling word-processing program.
On Monday they accepted a deal worth about $600 million to each of them.
Novell Inc. agreed to pay $1.4 billion in stock for their company, WordPerfect Corp.
Such a fantastic tale -- a start-up company becoming a giant player and making its owners near-billionaires -- is unlikely to be repeated in the software industry again.
A sweeping consolidation is under way, which is likely to leave the software business looking like the publishing industry, with three or four big companies and hundreds of smaller shops or would-be "authors" gasping for shelf space.
Just in the past month, the two leaders in "edutainment," Electronic Arts Inc. and Broderbund Software Inc., agreed to merge, as did the two founders of desktop publishing, Adobe Systems Inc. and Aldus Corp.
A host of smaller firms are being snapped up by far-larger companies.
Compton's Multimedia Publishing Group, for example, was taken over by Tribune Co.
Driving the consolidation are technical and economic forces, represented in large part by a single company, Microsoft Corp.
Led by its relentless 38-year-old chairman, William Gates, Microsoft has slashed prices in niche after niche, invented a new way of cheaply selling software applications in bundled form, and developed new kinds of operating systems that subsume entire software businesses or make it difficult for them to operate on a stand-alone basis.
The company now takes in 37% of all personal-computer software revenue generated world-wide.
Many software companies are struggling to support global marketing, research and development on increasingly thin profit margins.
To cut costs and achieve the economies of scale necessary to compete, they feel they have to combine.
"The business is moving into the commodity phase," says Larry Sonsini, a director of both Novell and WordPerfect.
"It's stunning how quickly this industry is changing.
It's really causing, more than I've ever seen, very quick re-examinations of business strategies and alliances."
"Software used to be a great cottage industry," says Mitchell Kertzman, chief executive officer of Powersoft Corp., a fast-growing programming-tools company.
In the old days, "you could find a niche and make mistakes, because software was fundamentally a technology business.
Now, more and more, it is a scale business.
Not only your marketing but even your technical innovation has to be carried out on a certain scale."
Adds Ron Posner, a veteran software executive: "The little guys just can't compete on a world-wide basis for shelf space and market dollars.
Either a small company finds a niche or it ends up being a supplier to the big guys."
The new dynamics call into question the independence of a host of the most venerable names in the software industry, including Symantec Inc., Software Publishing Corp., Autodesk Inc. and Borland International Inc.
Each of these companies has one or more strong products, but not enough clout to protect its markets and avoid stagnating or declining sales.
The changes don't mean that a small company can't prosper in a niche.
But it is increasingly difficult, because a little player has to be able to fiercely defend itself with low-priced products while still finding the money for marketing and development.
Intuit Inc., a highly successful producer of personal-finance software, has succeeded in fending off an invasion by Microsoft, but still felt compelled to gain scale by acquiring ChipSoft Inc., a maker of tax-preparation software, in a deal that will cause losses for the combined concern for up to three years.
Consolidation also isn't currently stifling innovation, because "there's tremendous proliferation of new categories" of software such as multimedia programs, says Jeff Tartar, editor of Soft-letter, a trade publication.
The consolidation is occurring within mature categories, such as word processing, database management and spreadsheets, "because end-users really want standards, more than in almost any other business," he says.
"It's as if the auto industry ran on six different types of gasoline.
Then we'd see consolidation."
WordPerfect's Mr. Ashton gloomily predicts that "there will be just two or three companies that will become strong and survive."
The leading candidates, in addition to Microsoft, are Novell, which dominates the market for software that links personal computers into networks, and Lotus Development Corp., which has developed a hot-selling "suite" of applications to compete with Microsoft's.
Lotus also has the first best-selling "workgroup" application, Lotus Notes, that makes it easier for groups of professionals to work together on the networks created by Novell's software.
But even Novell and Lotus will have trouble withstanding Microsoft's might.
Microsoft is developing operating systems that treat applications as mere appendages, more like accessories than stand-alone products.
Its control over such development could favor its own stable of best-selling applications, which it will tailor to the new technology.
Moreover, Microsoft is using its tremendous wealth to enter new markets such as educational and entertainment software by literally buying shelf space: The company generously rewards software retailers for prominently displaying its products.
"No one spends more money with resellers than we do," says Steve Ballmer, Microsoft's executive vice president.
"We want better store presence, and we'll get it."
Mr. Ballmer says there is still plenty of room for small players in software, but as a category gets hot, the little guys better get big fast.
Looking at the advantages conferred by Microsoft's size, Mr. Ballmer concludes, "It's a great time to be us."
No company symbolizes the glory days of the industry, or its current problems, better than WordPerfect.
The saga of Messrs. Bastian and Ashton tells of a time in which software companies could be run by amateurs and still reap huge profits.
The company got its start in 1977, after Mr. Bastian was fired as director of the BYU band because he didn't have a Ph.D.
The dismissal prompted him to finish a master's degree in computer science.
Then Mr. Ashton asked him to be the chief programmer for a small business he was starting, to build a word-processing program.
The company's first products worked on minicomputers, and it wasn't until 1982 that it made a program for a PC.
By then, WordStar International Inc. held what seemed an insurmountable lead in PC word processing.
But WordPerfect gained ground steadily simply by allowing its programmers to come up with new features, and by relying on direct-mail solicitations, word of mouth and glowing reviews in computer magazines in order to stimulate demand.
The cost of doing business was low -- and was it ever profitable.
By 1987, the company had topped $100 million in sales, earning a stunning pretax margin of 33%.
As a bonus, the company paid for a trip to Hawaii for all employees and their families.
The success confirmed the feeling of Messrs. Ashton and Bastian that software was a field for business amateurs.
Both were suspicious of professional managers.
Starting in 1980, they entrusted the daily operations of the company to W.E. "Pete" Peterson, Mr. Bastian's brother-in-law.
Mr. Peterson had run a drapery business in Orem, Utah, and held a part-time job bagging groceries when he was hired as WordPerfect's "office manager."
He soon found himself making key decisions and managing the finances.
Since the company paid cash for everything, even new buildings, "I kept control through the power of the purse," Mr. Peterson says.
WordPerfect's soaring sales imbued Mr. Peterson with overconfidence.
He believed that the company's word processors essentially sold themselves.
He skimped on advertising, carped about the greed of distributors and retailers and balked at diversifying into other types of computer programs.
As the company grew, he stuck fiercely to his roots.
Born in Orem after the war, he grew up when the town's biggest employer was a steel mill and "the brightest kids left the state."
He was proud that natives, mostly Mormons, ran WordPerfect.
"We were tired of seeing outsiders come in and run our businesses," he says.
The desire of Messrs. Ashton and Bastian to retain exclusive ownership of WordPerfect created strange anomalies.
In lieu of stock, they paid enormous salaries.
Mr. Peterson earned as much as $5 million annually.
"I was paid like Karl Malone," he says, referring to the Utah Jazz forward.
The tradition of nepotism continued even as WordPerfect grew.
Mr. Peterson often hired senior sales and marketing executives from the ranks of his family, friends and neighbors.
"At the time, the thinking was that if you had the right kind of personality, you could learn the skills to do the job," says Ross Wolfley, whom Mr. Peterson hired as a marketing executive in 1986, even though Mr. Wolfley's resume mainly featured a law degree and eight years as an Air Force pilot.
Relying so heavily on people with the same views might have been a drawback, except that in the second half of the 1980s WordPerfect was growing so fast that it barely mattered who was hired.
"You could make mistakes, but no one would notice," Mr. Wolfley says.
But beginning in 1990, people started to notice -- and the reason was Microsoft.
In May of 1990, Microsoft released a vastly improved version of a program called Windows, designed to make a desktop computer much easier to use.
Customers stampeded to it, buying millions of copies in the first 12 months.
Along with Windows, Microsoft released a word processor tailored to take advantage of the easier-to-use features.
So strong was WordPerfect's hold on word-processing customers that Mr. Ashton saw no need to rush to market a Windows version of his product.
The decision reflected the kind of mistakes made by many software companies that hadn't yet been exposed to the rigors of ferocious market-share battles.
"The very idea of competition was foreign to us," admits John Lewis, WordPerfect's executive vice president.
WordPerfect even spurned Microsoft's help.
Microsoft gave the company a nearly complete version of Windows five months before its public release, but WordPerfect did almost no work on a Windows version of its product.
Mr. Ashton acknowledges that this was a mistake.
Once it trailed Microsoft in Windows word processing, WordPerfect never caught up.
It wasn't until 1992 that WordPerfect released a product that slowed Microsoft's advance.
In March 1992, Mr. Peterson was ousted, in part because he refused to spend more heavily on promotion to counter Microsoft.
WordPerfect then became more visible, but it still was restrained.
When Microsoft began running ads that WordPerfect thought contained falsehoods, Mr. Ashton objected in a polite note to Mr. Gates -- who ignored it.
After a year of humiliation, WordPerfect sued Microsoft, but quickly reached a secret settlement.
By the end of 1992, WordPerfect was reeling.
Then it was stunned by another development: the bundling by Microsoft of separate applications into a single "suite," or package, priced just slightly higher than an individual application.
Sales of the Microsoft Office suite soared.
WordPerfect countered by allying with Borland to produce its own suite.
But because they came from different companies, the WordPerfect/Borland applications didn't share common controls, whereas the pieces of Microsoft's suite worked together smoothly.
Despite recently revamping WordPerfect's deal with Borland to gain more consistency among its programs, Mr. Ashton concedes: "Our bundle was having its problems."
But WordPerfect's biggest problem -- and that of much of the rest of the industry -- is that Microsoft Office drove prices into a tailspin.
WordPerfect's sales declined in 1992, and grew modestly in 1993, while its profit margins plunged by roughly two-thirds from its heyday.
When WordPerfect finally did lower its prices, it found it no longer could afford to offer its customers free telephone support, a lauded practice the company grudgingly discontinued early this year.
Lower prices also forced WordPerfect to lay off about a sixth of its 6,000 employees.
With the layoffs and tighter business controls, WordPerfect might have been able to rebound, but a major technical trend made Messrs. Ashton and Bastian think it was time to cash out.
The technology that underlies software is basically making it possible to give operating and network software greater and greater power, pushing applications into the background.
Microsoft plans a succession of new operating systems, which will hit the market in 1995, that take over many of the traditional services performed by applications, such as database searches and electronic mail.
Three weeks ago, Mr. Ashton proposed the sale of his company to Novell, which intends to use WordPerfect and applications bought from Borland to create its own suites, along with networking versions.
Mr. Ashton says software is no longer the place for people like him.
"I don't see anybody being able to do it the way we did," he adds mournfully.
"It's no longer a situation where anyone can play."
