The House Budget Committee, voting along party lines, approved the outlines of President Clinton's $1.5 trillion fiscal 1995 budget and deferred an internal Democratic dispute over defense spending.
Democratic liberals, led by Rep. Barney Frank, had threatened to hold up the resolution, for the year that begins Oct. 1, in an attempt to shift some $11 billion in budget authority from defense to domestic programs over the next four years.
But the Massachusetts Democrat ran into opposition from party conservatives, and they put off a settlement by agreeing that Mr. Frank could press his case when the budget resolution reaches the House floor next week.
"I want a fair chance," said Mr. Frank.
But given strong opposition from the White House, his prospects for prevailing aren't bright.
The toughest task facing committee members was finding $3 billion in new spending cuts to offset Congressional Budget Office estimates that administration programs would cost slightly more than the White House had projected.
The committee also reordered some of the president's suggested priorities, adding back some $494 million, for example, for low-income energy assistance while trimming proposed increases for research in new technologies.
These changes, which aren't binding on the House committees that actually appropriate money, foreshadow the difficult trade-offs ahead between existing programs and Mr. Clinton's proposed "investments" as Congress struggles to hold spending below fixed caps set in the deficit-reduction program that passed last year.
Committee passage came after Republicans unsuccessfully offered a series of amendments and an alternative five-year budget designed to sharpen political differences with Democrats.
The alternative "defines them and it defines us," said Rep. John Kasich of Ohio, ranking Republican on the budget panel.
Lacking a Clinton tax increase to shoot at, Rep. Kasich moved to create a tax issue by proposing a $500-per-child credit for families with incomes below $200,000; the tax break would cost some $103 billion over five years.
The GOP alternative would also pay for slimmed-down health reform and crime programs and restore tax-deductible individual retirement accounts for all income levels.
Despite all this, Mr. Kasich insists his budget would still reduce the deficit by $150 billion more than Mr. Clinton's budget would over five years by cutting health and welfare spending, bureaucratic overhead, and by "privatizing" such federal operations as the air-traffic control system.
What Mr. Kasich's proposal doesn't do is come close to eliminating the deficit -- a goal he says he'd enshrine in the Constitution through a balanced-budget amendment.
The GOP plan proposes a $176 billion deficit for 1999; that's just two years before the effective date of the amendment being pushed in the House.
"It's not intellectually credible" to propose a balanced budget over the next five years, Mr. Kasich explained, saying the task would likely take twice that long.
