Federal Reserve policy makers voted to push up short-term interest rates for the second time in as many months, and analysts predicted that the Fed is likely to continue to raise rates if the economy maintains its momentum.
Although the Fed wasn't explicit in its unusual statement announcing the decision, its Open Market Committee decided to increase the benchmark federal-funds interest rate by 1/4 percentage point, to 3 1/2%.
After holding rates steady for about a year and a half, the Fed raised the federal-funds rate, at which banks lend to each other overnight, to 3 1/4% from 3% on Feb. 4.
With the economy gaining strength, most analysts expect the Fed to increase short-term rates at least another half-point by year end.
A few said the next move could even come before the Open Market Committee meets again on May 17, but most don't expect that to happen.
"We had been saying 1/4 percentage point a quarter," said Darwin Beck, who monitors the Fed for First Boston Corp.
"They're at least on that track or faster now."
For years, the Fed has telegraphed its interest-rate moves to financial markets, but refused to say anything in public.
Under pressure from Congress, however, the Fed has apparently changed its ways -- at least a little.
Just as it did in February, it issued a news release disclosing the policy committee's decision.
After the Feb. 4 move, the Fed's first increase in rates since 1989, the bond market reacted by pushing up long-term interest rates.
But yesterday's move was widely anticipated.
"It was something the bond market wanted, and it got it, so it was pleased," Mr. Beck said.
Yields on 10-year Treasury securities were quoted late yesterday at 6.42%.
Stock prices were mixed.
The increase in the federal-funds rate will tend to push up the short-term rates that banks and money-market funds pay to savers, as well as the rates that banks charge borrowers.
But it isn't clear whether banks will respond by raising the highly visible prime interest rate, now at 6%.
The prime rate is used for such things as home equity loans.
The gap between the federal-funds rate and the prime rate is 2 1/2 percentage points, about a half-point narrower than it had been but still about a half-point wider than it has been historically.
Although loan demand is beginning to pick up, competition for business remains fierce.
"Banks might decide to try to compete on pricing until we have a more robust demand for business loans," said economist John Lonski of Moody's Investors Service Inc.
"There's a good chance banks may not immediately hike the prime."
But other economists differed.
"The first increase that the Fed did was free," said James Annable, chief economist at First Chicago Corp.
"The second one most likely won't be.
Banks will follow with a half-point increase."
The Fed move came four days after Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan met at the White House with President Clinton to discuss the economy, a meeting that drew an enormous amount of unwanted attention and speculation on Wall Street when it was disclosed.
The Clinton administration took yesterday's announcement calmly, emphasizing the Fed's independence and the indications that the economy is getting stronger by the day.
"It's their decision as to how to read the evidence on the economy," said chief White House economist Laura Tyson.
"The administration and the Fed have the same objective: Sustainable economic growth and low inflation."
The White House economic forecast predicts that the Fed would raise short-term rates by only 1/2 percentage point this year, but recent economic indicators suggest that economy could be growing faster than the 3% pace that administration economists expected.
The Fed implements changes in the federal funds rate by buying and selling Treasury securities through the New York Fed.
In the recent past, the New York Fed has made it clear to financial markets -- and through them to the press -- that rates were changing.
When the Fed raised rates in February, it made the unprecedented move of issuing a statement.
Fed spokesman Joseph Coyne said at the time that it wasn't a precedent.
Mr. Coyne said yesterday's announcement reflected only a "provisional" decision, not a permanent change in policy.
But hardly anyone else viewed it that way.
"Now that they've done it made an announcement twice, there's going to be some kind of presumption that they're going to do it," said Marc Wanshel, who tracks the Fed for Morgan Guaranty Trust Co.
House Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas), the Fed's chief congressional critic, praised the move -- saying it would "prevent wild speculation and unnecessary leaks" -- but said the Fed should do still more, such as releasing transcripts of its meetings within 60 days.
Yesterday's statement removed any uncertainty about whether the Fed had acted, but gave no more detail than it generally signaled to financial markets.
Wall Street analysts said the change wouldn't make much difference to them.
But the concession to its congressional critics adds to the impression that the Fed is on the defensive, and could be the precursor of more changes at the central bank.
Steven Lipin in New York contributed to this article.
