If you think a marathon runner has it rough, try handing one a cup of water.
Odds are you'll spill most of it -- or worse.
World-class runner Joan Benoit Samuelson finished a disappointing sixth in the 1991 New York City Marathon after being tripped by a cup boy.
That's unlikely to happen in the eighth Los Angeles Marathon this Sunday, thanks to Joe Blackstone and his 40 trained water-station captains.
"Thumb and middle finger -- that's the perfect hold," says Mr. Blackstone, the marathon's director of operations, as he demonstrates the technique volunteers will use to pass out water to 19,000 panting runners.
Training sessions for the captains have been held since January, including a rehearsal two weeks ago using standard seven-ounce cups.
The dos and don'ts: Fill the cup part way, hold it at arm's length and move it in the runner's direction.
A stiff-armed grip to a bouncing runner ends in a slosh.
If runners want a cool cup of water in the face, they'll ask for it; splashing cold water on an unsuspecting runner can cause muscle contractions and cramps.
The L.A. event -- which will be supplied with 30,000 gallons of bottled water by a company sponsor as well as 10,000 gallons of Gatorade -- appears to lead America's marathons in its distribution methods.
It was, for example, the first to offer water every mile.
The older Boston and New York races, which used to start handing out water at Mile 5, now also space tables every mile along the 26.2-mile course.
At the Los Angeles water classes, attendants at every fourth mile marker learn they have to guard the special fluids elite runners are allowed to keep there in personalized plastic bottles.
Volunteers stationed along the course also must be versed in Vaseline, which runners smear under their arms and between their legs to prevent chafing and blisters.
The product is handed out on tongue depressors.
"Oh, there's a terrible story," sighs William Burke, president and founder of the L.A. race.
In 1986, the marathon's first year, inexperienced runners automatically treated the Vaseline-daubed sticks the same way they did everything else they were handed: "People were eating it," Mr. Burke says.
Today, water-station captains are instructed to make it clear what the Vaseline is for by yelling, "This is for blisters!"
