Modami Services Inc. said its board dismissed its chairman and chief executive, Michael Salit, alleging that he had improper financial ties to a company supplier.
Modami said it began an internal investigation last year into questionable purchasing orders.
As a result, the company said it discovered that Dr. Salit, starting in 1992, had received stock in an Israeli supplier for Modami, which makes yogurt and sandwiches, distributes private-label groceries and sells eyewear.
Modami's outside counsel, Elliott Barnett, also said that the investigation disclosed that $1.3 million of company funds in 1992 went into Florida bank accounts connected to Dr. Salit and to the Israeli supplier, Nutrix Ltd.
Mr. Barnett said there isn't a full accounting for these funds.
Dr. Salit, reached at his home, said the allegations are "absolutely not true.
I founded that company, I nurtured it, and I would never do anything to hurt it."
He referred questions to his attorney, Henry Handler, who said that Dr. Salit, a 50-year-old physician, rejected stock offers from Nutrix.
Mr. Handler said Dr. Salit also wasn't in control of the Nutrix accounts in Florida.
Modami, based in Boca Raton, Fla., also alleges that its former chief financial officer, David Lobel, who left the company last July, held Nutrix stock and was connected to the deposit of Modami funds into the Florida accounts.
Mr. Lobel, 51 years old, couldn't be reached for comment.
Modami officials reported their allegations to the Securities and Exchange Commission last Thursday.
The agency, according to the company, said it would be taking no immediate action.
Modami said the investigation hasn't affected current operations.
The company's board named Paul Kravitz, 63, as chief executive.
Mr. Kravitz had served as chief financial officer since Mr. Lobel left the company, and was acting as president and chief operating officer.
He will remain president.
John Boone, 57, who had served as vice president of operations, was named chief operating officer.
Justin Dimacchia, 50, who had served as vice president of finance, was named chief financial officer.
In its most recent fiscal year, ended Aug. 31, 1993, Modami reported sales of $350,710, with a loss of $3,986,596.
Mr. Kravitz said the company expects to report $3 million in sales for the fiscal second quarter ended Feb. 28 and an unspecified loss, which will be smaller than the year earlier.
In the year-ago quarter, the company posted a loss of $930,062, on revenue of $106,404.
Looking ahead, Modami said it expects to benefit from additional revenue provided by two sandwich manufacturers it acquired in the past half year, Mr. Kravitz said.
For the entire fiscal year, he added, the company expects to report sales of about $26 million.
