If Texas A&M University professor Don Saylak has his way, someday the nation's highways will be paved with the stuff of acid rain.
Mr. Saylak has spent the past eight years finding uses for the gunk that Texas coal plants once spewed into the atmosphere.
Environmental laws have forced utilities to capture the smoke, but now they're left with 13 million tons of byproduct annually that is stockpiled or buried in landfills.
And since Texas consumes more coal than any other state (50% more than second place Indiana), a group of utilities, including Houston Lighting & Power Co., which is a unit of Houston Industries, and Texas Utilities Co. in Dallas, has turned to Mr. Saylak and other researchers at Texas A&M's Texas Transportation Institute to figure out what to do with the leftovers.
What Mr. Saylak has to work with is a hodgepodge of calcium sulfate and calcium sulfite compounds dubbed "gypsite" by researchers.
(When calcium sulfate occurs in nature, it's known as gypsum.)
If emitted into the atomosphere, the sulfur dioxide in the compound goes through a series of chemical reactions to create a component of acid rain.
Using the gypsite combined with either cement or ash (also produced by the coal power plants), Mr. Saylak and his researchers have created a substance that he says can replace limestone and gravel in the building of roads.
"This stuff begins totally useless," says Mr. Saylak.
"We call it `harvesting smoke.'"
Four test roads near the university have so far held up, says Mr. Saylak, and researchers have used the substance to make construction materials like drywall and no-bake bricks.
(Conventional clay bricks require a 3,000-degree Fahrenheit heating process.)
The discovery is a bright prospect for Texas utilities, which would rather sell the byproduct than store it.
And if subsequent tests prove successful, researchers estimate the gypsite material will be about 30% cheaper than other road building materials.
"Our only option now is to landfill the product," says Cindy West, a Houston Lighting & Power spokeswoman.
"If there's some positive use for the product, that's a better option, and in the long run, it's the environmentally beneficial thing to do."
The technology has yet to undergo a real-world test, let alone commercial application, but researchers are hoping to soon use the substance on a section of state highway in Leon County north of Bryan-College Station.
In addition, a new state law encourages state transportation officials to use waste materials (like tires and power-plant byproducts) in road construction.
Mr. Saylak also envisions low-cost building products that could be used to create affordable housing.
But a tougher hurdle than strength tests looms ahead.
Although Mr. Saylak says environmental tests at the university show the substance to be safe, he says it will take some convincing before contractors and the general public feel comfortable building roads and living in houses built with an industrial-waste product.
"Contractors are very leery about the liability of using materials that are nonconventional, and they have every right to be," says Mr. Saylak.
"We still have to get over the stigma."
