U-Haul International Inc., heating up a bidding war, said it increased its cash offer to $357.5 million, from $309.5 million, for partnerships that own 139 self-service storage centers.
The privately held truck and trailer rental company, which has its own self-serve storage business, is competing with a proposal by Shurgard Inc., a closely held Seattle firm that operates the centers under management agreements with the partnerships.
Shurgard's plan would consolidate, or "roll up" the partnerships and convert them into a publicly traded real-estate investment trust.
"Our research indicated the Shurgard limited partners want their original investment back," said Harry DeShong, U-Haul executive vice president.
In addition to the increased cash offer, U-Haul offered as options two annuities, structured through Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Co., that the company said would return to the partnerships' holders their original cost, or higher returns within certain time frames.
The prospectus for Shurgard's proposal values the assets of the partnership at $387.4 million, still above the revised U-Haul bid.
Rather than cash, Shurgard's proposal gives investors the choice of stock in the new REIT, or notes that mature in 2000.
If U-Haul succeeds, Shurgard likely would face the loss of fees from its contracts to manage the partnerships.
Shurgard's controlling shareholder and chief executive officer, Charles K. Barbo, is a general partner of all the partnerships.
Last month, the general partners sued in federal court in Seattle to block U-Haul's offer, and U-Haul sued the general partners alleging that they attempted to improperly amend the partnership agreements to make it harder to remove the general partners.
Friday, the general partners said they were reviewing U-Haul's increased offer, which expires Jan. 28.
Late last month, the general partners also rejected a $136 million bid by another company, Storage Equities Inc., of Glendale, Calif., for assets of seven out of the 17 partnerships.
According to a Shurgard prospectus, Storage Equities has expressed interest in increasing its offer, but hadn't done so as of Friday.
