It's enough to make you beg for a rest stop.
"With bumper-to-bumper traffic expected on the vaunted information superhighway, consumers are apt to be blinded by the glare of oncoming technologies," says Fortune magazine.
"Remember, some customers will want to be chauffeured, others will want the wheel themselves."
But "one way or another, all will be in the driver's seat."
The city of Plano, Texas, should have an "on-ramp" to the information superhighway, a local school official tells a reporter.
"We don't want to be too far on the median and too far on the curb."
"The networks," says comedian Sinbad, hosting cable-TV's Ace awards, "are no longer the big HoJo on the information superhighway."
The metaphors are piling up on the electronic interstate like jackknifed tractor-trailers, and there isn't an off-ramp in sight.
"I thought we could keep torturing the analogy until people stopped using it," says Allen Rucker, the Los Angeles comedy writer responsible for the Sinbad joke.
"We probably failed."
Indeed, the "information superhighway" seems to have unlimited mileage and no brakes.
The phrase merged into the fast lane as politicians touted "road maps" for handling rapid changes in telecommunications.
Now it's veering out of control.
The media are the biggest road hogs.
Consider the accounts of a Los Angeles speech last month by Vice President Al Gore, who claims to have fathered the term "information superhighway."
Depending on the story that you read, Mr. Gore was steering down the information superhighway, raising speed limits, installing checkpoints, offering an easier ride, earning his learner's permit or putting the "pedal to the metal."
Mr. Gore was seen alternatively as handing industry the keys to the tollbooth or trying to keep disadvantaged people from being "stranded on the shoulder."
Promoters are hitching rides on the "info pike," too.
TV ads for MCI Communications Corp. touting the new road have child actress Anna Paquin saying, with an 11-year-old's enthusiasm: "Its speed limit will be the speed of light."
David Letterman, in a promo, says his "Late Show" on CBS is "like an information superhighway, without the information."
New twists in the road keep turning up.
A telephone trade group talks of wanting to save an "emergency lane" on the superhighway.
An NBC official warns of "drive-by shootings on the information superhighway."
There are even sharp turns into mixed metaphors -- one of them a reference to riverboat gamblers on the mighty thoroughfare.
All of which raises the question: Just what is the information superhighway anyway?
The answer is as elusive as the Kansas horizon on I-70.
Some say it's a future network of fiber-optic lines that will stretch across the country, giving everybody hitherto unimagined services through their TV sets.
Others say it's the Internet, an existing network that allows people to converse by typing on home computers.
Actually, the information superhighway is wide enough to include a slew of activities ranging from off-track betting to videos-on-demand, home shopping and the long-heralded picture phone.
Nobody knows whether all that many people will actually want to go with the flow of traffic.
"So far, it's just a lot of puff," says Dennis Baron, a University of Illinois English professor who has been tracking the phrase "information superhighway."
Still, he says those who complain about the phrase are merely enshrining it.
"If you listen long enough, you'll find them using it, too."
"It's a moronic term," complains Paul Saffo of the Institute for the Future, a Menlo Park, Calif., consulting firm.
"Nobody would dare use it on the Internet," he says.
Other users would consider them dweebs.
But a few minutes later, he is calling Next Inc. workstation computers "the De Lorean of the information highway."
Seagate Technology Inc. chief executive, Alan Shugart, makes fun of the term, too.
But aides say that while riding on the New Jersey Turnpike recently, he succumbed to the lure of the road, boasting his disk-drive company was out to put up the signs, sell the maps and own the restaurants on the selfsame information super-highway.
Such analogies are causing gridlock in corporate press releases.
Thomas Brooksher, a Denver trade-journal publisher, complains that he has to wade through a page of highway expressions before he can figure out just what it is a company is hyping.
"If they say `information highway,' they figure people will read it," he says.
"It's like saying, `free sex.' "
The industry has flirted with road imagery since as far back as 1910, when American Telephone & Telegraph Co., in its annual report, promised a telephone system "as universal and as extensive as the highway system."
Vice President Gore's father, Sen. Albert Gore of Tennessee, was a big wheel in establishing the Interstate Highway System.
As a child, young Al sat in on congressional hearings that decided the color of signs and the size of lanes on the interstates.
He says he coined the phrase "information highway" in 1978 during a meeting with computer-industry officials.
Most people, interestingly, are willing to give full credit to Mr. Gore for coming up with the phrase, which he made the center-strip of his vice presidential campaign in 1992.
Now, some folks seem actually to confuse Al Jr.'s highways with Al Sr.'s.
Federal Highway Administration officials say they have been asked if they work on the "information superhighway."
Talk show host Dick Cavett, kicking off a recent (Information) Superhighway Summit in Los Angeles, said, "When I think of highways, I think of something long and boring that 50,000 people are killed on every year."
And, as was bound to happen, some communications-industry leaders think the metaphor has run out of gas.
But alternatives such as "information canals" and "information skyways" don't have wheels.
Technology consultant Charles Morris is promoting "information ocean" (data float around until needed).
But even that isn't vast enough for one White House aide, who uses "ideaspace" -- discreetly, he says, to avoid offending Mr. Gore.
The vice president isn't yet ready to yield on the "information superhighway."
"He still thinks it's an appropriate metaphor," a spokeswoman says.
But lately even Mr. Gore has rolled his eyes at what he has wrought: for example, a business worried about becoming "roadkill."
Mr. Gore, himself, now sometimes speaks of the metaphor-proof "National Information Infrastructure."
Still, the "information superhighway" rolls on.
The American Dialect Society voted the phrase Word of the Year for 1993.
