When General Electric Capital Corp. went on the road to promote a $300 million note issue last October, it made some unusual stops.
Along with the traditional trip to Hong Kong, the U.S. company visited Shanghai and Beijing.
The detour paid off.
Roughly 30% of the offering -- aimed at non-Japanese investors in Asia -- was snapped up by Chinese financial institutions.
"There are clearly a lot of international investors in China," says Jeffrey Werner, treasurer of GE Capital, the finance unit of U.S.-based General Electric Co.
GE isn't alone in making that discovery.
Most people think of China as a major importer of capital; its state-owned companies raised a record $1.7 billion through overseas sales of debt securities last year.
But Chinese institutions also are emerging as exporters of funds.
In the past few years, they have quietly become Asia's fastest-growing investor base for foreign government and corporate bonds.
As the Chinese economy roars ahead at an annual clip of 12% to 13%, the country's financial institutions are flush with foreign funds, generated by exports and the inflow of foreign investment.
While the banks plow some of those funds into the domestic economy to finance infrastructure and other projects, they are eager to invest much of the cash abroad.
"The capital flow is no longer a one-way street," says Tomoo Hayakawa, president and chief executive officer of Asian Finance & Investment Corp., a Singapore-based affiliate of Asian Development Bank.
Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore remain the region's biggest investors outside Japan in foreign debt securities.
But China is gaining ground on them.
Although no precise figures are available, bankers say roughly a dozen Chinese institutions regularly take up 15% to 20% of offerings of Hong Kong dollar-denominated bonds and so-called Dragon bonds, which are debt securities aimed at buyers in Asia outside of Japan.
The portion rises to 25% or 30% when the Dragon bonds are from a Chinese issuer.
Just five years ago, bankers say, China's role in the market was negligible.
Chinese demand for such investments has grown with its foreign-exchange reserves.
The reserves -- held both by People's Bank of China and state-owned Bank of China -- stood at $41.4 billion as of Sept. 30.
That's up 50% from the end of 1990, though it is below the peak of $45 billion recorded in December 1992.
Bond traders say Chinese investors are highly professional and in many cases more aggressive than their counterparts in other Asian countries.
Taiwan's Central Bank of China, for example, is the biggest foreign buyer of U.S. Treasury securities, but it tends to stick to the cautious strategy of holding the paper until maturity.
"Investors in China trade in and out of the market a lot for short-term trading gains," says Bryan Chan, assistant manager at Yamaichi International (H.K.) Ltd.'s international bond division.
On a day of active trading, transactions from Chinese investors account for roughly 30% of total trading volume of his office in Hong Kong, Mr. Chan says.
The office also deals with investors in Hong Kong, Taiwan and the Philippines.
Much of China's bond-market savvy comes from Bank of China, whose extensive international branch network has given it experience in foreign markets.
Until about two years ago, Bank of China managed the country's foreign reserves.
People's Bank, China's central bank, is gradually taking over that duty, but Bank of China still manages the bulk of the reserves.
"Unlike Taiwan, where the central bank is very bureaucratic, China's reserves are managed by people who are more or less commercial bankers," says a bond trader with a European bank.
Most aggressive are the newcomers, such as the Shanghai branch of Industrial & Commercial Bank of China and Bank of Communications in Shanghai.
Many of the banks' corporate and individual depositors, worried about inflation and the risk of devaluation, insist on holding foreign currency rather than the yuan.
Some of those deposits are invested in international debt securities.
Chinese investors seem most eager to buy paper with triple-A ratings and high name recognition.
Hence the popularity of GE Capital's notes.
A company official says GE Capital decided to take its roadshow to China after noticing that a significant portion of its Hong Kong dollar-denominated notes issued in the past year had been bought by Chinese financial institutions.
