Today in Los Angeles, California's Occupational Safety and Health Standards Board opens hearings to consider requiring, by law, that employers in the state "adjust" their "work pace."
The "adjustment" Cal-OSHA has in mind is downward.
To those surprised to find the no-longer-so-Golden State girding to require its (remaining) businesses to do less, welcome to the safety and health juggernaut that is "ergonomics."
Ergonomists define their discipline as the study of workers' relation to their environment; "ergonomic measures" are the favored solution to carpal tunnel syndrome and other "cumulative trauma disorders" (CTDs) purportedly caused by repetitive, forceful motions at work.
The Cal-OSHA hearings result from the state assembly's requirement that an "ergonomics" rule be adopted to "minimize the instances of injury from repetitive motion."
A similar mandate is pending in Congress, where Labor Secretary Robert Reich has testified that CTDs are the "occupational diseases of the information age."
The federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration already has promised a draft standard by fall, and for several years now it has been prosecuting companies under the federal act's "general duty clause."
So, for instance, fed OSHA has charged that risk of "death or serious physical harm" lurks in the hand motions that produce Pepperidge Farm's delightful Milano cookies.
Ergonomics' appeal lies in its unquestionable premise and its equally unquestionable -- and unquestionably attractive -- conclusion.
The premise: Hard work is tiring and sometimes uncomfortable, even painful.
The conclusion: Work less and you'll feel better.
Why, I've experienced the very thing myself!
Though usually packaged in pseudo-scientific jargon, ergonomists' remedies reflect a similar rough common sense.
CTDs, the theory goes, are the product of repetition, force and posture.
To cure them, reduce repetitions -- "adjust" the work pace, hire seven employees to do the work of five, give employees frequent "rest periods."
As for force, lessen it by dropping the weight of what employees press, lift and carry.
"Redesign the workstation" to improve employees' posture.
All of these measures are either expressed or implied in the proposed California standard; they are to be taken by employers (to an indeterminate extent) on a finding of such CTD "symptoms" as "pain from movement."
The measures already are being demanded by federal and state OSHA regulators in cases like that against Pepperidge Farm.
Nor is this the limit of ergonomists' agenda, for they have in store for employees a still greater freedom -- unemployment.
OSHA inspectors may not be engineers, they may not be physicians, but they can surely recognize that if a given operation required no workers at all, illness and injury would disappear.
Automation is, accordingly, a commonly proposed ergonomic measure.
This past fall at a job safety conference in Chicago, a meat-packing-plant manager swelled with pride at a film of one of his company's fully automated operations, with nary a worker in sight: We used to have hurt backs, hurt shoulders, he commented -- but not anymore.
Union members in the audience were wise to take note.
Most ambitious of all, however, is ergonomists' program to reach beyond physical conditions of the workplace to address the very terms of employment.
Increasingly, ergonomists and their critics are finding that employee reports of CTDs -- which are difficult to verify objectively -- correlate more strongly with generalized job dissatisfaction than with a job's physical demands.
With admirable persistence, ergonomists are now recommending changes to the "psycho-social" conditions of the workplace.
The research arm of OSHA has recommended mandatory ergonomics programs to address, among other things, "opportunity for advancement," worker "feedback," and "management style and climate."
Perhaps instead, "psycho-social causes" ought to occasion some last-minute reflections on the doubtful science underlying ergonomics.
In the words of ergonomics guru Don Chaffin, what the field lacks is "good evaluations that hold up to scientific scrutiny."
While no one doubts that hard work can become tiring and uncomfortable, respected physicians question, first, whether CTDs exist as a diagnosable condition falling within OSHA's authority to address "illness" and "injury."
While disputing this, ergonomists acknowledge, second, that an ailment carrying all the symptoms of a CTD might have causes other than repetition and force, and therefore not be a CTD at all -- diagnosis is hard in any given case.
Third, and perhaps most notable of all, ergonomists readily confess not to know the levels at which repetition and force become "hazardous."
In other words, while commanding business on pain of civil or even criminal penalty to reduce repetition and force to nonhazardous levels, OSHA regulators do not know themselves where this line between legal and illegal conduct lies.
Such a mandate is probably unconstitutional, and is certainly stupid policy.
Before parading naked for his countrymen, the emperor who wore no clothes paid a hefty sum to clever tailors who assured him they had woven a fine garment indeed.
Other countries -- notably, Australia -- have invested small fortunes in "ergonomic reform," only to see their CTD "epidemics" wax and wane regardless of the measures taken.
As ergonomics rises to the top of the nation's labor agenda, policy makers would do well to take careful measure of the science underlying it.
Mr. Scalia, a lawyer in Washington, represents management in occupational safety and health matters.
