Congress has once again turned down the idea of a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution.
But as far as I'm concerned, if at first, second and third you don't succeed, try, try again.
The opponents of a balanced-budget amendment would have us believe that it is some sort of weird idea.
We're all in favor of balanced budgets, many of them maintain, but an amendment is not the way to get there.
Sen. Nancy Kassebaum (R., Kan.), who has voted for the amendment in the past, opposed it this time.
She has concluded that an amendment will prove an embarrassment to our nation.
But any nation that, through its elected representatives, has performed as ours has over the past decade and a half deserves a little embarrassment.
As a reporter, I remember that in the post-World War II years we often wondered whether the government was going to announce a surplus or a deficit.
In eight of those years there was a surplus, and in many others the deficit was relatively small.
Korea, Vietnam and the 1970s' inflation put heavy upward pressure on the deficit, but the major troubles came in the 1980s, when deficits for the first time soared to over $200 billion.
Critics of President Reagan tend to put the blame on his tax cuts, but I think a more important problem was the president's inability to sell Congress on the spending cuts he wanted.
Deficits are now headed downward.
It isn't too difficult to make reductions from the $290.4 billion peak reached in 1992.
But there is still a long way to go.
As President Clinton's economic advisers say in the latest Economic Report, deficits of this size would be less of a problem if national savings were large enough to finance both the deficits and private business investment.
(It's painful to recall that an important contributor to national savings used to be government surpluses.)
Actually, U.S. private savings are among the lowest in the world and fell in the 1980s.
The best way to cut the budget deficits, of course, is for the administration and Congress to cut spending and, if necessary, raise taxes.
The biggest problem was and is entitlement programs.
The public has been sold on the idea that the government must help everybody, whether they need it or not.
The prime examples are Social Security and Medicare.
A personal experience last year brought this home to me.
As a result of a swimming pool accident, I spent two weeks in a hospital, and the bill came close to $70,000.
With company insurance and huge help from Medicare, only a few dollars remained unpaid.
I took the money and ran, but not without a tinge of the embarrassment that Sen. Kassebaum mentions.
The balanced-budget amendment would not be the straitjacket some opponents claim.
If 60% of the lawmakers chose to override it, they could do so.
It's hard to imagine a claim on the national purse that was really important and yet could not muster that much of a majority.
The amendment alone would not solve our problems.
But the process of ratification by the states would provide an opportunity for grassroots discussion of the enormous financing burden that Americans seem on the brink of passing on to their children.
The public might not be as sold on the arguments for a "free lunch" as the lawmakers think.
A balanced-budget amendment would give us a chance to find out.
