Coca-Cola, pleased with last year's ad blitz featuring a dizzying number of different commercials, is repeating the strategy this year and again relying heavily on the Hollywood talent firm Creative Artists Agency.
Of 26 spots for Coke Classic, CAA produced 23.
Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson, Coke's ad agency since 1955, has an even smaller role this year than in 1993.
It produced only one commercial (last year it produced two), while newcomer Fallon-McElligott, a midsize agency in Minneapolis, created two spots.
The Fallon ads, both humorous, focus on Coke's distinctive contour bottle.
The CAA commercials include an army of talking ants marching off to polish off a spilled bottle of Coke; talking ice cubes that are thrilled Coke is about to poured on them instead of a private-label cola; and goofy black-and-white footage, titled "How to Ask for a Date," in which a teenager asks a girl to a "weenie roast."
There are also technically dazzling ads, including one using lush colors that dissolve into scenes of a farmer taking a break from harvesting his crop to swig a Coke and dance with his wife.
It is reminiscent of "Oklahoma!"
The campaign will begin this weekend with a CAA commercial on the National Basketball Association's All-Star Game on General Electric's NBC network.
A 30-second computer-animated spot, titled "NBA Dancing Clothes," features the jerseys of such NBA players as Patrick Ewing, Robert Parish and Horace Grant.
Coke will be a major sponsor of the Winter Olympics on CBS, and two new CAA commercials will feature the popular polar bears from last year's campaign on the luge and ski jumping.
Last year, Coke introduced 15 spots appearing 105 times on 17 broadcast and cable outlets in one week.
This year's blitz "will be very similar," says Charles Fruit, Coke's vice president, director of media, although he declines to be specific.
Coke's challenge with its second campaign from CAA is quite different from last year's.
In 1993, it needed to revitalize its advertising and overcome the perception that the hip soft drink for the youth market is Pepsi.
This year, Coke needs to continue the momentum created by the 1993 commercials, which were considered fresh and vibrant.
The new campaign, in which last year's one-word slogan "Always" and catchy jingle ("There's always Coca-Cola") are used frequently, is the first from Sergio Zyman since his return to Coke as senior vice president and chief marketing officer last August.
Mr. Zyman, who earned the nickname "Aya-Cola" for his reputation for being sometimes overly aggressive, had some choice words for his main rival.
Asked during a news conference for his opinion of a Pepsi ad showing a chimp drinking Coke, Mr. Zyman called the commercial "dated . . . the same old thing."
Pepsi, he said, is "fixated" on Coke's "rear fender. . . .
We don't need to do comparative advertising."
A Pepsi spokeswoman says: "Let the games begin.
We must be doing something right.
We did some post Super Bowl game polling of consumers, and Pepsi was the most recalled brand, and their favorite overall advertising during the Super Bowl was the chimp spot."
Coke's Mr. Zyman says it has been "decades since we have been this pleased with our advertising."
The "Always" campaign "moved the sales needle," he says, but he declines to be specific.
The soft drink category has been sluggish lately, with consumers gravitating to alternative beverages, such as iced tea and so-called new age drinks, including fruit-flavored carbonated water.
But last year, Coke Classic's share of the market actually grew, albeit marginally, to 20.1% from 20% a year earlier, according to Beverage Digest, a newsletter in Old Greenwich, Conn.
In comparison, No. 2 Pepsi fell to 17.7% from 18% and diet Coke at No. 3 fell to 8.9% from 9.1%.
With the new ads, many of which will be seen world-wide, Coke is targeting some consumers it heretofore ignored.
For instance, one spot is aimed at people who drink the caffeine-laden product after midnight and may find it as difficult to get to sleep as those who imbibe coffee after dinner.
The commercial is in French (although an English-language version will subsequently air in the U.S.) and features lots of leather, after-hour clubs and motorcycles.
Another commercial that easily fits into late-night programming is eye-catching and appropriately titled "Hypnosis."
The amusing spot shows a swinging Coke logo in front of video monitors and a pair of eyes.
The monotone voice-over repeats the order, "Go to the store and get lots of Coca-Cola. . . .
Disregard all other soft drink advertising."
Missing from this year's roster of spots are big-name CAA clients who directed some of last year's ads.
For instance, Richard Donner ("Lethal Weapon") and Rob Reiner ("When Harry Met Sally" and "A Few Good Men") were among directors to participate in last year's Coke campaign.
This year's crop of directors includes John Singleton ("Boyz N' the Hood") and Joan Gratz, who won an Academy Award for the animated short-subject film "Mona Lisa Descending a Staircase."
The entire "Always" campaign is "intrusive," says Jesse Meyers, publisher of Beverage Digest, who previewed the ads yesterday.
"That's good," he says.
"It makes you stop and look at them."
In what has to be encouraging news to Fallon-McElligott, its ads received the loudest laughter at a Coke news conference in Manhattan.
Its ads don't use quick edits and don't have a wise-guy attitude.
Instead, they have the dry, Midwest sensibility that Fallon is known for.
In one ad, a round banana, a square egg and green peas in a rectangular case are used to illustrate how certain products can come only in certain packages, just like Coke in its trademark bottle.
The sole McCann spot isn't very distinctive: It shows a pair of hands shuffling a deck of cards revealing images of a Coke bottle being poured into a glass.
Mr. Zyman says another agency, Wieden & Kennedy in Portland, Ore., which handles Nike ads, is on board to work on "new projects for me."
He wouldn't elaborate, although industry speculation is that Coca-Cola plans to introduce such new products as a beverage with a calorie count between diet Coke and Coke Classic.
Not only has McCann's role in creating domestic advertising for Coke diminished, but the agency's international turf also is under siege from another big global network, closely held D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles.
DMB&B has won two new assignments from the big client -- one domestic and one overseas, according to industry executives.
The win follows DMB&B's move last month to reorganize its Spanish-language units into an international network, called DMB&B Americas.
DMB&B officials couldn't be reached; Coke declined to comment.
Ad Notes. . . .
ACCOUNTS: PacTel Corp., the Walnut Grove, Calif., cellular phone and paging service company, tapped Chiat/Day of Venice, Calif., to create corporate advertising to support its planned spinoff from parent Pacific Telesis Group.
Estimated billings on the new account are $15 million. . . .
Canandaigua Wine Co., Canandaigua, N.Y., tapped Trone Advertising, Greensboro, N.C., to create ads for Paul Masson wines.
Billings weren't disclosed.
WHITTLE: A.C. Nielsen will start measuring the audience for Whittle Communications' Special Report Network, which brings programming and ads to patients in the waiting rooms of family physicians.
Nielsen employees will visit doctors' offices to count patients and see whether television sets are turned on and publications are available.
NBC ON LINE: General Electric's NBC network said it plans to launch its own interactive on-line service this spring on the Prodigy and America On-Line computer networks.
The electronic service, first reported in Advertising Age, also will carry merchandise from the NBC store, said Alan Cohen, senior vice president of marketing.
Prodigy is a unit of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co.
AC&R: Ad agency AC&R Advertising prevailed in a 1991 age-discrimination suit filed in federal court in Los Angeles by Patrick King, a former West Coast executive at the agency, who had charged he effectively was dismissed because he was over 50.
Still pending against the Saatchi & Saatchi unit are three other age-discrimination suits.
Mr. King and his attorneys couldn't be reached.
