Bernie Richter is one of the term-limit babies of the California Legislature, a 62-year-old businessman who rode a taxpayer revolt in his rural district north of the capital into an Assembly seat in 1992.
By 1998, he'll go home.
There's a bit of Jimmy Stewart's "Mr. Smith" character in this passionate man with a Main Street sensibility.
He's a free-market Republican but too independent or idealistic to fit neatly into the Capitol's longstanding and often cynical partisan warfare.
Sometimes he leaves the sharpies and hacks of the statehouse shaking their heads.
This was apparent last week when he pushed a bill to sidetrack California's zero-emission car mandate.
This regulation would force the introduction of battery-powered autos three years hence, hang the cost.
Though it may never be practical, the electric vehicle (EV) is a cute totem of our environmental aspirations.
To oppose it is to take a thousand volts to your green voting record.
Mr. Richter not only challenged the mandate but did so in fiery, even Randian rhetoric.
He alluded to the command Soviet economy and spoke of a "big lie" by which "the very people who make cars can be discredited so that their advice and opinions count for nothing, but some bureaucrat in the CARB {California Air Resources Board} or the Environmental Protection Agency or some politician in the Legislature, all of whom have never in their lives produced anything . . . shall order these large companies to produce what they think they should produce."
Richard Katz, chairman of the Assembly Transportation Committee that was considering the bill, thanked Mr. Richter for his "enlightening" remarks, drawing titters from the few hundred in the Jesse Marvin Unruh Hearing Room (a huge portrait of "Big Daddy," the former Assembly speaker, looks down on the audience).
The defeat of this challenge was foreordained -- as is most everything in Speaker Willie Brown's bailiwick -- but even some of Mr. Richter's fellow Republicans found his polemic only more reason to hit the road.
The bill got just two votes on the 16-member panel.
Another problem for Mr. Richter was his necessary ally, the auto manufacturers.
Legislators usually carry a bill on behalf of some interest group.
Although battling the EV is a personal cause for Mr. Richter (his brother is a car buff), the anti-mandate legislation was regarded as Detroit's bill.
The deadline-dreading industry assisted Mr. Richter, though it prefers to try to swing a deal with CARB, which drew up and enforces the mandate.
Neither option is promising: With little investment in the state, the auto makers have few friends in any quarter.
Critics hound car makers over various technological and safety improvements they have supposedly stifled over the years.
Richard Klimisch, engineering vice president at the auto makers' trade group, jokingly referred at the hearing to "the 50-mile-per-gallon carburetor hidden in a desk drawer," but for many people, including frustrated entrepreneurs, suspicions about Detroit's ways are real.
And not without reason.
Big corporations, like all entrenched entities, resist change.
The auto makers, especially, behaved like oligarchs until the 1980s.
Even recently, they've been cozy with the White House.
Nonetheless, Detroit is more attuned to customer wishes now, and it doesn't seem to think sappy sentiment about the EV translates into much real demand in the near future.
The auto makers can point to several technology busts -- antilock truck brakes, catalytic converters, interlocking starters, diesel cars -- that were directly or indirectly forced by government.
Even the air bag, which eventually caught on with the public, may yet prove to be a mistake.
Mr. Richter sought to be the car companies' defender, but it's a mistake to make too much of Detroit, pro or con.
For one thing, other powerful corporate interests are also involved in this fight.
There are the electric utilities, which in conjunction with government are prepared to subsidize the buyers of battery cars at the expense of general ratepayers.
And then there are the oil companies, distrusted even more than the auto makers but still big backstage players -- they financed a major study challenging the pollution gains to be had from EVs and calculating their tremendous overall costs.
An alternative-vehicle market doubtless will exist in the future, though it likely won't fit the specs that the California promoters have drawn up.
EVs already are profitable for companies that make them for niches such as shuttles and deliveries.
But a non-battery technology could be in the offing from unsubsidized capitalists, and Detroit might yet be surprised.
Even some of the work being spawned by the mandate may have mass-market use, just as the space program generated commercial spinoffs.
The important thing is not to hem in technology with stipulations that are too narrow and misdirect precious resources.
Prescribed innovation also leads to the creation of a lobby dedicated expressly to that narrow goal and forever unwilling to abandon it.
California already has seen this happen -- that's why so many guys in suits packed last week's hearing.
Mr. Richter understands that, and attacked the fulcrum of this activity.
Other legislators, not so willing to be spoilers, still wonder whether a zero-emission fixation will delay the arrival of a more practical engine nearly as clean.
That issue lies ahead for CARB.
Its staff gives no sign of backing off, citing induced progress toward meeting the mandate.
(The agency's edict builds toward a requirement of more than 200,000 no-emission cars sold annually in California by early next decade.)
The agency is now headed by Jacqueline Schafer, who was an environmental appointee of Ronald Reagan while he was president.
But with CARB's biennial review of its policy looming, she so far has toed the EV line.
Meanwhile, the electric lobby is rounding up new celebrities.
Robert Stempel, the former General Motors boss, is undertaking an EV venture, even as leaner and meaner GM backs away from the experiment that he and Roger Smith championed.
Nicolas Hayek of Swatch watch fame is teaming with Mercedes-Benz to try some heavy-duty putt-putts that include an all-electric model.
Surely the prospect of a guaranteed market in California and perhaps elsewhere in the U.S. will attract others.
If the mandate is kept, some of them will realize booty even if motorists never warm to their wares.
The big auto makers will throw them enough business to meet the quotas and everybody else can pay a little extra for their cars to cover EV marketing costs.
It may not be a "disaster," as Mr. Richter predicts, just another tailfin on the national economy.
But unlike him and his colleagues, the regulation does not have an expiration date.
