More than 67% of Ukraine's voters went to the polls yesterday, rendering the country's first democratic parliamentary elections since independence valid, preliminary results showed.
A 50% turnout was required.
But an emerging conflict between the executive and legislative branches of power threatens to further destabilize the tense political situation here, which could delay the implementation of economic reforms and undermine coming presidential elections.
"I would like to see a new parliament that is ethical, reform-minded, and professional so it could lead the country toward democracy," Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk said after voting.
But he reiterated his fear that the people wouldn't elect enough candidates to fill the 450-member parliament.
To win a seat, a candidate must receive more than 50% of the ballots cast.
With 5,833 registered candidates nationwide, some regions have more than 30 candidates on the ballots, and few races were expected to be decided yesterday.
Runoffs between the top two candidates in any given district are to be held by April 10.
But some officials in Kiev fear not enough people will vote in runoffs, leaving parliamentary seats vacant.
Mr. Kravchuk also reaffirmed his threat, originally voiced on national television Friday evening, to postpone the June 26 presidential elections if he felt they would be a destabilizing force.
Ivan Pliusch, the powerful chairman of Ukraine's parliament, soundly criticized Mr. Kravchuk for his pessimism over the parliamentary elections and his threat to delay the presidential ballot.
"There's no reason to be making all this negative noise.
I am deeply convinced there will be a full parliament," said Mr. Pliusch after voting yesterday.
Mr. Kravchuk has threatened that the country's old parliament would continue to work if voters failed to elect enough new lawmakers to constitute a quorum.
If the president carries out that threat, Ukraine would be faced with the same political deadlock that led to yesterday's election.
The previous parliament, which two years ago was clearly led by conservatives, has become severely splintered and unable to pass any effective legislation, including laws that would push the country to a market economy.
