They're popping up all over the Southwest: automobile ornaments in the shape of two-legged fish that look like they swallowed the word "Darwin."
That's Darwin as in Charles Darwin, the evolutionist.
The six-inch-long, silvery plastic bumper plaques are a tongue-in-cheek offshoot of their popular fish-shaped cousins, which adorn the rear panels of many cars as a traditional symbol of Christian faith.
But finding Darwin is a task for the fittest.
The creature is made by Evolution Design, a one-woman Austin, Texas, company that doesn't advertise, so folks have to rely on word of mouth or detective work to track down their prey.
Alex Karasik, a student in Berkeley, Calif., craved one; he finally saw a woman sleeping in her Darwin-decorated car and banged on the window to find out where she bought hers.
(Answer: Dark Carnival, a Berkeley science-fiction bookstore that sells "about 100 a week" at $4.95 each.)
Other Darwin-decorated products include lapel pins and T-shirts, one of which says on the back: "Support the theory of Evolution. 400 billion amphibians can't all be wrong!"
Darwin's creator is Chris Gilman, a North Hollywood, Calif., special-effects designer whose friend Daphne Loveland runs Evolution Design in her spare time.
Mr. Gilman says the idea struck him 10 years ago, but he didn't make a prototype until 1989.
The effect was instantaneous.
While driving, "people would honk their horn and I'd think, uh-oh," he says.
"But they'd be yelling, `That fish!
Where did you get it?' "
Some people take offense.
Parris McBride, whose 1981 Jeep sports a Darwin, says an angry stranger confronted her in a parking lot and told her she was "un-Christian."
A Dark Carnival customer found his bumper plaque broken in pieces -- and promptly bought 10 more.
But one maker of Christian fish doesn't mind the takeoff.
"I don't necessarily agree, but that's fine," says Walt Markus, whose Gateway Press Inc. in Murphys, Calif., makes several variations of the original fish.
"When someone copies your idea, it's a nice form of flattery."
