There's a new, quiet form of computer-aided trading for customers going on inside once-swashbuckling Salomon Inc., and some analysts think the firm's stock will get a boost from it.
In the past, investors grew seasick as the shares soared and plunged along with the various high-risk bets in stock and bond markets taken by the company's Salomon Brothers securities business.
But what's encouraging the bulls today is a new and more-circumspect mood within Salomon, which some think makes the stock unduly cheap at its current multiple of about 7 1/2 times trailing earnings.
Wanton risk is out, Salomon says.
Stability is in.
For evidence, take a look at Salomon's high-tech trading arm known as the Quantitative Trading Group.
It executes off-exchange computer-assisted program trades for big customers such as mutual-fund portfolio managers, at lower-than-usual commission rates.
A visit to the 40th-floor operation confirms it's a far cry from brash in-house trading realm for which Salomon was known in the 1980s.
In a corner, millions of dollars in stocks are traded with a touch of a button -- but not because some trader is gambling on the stocks' prospects.
The quantitative-trading unit is "exchanging" long lists of stocks from Salomon's inventory directly with customers at previously agreed-upon prices.
The benefit for customers: lower commission rates than conventional trading and no fuss, since the trades don't show up in the public markets.
"We would like to drive the cost of trading down as much as possible," says Neil Yelsey, a 35-year-old former stock analyst with an engineering degree who heads the trading operation.
His boss, Jonathan Sandelman, says the unit's improved "analytics" hold down both Salomon's risks and customers' costs.
(Salomon is also active in conventional program trading on the New York Stock Exchange.)
It's hard to suppress a grin when one hears Salomon, of all firms, talking about "customer service" and sophisticated computer software.
Salomon Brothers in the 1980s was known for a by-the-gut trading style for its own account that made earnings especially unpredictable.
That style worked fine, until Salomon's humiliation in the 1991 Treasury-auction bidding scandal.
But being forced to build up its customer-driven businesses could be a silver lining in that scandal.
According to last week's earnings report, nearly 74% of 1993 pretax earnings for Salomon Brothers came not from in-house trading but from customer-driven business.
That's up from 16% in 1992.
Of course, this isn't a trendy time to be positive on Salomon or any other brokerage-industry stock.
Though brokerage stocks jumped 27% in 1993, many investors are fleeing the sector, fearing the end is nigh for the bull market.
This week, Oppenheimer & Co. issued a "buy" rating on Salomon, citing the prospect for more-stable earnings as its business mix changes.
"They're definitely building up the customer-driven stuff," Oppenheimer analyst Steven Eisman said yesterday.
He set a price target of 60 to 65 for the stock over the next 12 to 18 months.
He called Salomon's current valuation -- including a price only 1.3 times book value -- "extremely compelling."
Mr. Eisman also issued buys on Merrill Lynch, now at 43 7/8, and Morgan Stanley, now at 79 1/2.
He cited those firms' inroads in Europe and emerging markets, plus beefed-up "management controls."
Salomon, for its part, is also moving to build up its management and risk systems.
Within Mr. Yelsey's unit, Salomon tries to keep such an accurate track of its stock inventory that it can complete multistock program trades directly with customers, at low cost to both sides.
Customers use Salomon-provided software to see the precise commission rates they will pay to trade any of the 400 or more stocks in the quantitative group's inventory.
A customer might scan the commission charges for each of, say, 100 stocks in a program package and choose to eliminate a few with high commissions.
For Salomon, it is all a more-stable game than gambling on interest rates.
"This is a business," says a Salomon spokesman, "where our balance sheet is used for the customer."
Salomon Inc.
Year ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Revenue: $8.80 billion
Net income: $827 million*; $6.28 a share**
Fourth quarter, Dec. 31, 1993:
Per-share earnings**: $3.64 vs. $1.06
Common shares outstanding: 110.8 million
