International financier George Soros plans to finance a $4 million emergency aid package for Macedonia, to help stave off the country's economic collapse.
Officials representing Mr. Soros's philanthropic organization said the aid program -- to be announced on Tuesday in Skopje, Macedonia -- will go toward purchasing grain to feed livestock, and that additional funds might be found to fly out an early crop of spring vegetables to Western markets.
The program is being organized by Mr. Soros and isn't connected to the Soros Foundation's operating budget.
Supply routes to Macedonia are being hampered by Greece's decision last month to close its borders with the former Yugoslav republic and to cut the landlocked nation's access to the Greek port of Salonika, the gateway for 70% of Macedonia's goods.
Greece imposed the blockade after Macedonia refused to give into a list of demands by Athens, including changing the country's name.
Greece says use of the name Macedonia implies territorial ambitions on the northern Greek province of the same name.
Mr. Soros said in a telephone interview that he hopes the aid will draw attention to the Macedonia issue and spur the European Union and the U.S. to pressure Greece to lift the embargo.
Mr. Soros described the embargo as an act of "blackmail" by Athens and said it was "shameful" that the EU and Washington have given in to it.
"Macedonia is a multi-ethnic state with a moderate government that is in danger of being torn apart by extremists if the embargo continues," Mr. Soros said.
"This could ignite a wider conflict drawing in neighboring countries that could become a second Bosnia."
The package consists of a $2.5 million low-interest loan to Macedonia to buy 20,000 tons of grain from Turkey, along with a personal gift of $1.5 million from Mr. Soros to finance transporting the feed by ship to Bulgaria and then by truck to Macedonia.
Additional funds might be made available by Mr. Soros to charter planes to bring 600 tons of Macedonian cucumbers and tomatoes to Vienna, where they will be sold.
Macedonia's economy is being squeezed on two fronts.
In addition to the Greek blockade, it has been hit by United Nations sanctions against neighboring Serbia, a major trading partner.
The result is fuel shortages, factory closings and recently, the slaughter of livestock because freighters carrying feed are blocked in Salonika.
The Macedonian government says losses due to the Greek embargo alone amount to $80 million a month.
"Our people are suffering, and the consequences of a prolonged Greek embargo could be terrible," said Macedonia's President Kiro Gligorov in a telephone interview.
Hungarian-born Mr. Soros runs Soros Fund Management, a successful hedge fund, in addition to financing 22 foundations in Eastern Europe and South Africa that promote cultural, educational, health and independent media activities.
