Enough anguished reactions from physicians have reached me and The Wall Street Journal (Letters to the Editor, Feb. 11) concerning a provocative quote attributed to me in a Jan. 14 article that I must set the record straight.
The controversial quote that elicited the anger does not reflect my own view on physicians at all.
The Journal's reporter had asked me a sophisticated question on what theory of justice politicians could single out a particular profession for taxation.
I responded that, to justify the strategy, the politicians must consider that profession overpaid relatively to what its members would earn in a freely competitive market.
I then speculated that politicians may draw that inference from the fact that, every year, about twice as many qualified American youngsters apply to American medical schools than are permitted to enter, and that strict licensure laws further protect the profession from competition (e.g., from nurse practitioners).
I told the reporter that politicians now seem to be saying to physicians that "you may keep your good incomes and your Mercedes cars, but you will have to treat more patients for that income.
We'll make sure of it by taxing away some of that income and then giving it back to you if you take care of the now underserved."
I mentioned further that this is a form of forced productivity gain -- analogous to telling factory workers "you must work a half-hour past 5 p.m. for the same pay."
From years of empirical research on medical practices, I know that physicians work the long hours (an average of about 60 hours a week) that are typical of all ambitious professionals in both the private and public sectors.
In the case of physicians, however, those long hours are irregular and often unusually taxing.
Having long marveled at the enormously high incomes that can quite easily be earned in finance, in jurisprudence and in management consulting, I would be the last to begrudge physicians their current income (now an average of close to $180,000 a year), in spite of the troublesome barriers to entry into the medical profession.
Indeed, I have often testified before Congress that picking on physician incomes as a cost-containment strategy will never yield much in the way of savings, as those incomes represent only about 12% of total health spending.
Finally, I see nothing amiss in physicians driving fine automobiles, should they fancy them.
At this time, American physicians are frightened by the prospect of "managed competition," which, as the Journal's Hilary Stout has astutely observed (Feb. 10) marches on regardless of government policy.
Under the circumstances, I would be loath to irritate the profession further.
Uwe E. Reinhardt
Princeton, N.J.
