Takeover-stock traders said Viacom Inc. has a clear but narrow edge over rival bidder QVC Network Inc. after Tuesday's final round of bidding for entertainment and publishing company Paramount Communications Inc.
Reflecting traders' view that QVC has the inferior bid, QVC stock surged yesterday, ending at $47 a share, up $2.25 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Viacom Class B shares sagged 62.5 cents a share to $33.50 on the American Stock Exchange.
Because the winning bidder for Paramount will issue millions of new shares and take on debt, shares of the perceived leading bidder usually fall, while the trailing bidder's stock rises.
Tuesday's final bids climaxed an epic takeover battle for one of the last remaining independent entertainment companies.
Paramount has been swept up in a frenzy of demand for programming among cable-TV, publishing, and telecommunications companies, all jockeying for position in the multimedia future.
Richard H. Schneider, a takeover-stock trader, said, "I think it is very clear that Viacom has come up with real, quantifiable value to the Paramount shareholders, and absent some strong turn of events, my feeling is that Viacom will be the Paramount victor."
But the higher market value of QVC's cash-and-stock offer continued to confuse some investors during trading yesterday and clouded the outcome of the contest.
Investors have until Feb. 14 to choose between the two offers.
QVC, a home-shopping company, was clearly hoping to capitalize on the fact that the market value of its offer, which now tops $87 a share, or $10.4 billion, far exceeds the roughly $83-a-share, $10 billion value of Viacom's bid -- even though most traders consider those daily price quotes almost meaningless.
Meanwhile, Paramount's operations have suffered, even as the bidding for the company has escalated.
Yesterday, Paramount surprised Wall Street with the announcement that it expects to report a loss of about $35 million to $40 million, or 29 cents to 33 cents a share, for its fiscal third quarter, ended Monday.
That would compare with a loss of $66.8 million, or 56 cents a share, a year earlier.
Paramount said it expects to report an $18 million loss from cable channel USA Network, which it owns jointly with MCA Inc.
Paramount said it also will report a loss in its movie operations, largely because of an unexpected write-down on the film "Addams Family Values."
Analysts generally had expected the company to report a profit in the quarter.
"This is another indication of the volatility and riskiness of this business," said Ed Hatch, an analyst at UBS securities.
"QVC or Viacom will have their work cut out for them in turning Paramount around."
Paramount shares slumped $1.875 a share to $78 on the New York Stock Exchange, reflecting disappointment among investors who had been hoping for huge last-minute increases in one or both of the offers, as well as concern about Paramount's results.
Both QVC and Viacom had been informed of the expected loss.
Meanwhile, some traders who began the day calling Viacom, a cable-TV programmer, the sure winner were less certain by midafternoon, based on reports that QVC might take new steps to get back into the contest.
People in the QVC camp, unwilling to concede defeat, were said to be weighing at the very least a public-relations campaign to promote QVC stock in the two weeks leading up to Feb. 14.
With Viacom ahead in the view of many of the short-term traders, who own roughly half the stock, QVC hopes to win support among longer-term institutional investors by stressing its business prospects over Viacom's.
"Much will depend on QVC's persuasiveness over the next two weeks and the support the stock will receive from BellSouth and others," said Mr. Hatch.
Lisbeth Barron, an analyst at S.G. Warburg & Co. added, "If you're a trader, you don't have any choice but to go to Viacom."
But she said investors with "any type of longer-term perspective" may favor QVC, partly because it would buy Paramount with less debt.
There was also speculation that QVC or one of its corporate allies might act to improve the QVC bid by announcing a plan to acquire QVC shares, which could bolster the stock component of QVC's bid.
But such a move might draw a legal challenge, because both companies agreed not to make changes in their offers after Feb. 1, under bidding procedures set up six weeks ago by Paramount, and any coordinated QVC share-buying plan could be interpreted as a changed bid.
Charles Leeds, a partner at Omega Advisers Inc., a hedge fund that owns more than four million Paramount shares, said he believes the Viacom bid is "clearly superior" to QVC's by a margin of about $2 a Paramount share.
Traders said Viacom's stock was trading on a basis that includes the dilutive effects of issuing stock to finance the acquisition, while QVC's stock was trading without such dilutive effects.
One trader with a large Paramount position assumes that QVC stock would trade at $35 a share if QVC won the contest, $12 below its current market value, but that Viacom B shares would only trade $1.50 a share below the current market price if Viacom won.
On that basis, this trader values the QVC bid at $79.30 a share, or $9.5 billion, compared with $81.05 a share, or $9.7 billion, for Viacom.
Another trader noted that QVC's bid includes $3.4 billion in common stock, compared with only $1.9 billion for Viacom, but that Viacom's stock component is protected with a security designed to provide value if Viacom stock doesn't rise over the next few years.
Paramount advisers, clearly concerned that the bidding process resulted in such disappointing bids while the company's fundamentals are detriorating, were also mapping plans to end the process even if neither bidder gains 50.1% of Paramount stock by Feb. 14.
One plan under consideration, if neither bidder gained the required majority, was for the Paramount board to drop the company's poison-pill takeover defense for whichever bidder received more shares under its tender offer.
The board, which endorsed Viacom's last bid on Jan. 21, is expected to hold to that view at a meeting tomorrow.
Meanwhile, a person in the Viacom camp said that Paramount's disappointing earnings estimate "doesn't change the way Viacom looks at the value of the asset."
QVC had no comment.
Analysts were particularly surprised by the results at USA Network, long considered one of the industry's most successful cable channels.
But the company apparently overpaid for programming that didn't generate expected ratings and advertising dollars.
Paramount said USA expects to record a $78 million pretax charge for the year ended Dec. 31, to adjust the value of rights to the programming.
Laura Landro contributed to this article.
