Some people may see the Transmedia Executive Savings Card as an unofficial invitation to bend the rules.
For an annual fee of $50, these charge cards, distributed mostly in the New York City area, offer holders 25% discounts on meals at more than 1,000 restaurants.
But for those willing to take a chance with their employers or the Internal Revenue Service, there's another advantage: The restaurant receipt, which is commonly submitted to support expense account claims or tax deductions, shows the full retail price of the meal.
The real bill, the one that reflects the 25% discount, comes later to the card holder's home as part of his or her regular monthly credit card statement.
"We make no bones about it.
You could be reimbursed for more than you paid," says Melvin Chasen, chairman of Transmedia Network Inc., the Florida-based company that offers the cards.
Mr. Chasen says he isn't advocating expense-account fraud.
"That's between you and your company," he says.
"I would personally be hesitant about doing it.
Unless the company doesn't care."
Besides, he argues, some say the discount is similar to frequent flyer miles that many traveling business people get to keep, even though their companies paid for the ticket.
The other school of thought, he concedes, is that it's cheating.
Transmedia Network makes its money by acting like a bank for restaurants.
It advances them money now in exchange for double that amount in food and drink credits later.
Transmedia, in turn, passes along half of the discount -- 25% off the menu prices -- to card members and earns a profit from the remainder.
Although restaurants seem to be getting the short end of the stick, a surprising number of them, of all types, have signed up with Transmedia.
Restaurateurs say they get a needed influx of money and customers from the deal.
If all goes according to plan, Transmedia makes money, the restaurants get new business, and the customers get a cheaper meal.
Recently the New York Times Co. joined the Transmedia plan, offering a co-branded Transmedia Card called the Transmedia TimesCard to subscribers who prepay a six-month, seven-day-a-week subscription at the undiscounted price.
The newspaper's aim is to reduce overdue subscription payments, cut down on subscriber attrition and subscription discounting.
In a letter to subscribers, Charles E. Shelton, the newspaper's vice president of circulation, tells potential card members what's in it for them: "Just present your Transmedia TimesCard when you get your check, as you would any other charge card.
Your charge slip discreetly shows full menu prices and any tax.
Just add your normal tip and sign.
Later on, the total appears on the Visa, MasterCard or Discover account you've pre-specified . . . minus your 25% credit on the food and beverage portion of your bill."
Mr. Shelton couldn't be reached for elaboration.
"There certainly is an opportunity for fraud" using the Transmedia TimesCard, acknowledges Daniel Cohen, the Times's group director for promotion.
But Times employees who use their own Transmedia TimesCards or regular Transmedia cards for business purposes had better be above board when submitting expenses.
"In this building we've circulated memos," he says.
"The people in finance know enough to say, `Hey, you didn't include the discount.'"
Other companies have gone so far as to forbid the use of personal credit cards for business expenses.
The Internal Revenue Service, however, is a little more laissez faire.
"The fact that the card may be abused doesn't generate abuse," says an IRS spokesman.
He warns, however: "If someone used the face amount rather than the real transaction cost, that could be a problem."
Restaurateurs who accept the card are under no illusions about what happens.
"I suspect there is an awful lot of untruthful reporting," says Jeanelle Myers, the manager of Manhattan's Broome Street Bar & Grill.
