House Ways and Means Democrats upheld a central premise of the Clinton administration's healthcare initiative: the proposed requirement that all employers help buy health insurance for their workers.
The 6-5 vote represented a badly needed victory for the White House.
It set the tone for a day of partisan skirmishing in the panel's health subcommittee over a Democratic-backed alternative to the Clinton plan.
The measure would abandon, or streamline, major parts of the president's proposal, and establish a new government-run, Medicare-like program for small businesses and lower-income workers unable to get private coverage.
Its basic benefits package would be less extensive than the president's.
But like Mr. Clinton's plan, the alternative would rely on employer contributions to help achieve the goal of assuring coverage for all Americans.
The panel's four Republicans, joined by Rep. Mike Andrews (D., Texas), took immediate aim at the so-called employer mandate in amendments.
But as the voting showed, Democrats retain a working majority, which Democratic leaders hope will enable them to move the bill to the full Ways and Means Committee for action next month.
Rep. John Lewis (D., Ga.) said the Republican-led assault on the employer mandate would be "a dagger in the heart of the bill."
Republicans portrayed the issue as a "fault-line" dividing the two parties in their approach to health reform.
"It is a dagger at the heart of small business," said California Rep. Bill Thomas, the subcommittee's ranking minority member.
"This is not Social Security. . . .
It is the mother of all entitlements."
By the 6-5 margin that upheld the employer mandate, the panel beat back a GOP effort to cap tax benefits of corporations and individuals for employer-financed health-insurance plans.
Advocates say limiting the tax benefits would stimulate market forces to reduce health costs by making purchasers of health services more sensitive to prices.
Yesterday's debate left open the possibility of future compromise on the issue as Democrats look for resources to soften the burden the legislation would impose on small businesses and lower-income workers.
One option would involve reducing the mandate on small employers and offering an individual tax credit to help workers pay for the remainder.
Rep. Jim McCrery (R., La.), who offered yesterday's tax amendment, said union workers, who have negotiated for richer health benefits, could continue to receive today's favorable treatment through the length of their contracts.
And Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark, the subcommittee chairman, admitted he had "flirted" with the idea of capping the tax benefits for at least wealthy individuals to help pay for coverage for lower-wage workers.
"It is something that must be looked at," said Rep. Benjamin Cardin (D., Md.) of the current policy tax policy.
"We can no longer continue the unlimited deductibility policies we have had in the past."
In yesterday's action, Rep. Andrews was the Democrats' most consistent defector, although the panel's six other Democrats are restive too.
Rep. Sander Levin (D., Mich.) served notice that he wants to delay the effective date for much of the bill by a year.
But Rep. Gerald Kleczka (D., Wis.), after wavering in the past, sounded a more positive note last night despite his continued reservations about some provisions.
Mr. Stark, for his part, was clearly pleased with the tenor of the day.
"I'm sure that every one of the six Democrats who participated want to get a bill out," said the Californian.
"I think they will."
Despite his initial opposition to the employer mandate, Mr. Andrews later joined his six Democratic colleagues in supporting an additional requirement for employers.
Offered by Mr. Kleczka, the amendment would require employers of workers with nonworking spouses to pay 80% of the cost of health policies covering the workers' entire families.
Rep. Lewis said the provision was important in guaranteeing health coverage for women.
Rep. Nancy Johnson (R., Conn.) protested the provision, declaring: "We are heaping costs on small businesses at such a rate that the disincentive to expand employment is becoming very real."
Later she warned: "This will put some firms in my district out of business, make no mistake about it."
The amendment passed on a 7-4 party-line vote.
Democrats also narrowly defeated an amendment by Rep. Fred Grandy (D., Iowa) that would have stricken a provision requiring employers who currently pay part of the cost of early retirees' health insurance to pay 80% of the cost of providing Medicare coverage for these people.
Early-retiree health costs have become an increasing burden for a number of large manufacturing companies, including the Big Three auto makers in Rep. Levin's home state.
Mr. Clinton's plan would solve the problem by having the government take over 80% of all early-retiree health costs.
Mr. Stark said the president's plan is "too generous."
But he said he opposed Mr. Grandy's amendment as "too parsimonious."
The amendment was voted down 6-5.
Party lines sometimes blurred when it came to more technical provisions involving the employer mandate.
Three Republicans joined four Democrats, for example, in supporting an amendment by Mr. Cardin designed to assure that employers give their workers choice in health plans.
As drafted, the bill would require employers to pay 80% of whatever plan a worker chooses; Mr. Cardin argued that would have encouraged employers to offer only the cheapest plans to avoid having to shell out more money.
His amendment would require employers to pay only for 80% of the cost of the lowest-priced plan meeting certain criteria in their regions; that presumably would free employers to offer workers more costly plans because they wouldn't have to incur additional costs themselves in doing so.
At another juncture, Rep. Johnson, a proponent of market-oriented health-care reforms, supported an amendment by Rep. Jim McDermott (D., Wash.), the chief sponsor of a single-payer, government-run option.
Mr. McDermott wanted to expand the proposed Medicare-like coverage to be available not only to small employers but to large companies as well.
"If you would help me marketize Medicare, I'll help you Medicare the market," she told Mr. McDermott.
She later was the only Republican to support his motion, but it nonetheless failed on a 5-5 tie vote.
