Nearly 50 years ago, the specter of long-term mass joblessness unnerved America.
World War II had ended in triumph, but the outbreak of peace held its own perils.
The Great Depression had been submerged by war rather than resolved, and there seemed little reason to believe that 1948 would look much different from 1938.
The returning GIs, it was thought, must either displace the new workers who had run the wartime economy or else face unemployment themselves as the Depression set in again.
It seemed perfectly plain, to experts and ordinary citizens alike, that prospects were grim for a huge number of American workers.
Yet this period of apparently wellfounded pessimism gave way to an era of rapid growth and rising living standards.
The transition was by no means painless.
But the main story, still, is the enormous discrepancy between the fearful expectations of the postwar years and the positive turn that history actually took.
The explanation seems simple: Americans at the time had a vivid picture of imperiled old jobs and only dim inklings of better jobs to come.
The economy's capacity to create new jobs simply exceeded the mind's capacity to imagine them.
We may be at such a juncture once again.
Global competition, defense downsizing, corporate restructuring and technological change have put many established jobs at risk.
Even informed Americans despair that there will ever be enough good jobs for new entrants to the labor force or for displaced workers.
Anxious voices -- "Where are the jobs?"
"Training for what?" -- greet proposals to reform education and deliver competitive job skills.
The future, to be sure, is ultimately as unknowable in 1994 as it was in 1949.
But we may be able to use the lessons of the past -- as well as some modest advances in economic forecasting -- to gain a degree of insight into the jobs of the future.
A clearer view of employment prospects may prevent pessimism from undermining concrete measures that would make the good jobs of the future come faster and more surely for American workers.
All the evidence points to strong, long-term growth in demand for workers with problem-solving skills.
In the Clinton administration's first 11 months, the economy created more than 1.6 million private-sector jobs.
Over the past year, nearly half of the employment growth has been in managerial and professional jobs.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts that the number of jobs for technicians will grow 37% between 1990 and 2005.
Yet these familiar categories are only approximate labels for the skill-centered work that is emerging.
Distinctions are eroding.
The old hierarchy of mid-level managers, lower-level supervisors and low-skilled drones is blurring into a broad class of workplace problem-solvers.
Expertise and authority seep away from the front office and are dispersed throughout the productive team.
"Goods" and "services" are becoming less distinct, as more and more of the value of a product is embedded in related services delivered both before it is manufactured (design, programming, process engineering) and after it is sold (targeted distribution, customized installation, training in applications).
Credentialism is breaking down.
Many of the fastest-growing good jobs -- factory technician, data-processor -- don't require a college degree.
But as formal credentials become less essential, up-to-date skills become ever more crucial -- even in jobs where the unskilled could formerly thrive.
Workers without skills, meanwhile, find their options shrinking.
More than ever before, what you earn depends on what you learn.
Americans without training beyond high school have suffered a continuing decline in earnings over the past 15 years.
High-school dropouts have been hit even harder, with collapsing wage rates and rising unemployment.
Like comparable periods before, our current era of rapid economic change opens new opportunities.
Every American can develop the skills to make it in the new economy.
The winners won't be limited to college graduates.
A recent study by economists Tom Kane and Cecilia Rouse found that every year of postsecondary training in universities or community colleges, and whether leading to a degree or not, boosts annual earning power by 5% to 10%.
The good jobs of the future won't fit neatly into our current categories of "manager/managed" or "high-tech/low-tech."
Examples abound.
There's a new kind of delivery truck driver equipped with a computer and modem in her cab, so she can time deliveries to exactly when customers need them, and then custom-assemble the complex machinery she's delivering.
She shares little more than a job title with the trucker of 10 years ago.
She's a high-skilled service technician, and she's making good money.
Throughout the economy, familiar-sounding jobs are becoming more demanding, and more rewarding, as job descriptions metamorphose.
In 1990, just 18% of the functions in a typical Ford automobile were computer-controlled.
In 1994, the proportion is 82%.
This technological shift has profound consequences for the number and nature of good jobs.
Auto mechanics skilled in computer diagnostics can command annual salaries ranging from $30,000 to $75,000.
In the same way, assembly work is transformed, as a new kind of factory worker sits behind a computer, programming and reprogramming a robot that does the pulling and twisting that human beings used to do.
The bad news about our current juncture in economic history is real enough: More and more old jobs are imperiled by global economic integration and technological change.
Fewer and fewer Americans can count on holding a single job throughout their careers, and the unskilled face worsening odds for sustainable prosperity.
But the good news is equally real, if less obvious: The payoff to skills is surging.
Technological evolution is spawning a profusion of good new jobs.
Integrated, expanding global markets create many more opportunities than they close off.
And the skills needed for many of these high-skill, high-wage jobs can be learned, often through two-year associate's degrees, apprenticeship programs and on-the-job training.
Hard questions remain.
How do we ensure that the right kinds of training are available, at the right time, as Americans struggle with work-force transitions?
How do we buffer the shock of change for workers who now depend on vulnerable jobs and industries?
The Clinton administration is working hard to answer these questions.
But one question -- "training for what?" -- is easier to answer than it seems.
The evidence shows that skills pay off.
The evidence shows that American workers can learn.
"Training for what?"
For the high-skill work taking shape all around us today.
America's economy is racing into the future.
There is no excuse for leaving a single citizen behind.
Mr. Reich is the U.S. secretary of labor.
