Mom and pop may not realize that their high-yield junk-bond mutual fund is investing not only in Donald Trump's casinos, but also in Argentina.
It was a grand idea in 1993, when developing-country debt helped to turbo-charge some junk funds' total returns, which averaged 20% overall.
That success has enticed several other junk funds to stray beyond the familiar turf of U.S. corporate debt.
Some have put 10% to 30% of their money in the notes and bonds of developing-country governments and companies.
The foreigners naturally are happy to have such investors; China on Friday announced plans for a $1 billion global bond offering, its first ever.
But the future may be less rosy for investors.
Buyers of developing-country debt -- which may include some unwitting junk-fund investors -- face a whole new list of worries: Third World political upheaval, high inflation, a long history of defaults and currency zigzags.
So this is a good time for investors to consider whether the "high-yield" funds they own are turning into frequent globe-trotters and whether they want to go along for the ride.
Curtiss Barrows has a warm spot in his heart for Argentina, Indonesia, Hungary and the Philippines, just a few of the countries that helped steer his Phoenix High Yield Fund to a 21.48% total return (price change plus income) for 1993.
"If it weren't for that 25% of my portfolio invested in developing-nation bonds my total returns would have been mediocre," he says.
"When I started buying this stuff" three years ago, "my bosses thought I was nuts.
Now they love me."
Mr. Barrows isn't alone.
Managers of several top-performing junk funds say they have increased or plan to increase holdings of developing-nation notes and bonds, especially in Latin America.
Economic reforms and new trade agreements have sparked a rebirth of investing in developing nations, many of which were in default just a few years ago.
U.S. fund managers are willing to take on the often murky political and economic risks in exchange for a shot at huge returns.
Prices for some of Peru's defaulted loan paper, for example, have jumped from less than a dime on the dollar to about 70 cents in three years.
Among the most popular nations are Mexico, Argentina and Venezuela.
Some managers, such as Mr. Barrows, are looking at Eastern European and Asian nations as well.
Not every manager is jumping on the bandwagon.
David Glancy manages the Fidelity Spartan High Income Fund at Fidelity Investments, which has an army of researchers for developing-nation stocks and bonds.
Yet Mr. Glancy says his fund, which had a 1993 return of 21.04%, is "probably one of the most underrepresented in emerging markets" among junk-bond funds.
"If people want to own emerging-markets funds, they can own them," he says.
"People are going to be really ticked off if they lose money in a junk-bond fund because the manager was putting money into the debt of Sri Lanka."
For investors who actually read the fine print in prospectuses and understand what they are getting into, the strategy isn't necessarily a problem.
"It's not misleading, in the sense that it's described in their prospectuses," says Bart R. Geer, manager of MetLife State Street High Income Fund, which had a 1993 return of 22.32%.
"But, given where the money has historically been invested, people may not know to ask the question. . . .
Would they feel comfortable with the answer?"
Playing Third-World bonds is "a bit like taking some of my client's money and saying, `let's play red or black.'"
But many managers are enthusiastic.
Keystone Group Inc., for example, placed two funds among the top 10 junk-bond funds last year: Keystone America Strategic Income Fund, up 31.69%, and Keystone Custodian Fund Series B-4, up 26.22%.
Donald Keller, a senior portfolio manager, says Strategic Income has 30% of its assets in developing-nation bonds, and the figure could go as high as 50% this year; two years ago it had none.
And Custodian Fund has 25% in developing nations.
Oppenheimer High Yield Fund, which had a total return of 21.37% in 1993, has about 11% of assets in developing-nation bonds, says portfolio manager Ralph Stellmacher.
PaineWebber High Income Fund A, which returned 22.79% in 1993, is considering buying developing-country bonds, says manager Evan Steen, but is unlikely to reach the holding levels of Keystone's highflying funds.
And Jin Ho, manager of Putnam High Yield Advantage Fund, which had a 21.04% return in 1993 and already owns a few developing-nation bonds, is considering even greater commitments to the sector.
The line between the foreign-bond market and U.S. junk bonds is blurring.
Mr. Ho of Putnam says: "The trend you will be seeing going forward is the merging of high-yield and emerging-market debt resources."
Salomon Brothers Inc., for example, is trying hard to persuade junk-bond managers that the leap from U.S. junk bonds to foreign bonds is more like a baby step.
Last spring, the securities firm, a unit of Salomon Inc., sent a much-talked-about guide to its clients titled "Evaluating Sovereign Credit Risk: A High-Yield Analysts' Guide."
The guide dismisses managers' fears, calling attention to the "revolutionary political and economic changes" of the 1980s, which provide "an opportunity for the high-yield investor in the area of sovereign bonds."
The guide makes the argument that with some training, a junkfund manager can do his own analysis of foreign government bonds just as he would with U.S. corporate junk bonds.
Mr. Barrows has been among the most receptive.
Some of his competitors wonder how he can do all the necessary analysis without a fully staffed research department specializing in foreign bonds.
"They want me to have piles of charts and stuff from my own research department, and I think that's a bunch of baloney," he retorts.
"I already have piles of research" from the firms that sell the bonds, such as J.P. Morgan, Goldman, Sachs & Co., and Salomon Brothers, he says.
Until recently, bond markets such as Mexico's were very illiquid -- difficult to buy and sell in easily because there were few market makers and willing investors.
But the situation has changed.
Many managers no longer feel compelled to treat many developing-nations bonds as illiquid credits.
Many U.S. funds are limited to holding just 15% of their assets in such credits.
Certain developing-nation bond markets "offer as much and perhaps in some instances more liquidity than you can find" in U.S. junk bonds, says Mr. Stellmacher of Oppenheimer.
Thomas Ole Dial, a portfolio manager at the recently launched Northstar High Yield Fund, says that if a security is traded by three or more market makers, he might count it as liquid.
But true liquidity means you can easily sell a bond into a bear market; most developing-nation bonds have yet to experience that.
Stratospheric returns aren't necessarily proof that a fund is binging on developing-nation debt.
Dean Witter's High Yield Fund was within spitting distance of being last year's top-performing junk-bond fund, with a total return of 31.59%.
The Dean Witter fund doesn't own any developing-nation bonds, nor does it plan to buy any, the firm says.
Vanguard Group won't put developing-nation bonds in its junk-bond funds.
It doesn't even have any so-called emerging-market bond funds.
"We think there is a lot of risk" in these markets, says Jeremy G. Duffield, a Vanguard senior vice president.
"It's easy to forget" when investors "have been well rewarded" as they were in 1993.
China and Mexico's Banco Nacional de Comercio Exterior SNC each are scheduled to sell $1 billion of global bonds by the end of this month.
China announced on Friday that it filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell $1 billion of noncallable 10-year notes through a group of underwriters led by Merrill Lynch & Co.
The offering will be China's first dollar-denominated global offering.
Bancomext also plans to sell $1 billion of noncallable 10-year notes through lead managers Goldman, Sachs & Co. and Merrill Lynch.
Meanwhile U.S. Treasury securities took another beating Friday and ended a roller-coaster week lower.
Behind Friday's decline was more economic news casting doubt on the belief that the economic recovery might have been losing strength at the end of 1993.
In fact, traders said, there are signs that some of the economic vigor has been spilling over into 1994.
Strong economic indicators are generally bearish for the bond market because they pose the threat of higher inflation, which erodes the value of fixed-income investments.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped 1/2 point, or $5 for a bond with a face value of $1,000, to 99 13/32; the yield climbed to 6.29% from 6.25% on Thursday.
The bond market's troubles began in early trading after the Federal Reserve Board reported that industrial production jumped 0.7% in December.
Traders had anticipated a smaller rise of about 0.4%, and the news immediately sent prices lower.
Then at mid-morning, the market took another hit from news of a greater-than-expected increase in consumer confidence.
The University of Michigan's confidence index was said to have risen to 95.8 for the first half of January from 88.2 in December.
The report is made available only to subscribers.
At the same time, business inventories were reported up 0.6% in November.
The data only served to deepen the bearish sentiment that was sparked Thursday by a larger-than-expected rise in retail sales.
And all the data taken together have prompted enough investor selling to erode much of the improvement in bond prices following week's employment report.
"It looks like we came out of the fourth quarter stronger than the market had thought," said Mead Briggs, head of risk trading at Deutsche Bank Government Securities.
In response to that shift in sentiment, "there has been retail selling," Mr. Briggs said.
This week will be a shortened week for cash bond trading; the market is closed today in observance of Martin Luther King Day.
