Members of the Senate Banking Committee embraced the goal of a less cumbersome bank-supervisory system but opposed aspects of the Treasury's plan to consolidate four regulatory agencies into one.
Several senators suggested that the Clinton administration will have to accept compromises if it wants to get a plan through.
The administration is proposing to place the regulatory authority of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve Board and the Office of Thrift Supervision into a new Federal Banking Commission.
"No other country has a regulatory system anywhere near as confused as ours," Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told the panel.
He said that banking organizations controlling nearly 50% of the nation's bank assets are governed by three or four regulators, and he called the cost and complexity of overlapping regulation "a serious disadvantage in today's competitive world."
But the Fed has campaigned hard against the plan, claiming that the loss of regulatory power would impede its ability to conduct monetary policy and to control financial crises.
Mr. Bentsen testified that the administration has tried to accommodate the Fed's concerns, but that the central bank has responded with a plan that would significantly expand the number of banks under its regulatory control.
Republican efforts to use Banking Committee hearings as a device to explore President and Hillary Rodham Clinton's dealings with Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, a failed Arkansas thrift, are also a potential complication.
GOP Sen. Christopher Bond of Missouri yesterday asked whether anybody in the Clinton administration had discussed Worthen Banking Corp. of Little Rock while crafting the proposal.
The Fed is investigating whether the bank's close relationship with the Stephens family, the wealthy Arkansas investment bankers, violates banking law.
If the administration plan passes, Worthen, which agreed to lend Mr. Clinton $3.5 million during his presidential campaign, would no longer be subject to Fed supervision.
Frank Newman, Treasury undersecretary for domestic finance, said of Worthen: "It was never raised in any of the interagency meetings.
It was absolutely not a factor whatsoever in any way in our approach here.
This is 100% driven by the desire for good government, for efficiency, and for us to have a healthier banking system going forward for this country."
Sen. Bond noted that in 1992 The Wall Street Journal quoted Curt Bradbury, Worthen's chairman, as saying: "I would like to be in a position to think I could call the president of the United States and give him my views -- on the Federal Reserve, for example."
Mr. Bradbury explained in that article that he was referring to economic, not regulatory, matters.
Mr. Bond asked Mr. Bentsen to provide a list of the people in the administration who discussed the regulatory consolidation plan.
After the hearing, Sen. Bond said that Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman last month briefed several White House officials on the timetable for possible government lawsuits against people involved in the collapse of Madison Guaranty, and he wanted to see whether any of these officials also participated in discussions of the regulatory restructuring plan.
The former owner of Madison was a business and political associate of Mr. Clinton.
An independent counsel is studying allegations that funds from the thrift may have been used improperly to fund Mr. Clinton's campaigns or an investment in Whitewater Development Co., an Arkansas real-estate venture.
President Clinton has denied any wrongdoing.
Sen. Bond also said that bankers favor efforts to reduce regulation but aren't supporting the consolidation plan.
Mr. Bentsen agreed, saying: "I think there's been a major, major misunderstanding and a misstatement of what we're trying to do here."
He insisted that the plan would protect the current dual banking system, which gives banks a choice of being regulated primarily by federal or state regulators.
In fact, he said, healthy state-chartered banks with less than $250 million in assets would be examined solely by state authorities and that larger state-chartered banks would be examined by state authorities in alternate years, as they are now.
After the hearing, Mr. Newman said the fees that some large state banks pay would rise under the Treasury plan.
He also said that the fees most banks pay for examinations will stay the same or fall.
