New trademark laws throughout Southeast Asia, which were supposed to put the brakes on the region's thriving counterfeiting industry, are less effective than many companies had hoped.
Clothing makers Levi Strauss Associates Inc., Pierre Cardin and Alfred Dunhill of London Inc. are learning this the hard way, through litigation with an Indonesian company that has laid claim to some of their most lucrative trademarks.
Trademark lawyers say the problem, in Indonesia and elsewhere in Southeast Asia, is that the region's culture and courts continue to bolster the counterfeiting industry because of its economic strength in the area.
"It's one thing to have a law on the books," said Steven M. Weinberg, a Phoenix attorney and an executive editor of the Trademark Reporter, an industry newsletter.
"It's another thing to have cultural values and views change in order to accommodate, particularly, the interests of people who are from outside the country or region."
Some judges, for instance, interpret the new laws in ways that favor their country's economy, Mr. Weinberg said.
He added that the trademark-rights environment has, nonetheless, improved significantly for foreign companies from a decade ago.
Indonesia is one of at least eight Southeast Asian nations that beefed up antipiracy laws and policies in the past year because of pressures by the U.S. and other countries.
Piracy in Asia cost U.S. companies at least $2 billion in 1992, according to the International Intellectual Property Alliance, a Washington lobbying group.
The new Indonesian law did away with the country's previous trademark-approval process, under which the first company to file for a trademark received it -- even if the trademark already was used elsewhere by another company.
Under that old law, one company, PT Makmur Perkasa Abadi, registered trademarks used by Pierre Cardin, Levi Strauss, Alfred Dunhill and other multinationals.
Under the new law, which took effect in April, companies must demonstrate that they're entitled to a trademark before they can receive it.
However, PT Makmur argues that it still holds its previously registered trademarks to belts and hats made by Paris-based Pierre Cardin, and also that it owns the trademark "Levi's," according to James B. Lumenta, a Jakarta lawyer who represents Pierre Cardin and Levi Strauss.
PT Makmur also contends that it owns the trademark to Alfred Dunhill's leather products.
In the U.S., such disputes would be resolved quickly because foreign companies generally win trademark protection if they've already registered the mark in their home countries.
Levi Strauss, based in San Francisco, actually won a Jakarta court order nullifying PT Makmur's right to the "Levi's" trademark, but the Indonesian Trademark Office simply ignored the ruling.
A judge in the same court subsequently suspended the cancellation order, allowing the Indonesian company to keep the trademark, according to Mr. Lumenta.
Meanwhile, PT Makmur has sued Levi's, Pierre Cardin and Alfred Dunhill for allegedly violating the Indonesian company's trademarks.
"It's an outrage," said Bernard Danillon, a spokesman in Paris for designer Pierre Cardin, who traveled to Indonesia last year to speak out about the trademark problems.
"He is very upset."
Many companies, confronted with such a problem, buy back their trademarks from the usurping companies.
"But we didn't want to get into that because it would be a never-ending story," said Michael Blakeney, Alfred Dunhill's general manager for trademarks.
None of the companies were able to provide an estimate of their losses from the trademark disputes.
Neither PT Makmur nor its lawyer could be reached for comment.
Corruption and bribery within the trademark-enforcement system are major reasons that the problems persist.
"People want money," said Mr. Lumenta, a partner in Amroos Law Consultants.
"As long as the mentality doesn't change, I don't think we'll get very far" on enforcement.
