Something has gone awry in rural Texas' quest for economic development.
In Hidalgo, funds earmarked for the creation of new industrial jobs were used to build a statue of a giant killer bee.
In Cameron, officials are using similar funds to keep the local hospital afloat.
And in Kemah, officials approved using such money for the purchase and stringing of Christmas lights in the town.
"It's kind of a constant battle to keep this money reserved for what it was intended for," says Sen. Bill Ratliffe, a Republican from Mount Pleasant.
"There are going to be cases where people don't use it wisely."
If anybody knows the purpose of this money, it's Mr. Ratliffe: In 1989, he sponsored the legislation that gave Texas' smaller cities -- those in counties with fewer than 500,000 people -- the opportunity to collect up to a 1/2-cent sales tax, provided the proceeds were used for the creation of industrial jobs.
The law was amended two years later, permitting some larger cities to collect the tax and use it for a broader range of purposes; Arlington's $190 million stadium was primarily financed by the tax.
Currently, 119 cities levy the sales tax, which has generated more than $150 million since 1989.
And last month, 15 new cities voted to begin collecting the tax.
"The incentives have become a very big part of economic development, in terms of recruiting companies and in keeping the ones you have," says Michael Bourn, executive director of the Amarillo Economic Development Corp., the agency that oversees the spending of the sales tax.
"They are particularly necessary tools in communities that are outside the major urban areas."
Mr. Bourn says that Amarillo has spent about $20 million to sponsor 24 projects that are expected to create 4,400 direct and indirect jobs.
But concern that the tax is being misused has raised the possibility that the Legislature will crack down, either by requiring state approval for expenditures, imposing stricter guidelines, or doing away with the tax altogether.
"It can and should be a valuable tool for the economic development of Texas," says Bill R. Shelton, managing director of the Cornerstone Group, a Fort Worth consulting firm that has conducted surveys on cities' use of the tax.
"The abuses unfortunately are not going unnoticed."
Those abuses, critics say, cover a wide range.
Some towns, they say, spend money on projects that appear to be clearly outside the purpose of creating industrial jobs -- buying Christmas lights, for instance, or expanding the county courthouse.
But a bigger problem, critics charge, is that many small towns don't have the expertise to evaluate investment options -- and end up throwing money away on questionable projects.
That, some suggest, is what happened in Copperas Cove, a city of 24,000 near Killeen.
The problems started when the board of the local economic-development corporation guaranteed a $14,000 loan to a local photography studio.
The studio, officials say, wanted to hire another employee and purchase new equipment in order to expand.
Instead, the company defaulted on the loan and left town with the collateral.
But that's not the worst of it.
The board last year also backed a loan for more than $1 million for No Touch Inc., a start-up container-manufacturing company.
Six months later, the board guaranteed another $300,000 loan -- this one from the local bank.
And in anticipation of the support operations No Touch would need, the board guaranteed a $49,000 loan for the Cove Tool & Die Mfg. Co., a Copperas Cove firm.
But late last year, city officials say, No Touch filed for reorganization under the bankruptcy laws.
Cove Tool quickly followed.
And now the Copperas Cove Economic Development Corp. is repaying all the debt.
The episode has all but depleted the city's economic-development funds and prompted calls to repeal the tax and disband the corporation.
After two years of collecting an estimated $1.2 million in tax funds, the corporation is left with a balance of about $33,500 -- and it still has to pay off most of the $1 million loan.
Two weeks ago, the Economic Development Board fired executive director and former city mayor Jim French.
"We created the economic-development corporation in hopes of diversifying our economy," says Teresa Cleghorn, editor of the Copperas Cove Leader-Press, the town's weekly newspaper.
"Instead of having hundreds of new jobs, we have a lot of people who are unemployed because the companies they were working for are in bankruptcy."
Other towns have been criticized for putting the tax money into projects that are outside the legislation's requirements.
Whether the spending is illegal hasn't been tested.
But there's no question that some of the projects have been, well, odd.
In Hidalgo, the city spent nearly $20,000 in 1992 to erect a fiberglass and steel statue of the killer bee.
Hidalgo, say city officials, was the place where the Africanized honey bees first crossed into the U.S. in 1990.
The big bee was funded with economic-development tax funds under provisions that allow some of the money to be spent on marketing and promotion.
Hidaglo officials concede the bee probably seems silly to outsiders.
But they make no apologies.
The bee, the city claims, has generated much more than $20,000 worth of national publicity, and tour buses now stop to see the bee.
"We have over 25,000 cars that come across the international bridge every day, going to and from McAllen, but they just drive through our town," says Joe Vera, president of the Hidalgo Chamber of Commerce.
"We feel like we've detoured some of that traffic."
In the East Texas city of Athens, about $3 million in sales-tax funds were used to woo a fish hatchery.
But what made this deal unusual is that it is a state-operated fish hatchery.
Other cities, such as Abilene and Amarillo, have used the tax funds to court state-operated prisons.
But the fish hatchery has prompted the most criticism, because prisons, at least, can create hundreds of jobs.
The fish hatchery, scheduled for groundbreaking this month, should create 19 jobs.
"It is certainly on the margins of good use for it," says Sen. Ratliffe, who, while reluctant to criticize use of the money for prisons, concedes, "It's a little ironic they would use it to attract state payroll."
Athens officials admit $3 million for 19 jobs probably sounds like a bad deal.
But they argue that the fish hatchery will boost tourism.
Although city officials say Athens now attracts about 60,000 tourists a year, they claim a study found the fish hatchery would boost that number by 300,000 to 500,000 people.
"This part of Texas is well known for its bass fishing," says Don Manning, Athens city manager, who says that the city also has used its sales-tax money to attract a medical-supply company.
One of the most questionable uses of the tax funds is in Cameron, where all of the city's estimated $339,000 in sales-tax collections has gone toward paying off $600,000 in operating bonds for Central Texas Hospital.
Texas Attorney General Dan Morales has issued an opinion, stating that the tax money can not be used to support hospitals.
But the practice continues.
"They justified it by saying that if there wasn't a hospital, that industry wouldn't stay or wouldn't come into Cameron," says Janet Sheguit, tax assessor -- collector.
One other concern about the way the tax has worked out: Texas towns aren't only competing with other states for new jobs.
They're competing with each other.
The city of Allen, for instance, scored big when it convinced TRW Information Systems, a unit of TRW Inc., Cleveland, to consolidate offices previously located in Richardson, Dallas and Anaheim, Calif., in Allen, bringing with it 1,000 jobs.
But Allen's success came at the expense of Dallas and Richardson, neither of which are eligible to collect the tax.
"In some ways, it gives us a much greater advantage" over cities that don't have the tax, says David Pitstick, director of the Allen Economic Development Corp.
"But if we didn't have it, could we compete with bigger cities?
No way."
Despite all the problems, Sen. Ratliffe is hesitant to call for changes in the law.
The bottom line, he says, is that elected city officials decide how to spend the money, either by themselves or through their appointed representative.
"I assume these places have voters," Sen. Ratliffe says.
"And if they think this money is not being spent the way it ought to be, somebody ought to be called to answer for it."
But as a result of the concerns, state economic-development officials are working with cities to clarify the dos and don'ts.
The Texas Industrial Development Council Inc., whose members include economic-development corporations and chambers of commerce, is creating a special newsletter just for those cities that collect the tax.
Two information meetings in Plano and San Antonio also are scheduled in the coming months, and the group is soliciting input from members to determine whether to lobby for changes in the law during the next legislative session.
The tax "is beginning to be just another revenue source for the city -- it's not being used to create new jobs," says Joe Newman, executive director of the Industrial Development Council.
"We're very concerned that . . . it's going to dilute the original purpose of the bill quite a bit."
