The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries won't reduce crude-oil output, setting the stage for at least a small drop in already weak oil prices.
A move by a majority of the oil ministers to cut production significantly to stop the fall in oil prices failed after two days of talks at their meeting here.
Saudi Arabia, which accounts for nearly one-third of OPEC's production, rejected any cuts in its output of eight million barrels a day.
The oil ministers did agree that prices are likely to fall further as a consequence, at least in the second quarter, before they begin recovering later this year.
"I suspect that for the first few months, we will see a decline," Gholamreza Aghazadeh, Iran's oil minister, said.
Unhappy with the outcome, Mr. Aghazadeh blamed his Saudi Arabian counterpart, Hisham Nazer, for blocking proposals to cut OPEC's output of nearly 25 million barrels a day by as much as 6%.
He and others said that Mr. Nazer insisted during the talks, which ended Saturday night, that the kingdom wouldn't give up a single barrel of its volumes.
Mr. Nazer has made clear repeatedly he would like higher oil prices -- but not at the expense of giving up to others what Saudi Arabia regards as its rightful share of the world's oil market.
He suggested here that if the others wanted to cut their own production to lift oil prices they should do so.
Mr. Aghazadeh hasn't given up hope altogether.
"We'll talk with Saudi Arabia to change their mind," Mr. Aghazadeh said yesterday just before leaving Geneva.
The Iranian minister said he would propose a cut in OPEC's output at the next ministerial meeting June 15 in Vienna if prices haven't improved by then.
Still, by failing to agree on any immediate reductions in OPEC's output, the ministers were forced to reject an offer by seven other oil exporters outside the organization.
These countries, ranging from Oman to Russia, had offered to cut their oil exports by 5%, or as much as 250,000 barrels a day, in return for OPEC reductions.
The OPEC ministers will ask, however, that the non-OPEC countries freeze their oil exports at current levels for the year.
OPEC has blamed a rise in oil production elsewhere, particularly in the North Sea, for the past year's drop of some $5 a barrel in oil prices to five-year lows.
But much of that plunge came late last year after OPEC had been unable to agree on output cuts at its November meeting.
The expected new declines are likely to be much smaller and possibly temporary.
Analysts and oil traders here to monitor the OPEC meeting said they expect prices to fall as little as 50 cents a barrel.
"We will get a little quivering when the market opens" today , said Jack W. Wilkinson, Sun Co.'s chief economist.
Prices recently had strengthened some, as they often do in advance of an OPEC meeting.
In the U.S., where the prices of the benchmark crude recently had ranged between $14 and $15 a barrel, the futures contract for May delivery settled at $15.13 Friday, up five cents for that day.
On London's International Petroleum Exchange, North Sea Brent crude for May delivery rose 22 cents to $14.11 a barrel.
Prices had been expected to plunge well below these levels again if the oil ministers had kept their production unchanged for only the second quarter, when oil demand is at a seasonal low.
Most oil analysts had been recommending OPEC extend current production quotas for at least six months, through the third quarter, when there is a seasonal upturn in demand.
But the ministers went one better.
They agreed to hold the current quotas through the fourth quarter, when oil use moves toward its annual peak.
"Going out to nine months is a positive development" for the oil market, said Constantine S. Nicandros , president of Conoco Inc., who was in Geneva dealing with matters unrelated to OPEC.
Many oil economists expect, in fact, that prices should begin rising by midyear.
"If the OPEC members do not exceed their quotas, oil prices prices can be expected to rise significantly in the second half of the year," said John Lichtblau, chairman of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation.
