What's the real score?
Now that the demise of the Southwest Conference is assured, with Texas, Texas A&M, Baylor and Texas Tech abandoning the league for the Big Eight, let's look at what the move means for the numbers that really matter in college sports: the bottom line.
At the University of Houston, Rice, Southern Methodist and Texas Christian, the four schools left to fend for themselves, the Southwest Conference's death will mean the loss of roughly $2 million a year apiece.
Though the schools won't confirm the figure, several league officials say that's what they have received as part of the conference's agreement to share revenue from television, bowl game and NCAA basketball tournament appearances.
What does that $2 million mean?
About 20% of the athletic budget at many conference schools.
Bill Carr, the University of Houston's athletic director, says that if the school can't replace the money through a new conference arrangement, his department will have to trim its offerings.
Texas and Texas A&M have carried the Southwest Conference.
Both schools have strong national and regional TV appeal; last year they generated more than 60% of the conference's estimated $8 million in football TV money.
Without them, the four orphans have little to offer TV.
The four may try to link up with another conference that already has a TV contract, though finding candidates will be hard.
Or they may try to find new partners and start a league that will attract a TV deal.
That's the inclination of Rice, SMU and TCU, which have been meeting this week with the likes of Tulane, Memphis State and Louisville -- three schools with well-regarded basketball programs.
An executive at Raycom Inc., a Charlotte-based sports-programming network that now broadcasts Southwest Conference football and basketball games, says his company might be interested in the basketball rights to such a league.
But the teams involved "would lack appeal as far as football is concerned," he adds.
While Houston, Rice, SMU and TCU lose out, Baylor and Texas Tech will benefit from their move to the new, still-unnamed conference, nearly doubling the revenue-sharing dollars flowing into their athletic departments.
(Texas and Texas A&M will also gain, but probably not as much, because they have received bigger-than-average shares of Southwest Conference revenue -- closer to $2.5 million, league officials say.)
While six of the current eight Southwest Conference schools rarely land even on regional TV, the expanded Big Eight will have five strong football draws: Colorado, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Texas and Texas A&M.
And six Big Eight teams, led by Kansas, earned berths in the lucrative NCAA basketball tournament last year.
That concentrated national prominence, and the more-frequent high-profile matchups it will generate, will mean more money all around.
Last year, Big Eight schools took in more than $3 million each in shared revenue.
For Baylor and Texas Tech, the revamped conference could generate TV and other revenue of roughly $3.8 million each.
At Baylor, the new deal will enable the athletic department to hire a full-time receptionist, install air conditioning in the baseball locker rooms and upgrade high-school-caliber scoreboards.
Texas Tech hopes to add women's teams in at least softball and soccer.
The school also plans to hire personnel to give athletes more academic counseling.
Texas Tech's and Baylor's hometowns, Lubbock and Waco, also expect big rewards from the conference switch.
More-prominent conference opponents should boost game attendance and benefit the local economies, civic officials say.
(Austin and College Station won't feel the same impact because Texas and Texas A&M have so many alumni that they usually fill their stadiums anyway.)
When Oklahoma played at Texas Tech in 1992, attendance totaled nearly 49,000, 75% more than for a game against Houston that season.
A game like that conservatively translates into $600,000 for the Lubbock area hotel industry, and at least $1.2 million in total spending, local officials say.
Five or six such home games a year would represent about 0.1% of Lubbock County's $5.1 billion economy.
Waco officials say big games there also have at least a million-dollar impact.
With the help of the local chamber of commerce, Baylor's athletic department set out three years ago to ensure that in a league shakeup, the Bears would be attractive enough to be included in a new or expanded league.
A task force of corporate and community leaders raised season-ticket sales 25%, and Baylor's home attendance last year -- 34,300 a game -- trailed just Texas A&M and Texas among conference schools.
Liberty Sports Inc., the Dallas-based parent of Houston's Home Sports Entertainment and the Prime network, could turn up a winner with the birth of the revamped Big Eight.
Liberty, a unit of Liberty Media Corp., Cheyenne, Wyo., has offered the new league $40 million for five years of cable-TV rights to conference football games.
(It would get second choice of games, after ABC, which is expected to sign a contract soon for broadcast rights.)
Liberty's Prime network now airs a Big Eight game of the week on a delayed basis, and carries some Southwest Conference games produced by Raycom.
Because the new league will have more games with national appeal, Liberty expects it will be able to syndicate many of the contests to sports cable systems nationwide.
Liberty isn't alone in pursuing the cable rights; Raycom also is interested in a football package for the new league.
A Raycom executive says, however, that a $40 million cable package probably is more than the league's games are worth.
Three conference-related events have generated up to $48 million a year for Dallas's economy: the Texas-Oklahoma football game, the Mobil Cotton Bowl and the league basketball tournament.
The conference shuffle means one of those events will soon be dead, and the other two face uncertain futures.
When the conference shuts down in 1996, Reunion Arena will lose the basketball tournament, which the Dallas Convention and Visitors Bureau says has generated $1 million to $3 million a year for the local economy.
The new conference's tournament is likely to remain every year in Kansas City, Mo., where the Big Eight tournament has been a rousing success.
The Texas-Oklahoma football game, which has generated $17 million to $20 million a year for Dallas, may soon begin alternating between the schools' campuses, in Austin and Norman, Okla.
Oklahoma officials say they have no plans to move the game from Dallas, but they have pushed for years to relocate it, arguing that its economic stimulus should benefit the schools' communities.
That's more likely now.
Under Big Eight rules, the home team -- a designation that will alternate between the schools each year -- decides the game's site.
The conference shuffle means uncertainty for Cotton Bowl officials.
The Southwest Conference for years has sent its champion to the Cotton Bowl.
With the conference's passing, the game will lose that strong local draw.
But officials at NBC, which has the TV contract for the Cotton Bowl through next year's game, say that could prove beneficial.
If the top two teams in the polls aren't committed to other bowls through conference pacts, the Cotton Bowl could bid to pair them in an unofficial national championship game.
That would mean more money for Dallas.
As it stands, the bowl generates as much as $25 million.
The Orange Bowl, which hosted last season's national championship game, injected $127 million into the Miami economy.
The Southwest Conference's death won't just affect cities and universities.
Its impact will also be felt on much smaller and more personal levels.
If the four schools left out of the expanded Big Eight don't form a new league, when the Southwest Conference closes its doors in two years, the 13 people on its headquarters staff will lose their jobs.
The end of the conference also will hurt small businesses, like Holmes Millet Advertising Inc. of Dallas, which gets 15% to 20% of its revenue from work for the conference.
"We'll definitely miss it," says partner Jeff Millet.
