Hillary Rodham Clinton's central role in the Whitewater controversy raises awkward questions for Republicans and Democrats alike.
And because the first lady is also the president's chief advocate on health-care reform, the stakes go beyond politics to policy.
In what has become a partisan game of image-control, Republicans are wary of seeming too aggressive in commenting on Mrs. Clinton's position.
Rep. Jim Leach of Iowa, the senior Republican on the House Banking Committee, has carefully avoided criticism of Mrs. Clinton even as he has pressed for a more vigorous investigation into the controversy.
And Senate GOP Leader Robert Dole of Kansas scarcely mentioned her name in a long news conference yesterday in which he called for a select committee to investigate Whitewater.
"If there should be a lesson from 1992, it is that you're on very tenuous ground when you try to do a bumper shot at an opponent through somebody's family member," says GOP consultant Bill McInturff.
Democrats, meanwhile, are concerned that the controversy could hurt her effectiveness in promoting health-care reform before Congress.
And within the White House, there are tensions over her role in the affair and her reported resistance to the appointment of a special counsel to investigate the matter -- an appointment President Clinton finally agreed to yesterday.
Amid this backbiting, Betsey Wright, a family friend and Mr. Clinton's former gubernatorial chief of staff, accuses White House aides of "fundamental sexism" for their portrayal of the first lady in comments to journalists.
"It was an act of disloyalty," Ms. Wright said in an interview yesterday.
"It made Bill Clinton look like a wimp."
Given this bloodletting among the Democrats -- and agreeing with Mr. McInturff that attacks on Mrs. Clinton backfired in the presidential campaign -- most Republicans are biding their time.
But given the political stakes, including health care, others are clearly tempted.
"We're probably being overly prudent in following the dictum, `Don't attack a lady,'" says Fred Steeper, George Bush's pollster in 1992.
Citing recent focus groups of rank-and-file voters, Vince Breglio, a Republican pollster, says Mrs. Clinton is too much a part of the policy apparatus of the administration to be ignored.
"When people look at that couple, what they see is Mr. Outside and Ms. Inside," Mr. Breglio says.
"That's the role they've defined for themselves.
If there's a problem of this magnitude, you simply can't turn your back because she's the president's wife."
As an Arkansas attorney, Mrs. Clinton was both a partner in the Whitewater Development Co. real-estate investment and represented now-defunct Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan before state authorities while her husband was governor.
A member of the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, she and another Rose attorney acted as Madison's counsel in 1985 when the troubled thrift was struggling to meet federal net-worth requirements.
And in a letter to the Arkansas Securities Department, Mrs. Clinton argued that Madison should be allowed to pursue an unusual recapitalization plan relying on the issuance of preferred stock in the S&L.
"This is not primarily about Bill Clinton.
It is primarily about Hillary Clinton," says Vin Weber, a Republican commentator and former congressman who now leads the conservative advocacy group Empower America.
"The biggest implication of all of this is health care."
"One way or another, it will affect the health-care debate," says Frank Luntz, a conservative consultant and former pollster for Ross Perot.
"She's the main carrier of the message, and if the carrier gets damaged, the message becomes a lot less credible."
The timing is all the more awkward since the administration was hoping these weeks would help it regain lost momentum on the health-care issue.
Harold Ickes, who was recently brought into the White House to help coordinate the administration's health-care campaign with Mrs. Clinton, has instead been increasingly drawn into the Whitewater maneuvering.
And to the extent that Mrs. Clinton is distracted, it could strengthen the hand of those arguing for further compromise on the goals set out in her reform package.
"If it turns out badly for her, sure, the health-care push is damaged, and you end up being Cooperized," says GOP theoretician Kevin Phillips, referring to an alternative reform bill backed by Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper of Tennessee.
"The stakes are enormous."
The Democrats' stake in health care was, in fact, a driving force in the decision yesterday to appoint a special counsel.
And the White House hopes to clear the decks and return to a legislative agenda that it believes is ultimately critical to the president's own political credibility.
"Health care is about him and he will be about health care," said one official later.
"She will get credit, but it isn't about her."
Matched against her critics too is Mrs. Clinton's considerable popularity.
"If you attack Hillary Clinton, you're attacking uphill," says Democratic pollster Mark Mellman.
And in their calculated restraint thus far, Republicans risk being seen as patronizing in their attitude toward women.
"The change she has brought about to evaluating the wife of the president . . . is that she is accountable for herself," says Harriett Woods, who heads the National Women's Political Caucus.
"We women seek the glory, but we also have to take the consequences when we make mistakes.
I don't know if she has made mistakes, but if she has I hope she would be equally accountable."
James M. Perry contributed to this article.
