Things finally may be looking up for investors in money market mutual funds.
Yields are expected to rise over the next few months, reversing a slide that has lasted nearly five years.
Although the increase is likely to be small, fund managers expect to once again see big inflows of cash as investors seek the safety and liquidity of money funds.
"The money market's day in the sun is returning," says Neal Litvack, executive vice president of Boston-based mutual-fund giant Fidelity Investments.
"It's not a yield play, it's an uncertainty play."
Mr. Litvack and others in the fund industry reason that investors will get nervous as rising interest rates push down bond prices and the net asset value of their bond-fund shares.
There's also the possibility of a decline in the stock market, which reached record highs in 1993.
"Competitively, money funds will look a little better," says Walter Frank, chief economist for Money Fund Report, an Ashland, Mass., newsletter.
"Security will once more be an issue."
Money funds are considered among the most stable investments; they're designed so net asset value remains at $1 per share and only the yield fluctuates.
Funds generally permit check writing, so assets are completely liquid.
"When and if there is a stock market correction you'll have opportunities you can take advantage of," says Joseph DiMartino, president of Dreyfus Corp. in New York.
Some cash started trickling into money funds at the end of the fourth quarter.
Assets of taxable funds open to individual investors were $307.13 billion at year end, according to Money Fund Report, compared with $305.49 billion three months earlier.
Assets were $309.31 billion at the end of 1992, when fewer funds reported to the weekly newsletter.
Yields inched up during the latest quarter.
The average yield on taxable funds open to individuals was 2.58% in the fourth quarter, up from 2.55% in the third quarter.
Portfolio managers indicated they expect further increases; the average maturity of all taxable funds' investments shortened to 57 days in the last week of December, from 63 days in September.
Still, they don't expect significant moves soon.
Robert F. Auwaerter, vice president of Vanguard Group in Valley Forge, Pa., for instance, thinks the Federal Reserve will push up short-term interest rates a quarter to half a percentage point in the next six months, and money fund yields will follow.
Walter Frank, chief economist for Money Fund Report, thinks an increase of a quarter percentage point is possible during the first three months of this year.
Still, "that still leaves rates very low," he notes.
"It doesn't do much for investors."
For now, investors can do better with tax-exempt money market funds.
The average compound yield on tax-free funds, which assumes reinvestment of dividends, was 2.36% in the latest week, according to Money Fund Report.
For an investor in the top 39.6% federal tax bracket, that's equivalent to a taxable 3.91%.
Meanwhile, the comparable average on all taxable funds, which includes funds open to institutions, was 2.78%.
The spread, or difference, is even greater for investors in high-tax states, such as New York and California, who invest in tax-exempt funds that buy securities only from that state.
"It's an obvious place to pick up income that a lot of people don't take advantage of," says Mr. Litvack.
He estimates that only 25% of the people who could benefit from tax-free holdings buy tax-exempt investments.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has moved to tighten restrictions on tax-free money funds, to match the tough restrictions it imposed on taxable funds in June 1991.
Under proposed rules, national tax-exempt funds would be limited to a maximum 5% of their assets in securities of a single issuer, the same limit imposed on taxable funds.
State-specific funds wouldn't be subject to the 5% limit, but would be required to make additional disclosures in their prospectuses about risks associated with lack of diversification.
State-specific funds also wouldn't be allowed to buy less than top-rated securities.
The SEC proposal also formalizes some restrictions previously issued in a letter from the director of the division of investment management and includes a number of technical provisions.
It is open for public comment until April 6, after which the staff will draft a final proposal for consideration by the full commission.
Although no tax-free fund has ever "broken the buck," or had its net asset value fall below $1 a share, "we want to reduce the likelihood that there will be a problem," says Robert Plaze, assistant director of the SEC's division of investment management.
A look at consumer-oriented money funds, some of their holdings and the average maturity of their investments at the end of the fourth quarter.
Performance figures are estimated annualized yields, which include earnings from the fund's investments and the effects of compounding.
Funds open only to institutions, special-purpose funds and tax-exempt funds are excluded from these tables.
