Here's how Andrzej Krzeminski, head of international banking at Poland's Bank Inicjatyw Gospodarczych, or BIG Bank, is winning the hearts and minds of merchants for Visa International, the credit-card consortium.
First he finds a shop that doesn't sport the Visa logo in its window.
Then he poses as a customer, placing orders for a large amount of merchandise.
As the happy shopkeeper totes up the bill, Mr. Krzeminski pulls out a Visa card, only to be told it isn't accepted.
He stalks angrily out, leaving the disappointed merchant to reshelve the goods.
Then he sends in other BIG Bank colleagues to pull the same ruse over the next few days.
It's a tough store owner who can hold out long before signing up with Visa.
"It's quite efficient," observes Mr. Krzeminski.
"The shop managers go a little crazy."
People like Mr. Krzeminski and his associates at BIG Bank have given Visa a powerful lead in the rapidly growing Polish credit-card market.
"Poland is Visa-dominated," notes Ciara Linnane, editor of East European Banker, a newsletter.
With American consumers long awash in a sea of plastic, Visa and its archrivals, MasterCard International and American Express Co., have carried to foreign shores their fierce fight to sign up as many banks, shops and consumers as possible.
MasterCard and Visa, the two biggest global card brands, are consortiums for the world's financial institutions and do much of the legwork to set up an infrastructure and persuade merchants to accept their cards.
Member banks such as Citibank or Hongkong & Shanghai Bank then issue to consumers the cards that allow them to buy on credit.
American Express, while issuing charge cards that must be paid off monthly, is trying to build up its Optima credit card.
Much is at stake.
Last year, more than $1 trillion was spent via plastic cards, and estimates call for the global card market to hit at least $2 trillion by the year 2000.
"Outside the U.S., the potential for growth is still quite phenomenal," says David Robertson, president of the Nilson Report, an Oxnard, Calif., newsletter that tracks the card market.
It might seem that spreading the plastic gospel would be easy.
After all, most consumers like the convenience offered by charge and credit cards or their close but less-profitable cousins, debit cards.
Debit cards function like a bank check in that they deduct the cost of a purchase directly from the owner's bank account.
Certainly most banks are eager to get into the lucrative credit-card market, perhaps the most profitable consumer-banking product, because of the fat interest rates charged.
Even merchants, less enthusiastic because of the fees they must pay card firms for each transaction, usually bow to consumer pressure.
But in their efforts to go global, the big card concerns face a bewildering array of problems.
Marketers must figure out what makes the consumer in a given country tick.
Lawyers pore over regulations to divine what various governments will and won't allow.
Technicians seek ways to shuttle vast amounts of data over sometimes-primitive electronics and telecommunications networks, while engineering equipment that can detect or prevent fraud or other misuse.
All the while, the foot soldiers like Mr. Krzeminski ferret out new opportunities to sign up shopkeepers.
For the moment, Visa holds the lead in the global card wars with 323.3 million cards world-wide and more than a 50% share of card volume.
MasterCard, with 204 million cards outstanding, is second but picking up steam.
American Express has targeted a more limited but affluent market of frequent business travelers and wealthy individuals, but it also is making a big push for corporate clients at home and abroad.
The real growth in plastic cards will come increasingly from newly industrialized nations, like Taiwan.
There, card usage by consumers skyrocketed once credit and foreign-exchange controls were lifted in 1990.
In the ensuing 18 months, the number of cards outstanding soared to 1.3 million from just 50,000.
Adjusting to diverse cultural values is at the heart of every card-issuer's strategy.
That's why local banks often play a critical role in establishing cards for either Visa or MasterCard in a particular country, just as in the U.S.
But while local banks may be wary of opening their markets to cards, they face pressure from the big international banks that are trying to pry open places like France and Germany.
Big U.S. banks long have carried the credit-card banners abroad for Visa and MasterCard, and Citicorp is the dominant global consumer bank.
Its franchise spans 39 countries, with nearly 800 branches outside North America.
Citicorp's credit-card operations overseas now have seven million accounts, compared with 19 million in the U.S. Overseas cards earned approximately $100 million after taxes last year, and profits are expected to grow at a 20% clip, says Pei-yuan Chia, Citicorp vice chairman and global consumer-banking chief.
"There are a lot of opportunities outside the U.S.," says Mr. Chia.
Not that they will be easy to seize.
Americans long have been enthusiastic about charging things, willing to pay punishing interest rates for the privilege of postponing payment.
But to many European consumers, what amounts to taking out a loan -- even a small one -- to pay for anything is anathema.
Germans especially are reluctant to buy on credit.
European consumers prefer debit cards.
People in some industrialized countries have little use for any kind of plastic card.
Italy, for example, has a sophisticated credit and banking system well suited to handling credit and debit cards, but Italians prefer to carry cash, often huge wads of it.
It is common to see an Italian handing over millions of lire to pay a large utility bill in person.
"It's as if we'd built a perfectly modern highway system, but people continued using country roads instead," says a frustrated spokeswoman for the Italian Banking Association.
Japanese consumers are especially vexing to the card concerns.
Most Japanese have a credit card -- there are 200 million outstanding in the nation of 120 million people -- but card purchases amount to less than 1% of all consumer transactions.
"They have them, they pay the membership fees, but they never use them," says Gunilla Broadbent, president of BAI International, a New York consulting firm.
Japanese long have looked down on credit purchases, but acquire cards to use while traveling abroad.
The U.S. in particular, they fear, is too crime-ridden for travelers to carry cash safely there.
Japan has the potential to be "a high-growth market for any issuer," says Hitoshi Kondo, Visa's assistant general manager in Japan.
The challenge is to find ways to persuade the Japanese to use their plastic at home.
Not so in Taiwan, where after four years, Visa is so widely accepted that one of the country's top vocalists, Chou An-an, hit the top of the charts with a song called "Do You Love Me More or Your Visa Card More?"
Visa discovered that allying with the right people and right banks made all the difference.
Carl Pascarella, Visa's new chief executive, says once the consortium decided to target the country, an early stop was with Jeffrey Koo, a powerful Taiwanese businessman.
Mr. Koo is a member of Taiwan's most politically connected family and often serves his country as an unofficial high-level envoy.
He not only runs Chinatrust Bank, one of Taiwan's largest banks and the cornerstone of a financial-services empire, he also is chairman of the country's National Credit Card Center.
Formerly the only body allowed to market credit cards directly to merchants in Taiwan, the NCCC also ran the country's sole credit-card processing center.
Visa persuaded Mr. Koo to join its Asian board.
Visa put together a "tiger team" of executives from the Asia/Pacific region to train employees of NCCC in the workings of an international card.
Visa set up an office in Taiwan and staffed it with a former executive of International Business Machines Corp. who is Taiwanese.
Then Visa started a print and billboard advertising campaign to increase consumer awareness, building on an already aggressive Visa traveler's-check operation in Taiwan.
All the while, Visa and issuers such as Citibank were pressing regulators to open the market to their credit card.
When that time came, Visa was ready to move quickly, and it since has become the dominant card, with 950,000 active cards in Taiwan.
MasterCard, which entered the market about two years ago, has 195,000 active card holders.
Observers of the market estimate Taiwan's population of 21 million could support as many as 10 million cards.
But in their quest to sign up new card holders, the international card companies sometimes face local competition.
That's true in France, where all French retail banks agreed a decade ago to form their own payment-card system.
Visa and MasterCard are honored in France, but the Cartes Bleues debit cards, or blue cards, have become the predominant method of payment for even small transactions.
It's common in restaurants to see waiters carrying hand-held electronic terminals across the dining room to allow a customer to tap in his personal code after a meal.
The cards are costly for banks, since they are not earning juicy interest rates, and cumbersome for merchants.
Colette Siljegovic, owner of the Cafe de Flore, a famous retreat for intellectuals and tourists on Paris's Left Bank, refuses Cartes Bleues.
She says each transaction takes too long, holding up the bustle of her cafe, which serves some 5,000 cups of coffee a day.
Looking to the future, the vast market in China beckons.
Spending per card is higher in China than in almost every other country, but that is only because the relatively few cards issued there -- fewer than three million at last count -- are almost entirely for business use.
Businesses find cards particularly appealing since China doesn't have an efficient means of transferring money or paying bills.
Few consumers have cards, and the major card issuers are moving cautiously in China, at least in part because of ambiguous laws governing payment collection.
"There's a great mass of people, but cards haven't been mass-issued," concedes Visa's Mr. Pascarella.
Not every country that wants a credit-card economy gets it.
Amid the disintegration of the Soviet Union, Viktor Rajevski, the deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers of Soviet Estonia, flew to San Francisco to meet with executives of Visa International.
In constructing a financial system, Mr. Rajevski wanted to know if his budding country could skip cash and proceed right to charge cards.
"He said, `Look, our economy is basically barter and ox-cart,'" recalls Charles Russell, former chief of Visa.
"What he really wanted to do was avoid the evolution of large currencies and checks and go right to an electronic system.
What he wanted to do was very intelligent."
Alas, Estonia's ox-cart economy couldn't afford the massive spending necessary to erect the communications network to support a financial system based entirely on credit.
Still, there is progress.
Just a few months ago, Visa installed the first automatic-teller machine in Tallinn, the Estonian capital.
"That was something of an event here," says a smiling spokeswoman for Estonia's central bank.
Charles Fleming in Paris and Jathon Sapsford in Tokyo contributed to this article.
