IN SEARCH of the next Home Depot: New niche ideas test the superstore format.
"We're coming to the end of the obvious superstore" ideas with clearly large markets, says Lloyd D. Ruth of Marquette Venture Partners in Deerfield, Ill.
Nevertheless, he is putting money on Lil' Things, a store for babies and small children.
The three new Lil' Things stores in Dallas boast hair salons and portrait shops as well as togs, toys and furniture.
In Austin, Texas, Gary Hoover, a book superstore pioneer, plans a shopping mecca for travelers.
TravelFest Superstores will sell travel gear, such as luggage, as well as services like fare and tour bookings.
Meanwhile, Chicago's Reiters Inc. this week opened a 7,500-square-foot store just for custom- and ready-made window coverings.
"There's room for a category killer" in this area, says George Rosenbaum, a Chicago consultant.
But how will superstores fare with the dawn of electronic shopping?
They have the sourcing expertise and the computer and distribution systems to make the shift, says R. Fulton Macdonald, a New York retail consultant.
MANY STILL SAY IT with flowers, but offbeat Valentine's Day gestures abound.
The Arlington Park Hilton in Illinois touts a $26,200 "Safari Package" that includes a weekend in a palm-bedecked Safari Suite and a Jeep Cherokee to take home.
Couples who prefer inner exploration can sample a getaway at Seattle's Mayflower Park Hotel, complete with champagne, bubble bath and a "relationship seminar."
Is a love note pedestrian?
Valentine Mailing in Jamaica, N.Y., will post your card from Paris.
The cost of continental cachet: $15.
Meanwhile, the American Bat Conservation Society, Rockville, Md., suggests Bat Bites, tiny chocolate bat sculptures.
The group is trying to make the creatures into Valentine icons to drive home the message that they are "adorable and lovable," in the words of Tom Vallega, president.
And Rowe-Manse Emporium, Clifton, N.J., urges serious chocoholics to "brush up on romance" with a jar of chocolate body paint.
CALIFORNIA HO!
Movers say getting there may be even cheaper this summer.
Anticipating a bigger than usual spike in demand this summer for moving services out of quake-damaged Los Angeles and the state, some movers expect to cut prices for inbound moves to get more trucks into the area.
"We'll be out there fighting to get your business to get trucks going" to California, says James Wilson of United Van Lines in St. Louis.
For moves from some states, he expects discounts of 15% to 50% this summer.
Meanwhile, Ryder Systems, Miami, has already cut rental prices for trucks going to California up to 15% to meet demand in the quake's aftermath.
The pricey alternative: driving or sending empty trucks by rail to the state.
In the past two summers, Allied Van Lines, Chicago, hauled appliances to California retailers to bolster its supply of vans in the state.
But since it is the slow season right now, Allied doesn't have to resort to such tactics despite the jump in Los Angeles business.
Allied currently has enough vans in the state to meet demand, a spokeswoman said.
RUSHDIE IS REMEMBERED: This Valentine's Day, the fifth anniversary of the Islamic death edict on the writer, about 4,000 bookstores will insert a pamphlet on Salman Rushdie's plight in all books sold.
CHAT NOW, DEAL LATER.
Forrester Research, a Cambridge, Mass., technology-resource firm, estimates that the commercial on-line computer-service market will grow to a $3 billion industry by 1998, up from today's $530 million, as users move beyond talk and data sharing to buying goods and services.
THE ART OF LENDING is practiced by the Whitney Museum of American Art, which will send the San Jose Museum of Art hundreds of works for four long-term exhibits over seven years.
In turn, the New York museum will get $3 million from San Jose's Redevelopment Agency.
SCREENING FOR PC-SMARTS: Firms update tests for secretarial applicants.
Companies are changing their tests to keep up with how computers have altered secretarial work.
Avnet Co., Great Neck, N.Y., ditched its electric typing test three years ago after complaints from applicants that it "didn't replicate reality," says Bob Zierk, vice president.
It now uses a $390 software program to gauge WordPerfect skills, from composing letters to cleaning up a draft.
State Farm Mutual Automobile also resorts to ready-made software, but just for typing skills.
Since the insurer uses many programs, "you bring in somebody with basic keyboard skills and then train them on a particular word processor," a spokesman says.
Detroit Edison waits for tests being devised just for utilities by the Edison Electric Institute, a trade group.
This way, the company reduces concerns that an applicant has had the same test elsewhere.
Charles Schwab, the discount broker, dispenses with tests, preferring extensive reference checks.
"You can teach computer skills," a spokesman says.
BRIEFS: New York University Press publishes "The Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Students' Guide to Colleges, Universities and Graduate Schools" . . .
Mortal combat?
In a play for the video-game generation, Prince Sports Group Inc. will give away 200 tennis rackets in exchange for video-game cartridges in Atlanta this Saturday.
