Motorola Inc. and Hewlett-Packard Co., two major players in the emerging market for personal digital assistants, are about to unveil sharply different strategies for dominating that market.
H-P hasn't made any disclosures, but it is expected to announce today that it and Novell Inc. each are buying significant minority stakes in Geoworks, a closely held Berkeley, Calif., developer of operating systems for small, handheld devices such as PDAs.
The alliance's aim is to flood the lower end of the PDA market with "information appliances" for less than $300 apiece.
Versions would be designed for a specific business use, such as electronically providing multiple listings for real-estate agents, or medical data to doctors and nurses.
H-P would make the devices, and Novell would provide software linking them to computer networks.
Motorola is going after the high end of the market, introducing today a powerful PDA that provides two-way wireless data communications and an operating system that facilitates the use of special programmable agents, which automatically find and filter information, even when the device is turned off.
The Motorola Envoy is expected to cost about $1,500, and will be shipped sometime this summer, according to Bob Growney, president and general manager of Motorola's messaging, information and media sector.
H-P and Motorola are generating startling rates of revenue growth by creating mass markets for once-expensive products, such as computer printers and cellular phones.
Analysts say both their approaches are apt to be successful, overcoming the adverse reaction to the first generation of relatively limited PDAs, such as Apple Computer Inc.'s Newton and Casio Computer Co.'s Zoomer.
Wireless data communication is a compelling feature for businesspeople who can afford it, and Motorola's Envoy "is the first PDA that does what its manufacturer promised," says Richard Shaffer, a principal of Technologic Partners, a New York research firm.
Motorola is following the business model that led to its success in cellular phones, handheld versions of which started out at $2,500 six years ago and now sell for one-tenth of that.
But the biggest barrier to acceptance of PDAs is their price.
Casio's Zoomer, although little more than a high-powered organizer, costs about $600, as does Apple's latest version of the Newton.
H-P wants to shatter that barrier.
"If you want to reach a broader audience, it's time for us to move these price points down, attaching the right level of functionality to each device," says Robert J. Frankenberg, vice president and general manager of H-P's personal information-products group.
"Motorola's taking the rifle approach, skimming the cream of the crop of largest-dollar spenders who are reimbursed by their corporations," observes Richard Siber, a wireless analyst for Arthur Andersen Consulting, Boston.
"H-P's is a much broader shotgun strategy."
H-P, in Palo Alto, Calif., and Novell, of Provo, Utah, would say only that their stakes in Geoworks are "significant."
H-P has been discussing a relationship with General Magic Inc., a consortium including Motorola that has developed an extensive operating system for PDAs and communications software facilitating use of programmable agents.
H-P's Mr. Frankenberg said, "We haven't said we're not interested in General Magic," but chose Geoworks because its operating system can squeeze surprising functionality from very cheap microprocessors, including the ancient Intel Corp. 8086 that sells for about $1 each.
"The difference is where the price points are," he said.
"We think there is a huge market below $300.
Geoworks is by far the best environment for bringing the price down.
It is very conservative in its use of memory and processing power but is able to scale up very nicely from that."
Novell is key to H-P's approach because of its software's ability to tie PDAs into local-area and wide-area computer networks, initially via infrared transmission or cable connections.
That allows H-P to offload expensive communications and connectivity features onto the networks.
Doctors could use speedy infrared sensors to download updates to drug-reference manuals from nationwide networks, while nurses could download patient charts from a hospital's internal network.
"That's pretty cool," says William Lempesis, a PDA market researcher based in Pleasanton, Calif.
"It's a strategy that could be much more successful than what we hear about mobile companions costing $600 to $700.
It has to be cheap."
Competitors say that the H-P alliance is a little tardy, with the first devices not expected for about a year.
Using a $1 microprocessor shaves total prices by only about $40, and other PDA makers, such as members of the General Magic group and Apple, can strip down their devices to get to the low end as well.
Apple says many developers already are working on applications for hospitals and real-estate agents.
Moreover, devices now using Geoworks' operating system, such as the Zoomer, have flopped because they don't offer enough features for their price.
Rather than deconstruct the functions and uses of PDAs, Motorola has integrated many of them.
The Envoy squeezes most of its working parts onto two microchips and reduces the wireless modem to a heavily shielded device about the size of a credit card, from that of a small brick.
The Envoy weighs 1.7 pounds and is 7.5 inches wide, 5.7 inches high and 1.2 inches thick, with a 3-by-4.5-inch touch-sensitive screen.
With a highly graphical, pen-based operating system, users can send wireless messages to fax machines while waiting in the airport, or electronic mail to New York while lunching in the basement of a San Francisco hotel.
Mr. Growney says wireless messaging becomes "addictive" and allows businesspeople to engage in a sort of perpetual "multitasking."
The Envoy will include software that can link the user to both wireless and telephone networks, and to on-line services such as America Online, CompuServe Inc., and Sony Electronic Publishing Co.'s Official Airline Guides Flightline service.
Users can deploy programmable agents over American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s nationwide PersonaLink network, expected to be running by this summer.
Several companies, including CompuServe and Mead Data Central, are developing applications that let users' programmable agents collect information according to a personal profile.
However, Motorola could undermine its own Envoy when it begins shipping later this year a wireless modem on a small card that slips into other PDAs and notebook computers.
The Envoy's intended target, businesspeople, might prefer to make their notebook computers wireless rather than buy a separate wireless PDA.
Motorola -- Introduces today the most powerful PDA, its $1,500 Envoy, which has two-way wireless data capability, nationwide.
Apple Computer -- Slashed prices on a new version of its Newton MessagePad last week to $600, moving heavily into applications for corporations, such as sales forces, inventory clerks.
Needs external modem for wireless capability, bringing price to about $1,100.
Hewlett-Packard -- Will announce plans today to ally with Geoworks and Novell Inc. to make "information appliances" for under $300 for specific business users, such as providing real-estate agents with multiple-listing information, doctors and nurses with drug reference books and patient records.
