At many business schools, demand for M.B.A. and other degrees is going down.
So naturally more buildings are going up.
It isn't denial.
School officials say they cannot compete effectively in today's tightening market unless they construct stylish new quarters loaded with the latest high-tech gear.
The edifice complex is unprecedented.
By one count, 18 of 20 top-ranked U.S. schools are planning, undergoing or just finishing big construction projects with a total cost exceeding $500 million.
Major building ventures are under way at dozens of other business schools, too.
At Boston University's business school, for instance, M.B.A. applications and enrollment have slipped about 10% from two years ago.
Yet the school plans to break ground in May for a fancy new building with a six-story atrium, 2,000 computer outlets and 50% more classroom, office and meeting space.
B.U. has already constructed mock-ups of the latest in business classrooms and faculty offices and is soliciting professors' reactions to the prototypes.
The completed building, at a projected cost of $80 million, will be one of the most expensive management-education facilities anywhere.
"It's going to be a real attention getter," says Louis E. Lataif, the school's dean.
Some critics question the wisdom of investing in more space amid decreasing interest in business education.
After peaking in the late 1980s, the volume of M.B.A. applications has dropped sharply in recent years.
Nationwide registrations for the Graduate Management Admission Test, required of most M.B.A. applicants, dipped 16% between 1991 and 1993 and continue to slide.
Many schools also report declining demand for their executive education and undergraduate programs.
In school after school, the current building boom defies this shrinking demand.
The Anderson School at the University of California at Los Angeles has seen full-time M.B.A. applications and enrollment plunge more than 27% during the last three years.
But next year, the school will gain 50% more space when it moves into a $75 million, seven-building "academic village for graduate management study."
Texas A&M University's M.B.A. program suffered an 18% drop in applications and a 36% plunge in enrollment last year alone.
Its undergraduate enrollment has decreased more than 25% since 1989.
Nevertheless, the school now is finishing a $23.5 million facility.
Some building projects began long before student interest started to wane.
"Once you start construction, you can't stop it," says William P. Pierskalla, dean at UCLA's Anderson School.
He and deans of other top schools say they don't worry much about recent slips in applications and enrollment because they still have many more applicants than spaces.
At worst, they contend, student demand is returning to levels that preceded the M.B.A. boom of the 1980s.
But with the risk that demand might drop still further, business-school deans insist that they need new facilities to attract quality students and faculty.
As more schools put up new buildings, M.B.A. and executive-education students everywhere expect better classrooms, lounges and libraries.
Moreover, deans say, they require upgraded facilities to support recent curriculum changes that emphasize small-group learning, team projects and computer and video technology.
"The nature of business education has changed," says Alan Merten, dean of Cornell University's Johnson School.
Until recently, he continues, "all you needed was a blackboard and a classroom.
But now, you need video conferencing, multimedia and all kinds of different spaces."
Space is so tight at Johnson that some faculty members lack offices, Mr. Merten says.
So, despite a 35% decline in M.B.A. applications since 1991, Cornell plans to build a $35 million, larger home in a landmark campus building.
Even schools that haven't lost M.B.A. applicants believe they must add more and better space to maintain a competitive edge.
"We're not going to be able to sit with a 35th-rate building for very long without imperiling our position," says Jace Schinderman, an associate dean at Columbia University's business school.
M.B.A. applications there have increased 26% during the past two years.
Columbia has spent $4 million since 1990 making patchwork improvements and installing computer wiring in its cramped, 34-year-old building.
But now it is studying plans for a new building projected to cost between $60 million and $100 million.
Columbia's success despite its crowded quarters raises the question of whether new facilities matter.
"The reputations of the schools are already too established to be influenced by a mere building," says Sam Lundquist, director of graduate admissions at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School.
Wharton's newest building, an executive-education center, was completed four years ago.
Indeed, the $67 million home of New York University's Stern School, which opened in the fall of 1992, was the ninth most important factor influencing students to enroll this past fall, according to a Stern survey.
The building ranked behind Stern's location, reputation in finance and other elements.
Nonetheless, the school is using the structure as a key selling point in promotional and fund-raising material.
Not surprisingly, the building boom has set off a frenzy of fund raising by business schools.
Few have raised all of the money in advance; most borrow some, expecting higher revenue to cover the debt.
The University of California at Berkeley says it must raise another $6 million just to furnish its $45 million, three-building campus set for completion later this year.
To help cover higher operating costs, Berkeley hopes to boost its executive-education revenue fivefold to $12.5 million in coming years from $2.5 million now.
The University of Minnesota's Carlson School needs another $35 million for its planned $45 million facility.
To help make its case with donors and lawmakers, Minnesota has prepared a chart ranking it dead last in the number of square feet per student among a dozen business schools at big public universities.
All except Carlson have recently built or now are building upgraded facilities, the school notes.
At Cornell, a new building "is going to put pressure for new revenue across the board -- from annual fund raising to executive education," Dean Merten says.
The school won't proceed unless it has lined up the necessary money, he adds.
But "as long as it makes fiscal sense," the dean says, "now's the time to invest in firstclass M.B.A. programs.
They're not going to go away."
