In an early sign of congressional discontent with President Clinton's Russia policy, two key senators are criticizing the administration's management of the multibillion-dollar Russian aid program.
In a late-December letter to Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Sen. Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.), chairman of the Senate Foreign Operations Subcommittee, and the panel's ranking Republican, Kentucky Sen. Mitch McConnell, charged that the aid program lacks "a coherent strategy or conceptual framework."
And they called on the administration to make no new commitments of funds until it defends the program in hearings scheduled for early next week.
The hearings are also expected to raise questions about the workings of specific aid projects.
Sen. McConnell has privately charged that one, a $190 million housingresettlement program for Russian military officers, "reflected potentially illegal actions."
In an earlier letter to Sen. Leahy, Mr. McConnell charged that administration aides told the subcommittee that they planned to go along with the demands of Russian municipal officials in eight cities that a percentage of all houses built for officers returning from the Baltic Republics be given to their own political cronies or constituents.
"Some might argue this amounts to extortion," Mr. McConnell wrote in the letter.
President Clinton, according to aides, raised the issue in his recent summit meeting with Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
The senators are also expected to question why a half-dozen high-powered U.S. consulting firms are getting the lion's share of technical-assistance contracts valued at millions of dollars.
Until now, the administration's requests for Russian aid have breezed through Congress.
These questions come at a particularly tough time for the administration and Strobe Talbott, who is Mr. Clinton's top adviser on Russian affairs and was recently nominated to the No. 2 job at the State Department.
Mr. Talbott has been criticized for failing to predict the strong showing of Russian fascists and communists in last month's parliamentary elections, and any perceived problems with the Russian aid program could cloud his confirmation hearings.
The foreign operations subcommittee is one of four congressional committees that must sign off on specific aid projects before any money is committed.
The four committees have already cleared about $1 billion in new bilateral aid projects of a total $2.5 billion previously appropriated for Russia and the former Soviet Union in fiscal 1994.
The subcommittee's objections aren't expected to slow down any disbursements.
In their letter, however, Sens. Leahy and McConnell suggested that their recent approval of the first set of projects was given in recognition of "the urgency of some of the programs" as well as "our desire not to cause difficulties" during Mr. Clinton's summit meeting, rather than any satisfaction with the design or management of the project.
Mr. Talbott said he will try to convince the senators that "the policy is pointed in the right direction."
Mr. Talbott and Mr. Christopher have spent several hours this week in meetings with Sen. Leahy trying to head off any confrontation at the hearing.
Mr. Leahy said, "We haven't raised these issues to beat up on anybody. . . .
I just want to make sure that somebody's got the long-term goals in view."
President Clinton's strong, personal commitment to President Yeltsin may also be criticized at the hearings.
Mr. Leahy is also expected to urge administration officials to refocus aid programs to take into account the "rising human cost" to ordinary Russians squeezed by economic reforms.
Administration officials agree that more emphasis should be put into crafting a social safety net in Russia, but they insist that U.S. bilateral aid cannot pay for such a program.
Instead, the administration is lobbying still-skeptical international lending agencies to come up with more social spending for Russia.
