The Clinton administration asked the Supreme Court to rule that a federal law barring fraud in initial public sales of stock also applies to resales of the shares.
The administration made the request in a brief urging the high court to review a dispute between a New York investment banking firm, Allen & Co., and an Australian holding company, Pacific Dunlop Ltd.
The justices had asked the administration for advice on whether to hear the private dispute.
The provision at issue, Section 12 (2) of the Securities Act of 1933, bars false statements or omissions of "material facts" in securities sales involving "a prospectus or oral communication."
The provision is a potent weapon because -- unlike another major antifraud provision, Section 10 (b) of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act -- Section 12 (2) doesn't require investors to prove that they actually relied on fraudulent statements or omissions in deciding whether to buy stock.
Section 12 (2) also allows for bigger damage awards.
Conflicting lower-court rulings have led to confusion over whether Section 12 (2) applies to securities transactions other than initial public offerings.
The justices are expected to announce in coming weeks whether they will clarify the confusion by hearing Allen & Co.'s appeal of a ruling by the federal appeals court in Chicago.
The appeals court said that Section 12 (2) may be applied to transactions other than initial offerings.
The case began when a unit of Pacific Dunlop sued Allen & Co. under Section 12 (2).
The unit alleged that the investment banking firm had sold Pacific Dunlop stock in a battery-manufacturing company without revealing that the company faced extensive environmental claims.
A federal trial judge in Chicago dismissed the suit, but the appeals court reversed that ruling.
Allen & Co. then appealed to the Supreme Court.
If the high court affirms the appellate court's broad interpretation of Section 12 (2), it would give plaintiffs an advantage in lawsuits alleging dishonesty in securities deals.
(Allen & Co. vs. Pacific Dunlop Holdings Inc.)
