Lloyd's of London investors rejected a #900 million ($1.3 billion) settlement offer, increasing chances of a costly legal battle over losses suffered by the insurance market's investors.
The investors, some of whom have been ruined because of big losses from asbestos, pollution and natural-disaster claims, are gambling they will get more money from litigation or from a sweetened offer from Lloyd's.
Despite Lloyd's claims to the contrary, the investors believe it will make a better offer rather than face the financial and public relations risks of a drawn-out spectacle in court.
The compensation package was originally offered to investors in December.
It was meant to compensate them for losses suffered in the 1980s by 130 Lloyd's syndicates whose managers are accused of negligence.
It included payments from Lloyd's central fund and from errors and omissions insurance taken out by Lloyd's agents.
The agents, who recruit investors for Lloyd's syndicates, would be the target of investors' lawsuits.
The plan was supported by investors representing only 38% of the value of the proposed settlement, well below the 70% approval rate Lloyd's had required.
The Lloyd's plan did win a narrow majority of investors; of the 23,488 voting, 12,103 approved the package.
The plan appeared doomed from the start, as committees representing the investors, known as "names," urged members to reject it.
The plan covered only one-third of the #2.7 billion of losses under dispute and made no provision for future losses under the same policies.
The plan also would have meant the surrender of investors' rights to file lawsuits.
The more than 31,000 private investors, who have unlimited exposure to Lloyd's losses, must also contend with an anticipated loss of #2.05 billion for 1991, due to be reported in May.
(Lloyd's results are posted three years in arrears.)
That would bring Lloyd's losses over a four-year period to #7.5 billion.
Lloyd's now has withdrawn the offer.
"We put our all into this offer and it was the very best offer we could have made," said Roger Pascall, administrative director of the Association of Lloyd's Members.
"Lloyd's has other priorities now."
Although Lloyd's has said it won't make a richer offer, investor groups believe it may be bluffing.
A legal battle, which could last five years, would pose big risks for investors.
They have already spent some 100,000 in legal costs, without cases coming to court yet, and there's no certainty that the courts will rule in their favor.
With the managing agents themselves in shaky financial condition, the investors may find themselves fighting over a small pot of cash.
"The names have convinced themselves in almost all cases that they have a good case, but I don't think they're paying enough regard to the difficulty of making their cases stick and getting something out of it," Mr. Pascall said.
Despite years of bad publicity, the Lloyd's market has been recovering.
Its costs have fallen, many of its premium rates have increased and, because it has allowed corporate investment for the first time, its underwriting capacity has climbed to #10.9 billion this year from #8.7 billion in 1993.
And with the once-wealthy names failing to win much public sympathy, says Mr. Pascall, they could find themselves "stewing in their own juice."
A LLOYD'S OF LONDON spokesman, after investors rejected a $1.3 billion settlement offer, said: "We put our all into this offer and it was the very best offer we could have made.
Lloyd's has other priorities now."
In an article Tuesday, the quote was erroneously attributed to Roger Pascall, administrative director of the Association of Lloyd's Members.
(WSJ Feb. 18, 1994)
