Five of the European Free Trade Association members agreed to pass European Union financial-services legislation that isn't covered by the two blocs' European Economic Area, formed last January.
The EEA administrative body intends this week to allow securities traders and insurers to do business throughout the giant free-trade zone.
The 12-country EU's rules on capital adequacy and money laundering also are to be included.
With ratification by the EU's consultative assembly and the EFTA nations' legislatures, the changes would take effect July 1.
The EEA treaty extended most EU single-market legislation on free movement of people, goods and capital to Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden, but the other two EFTA members, Switzerland and Liechtenstein with close economic ties, were barred from joining because Swiss voters rejected the accord.
Liechtenstein, which has proposed to drop its customs union with Switzerland, may join the EEA after the EU finishes expansion talks with Norway.
The EU has reached membership pacts with Austria, Finland and Sweden.
Taiwan's central bank raised the ceiling on investments by foreign institutions in the country's stock market by 50% to $7.5 billion, a move eagerly awaited by local and overseas investors.
The central bank had been reluctant to raise the cap, noting that a stepped-up inflow of foreign capital in late 1993 led to a moderate rise in the New Taiwan dollar and a rapid increase in money supply.
The bank also set its first ceiling, $2.5 billion, on mutual funds raised abroad by Taiwan institutions for investment in the local market.
Applications to invest in Taiwan must still be reviewed by the central bank.
Yielding to business pressure, the French Industry Ministry ordered the two giant state-owned energy monopolies to halt diversification that impinges on the private sector at home, but to continue their development abroad.
The electricity and natural-gas utilities have diversified domestically since 1985 into areas such as waste disposal, public lighting, cable television, security services, and equipment production and installation, competing with large and small businesses.
Powerful unions at the two utilities, with 150,000 employees, favor the status quo.
Bangkok advised residents to store fresh water, because taps in the Thai capital soon could dry up at times.
The city has had to reduce pumping from the Chao Phraya River to leave enough fresh water to flush sea water into the Gulf of Thailand.
The river -- also a tourist attraction -- is so low in this dry season that salt water flowing upstream is jeopardizing farms.
Bangkok's water shortage could worsen before rains begin in a few months.
Citing a need to cut costs, Hungary's state radio pensioned or laid off 129 staff members.
The employees were mainly editors and journalists, and political opposition parties accused the government of trying to silence criticism two months before elections.
Journalists said the dismissals will leave the radio's coverage without seasoned reporters during the campaign in Hungary's transition to a Western-style democracy.
European Union research ministers cleared legislation to require member countries to recycle at least 50% of their packaging waste by the end of this decade.
A political compromise last December gives Ireland, Greece and Portugal more time to implement the law, and allows higher standards by countries that already have strict recycling rules, such as Germany and Denmark.
The proposal requires ratification by the European Parliament, where opposition is expected.
The U.S. and France came to an understanding about lifting French curbs on imports of U.S. fresh and frozen fish.
France, which imposed strict fish inspection procedures on Feb. 5 that sharply curtailed shipments from abroad, agreed to allow U.S. fish into the country starting today.
U.S. specialists will review France's inspection standards and methods to determine if further U.S. action is needed.
France earlier said its action conformed with European Union rules.
U.S. officials had vowed to restrict French cheese and wine imports if France didn't stop hindering fish imports, ostensibly for sanitary reasons.
France ordered the curbs after financially ailing French fishermen staged violent protests, demanding minimum prices and limits on non-EU fish imports.
U.S. fish sales to France last year totaled $82 million, and in the month since the French crackdown, U.S. losses are estimated at $800,000 a week.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Delft University researchers didn't sit on their findings that a million people in the bicycle-crazy Netherlands suffer saddle sores.
Helped by a grant from the Dutch government, which encourages cycling to protect the environment and reduce traffic, the Delft team developed a computer system to design made-to-measure seats. . . .
The International Airline Passenger Association's latest survey of most dangerous areas for flying lists the former Soviet republics, China, South Korea, India, central Africa and Colombia.
