Clear products are going the way of oat bran, hair mousse and mini-foods -- marketing fads that enjoyed a few years of almost hysterical popularity and then all but disappeared.
In the past few years, marketers created transparent versions of dozens of products, from colas and dishwashing soaps to beer, deodorant and gasoline, in an effort to portray them as purer, milder and more natural.
But like most marketing fads, clear was undone because of a proliferation of me-too products, and products that stretched the original concept too far.
"Saturday Night Live" even spoofed the trend with a parody commercial for Crystal Gravy ("you can see your meat!").
"Clear is dead," says Lynn Dornblaser, publisher of New Product News.
Adds Tom Pirko, a beverage industry consultant: "Clear was last year's color."
Data provided by Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service suggest the future for many clear products is murky.
Sales of Clearly Canadian soft drinks fell 35.7% in supermarkets, drugstores and mass-merchandise outlets during the 13 weeks ended Jan. 2.
Sales of Ivory clear dishwashing liquid dropped 27.3%, while sales of Mennen Lady Speed Stick Crystal fell 15.5%.
Miller Clear, a transparent beer, is already gone.
Crystal Pepsi, the most hyped of the clear products, has sustained its growth largely because of heavy promotions; even so, it has fallen short of PepsiCo Inc.'s expectations.
A few other clear products, such as Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.'s Ban Clear deodorant and Warner-Lambert Co.'s Caladryl Clear anti-itch medication, continue to grow.
The rise and fall of clear products illustrate how even the most sophisticated marketers get drawn into fads.
In many cases, companies simply mistake fleeting fashions for lasting shifts in consumer preferences.
Other marketers recognize a fad for what it is but don't want to lose customers to rivals, even temporarily.
Still other companies try to exploit fads by quickly launching products that don't require large investments.
Indeed, there are risks to ignoring fads -- as companies that ignored salsa and gourmet coffees discovered.
Both Procter & Gamble Co. and Colgate-Palmolive Co. initially scoffed at Church & Dwight Co.'s Arm & Hammer Dental Care baking soda toothpaste.
But consumers apparently liked the slightly salty taste and gritty texture of the Arm & Hammer product.
Baking soda toothpastes now have annual sales of nearly $300 million, and both big marketers have belatedly created baking soda toothpastes.
One problem with fad marketing is that consumers' attention spans are so unpredictable.
Traditional methods of market research, including focus groups, can't accurately estimate how long consumers will stick with a new product.
Give a new product to a group of consumers, ask them what they think, and a faddish item will always appear to be a winner, says Gary Stibel, a principal with New England Consulting Group in Westport, Conn.
"Hand anybody a Hula-Hoop, and they'll have fun with it -- at first."
In the early days, clear products seemed more promising than many marketing fads.
Using the absence of color to conjure up purity, lightness and wholesomeness dovetailed with several broad shifts in consumer behavior.
Aging baby boomers were moving from conspicuous consumption to abstinence, from alcohol to sparkling water.
Meanwhile, environmentally conscious consumers began gravitating toward products that contained fewer harsh or unnecessary ingredients.
When Clearly Canadian Beverage Corp., based in Vancouver, British Columbia, began testing a new soft drink in 1988, younger consumers liked the concept of a clear soft drink: "Clear was equated with natural," says Glen Foreman, chief operating officer of Clearly Canadian.
"It reinforced the idea that you get what you see."
In the next few years, consumer products companies latched onto the clear concept.
Colgate-Palmolive spent a decade and $6 million developing a sensitive skin version of its well-known green dishwashing liquid, Palmolive.
After testing light blue and yellow versions, the company found that consumers overwhelmingly preferred a clear formula.
By then, a Colgate spokesman says, the company was tracking the success of Ban Clear deodorant on the West Coast and rushed out a clear deodorant of its own, Lady Speed Stick Crystal Clean.
By 1992, the trend had become a fad.
Colgate brought out a clear version of its Softsoap hand soap.
A few months later, Procter & Gamble launched a clear version of its well-known Ivory dishwashing liquid.
Then Coors Brewing Co. began testing a clear malt beverage called Zima.
Consumers started filling up their cars with Amoco Crystal Clear Ultimate gasoline.
And Den-Mat Corp. launched its clear Rembrandt Mouth Refreshing Rinse.
Marketing experts say media attention to the clear phenomenon put more pressure on marketers to act.
"I sat in meetings with people who said `Let's do clear because clear is hot,' " says Doug Hall, president of Richard Saunders International, a Cincinnati firm that evaluates new products.
The beginning of the end of clear, some marketing experts said, was marked by the arrival of such products as clear beer and clear gasoline.
"The appearance of clear products that didn't fit the positioning debased the original concept of clear," says John Quelch, a marketing professor at Harvard Business School.
"These are parasite products."
At the same time, consumers began to balk at paying higher prices for products that actually claimed to have fewer ingredients.
And price competition between nearly indistinguishable rivals quickly began to cut into sales of some products.
That clear products are already passe comes as no surprise to Dani Houchin, 25 years old.
Ms. Houchin, who works as a training consultant in Manhattan, used to drink clear soft drinks, but has switched back to seltzer.
"When I first started drinking them, I thought they were interesting," she says.
"But once it became a fad I thought, `This isn't cool anymore.'"
Warner-Lambert Co.'s Parke-Davis unit said it will sponsor a new Olympic prize, which includes a $250,000 cash award, to encourage research in the areas of human movement, physical exercise and sports.
The prize will be awarded every two years in connection with the Summer or Winter Olympic Games between 1996 and 2000.
The first award will take place at the Summer Olympic Games to be held in Atlanta in 1996.
Parke-Davis is a maker and marketer of health-care products.
Warner-Lambert is a pharmaceutical and consumer-products company.
