In 1519, a bold band of some 500 Spanish conquistadors led by Hernan Cortes landed on the Mexican coast and for the next two years fought, negotiated, deceived, prayed and, with audacious ingenuity and more than some luck, finally defeated the far superior armies of the Aztec empire.
It was one of history's most extraordinary tales of conquest.
Under Montezuma II, the Aztecs -- or, more properly, the Mexicans, as they called themselves -- were equal to Prussia in military spirit, to ancient Greece in civic culture and to Confucian China in social mores.
Their capital, Tenochtitlan, was built on an island in a great lake, and with its beautiful canals, massive public squares and pyramids was both grander and more orderly than any city in Europe.
In "Conquest: Montezuma, Cortes and the Fall of Old Mexico" (Simon & Schuster, 812 pages, $30), Hugh Thomas has retold the tale in an exhaustive and fascinating work that will surely go down as a defining book on the era and one of the best and most readable nonfiction books of the year.
It also could not be more timely.
The integration of the North American Free Trade Alliance and the smoldering Indian resentment witnessed in the recent uprising in Chiapas are but two manifestations whose roots lie in that distant time of clashing armies and Homeric exploits.
Mr. Thomas, an English life peer, is best known for "The Spanish Civil War" and "Cuba or the Pursuit of Liberty," defining books on those subjects, which would seem to be enough for any one career.
This time he is also competing with a great classic, W.H. Prescott's "History of the Conquest of Mexico" (1843).
Mr. Thomas has won.
His accomplishment is in part due to prodigious research, including the uncovering of previously "lost" documents in forlorn Spanish archives.
But even more importantly it is due to an appealing sense of honesty that underlies each page.
The American Prescott, reflecting the prejudices of his time, dismissed the Mexicans as backward.
At the same time, so many of today's historians, reflecting a misguided "multiculturalism," are disdainful of the Spaniards as greedy imperialists.
The reader appreciatively follows Mr. Thomas as he openly lays out conflicting evidence and places it in the context of 16th-century Mexico and Europe.
Mr. Thomas correctly portrays the events as essentially a clash of two empires.
"Both were by most standards cruel, but cultivated," he writes.
"Both intermittently dreamed of conquering what they thought of as `the world.'
Both were possessed by powerful beliefs which the leaders of both parties looked on as complete explanations of human life."
Seeing people as determinants of history, Mr. Thomas captures the drama by telling it as a narrative that focuses on its two remarkable central protagonists, Cortes and Montezuma.
The more tragic is Montezuma.
Montezuma had ruled for 20 years as a powerful and inflexible autocrat over the central valley and, through tributary states, almost all of what is today Mexico.
Yet he was reduced to an uncertain sniveler who allowed himself to be held in his own capital, became psychologically attached to his kidnappers, and in the end, according to Mr. Thomas, was killed by stones thrown by his people amid the dust and smoke of battle as he appealed from a rooftop for peace.
His undoing appears to have been excessive religion.
Mexican life was ruled by a religious calendar, but Montezuma had turned it into a fetish.
He saw in the Spaniards portents of returning gods and a prophesized Armageddon -- the fall of the Fifth and last Sun -- and thus became too indecisive to fight, or fight well.
Cortes seized the moment, displaying unforeseen political sagacity, inspiring oratory and military bravery.
To quell restlessness among his troops, he beached his boats (he did not burn them, as legend has it), leaving forward the only way to go.
He first sought to capture Tenochtitlan without a fight, and when that failed, he turned the tributary states against the Mexicans.
Among his feats was the organizing of a six-mile line of Indian allies who carried the pieces of 12 brigantines over the mountains from the sea, assembled them and then dug a 1 1/2-mile-long channel to float them on to the great lake, where they lay siege to the capital.
Cortes committed selective massacres designed to intimidate.
But the Spaniards felt morally justified by the Mexican practice of daily human sacrifice.
Prisoners and slaves were dragged to the top of a pyramid and their beating hearts ripped out.
The limbs were eaten by noblemen and the flayed skin worn by priests.
Some 1,000 Spaniards, thousands more of their allies and more than 100,000 Mexicans died in all.
The Spaniards enjoyed technological superiority -- guns, steel and the horse -- but the Mexicans lost more because of arrogance, a suffocating hierarchy and a ritualistic tactic of trying to capture rather than kill the enemy.
Still, their bravery was awesome, as they fought until their beloved capital was rubbled.
Cortes went on to discover California, but he spent the last years of his life in disillusion, defending himself in inquiries over his actions in Mexico, for the Spaniards, unlike any empire before or since, indeed questioned the morality and purpose of their conquest.
Imported diseases in the end did much more damage than the conquistadors, but out of the morass grew a new Mexican culture that grows ever more vibrant today.
Mr. Schumacher, who covered South America for the New York Times, is an adviser to Dow Jones & Co.
