U.S.-Japanese trade relations spiraled further downward, as a Japanese negotiator in Geneva accused the U.S. of bad faith and a "betrayal of trust."
The latest fight involves negotiations at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the world trade forum in Geneva.
The GATT fight comes a day after the U.S. opened its trade offensive against Japan, threatening to levy sanctions on several hundred million dollars of Japanese imports because of a dispute over cellular telephones.
The U.S. wants to turn up the pressure on Japan to get it to make concessions in the so-called framework trade talks between the two countries, which collapsed last week.
The Japanese accusations at the GATT forum, which were accompanied by threats of retaliation, represent a significant escalation of the Japanese response, which so far has eschewed making such threats.
At the GATT forum, the U.S. and Japan ended several days of talks aimed at enlarging tariff cuts that were agreed to in December.
Despite intense U.S., Canadian and European pressure, Japan said it wouldn't cut any further its tariffs on wood products, copper and "white" alcoholic beverages.
Nobutoshi Akao, Japan's chief negotiator for the GATT talks, said his country had offered its last tariff cuts in December and wouldn't make any more.
In retaliation, he charged yesterday, the U.S. is going back on its pledge to lower tariffs on electronics and some other goods.
If that occurs, he added, Japan may retaliate by narrowly targeting U.S. exports of such goods as computer components.
"If the United States breaks a rule, we have to break a rule," Mr. Akao said, his voice rising ever so slightly.
"We exchanged final offers and what was on the table on Dec. 15 was final," he asserted.
John Schmidt, Mr. Akao's U.S. counterpart, said the offers made by the U.S. had been conditional on Japan's agreeing to reduce duties further on wood and wood products, white spirits such as vodka and gin, nonferrous metals and leather footwear.
"We are going to continue pressing them on this," Mr. Schmidt said.
In Washington, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said the U.S. hadn't formally withdrawn any offers.
He called Mr. Akao's assertions "erroneous" and said negotiations would continue.
The Japanese negotiator said the U.S. was withdrawing tariff cuts on industrial and consumer electronics, including telephone equipment and television and video cameras.
Mr. Akao said he received the list of items that would be affected only yesterday from the U.S. trade mission.
A U.S. trade official in Geneva said the U.S. was targeting products that were made almost exclusively in Japan, in order to leave other countries undisturbed.
The mood on trade was further soured by Japan's announcement yesterday that its trade surplus grew in January.
In Tokyo, the edginess was typified by chief government spokesman Masayoshi Takemura, who told reporters that he is "concerned about the latest U.S. decision" regarding the cellular-phone dispute, and that he hopes the U.S. will act "sensibly."
In parliament, Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa had previously raised the possibility that Japan might appeal to GATT as a response to unilateral sanctions from the U.S., Japanese news reports said.
Reports also indicated that some senior government officials may meet as early as Thursday to discuss a reaction to the U.S. trade moves.
In a separate development, the U.S. Commerce Department and Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry jointly issued a study concluding that Japan's automobile market is "extremely difficult and expensive to enter, particularly for new entrants."
The report cited factors such as the practices of Japanese dealerships and Japan's knotty distribution system.
And Motorola Inc. of the U.S. and IDO Corp. of Japan, central figures in the battle over Japan's cellular-telephone market, flung rhetorical daggers at each other in Tokyo.
On Tuesday, the U.S. asserted that Japan has violated a 1989 agreement in which it had promised to open its cellular-phone equipment market by allowing IDO to use network equipment from Motorola.
At a heavily attended news conference, Motorola Vice President Arnold Brenner charged that IDO last weekend rejected a Motorola proposal that could have averted the U.S. decision to seek trade sanctions against Japan.
Because IDO refused to accept a timetable for installing Motorola network equipment, "we couldn't go any further," Mr. Brenner said.
IDO President Takeo Tsukada, however, insisted that Motorola had no business even making the timetable offer.
"Our company-management policy isn't decided by negotiating with Motorola," he said.
"What right do they have to ask such things?"
Michael Williams in Tokyo contributed to this article.
