What are mutual funds telling investors to expect this year?
If the letters they're sending to shareholders offer any clues, the messages of choice are: Don't expect 1993-style returns forever.
And don't start selling just because the markets become uncooperative.
Take a year-end wrap-up letter recently mailed by Fidelity Investments.
After pointing out stock funds' heady performance in the '90s against major indexes, it delivers a prognostication: "Through the rest of this decade, investment returns will probably be more modest."
Other firms began preaching a similar sermon well before the new year.
For instance, Scudder, Stevens & Clark Inc., investment advisers to Scudder Funds, in late September asked investors whether recent high returns had "caused their expectations to become too high."
Explaining that record gains in both stocks and bonds were provoked by tumbling interest rates, the Scudder letter advised that "few areas of significant undervaluation exist" in the markets, which means fewer opportunities for "returns of the same magnitude as those we have witnessed since 1982."
Most any firm would be apt to urge caution after looking at 1993's figures.
According to Lipper Analytical Services, domestic stock funds returned an average 12.51% in 1993, while the average gain for world equity funds was a whopping 43%.
Domestic taxable-bond funds averaged a 9.66% return.
The numbers create such potential for future disappointments that Fidelity abandoned its standard outlook format -- which typically deals with specific sectors or funds -- for a broader approach.
"To some extent, people in 1993 became a little bit more speculative than they have in years past," Neil Litvack, Fidelity's executive vice president of marketing, said in an interview.
Although plenty of investors remain too risk-averse for their financial goals, he said, an important purpose of the letter was to caution customers who got their first taste of investing in 1993.
Though they were likely handsomely rewarded for chances they took, last year's success doesn't mean that their investments were the right long-term choices, he added.
The same tone prevailed in recent investor literature from Vanguard Group funds.
Late last year the firm mailed investors a two-page, question-and-answer interview with Chairman Jack Bogle.
The subject: risk.
The form letters, however, have yet to check investor enthusiasm.
Marketing departments report strong stock-fund sales, with many predictions that January will outpace the monthly record of $14.5 billion in sales, set in December.
But facing the possibility that this enthusiasm could turn quickly to dismay, fund letters are warning investors not to try to predict short-term market moves.
And their language suggests an effort to avoid an epidemic of redemptions if markets head somewhere other than north.
For example, a Vanguard newsletter making its way through the post features a Point/Counterpoint column that gives readers a face-off between the bulls and the bears.
The column's summary, however, addresses "long-term" investors, saying "the debate is largely a diversion.
"Rather than trying to exploit perceived market conditions," Point/Counterpoint counsels, "stay the course . . regardless of the momentary waxing and waning of hopes and fears in the marketplace."
