Lehman Brothers Inc. said it will launch a new derivatives unit and is expected to announce today that Nunzio Tartaglia will serve as the head of equity derivatives research and quantitative analysis.
Lehman, hoping to cash in further on Wall Street's lucrative derivatives boom, is setting up the Lehman Brothers Financial Products Inc. unit to trade interest-rate swaps, currency swaps and other derivative products.
The unit is initially capitalized at $200 million and has received a top triple-A credit rating from Standard & Poor's
Lehman is a unit of American Express Co., but not for much longer.
The establishment of the derivatives subsidiary and the hiring of Mr. Tartaglia come in the wake of American Express's announcement last week that it was getting out of the securities business.
It will pump $1.09 billion into Lehman and spin it off as a public company in the form of a dividend to American Express shareholders sometime in late April or May.
Mr. Tartaglia will work with the derivatives unit, but will be employed by the parent company.
The 57-year-old former astrophysicist and Jesuit seminarian was one of the handful of now well-known academics and scientists first recruited by investment banks in the 1980s to help design complex securities-trading strategies.
He joins Lehman from his position as a portfolio manager at Boston-based Harvard Management Co., which manages Harvard University's endowment.
But his career has taken him from Bell Laboratories to Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. to Morgan Stanley & Co., where he ran its profitable "black box" -- the Analytical Proprietary Trading unit -- until September 1989.
Then, he briefly ran his own hedge fund, Derivatech, before moving to Harvard Management.
"This is like Br'er Rabbit back in the briar patch," said Mr. Tartaglia.
"I love it."
Derivatives is a "very exciting area" right now, he said, and Lehman's goal of closely integrating its equity, derivatives and quantitative analysis divisions made the position very attractive to him.
The triple-A rating for Lehman's derivatives unit is important because the derivatives market has become increasingly credit-sensitive.
Many multinational companies won't deal with Wall Street firms with below a double-A rating.
Swap dealers with triple-A ratings have a tremendous advantage over other Wall Street dealers with lower ratings.
