Former U.S. Treasurer Catalina Vasquez Villalpando pleaded guilty to obstructing an independent counsel's probe into corruption at the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
She also pleaded guilty to Justice Department charges of tax evasion and not disclosing, to Congress and the Treasury Department, income from her former, private employer while she was treasurer.
Ms. Villalpando admitted concealing income from her previous employer, information that may have been relevant to her government service.
She didn't report $167,901 in 1989 taxable income, or pay $47,013 taxes on it.
In the independent counsel case, Ms. Villalpando, who was treasurer in the Bush administration from 1989 until January 1993, had documents destroyed after they were subpoenaed by a federal grand jury.
This one-count felony conviction carries a penalty of up to five years imprisonment and a maximum fine of $250,000.
The tax evasion and nondisclosure convictions carry possible penalties of 10 years in prison and a $500,000 fine.
She remains free until sentenced later this year.
Ms. Villalpando's plea brings the number of convictions related to the Reagan-era HUD scandal to 12.
The corruption included bribery and issuing HUD contracts on the basis of political favoritism.
Several high-ranking former HUD officials have been convicted, including three who were top assistants to former Secretary Samuel Pierce and three former assistant secretaries.
Mr. Pierce hasn't been charged.
By entering the plea, Ms. Villalpando admitted that in July 1992, while she was treasurer, she directed the manager of Communications International Inc.'s Washington office to destroy files that had been subpoenaed by the grand jury.
She then told her lawyer to tell investigators that she had no documents covered by the subpoena.
Ms. Villalpando had been executive vice president of CII's Washington office.
CII was a closely held, Atlanta-based telecommunications company.
Though a subsidiary, CII sought HUD funds, according to the independent counsel's office.
After the court hearing, Ms. Villalpando issued a statement that said she accepted responsibility for neglecting "to attend to some very important personal matters with the care and immediacy they required," the Associated Press reported.
Independent Counsel Arlin Adams said Ms. Villalpando's plea is "a clear warning to those who by word or deed act to obstruct this office's investigation of HUD" that "such conduct will be prosecuted with all available resources."
Despite Ms. Villalpando's legal difficulties, the Treasury is still printing currency that bears her signature.
Just last week, the Senate confirmed her successor, Mary Ellen Withrow, and the Treasury's Bureau of Printing and Engraving will begin spewing forth bills with the signatures of Ms. Withrow and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen in March.
