Economic leaders of the major industrial nations attributed recent increases in long-term interest rates to spreading economic recovery, rather than to signs of inflationary pressure.
Finance ministers and central bankers from the Group of Seven nations spent most of their daylong meeting in Germany on Saturday discussing the Russian economy.
But in the time devoted to their own economies, concern over long-term interest rates overshadowed exchange rates.
Despite recent interest-rate increases, howver, the prospect for sustained growth and low inflation in the G-7 countries "is rather good," British Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke said.
Regarding the Japanese currency's strength against the dollar, there was "no agreement to do anything on the yen," said Bank of England Governor Eddie George.
"There was no disagreement, either."
The yen strengthened sharply following the breakdown of U.S.-Japan trade negotiations on Feb. 11, although it has stabilized in recent days.
Japanese Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii said he told the G-7 that a rapid rise in the yen would hurt Japan's effort to expand its economy.
But French Finance Minister Edmond Alphandery said the yen's level "isn't the main object of concern among the G-7."
Before the G-7 meeting, U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen talked with Mr. Fujii, but they made no progress toward resolution of the trade dispute between Washington and Tokyo, officials said.
On the question of Russia, the G-7 reiterated its support for Russian reforms.
But "there were many critical questions from participants," said German Finance Minister Theo Waigel.
Senior Russian officials, attending the meeting as guests, promised to move toward economic stability.
The Russian officials presented ambitious plans to lower inflation to between 7% and 9% a month by the end of the year, down from about 30% a month now.
In addition, they sketched out plans to lower their budget deficit and the amount of credit creation to finance it.
Economic reform is the precondition to more aid from the International Monetary Fund, the G-7 said, but Mr. Bentsen indicated there might be some room for flexibility.
"What we're talking about is a credible commitment" to reforms, Mr. Bentsen said.
"It doesn't mean that you have to wait to have them all carried out."
The G-7 -- comprising the U.S., Japan, Germany, Britain, Italy, Canada and France -- suggested that the industrial countries may again allow Russia to reschedule some of the debts it owes them before it completes a standby financing package with the IMF.
Such IMF packages are generally a precondition for debt-payment delays.
Russia will owe about $11 billion in principal and interest on official debt this year.
The G-7 didn't promise any new aid to Moscow, but it urged the World Bank to work more aggressively to lend money it has earmarked to build infrastructure and social safety nets in Russia.
Germany's Mr. Waigel had called the meeting mainly to renew support for Russia.
Still, the recent rise in long-term interest rates throughout the industrial world seemed at times to cast as much a shadow on the meeting as did Russia's uncertain reform steps.
Since December, long-term rates have risen about one-third to one-half percentage point in all the industrialized countries.
Rates have risen because "there's increased growth around the world and there's more demand for credit," Mr. Bentsen said.
With the U.S. economy recovering and Japan and Germany expected to begin recovering this year, Mr. Bentsen said, "there was a general sense that the worst of the recent downturn is behind us."
He also blamed some of the recent rise on market speculation, adding, "I see no underlying inflationary causes for it."
The German central bank's president, Hans Tietmeyer, said: "We have to remember that the recent development in long-term interest rates began in the U.S." Stronger-than-expected U.S. growth is triggering fears of future inflation.
That could change if the U.S. could shift sentiment in U.S. credit markets, which would have the effect of lowering long-term rates world-wide, he said.
"The impression of our American colleagues is that this will occur.
I would consider it a positive development," said Mr. Tietmeyer, whose own efforts to bring down official German interest rates is being complicated by jittery bond markets.
Last week Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan warned Congress that U.S. short-term interest rates will rise further, but didn't say when or by how much.
A short-term rate rise that calms inflationary fears should stabilize long-term rates.
A continuing rise in long-term borrowing costs could slow the recovery in the U.S. and choke off the fragile recoveries in Germany and Japan.
Asked if the G-7 officials were worried about this, Mr. Bentsen said, "They were concerned, but it's nothing they dwelled on."
He added that "the general consensus was that the rise wasn't driven by inflation."
Asked if he's happy with the current value of the yen, Mr. Bentsen replied, "I think I want to stay away from that."
He reiterated the U.S. policy that "the fundamentals should dictate" exchange rates.
The IMF, which participated in the meeting, and several other G-7 nations joined the U.S. in saying that Japan isn't moving aggressively enough to reduce its huge trade surplus.
"Japan hasn't shown enough interest to policies favorable to imports and expansion," said Italian Treasury Minister Piero Barucci.
In an analysis, the IMF argued that Japan's package of tax cuts and spending increases won't stimulate domestic demand for imports enough to make a significant impact in its trade surplus.
