U.S. Surgical Corp. said that it is laying off 900 more workers as part of a restructuring and that it expects to return to profitability by the second quarter.
Leon Hirsch, chairman of the Norwalk, Conn., maker of surgical equipment, said that the company expects to post a loss for the current quarter, in what would be its fourth consecutive quarterly loss, but that the amount will narrow considerably from the loss of 26 cents a share it had in the fourth quarter before a restructuring charge.
The company hasn't reported its fourth-quarter results.
The news sparked a runup of $2.25 a share, or nearly 14%, in U.S. Surgical shares, which closed at $18.375 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
But some analysts said prospects for the company's long-term growth remain clouded by conditions in the market for products used in minimally invasive surgical procedures.
"All this restructuring and financial maneuvering looks like it's moving in a positive direction," said Kurt Kruger, analyst with Hambrecht & Quist.
"But there doesn't seem to be a market or industry turn" ahead that will lead to significant sales growth "in the foreseeable future."
Mr. Hirsch also said the company is close to a decision on how to raise additional capital.
He wouldn't elaborate.
The company announced a month ago that it had retained investment bankers to seek equity investors and that it was renegotiating loan agreements with its lenders.
The company said it continues to operate under waivers from its insurance company leaseholders and that it isn't in default on any of its bank agreements.
The additional layoffs, which will be completed by April 1, mean that the company has slashed its work force by 1,600, or nearly 20%, to 6,600 since last fall, Mr. Hirsch said.
Mr. Hirsch also said high levels of inventories at both hospitals and distributors that have plagued the company for the past year should be "at rock-bottom levels" by June 1 and that new orders from hospitals after that will result in orders to the company, rather than drawing down distributor stock.
Mr. Hirsch has made similar optimistic projections before about inventory levels, but he said the company has a "very good handle" on the problem now, in part with the help of company computers that are integrated with computers at distributors that track inventories.
The company also said that Bruce S. Lustman, U.S. Surgical's 46-year-old chief operating officer, is retiring effective April 1, but he will remain on the board.
Mr. Lustman, who has been with the company for 19 years, said he plans to pursue his hobby of sports-car racing, perform charitable work and spend time with his family.
Eight other corporate officers are also retiring effective April 1.
