The surprisingly heavy voter turnout in Ukraine's first democratic parliamentary elections is a political setback to President Leonid Kravchuk.
Nearly 75% of Ukraine's 36 million registered voters cast ballots, a much higher rate than expected and well above the 50% needed for a valid vote.
The turnout will make it difficult for Mr. Kravchuk to carry through on his threats to cancel the results or to seek greater presidential powers.
His opponents were pleased.
"This election is an absolute defeat for Kravchuk and others who were interested in railroading them," said Roman Zvarych, vice president of the nationalist party, the Congress of Ukrainian Nationalists.
"The president is hobbled now."
Neither Mr. Kravchuk nor his supporters have commented publicly on the result.
And the political situation is far from settled, as preliminary results show only 47 deputies won seats in the 450-seat parliament.
The remaining seats will be decided in runoff elections to take place by April 10.
Still, some of Ukraine's top politicians won seats, including the Parliament's powerful chairman, Ivan Pliusch, former Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma and prodemocracy Rukh leader Vyacheslav Chornovil.
The country's leading economists were also among the handful of first-round winners, including former deputy prime ministers in charge of economic reform Victor Pynzenyk and Volodymyr Lanoviy, and the head of Parliament's economic-reform committee, Volodymyr Pylypchuk.
Rukh leader Mr. Chornovil said at a news conference yesterday that he was pleased by the strong showing of democratic candidates who had won in the first round and those who are slated to proceed to the second.
At least 14 of the 47 new deputies can be considered advocates of reform.
Two candidates of the extreme nationalist party, the Ukrainian National Assembly, won seats, while candidates from the Communist and Socialist parties, mostly from eastern Ukraine, took 11 seats.
Mr. Kravchuk, meanwhile, will now have to decide his next step.
He had threatened to void the new Parliament if it weren't fully representative.
The president had also indicated he might ask for increased powers and cancel coming presidential elections, scheduled for June 26.
Mr. Kravchuk may also have to make decisions about the degree of independence he is willing to give some of Ukraine's regions.
Early results from an opinion poll in the 40% ethnic Russian Donbas region show that about 90% of the voters approved dual Russian-Ukrainian citizenship and Ukraine's joining the Commonwealth of Independent States as a full member.
The poll was held despite presidential bans.
A similar plebiscite in Crimea -- which also allows for a constitutional change that would open the door to secession of the peninsula from Ukraine -- showed a 70% approval rate, according to preliminary figures.
