Microsoft Corp., strengthening its ties with the entertainment industry, reached an agreement to acquire a leading supplier of tools for Hollywood special effects for about $130 million in stock.
Microsoft, the world's largest software supplier, said it reached a definitive agreement to purchase Softimage Inc., a Montreal company that is widely considered a leader in software tools that help movie and video makers spice up their productions with surreal or fantastic imagery.
Softimage's tools, for instance, were used in the making of special effects contained in the movie "Jurassic Park" and in many video games.
The terms of the deal require the approval of Softimage's shareholders, but employees own about 30% of the company.
Microsoft's offer, which will end up at $21 to $24 a share, is well above Softimage's recent stock price of about $15 a share.
In its fiscal year ended last October, Softimage earned $2.9 million on sales of $28.9 million.
On the Nasdaq Stock Market yesterday, Softimage closed at $15.125, up 12.5 cents.
Microsoft closed at $79.125, up 37.5 cents.
Microsoft, based in Redmond, Wash., currently doesn't offer any professional tools for movie-making, so the purchase gives it a boost as it tries to increase its presence in entertainment businesses.
But the fit between the two companies is rough.
Softimage makes its tools for Silicon Graphics Inc.'s brand of workstations, which are specialized computers.
Microsoft doesn't offer any software for workstations, and a Softimage executive acknowledged that Softimage had no plans to adapt its software for personal computers.
Still, the deal reflects the ability of Microsoft, with a buoyant stock and cash in excess of $2 billion, to quickly position itself as a supplier to both producers and consumers of visual media.
In a recent interview, Microsoft Chairman William Gates said that the company was vigorously pursuing growth opportunities in the so-called multimedia field, where sound, images, and moving pictures are meshed together with the help of computers and software.
Yesterday, Craig Mundie, who oversees Microsoft's advanced consumer-technology group, said Softimage's technology will help Microsoft share in markets spawned by the so-called information highway.
