Dallas -- Like many who are successful in sports, Nolan Richardson, coach of the University of Arkansas's basketball representatives, never tires of playing the "no respect" theme.
To hear the locker-room elite tell it, yawn and yawn, Rodney Dangerfield is a veritable prince of appreciation compared to them.
But on Sunday afternoon, after his team had beaten Michigan here, Richardson had to admit that some rays of sunshine had found their way to him through the gloom.
"I'm named national coach of the year {through an award sponsored by a deodorant and an Atlanta club}.
The president, the president {an Arkansas ex-governor who was on hand} comes and hugs me.
And we win to get to the Final Four," Richardson beamed.
"I'd say that was one helluva day."
It was that and then some, and there may be more to come.
The 76-68 victory over Michigan gave the Piggies the NCAA's Midwest regional title and a ticket to Saturday's national semifinal round in Charlotte, N.C. They'll play Arizona there, and the winner will play the winner of the Duke-Florida game for the championship the following Monday night.
Off the No. 1 poll ranking it somehow was accorded for much of the regular season past, Arkansas should go to North Carolina favored to capture its first national crown in the hoops sport.
That would be no more than proper, opined the coach, no shrinking violet whose wardrobe includes a purple suit.
"I've thought we've had the best team since practice started in November," he said.
"We're not from the Big 10 {Michigan's conference}.
The experts say they're the best, and they're pretty smart.
The computers say so, too.
But our kids have heart.
I've never heard of a computer that could check a person's heart."
EKGs to the contrary notwithstanding, Sunday's fray might indeed have been decided on a visceral level.
Before the 16,200 people in Reunion Arena, including the aforementioned president, his wife Hillary Rodham C., first daughter Chelsea and a couple-hundred guys with cords coming out of their ears, the Southeastern Conference squad raced to a big early lead and then watched it all but disappear until reasserting themselves in the final minute.
The decisive turn came when, his team trailing 68-71 and about 20 seconds left, Michigan's 6-foot-8 guard Jalen Rose was short on a three-point field goal try and Arkansas guard Scotty Thurman was fouled after retrieving the ball.
Thurman sank both his free throws, and back-court mate Clint McDaniel would make three more as Michigan hacked to delay the inevitable.
"What was on my mind?" echoed Thurman of his clinching tosses.
"Just making the free throws.
Wasn't room for anything else."
He added, echoing his coach's tune but not sounding like his tongue was in his cheek: "I'm not sure anybody truly expected us to beat a Big 10 power like Michigan."
It wasn't Michigan's organizational tie that made it a formidable foe, though, it was its lineup and recent history.
It included four-fifths of the frosh group of three years ago that had been NCAA runners up the last two seasons.
Gone to the pros is Chris Webber, the fabbest of the five, but the four who stuck around to be juniors -- Rose, center Juwan Howard and forwards Ray Jackson and Jimmy King -- were handful enough, and quite grizzled for collegians.
They'd donned the maize and blue in 101 games before Sunday, a career-and-a-half in the days when the sport was still regarded as an extracurricular activity.
Rose had been the Wolverine star heretofore, but Howard had stepped forward in these playoffs, and almost stepped right over Arkansas.
He scored 30 points on 11-of-17 shooting, grabbed 13 rebounds, and, with help from Jackson, limited Corliss Williamson, the bull-like Hog star, to 12 points, eight under his season's average.
For his pains, the 6-foot-10 Chicago native was named the regional's most valuable player.
"That Howard kid was awesome," Richardson confirmed.
"Every time he touched the ball something good happened for them."
But if Arkansas couldn't stop Howard it could outnumber him, just as it has most of its foes in a campaign that, now, numbers 29 wins against three defeats.
Facing the Hogs in the nine-year Richardson regime has meant facing 10 or 11 guys, seemingly all at once.
Everybody shoots, everybody handles the ball and the defense attacks in human waves until opposing tongues loll.
"You see teams unravel" under the defensive onslaught, Richardson has declared.
"{We} feed off it.
We start to foam at the mouth."
Nothing of the sort was observed Sunday, but Michigan was forced into 16 turnovers and, even with Howard's stellar marksmanship, shot but 40.6% from the field, well under its season's average.
That included just three of 17 shots from beyond the three-point arc, where many college games are won or lost these days.
Arkansas, by contrast, was successful popping away from wherever; in fact, its accuracy from three-point land (10 for 21, or 47.6%) was a touch better than from closer in (47.2%).
Every time Michigan would grind back from deficits that totaled as many as 14 points in each half, Hog guards Thurman, McDaniel or Al Dillard would drill a trey and shove it back down the hill.
Thurman, a sophomore, had 20 points to lead his team.
Darnell Robinson, who at 6-foot-11 and 260 pounds looks like no freshman I went to school with, had 14, all from inside.
Still, things got close toward the end, with Michigan getting to within two points, 61-63, with 5-minutes left, and to within three at 1:03, and Arkansas fans, the President included, looked as much relieved as elated at the end.
After the game, he and Richardson exchanged high fives and embraced on court.
They're pals, the First Fan having visited the campus at Fayetteville earlier in the season to meet and be photographed with the Arkansas coaches and players.
"He was as proud of the Hogs as I was," Richardson said later.
"When you're a Hog, you bleed little pigs."
Of course, it's better not to get stuck.
