President Clinton had a good tour of Europe.
He made jolly big man talk with Helmut Kohl, worked the crowds well and did nothing to distract the new Russian duma from its fisticuffs and table banging, thus aiding Boris Yeltsin's plan to treat the members like children.
Clearly Mr. Clinton is a president with a knack for politicking.
As his fans say, he has an agile mind and seems almost incapable of the verbal gaffes that have plagued many past Presidents, including two, Eisenhower and Ford, whose substantive performance in office was quite good.
As a goodwill ambassador, Mr. Clinton excels.
Such skill is not nothing.
An American president who can present an attractive image to the peoples of other nations broadens the political dimensions of his foreign policy.
John F. Kennedy had that ability, somehow transcending Soviet thought-control to project a wholesome presence into Russian homes at the height of the Cold War.
This talent may be even more important today because the image of America could influence the politics of emerging democracies.
Mr. Clinton set the right tone in Moscow when he urged Russians to look to the future, not to the past, and continue moving toward political and economic reform.
But of course, there is more to leadership than merely the projection of personality.
Even in this age of nascent democracies, an American president is not dealing directly with national electorates.
He is treating with other leaders.
They are, on the whole, individuals who would not be where they are were they not possessed of strong wills.
In the natural order of things, they set about to test the wills of other politicians.
Nikita Khrushchev sensed that there might be indecision lurking behind JFK's charisma, tested the young president's will and almost provoked World War III.
Sometimes an image of cheerful amiability can create the wrong impression among people who have the power to make a president's life -- not to mention the course of world events -- difficult.
Political analysts who dabble in psychology say that Bill Clinton is a man with a strong need to be loved.
That theory even has some specific anecdotal support but it could be argued that anyone willing to endure the slings and arrows of public life must have a strong thirst for the public adulation that relieves the rigors of such a life.
It is hardly an original observation that politicians, as with actors, try to make people like them.
The question is not whether, but how much.
A president's policies may tell more than his personality about how much he needs to be liked.
If the need is too strong it can be a problem, especially in the conduct of foreign policy.
The book on Mr. Clinton after his eight-day swing around Europe is that, yes, he possibly wants too much to be liked.
Blessed are the peacemakers, but an American president who seems too compliant may well find his path strewn with land mines.
Mr. Clinton's first big foreign policy mistake was to tell the world that his administration would focus primarily on domestic policy.
It was a tactical mistake in that it suggested that this President was defaulting on America's world leadership.
It was an error of principle in that it betrayed a misunderstanding of the role of the president in the American federal system.
National security is the president's most important job.
Governors can handle welfare or health policy, but only a president's decisions will determine whether the nation enjoys peace, or suffers war, or for that matter, falls victim to a fatal assault from its enemies.
Mr. Clinton tried to shuck off foreign policy to the United Nations, and got Somalia for his troubles.
It is not yet clear that he has learned much about the possible consequences of shirking his most important responsibility.
The European tour also betrayed a tendency to follow the course of least resistance.
At the NATO summit, he launched Partnership for Peace, an ill-defined plan that will give the former Soviet satellites of Central Europe a little, but not much, comfort about their own security.
His alternative would have been to start pulling Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary under NATO's security umbrella, relieving their very palpable fears of once again being thrown to the wolves of absolutism.
Mr. Clinton also talked Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine into doing something -- details were not revealed -- to rid his country of nuclear weapons, even though Mr. Kravchuk's parliament strongly opposes this concession to Russia.
Putting it in numerical terms, the President didn't want to do anything forceful for the 200 million people who inhabit the non-Russian former communist states of Europe.
He feared that it might antagonize the 150 million who inhabit the Russian Federation.
He surrendered to the likes of Vladimir Zhirinovsky even before he got to Russia, earning for his trouble only vituperation from that worthy.
At the NATO summit as well, the president shucked off some U.S. responsibilities in western Europe, acceding to French demands that the Western European Union share command over NATO forces.
If NATO has been powerless in the Bosnian crisis, it will be even more helpless now with a divided command.
Of course, that could become immaterial in a few more years because it is not certain that there will be any significant numbers of troops left to command if the U.S. and Europe continue disarming at the present rate.
As to Bosnia, that was brushed off with yet a third threat of air strikes, but to be carried out only if U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali orders them.
The NATO summit ended with cheerful quotes for the press about harmony, but it is relatively easy to have harmony if you agree, in essence, to do nothing.
NATO insiders fear that the alliance is unraveling.
Finally, there was yesterday's longwinded meeting in Geneva with the murderous Hafez Assad of Syria, which ended with Mr. Assad's protestations of peaceful intent.
Mr. Clinton's State Department seems to have decided that Assad "holds the key" to Mideast peace.
If that is true -- and it is doubtful -- anyone unwary enough to trust him to use it constructively deserves to have the door slammed on his foot, which would be the likely result.
Some might say that what seems like weakness in Mr. Clinton is merely the work of an adroit politician maneuvering in a world where all the customary signposts have been toppled.
Maybe so, but beware the likes of Kim Il Sung or Saddam or Rafsanjani.
Maneuver certainly.
Smile for the cameras.
But never forget to be tough when toughness is demanded.
