At this remote port at the northern tip of Japan's main island, construction workers are getting ready to bury one of the nation's most expensive industrial-policy failures.
That project is the nuclear ship Mutsu, which Japan once envisioned as the flagship for a proposed fleet of nuclear-powered merchant vessels.
The Mutsu, however, has sailed under nuclear power successfully only four times in 25 years -- and has absorbed more than $300 million along the way.
Having decided to throw in the towel, the Japanese government now plans to bury the ship's reactor here in Sekinehama and recommission the Mutsu as a nonnuclear ocean-research vessel.
The Mutsu isn't an isolated example of high-tech hubris.
Japan's landscape is littered with technological boondoggles that range from its obsolete standard for high-definition television to its overpriced commercial-satellite launch vehicle.
While Japan has a vaunted reputation for running a successful industrial policy, such planning frequently has gone astray, leaving the nation saddled with huge projects that drag on for dozens of years, consume billions of yen, and end up producing little of lasting value.
Western nations, of course, have produced some memorable technological fiascoes of their own.
Japan's failures, however, are unique, largely because they stem from what is ordinarily one of the nation's great strengths -- its ability to agree on and then doggedly pursue difficult goals.
In fast-moving technological fields, Japan's fondness for consensus has sometimes locked it into technological inferiority.
What's more, the strong consensus behind any given project tends to shield it from criticism, no matter how badly it falters.
Consider Japan's massive, long-term investment in HDTV.
Thirty years ago, when television pictures were frequently blurry and cloudy, the idea of a new TV format that would produce breathtakingly sharp images had considerable appeal.
Even as Japanese companies and the quasipublic Japan Broadcasting Corp. (NHK) labored on HDTV, however, conventional TV broadcasting made huge strides, narrowing the difference to a point where some people have trouble distinguishing the two.
As a result, Japanese electronics firms have managed to sell only about 20,000 of the expensive HDTV sets in almost three years.
Even worse, the Japanese developers locked themselves into an HDTV standard that partly relies on analog technology to process signals, thereby allowing U.S. companies to leapfrog them with an advanced digital system that is both more efficient and easier to interface with computers.
Yet when a senior bureaucrat in the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications recently dared to suggest that Japan might have to abandon its home-grown HDTV standard, NHK and electronics makers reacted with outrage, forcing the bureaucrat to retract his comments.
Even the HDTV saga, however, pales in comparison with the Mutsu, which weathered an incredible string of embarrassing setbacks.
On its first voyage in 1974, the ship sprang a reactor leak, which startled crew members plugged with boiled rice soaked in a boron solution.
Repairs and subsequent safety inspections took 15 years, during which Mutsu drifted up and down the coast of Japan like a latter-day Flying Dutchman in a vain attempt to avoid antinuclear protesters.
Meanwhile, angry fishermen forced the government to relocate the Mutsu's home port from one side of the Shimokita Peninsula to the other, at a cost of more than $100 million.
Although the Mutsu was in actual operation for no more than a year, Japanese officials argue the project still served a useful purpose by convincing the public of Japan's ability to harness atomic power for peaceful purposes.
In fact, the Japanese government is so proud of the Mutsu that it is building a ship-shaped museum in Sekinehama, where tourists will be able to view the Mutsu's actual reactor through leaded glass.
Similar examples abound in other fields.
Japan's desire to build a commercial-satellite launching business produced the H-II, a $2.2 billion rocket that costs much more than its rivals' and can be launched only four times a year.
The Postal Ministry's antipathy to cable television led instead to Japan's direct-broadcast satellite system -- actually two incompatible services that carry only a handful of channels nationwide.
Regulations prohibiting private ownership of cellular telephones and resulting in high costs have left cellular technology much less popular in Japan than in the West, even though Japan once led the world in cellular-network deployment.
Although Japan recently has started talking up deregulation and lecturing the U.S. on the evils of interfering with the market, there are few signs that the government has considered changing its ways.
In fact, even as the government moves to shut down old programs such as the Mutsu, Japanese bureaucrats are busy dreaming up new ones.
For instance, the government plans to spend at least 22.9 billion yen ($217 million) developing a high-speed magnetically levitated train, although the Transportation Ministry admits it doesn't know whether the system ever will be commercially feasible.
There are similar plans for a class of "techno super liners," high-speed cargo ships that would be at least 50% more expensive than ordinary ships, and for the long-promised fleet of nuclear cargo vessels as well.
