It's feeding time at the Iowa trough again.
The issue is public subsidy for corporate development.
And this time Big Labor has it right and the pro-business Republican governor has it wrong.
Iowa Governor Terry Branstad wants to offer about $73 million in subsidies to lure Ipsco, a Canadian steelmaker, to locate a plant near the Mississippi River town of Montpelier.
With 300 jobs initially pledged, that would amount to about $243,000 in special tax breaks and grants for each of the workers.
This wouldn't set the record; Kentucky holds that, at $350,000 a pop, also for a minimill run by another Canadian steelmaker.
But Iowa is no piker in the states' bidding war for desired businesses.
And Ipsco thinks it can get its price from someone, so it's told the Iowa legislature to get a move on approving the deal.
The Iowa Federation of Labor says stop.
President James Wengert objects to favoring select companies with "corporate welfare" at the expense of other potential uses for the tax money.
One such use, we'd suggest, could be general tax relief, such as a reduction in the property levy on expensive machinery that vexes the Ipsco folks and no doubt many other businesses.
Mr. Wengert says Labor is opposed even though he expects an Ipsco facility to be unionized, as its Canadian plants are.
An existing union steelmaker in the area contends it could be placed at a disadvantage.
Indeed, as Tom Vilsack, a downriver Democratic state senator observes, "You're actually picking and choosing businesses."
Several Democrats in Iowa, at least, don't think that's a proper role for government.
They ought to send that message to the White House.
The handout game, whether it involves steel mills or baseball teams or high-tech R&D, stops when politicians fathom or are made to learn that it doesn't pay off in most cases and it isn't their role in life to bestow these favors anyway.
They ought to attend to competitiveness by maximizing the appeal of their jurisdiction to every kind of enterprise, not just those with a big snout.
