Just months after Russia's first free elections, new battle lines are being drawn as the nation hurtles toward its next political confrontation.
Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, once courted by reformers and conservatives alike, now has thrown in his lot with President Boris Yeltsin, and reform.
While possessing quite different styles -- Mr. Yeltsin at his strongest is a fiery crusader for change, while Mr. Chernomyrdin is a cautious detail-man -- they are united by the pragmatic need to keep Communists and ultrarightists out of power.
"The era of `cohabitation' between Chernomyrdin and Yeltsin has begun," says Alla Yaroshinskaya, a member of the president's advisory council.
Others, reacting to the same danger, are joining in, including Yegor Gaidar, Mr. Chernomyrdin's predecessor and sometimes critic.
Mr. Gaidar is now calling on Russia's fractious reformers to rally to the cause before it is too late.
But while Messrs. Chernomyrdin and Yeltsin nominally control most levers of Russian power, their hold may already be slipping.
Mr. Yeltsin is clearly a weakened politician, still reeling from the slap in the face voters delivered Dec. 15 when they sent a majority of anti-Yeltsin delegates to the State Duma, parliament's lower house.
Moreover, his key reform success, the mass transfer of state property to private hands, has been tarnished by abuses and alleged corruption among former Communist factory bosses, including the heads of this city's Gorky Automobile Plant, Europe's biggest car factory.
Mr. Yeltsin, 62, whose health is the source of endless conjecture, has seemed fatigued and at times out of touch.
His spaciness cost him dearly last month, when the Duma voted to give amnesty to those jailed for inciting violent antigovernment protests last October.
Ms. Yaroshinskaya, 41, a former dissident journalist, observes the executive branch's disarray from the inside.
As the amnesty issue worked its way through the Duma, she tried urgently to phone Chief of Staff Sergei Filatov to prod Mr. Yeltsin to try to block the measure.
Mr. Filatov couldn't be bothered.
Mr. Yeltsin seemed completely unprepared a few days later when his major foes, former Vice President Alexander Rutskoi and the former parliament chairman, Ruslan Khasbulatov, suddenly appeared on television, free after four months in prison.
In symbolic terms, at least, Mr. Yeltsin's foes had delivered a mighty blow.
"At that moment, Yeltsin became a much feebler figure," says Ms. Yaroshinskaya.
Worse, perhaps, he has since offered an olive branch to his rivals, in the form of a formal political peace treaty.
While noble in design, the offer is seen by many as an invitation to conflict -- a sign that the president realizes his own weakness.
When Mr. Yeltsin abolished parliament five months ago, the justifying mantra was, "Russians respect only strength."
While Mr. Yeltsin ponders his next moves, Moscow is abuzz over wild reports of pending upheaval.
Rumors, perhaps disseminated by Mr. Yeltsin's opponents, suggest that the president's health is deteriorating.
(He is known to have a bad back and is rumored to drink to excess sometimes.)
Most alarming, an unsigned article in the latest edition of the weekly Obshchaya Gazeta details an alleged anti-Yeltsin coup plot.
While widely discredited, the report nonetheless has heightened the sense that Mr. Yeltsin is slipping.
And no one can say for sure any longer where the military's loyalty ultimately lies.
Obviously, it is dangerous to count anyone out in the fluid world of Russian politics.
Mr. Yeltsin has bounced back from earlier periods of apparent weakness.
And he continues to play active roles in setting policy for Russia's regions and in foreign affairs, most notably through his recent peace initiative for Bosnia.
Anatoly Chubais, a deputy prime minister in charge of selling off state-owned enterprises, rises to the president's defense.
"Just because Yeltsin isn't on TV every day doesn't mean he's weaker," says Mr. Chubais, 38, who is considered the last true radical reformer in the cabinet.
"Yeltsin's task now is to respond to any `illegal activities'" of his political enemies, he adds.
"I think he's ready for this."
But Mr. Yeltsin clearly is a shadow of the man who, in 1991, stood on a tank in Moscow and nearly single-handedly defeated that year's coup attempt against Mikhail Gorbachev.
That weakness has made the evolution of Mr. Chernomyrdin, who is 55, critically necessary.
It also makes the prime minister perhaps the last hope for pushing forward the free-market reform agenda of Mr. Yeltsin.
Once, Mr. Chernomyrdin would have seemed out of place in Nizhny Novgorod, the crucible of Russia's economic reforms.
But on a recent tour of the province with its governor, the jowly former gas-industry boss was acting born-again.
Mr. Chernomyrdin told factory bosses to stop expecting state credits and said Russia would adopt a controversial local experiment aimed at breaking up the country's 27,000 collective farms.
"Chernomyrdin is no less a reformer than Yegor Gaidar," crowed the province's governor, Boris Nemtsov, giving an exaggerated boost to the prime minister, who just last month had declared an end to Russia's "market romanticism."
Mr. Yeltsin's sudden decision, March 14, to take a two-week rest in the Black Sea resort of Sochi has prompted further speculation about his physical and political health.
Eyebrows were raised even more when Mr. Chernomyrdin unexpectedly flew to the resort on Monday, canceling important meetings in Moscow to discuss pressing political issues with Mr. Yeltsin.
The Russian media are drawing parallels to Mr. Gorbachev's ill-fated trip to the Crimea in August 1991, during which opponents launched the coup attempt.
The next critical showdown probably won't come during the president's holiday, but it could take place by the end of the year.
The once-fractious opposition forces are melding in what is likely to be a powerful anti-Yeltsin coalition.
Consider the dramatic meeting in Moscow this month at Pravda newspaper's House of Culture.
For the first time since the parliamentary White House was stormed five months earlier, Russia's hard-line opposition came together.
A series of speakers strode to the platform to deliver shrill attacks against the president.
Many had just been released from prison, including the leaders of the armed attack Oct. 3 on the Ostankino television tower that nearly precipitated civil war.
The standing-room-only crowd of 1,000 gave them the loudest ovations.
But the ultimate significance of the gathering wasn't the presence of the violent radicals but that of the elected opposition, leaders like Communist Party boss Gennady Zyuganov and ultranationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky.
Though torn by conflicting ambitions and goals, they proclaimed a common aim: to force early presidential elections this year, a full two years before Mr. Yeltsin's term expires.
The loose alliance became formal last week with the creation of Accord for Russia, a bloc of conservatives and nationalists bent on reversing the course of reform.
It already controls a majority of Duma seats.
"We want early presidential elections -- without Yeltsin," declares Mr. Zyuganov, an ambitious man who is planning to restart Communist propaganda campaigns inside Russia's workplaces.
As the two sides jockey for position, the economy continues to slide.
Industrial output in January fell 21% from its already-depressed year-earlier level.
More and more factories are laying off workers or shutting down for long stretches.
Talk of national strikes also threatens the president's power.
While constitutionally Mr. Yeltsin could probably deflect calls for early elections, he would be hard pressed to do so if hundreds of thousands of workers were to hit the streets calling for his ouster.
As Mr. Yeltsin gets shakier, Mr. Chernomyrdin is building up his own command structure.
The premier's apparat, housed in the spotlessly refurbished White House, amounts to a virtual shadow government under his direct command.
The apparat consists of 750 experts, including 200 economists, plus a staff of 500 secretaries, computer operators and other technical-support workers.
The apparat chief, 58-year-old Vladimir Kvasov, is himself one of the most powerful people in Russia.
Every government law and decree is shaped and ultimately signed by Mr. Kvasov and his team.
All cabinet ministers and even Russia's three deputy prime ministers report to him.
Only Mr. Kvasov himself reports directly to Mr. Chernomyrdin.
Mr. Kvasov, a former specialist in underground gas storage who keeps a very low profile, is admired for his bureaucratic expertise.
That contrasts with the bumbling reputation of Mr. Yeltsin's own staff, led by the secretive Viktor Ilyushin, a former Communist Party official from the president's home province of Sverdlovsk.
"In terms of economic planning, we exceed even the old Gosplan," says Mr. Kvasov, referring to the old State Planning Committee, responsible for all the five-year plans of yore.
Mr. Kvasov, a neat, bespectacled man, pulls out a thick folder of newly drafted laws ready for presentation to the Duma.
"The problem is, implementation these days isn't what it used to be."
With reform on the ropes, the only clear beneficiaries are Russia's new elite: the men who rule the factories, institutes and other organs of power.
For the most part, they were the old Soviet elite as well.
And they know how to profit from the system.
Gorky Automobile Plant, known by its Russian acronym GAZ, is a city unto itself in Nizhny Novgorod, some 500 miles east of Moscow.
The factory employs 109,000 people along a sprawling series of production lines and provides for their needs, from medical care to kindergartens.
When Russia began selling off state factories in 1992, GAZ's powerful directors blocked them.
Late last year, however, they suddenly took an active interest in the process and moved quickly with sell-off plans.
As it turned out, the directors took a large state credit earmarked for expansion and used it to buy 46 billion rubles ($27 million) in the factory's shares on behalf of the company but for themselves to control, Moscow prosecutors charge.
By buying a controlling stake, they tried to preserve their jobs and keep the old socialistic ways of management.
Moscow is threatening legal action.
A lineup of 12 somber GAZ officials greets a visiting correspondent at the factory's executive meeting room.
Behind them stand several large red banners commemorating the factory's achievements back in Soviet times, when most of these men were hired.
According to the directors, the share purchases were made legally with after-tax profits.
They say the whole affair is just a misunderstanding.
"We don't understand why the authorities want to wash the dirty linen in public," says Yuri Kulyomin, the pro-management chief of the factory's trade union.
For now, all of Russia is watching to see whether Moscow has the stomach to take on the leaders of GAZ or any of Russia's other "red" enterprise directors, who have been able to thwart reform while enjoying the support of their huge work forces.
"The GAZ case, unfortunately, is typical," says Mr. Chubais, the privatization czar.
To regain the political initiative, the government needs some good economic news.
But that isn't likely to come soon.
True, at a rate of 9.9% a month, inflation is at its lowest level since 1991.
But the pressure is on Mr. Chernomyrdin to find ways quickly to revamp production.
So far he has resisted calls for large-scale inflationary bailouts or wage-and-price freezes.
But many legislators already are calling for Moscow to declare a state of economic emergency.
If things don't improve, many expect trouble, probably in the autumn.
Until then, as the warring sides build up their forces -- taking the obligatory summertime break from cutthroat politics -- Russia will continue to drift.
Ms. Yaroshinskaya, the presidential adviser, believes the military will be tempted to step in as things deteriorate.
But first it must find a leader it can rally around.
One obvious candidate: Mr. Rutskoi, the former Afghan-war hero who is now sitting at his dacha, enjoying his freedom, writing his memoirs and waiting for the political winds to shift his way.
