President Clinton has said that each nation is "like a big corporation competing in the global marketplace."
His tough stance against Japan shows that he really believes this.
But the idea that a country's economic fortunes are largely determined by its success on world markets is only a hypothesis.
As a practical, empirical matter, that hypothesis is wrong.
It is simply not the case that the world's leading nations are to any important degree in economic competition with each other, or that any of their major economic problems can be attributed to failures to compete on world markets.
The growing obsession in most advanced nations with international competitiveness should be seen as a view held in the face of overwhelming contrary evidence.
Trying to define a nation's competitiveness is much more problematic than defining a corporation's.
The bottom line for a corporation is literally its bottom line: When we say a corporation is uncompetitive, we mean that unless it improves its performance, it will cease to exist.
Countries, however, do not go out of business.
They may be happy or unhappy with their economic performance, but they have no well-defined bottom line.
One might suppose, naively, that the bottom line of a national economy is simply its trade balance, that competitiveness can be measured by the ability of a country to sell more abroad than it buys.
But a trade surplus may be a sign of national weakness; a deficit, a sign of strength.
For example, Mexico was forced to run huge trade surpluses in the 1980s to pay the interest on its foreign debt, since international investors refused to lend it any more money.
It began to run large trade deficits after 1990 as confident foreign investors began to pour in new funds.
Would anyone describe Mexico as a highly competitive nation during the debt crisis or call what has happened since 1990 a loss in competitiveness?
Most writers who worry about the issue at all have therefore tried to define competitiveness as the combination of favorable trade performance and something else.
The most popular definition of competitiveness nowadays runs along the lines of the one given in "Who's Bashing Whom?" by Laura D'Andrea Tyson, chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers: "our ability to produce goods and services that meet the test of international competition while our citizens enjoy a standard of living that is both rising and sustainable."
But consider what that definition would mean for an economy that conducted very little international trade, like the U.S. in the 1950s.
For such an economy, the ability to balance its trade is mostly a matter of getting the exchange rate right.
But because trade is such a small factor in the economy, the exchange rate level is a minor influence on the standard of living.
So in an economy with very little international trade, the growth in living standards -- and thus "competitiveness" according to Ms. Tyson's definition -- would be determined almost entirely by domestic factors, primarily the rate of productivity growth.
That's domestic productivity growth, period.
For such an economy, "competitiveness" would turn out to be a funny way of saying "productivity" and would have nothing to do with international competition.
But doesn't this change when trade becomes more important, as indeed it has for all major economies?
It certainly could change.
Suppose a country finds that although its productivity is steadily rising, it can succeed in exporting only if it repeatedly devalues its currency, selling its exports ever more cheaply on world markets.
Then its standard of living, which depends on its purchasing power over imports as well as domestically produced goods, might actually decline.
So "competitiveness" could turn out to be about international competition after all.
There is no reason, however, to leave this as pure speculation; it can easily be checked against the data.
Have deteriorating terms of trade in fact been a major drag on the U.S. standard of living?
Or has the rate of growth of U.S. real income continued essentially to equal the rate of domestic productivity growth, even though trade is a larger share of income than it used to be?
The answer lies in national income accounts data the Commerce Department publishes regularly in the Survey of Current Business.
The standard measure of economic growth in the U.S. is, of course, real gross national product -- a measure that divides the value of goods and services produced in the U.S. by appropriate price indexes to come up with an estimate of real national output.
The Commerce Department also, however, publishes something called "command GNP."
This is similar to real GNP, except that it divides U.S. exports not by the export price index, but by the price index for U.S. imports.
That is, exports are valued by what Americans can buy with the money exports bring.
Command GNP therefore measures the volume of goods and services the U.S. economy can "command" -- the nation's purchasing power -- rather than the volume it produces.
And as we have just seen, competitiveness means something different from productivity if and only if purchasing power grows signicantly more slowly than output.
Well, here are the numbers.
Over the 1959-73 period, one of vigorous growth in U.S. living standards and few concerns about international competition, real GNP per worker-hour grew 1.85% annually, while command GNP per hour grew a bit faster, 1.87%.
From 1973 to 1990, a period of stagnating living standards, command GNP growth per hour slowed to 0.65%.
Almost all (91%) of that slowdown, however, was explained by a decline in domestic productivity growth: real GNP per hour grew only 0.73%.
Similar calculations for the European Community and Japan yield similar results.
In each case, the growth rate of living standards essentially equals the growth rate of domestic productivity.
Even though world trade is larger than ever before, national living standards are overwhelmingly determined by domestic factors rather than by some competition for world markets.
How can this be in our interdependent world?
Part of the answer is that the world is not as interdependent as you might think: Countries are nothing at all like corporations.
Even today, U.S. exports are only 10% of the value-added in the economy (which is equal to GNP).
The U.S. is still almost 90% an economy that produces goods and services for its own use.
By contrast, even the largest corporation sells hardly any of its output to its own workers: The "exports" of General Motors -- its sales to people who do not work there -- are virtually all sales, which are more than 2.5 times the corporation's value-added.
Moreover, countries do not compete with each other the way corporations do.
Coke and Pepsi are almost purely rivals: Only a negligible fraction of Coca-Cola's sales go to Pepsi workers; only a negligible fraction of the goods Coca-Cola workers buy are Pepsi products.
So if Pepsi is successful, it tends to be at Coke's expense.
But the major industrial countries, while they sell products that compete with each other, are also each other's main export markets and each other's main suppliers of useful imports.
If the European economy does well, it need not be at U.S. expense.
Indeed, if anything, a successful European economy is likely to help the U.S. by providing it with larger markets and selling it goods of superior quality at lower prices.
International trade, then, is not a zero-sum game.
When productivity rises in Japan, the main result is a rise in Japanese real wages; American or European wages are in principle at least as likely to rise as to fall, and in practice seem nearly unaffected.
The moral is clear: While competitive problems could arise in principle, as an empirical matter major nations of the world are not to any significant degree in economic competition with each other.
The magazine Foreign Affairs publishes a longer version of this material today.
Mr. Krugman's new book, "Peddling Prosperity" (W.W. Norton), will be published in March.
