The Clinton administration said China's human rights record last year "fell far short of international norms," raising the prospect that Beijing could lose its favorable trade status with the U.S.
In the annual human rights report to Congress, the administration said it was impossible to document how many political prisoners were being detained by Beijing, but estimated it could be in the thousands.
It also found that "physical abuse, including torture by police and prison officials persisted," and concluded that overall political and civil rights remained "severely restricted."
The report also criticized the human rights records of several U.S. allies, including Egypt, Israel, Saudi Arabia and Turkey, as well as the southern neighbor of the U.S., Mexico.
Old Cold War enemies, including many states of the former Soviet Union, also were criticized for human rights abuses, as was Vietnam.
But the chapter on China loomed large because of the possible trade consequences.
Timothy Wirth, the State Department's counselor, said that "limited progress was made" in China over the past year.
But he said that "much more significant progress is going to be necessary" before President Clinton would be able to renew China's most favored nation trading status in June.
Last year, Mr. Clinton renewed the trade status but told Beijing that it must make "overall, significant progress" in human rights in order to keep the designation, which gives China the same tariff treatment as most other U.S. trading partners.
China's bad marks in the human rights report had been expected.
But the annual report's publication yesterday puts Beijing and Washington on what could be a collision course.
Mr. Clinton, who criticized former President Bush as being soft on Beijing, is insisting that China improve its human-rights behavior but doesn't want to penalize U.S. business by cutting off trade with the world's fastest-growing economy.
Overall, John Shattuck, the State Department's assistant secretary for human rights, said that with the end of the ideological struggle of the Cold War, many human rights abuses now stem from ethnic, racial and religious conflicts in places such as Bosnia, Angola and parts of the former Soviet Union.
At the same time, he said "dramatic first steps" toward reconciliation in such places as the Middle East, Cambodia, South Africa and El Salvador have tended to reduce human rights abuses.
The report said that "Russia continued its progress on human rights" last year, but added that Moscow's record still was "uneven and some serious problems remain."
The report cited such problems as the expulsion of people from Central Asia and the Caucasus region of the former Soviet Union, which occurred when President Boris Yeltsin declared a state of emergency in the capital in October.
The report said that Vietnam "continued to limit severely" basic political and civil freedoms, but that Hanoi last year eased restrictions on travel and that its citizens' contacts with foreigners is "more widely accepted."
President Clinton is expected to decide soon whether to lift the two-decade-old U.S. trade embargo of Vietnam.
However, human rights won't be a major consideration in that decision.
Rather, Mr. Clinton must decide whether Vietnam is cooperating sufficiently with efforts to resolve cases of unaccounted-for U.S. soldiers from the Vietnam War.
In the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, the report said, there are "credible reports" that amid the surge in violence following the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord signed last September, Israeli soldiers mistreated Palestinian prisoners.
The report said this mistreatment included torture, administrative detention and destruction of houses of suspected terrorists.
The report also said that in Mexico, despite efforts by the government, "the security forces, in particular the police, continued to commit serious human rights violations in 1993."
The report also noted the recent armed uprising in the Mexican state of Chiapas, stating that indigenous groups there "remain largely outside the country's political and economic mainstream."
But the report didn't include much detail on the uprising, which occurred in January and will be part of next year's report.
