United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt & Whitney division claimed a significant victory as it beat out major rivals for Japan Airlines aircraft-engine orders with a potential value of $450 million.
Pratt & Whitney said the Japanese carrier selected its "high-thrust" PW4000 over engines made by General Electric Co. and by Rolls-Royce PLC.
The sale means that Pratt & Whitney, which fell out of favor with Japanese airlines back in the late 1980s, now would be an engine supplier to all three major Japanese airlines.
Karl Krapek, president of Pratt & Whitney, contended that the sale gives the East Hartford, Conn., jet-engine maker a 51% share of the hotly contested market for a new generation of engines to power longrange, wide-bodied aircraft.
GE's GE90 and Rolls-Royce's Trent 800 engines are the main competitors.
GE and Rolls-Royce couldn't be reached for comment.
Unlike the all-new GE and Rolls-Royce engines, Pratt & Whitney's engine is derived from its older family of engines, PW4000, introduced in 1987.
Mr. Krapek said the new high-thrust version and the older engine have 85% of their parts in common.
"We think our derivative approach is favored by Japan as the least-risk approach," he said, adding that the older engine will have about 10 million hours of flying time when Japan Airlines puts the new, "high-thrust" version on its new fleet of Boeing 777 planes.
Pratt & Whitney was the sole engine supplier for a long time to Japan Airlines.
Then, in 1987, the airliner picked GE over Pratt & Whitney to power a four-engine wide-bodied plane.
"Japan Airlines was very critical of our technical support and delays in delivering parts," a spokesman said.
Pratt & Whitney returned, however, in 1989 by winning orders for engines to power Japan Airlines' three-engine, longrange planes.
The latest contract includes firm orders valued at $240 million for 20 installed engines and four spares, and options for another 20 engines for an estimated $210 million.
Pratt & Whitney said deliveries will begin in 1995 and run through 1999.
United Technologies is based in Hartford, Conn.
