This city and its suburbs were sent reeling again on Monday when a predawn earthquake shook down freeways, dwellings and commercial buildings, killing more than two dozen and plunging much of the city into fear and darkness.
Despite the deaths, and though damage is expected to run into the hundreds of millions of dollars, earthquake experts said the region -- like San Francisco in 1989 -- cheated a grimmer fate because of the quake's timing.
The temblor, the most powerful to strike Los Angeles this century at 6.6 on the Richter scale, came at 4:31 a.m. on a holiday when freeways, shopping centers and most offices were virtually deserted.
"We are extremely grateful that this did not occur later in the day," said Rita Walters, a member of the City Council.
The epicenter was 16 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles.
Still, for millions of Angelenos who survived unscathed, the minute of shaking and rumbling was an episode of fear -- for some, raw terror -- that few will forget.
Said Toni Moston, a Studio City woman who leapt to safety from the balcony of her apartment as it collapsed: "I thought this was the Big One for sure."
Earthquake scientists have long predicted that an earthquake of 8.3 or better -- the magnitude of the 1906 San Francisco quake -- will strike the region in the next decades.
The quake comes atop a discouraging and costly string of disasters to befall the Los Angeles region in recent years.
Its economy nose-dived into recession in 1990, a fall exacerbated later by a collapse in the region's important defense sector, which has shed almost 50,000 jobs in three years.
Then in 1992 came the Los Angeles riots, which caused an estimated $775 million in insured losses.
Atop that, windswept brushfires roared through Southern California last fall, causing an estimated $960 million in insured losses, followed by mudslides.
The 1989 San Francisco earthquake, by comparison, caused about $7 billion in damage, about $950 million of it insured.
Still, economists, while not dismissing short-term negative effects to the region's economy, say the quake's repercussions shouldn't be crippling or long term.
"The impact of this will be smaller than people expect," said Larry Kimbell, director of the University of California-Los Angeles business-forecasting project.
Down the road, "economists will need a fine-tooth comb to see anything," he contended.
The severity of near-term effects will depend a lot on how quickly power and disrupted transportation systems are restored.
By some estimates, as many as 1.3 million people were without power shortly after the quake, while water service was disrupted to 600,000.
City officials were optimistic that most of the water and power service could be restored within a day or two.
But roads are a different matter: Interstate Highway 10, the world's busiest freeway, collapsed in two places, while Interstate 5 crumbled in one place.
In addition, at least a dozen other sections of freeway or major highways also suffered damage, some of it serious.
Though temporary detours may alleviate some traffic congestion, most people are girding for an extended nightmare of gridlock in a city with only limited public-transit facilities.
California highway engineers said merely surveying and designing repairs could take weeks, and actual construction months longer.
And, as strong aftershocks continued through the afternoon, state transportation officials estimated that it could take weeks just to clean up the debris.
One of the aftershocks was measured at 5.5 on the Richter scale, and emergency officials worried about possible landslides and further structural damage to buildings or roads.
Indeed, San Francisco's freeway system has yet to fully recover from the 7.1-rated Loma Prieta quake in 1989; that quake knocked out a section of the Bay Bridge and destroyed miles of elevated freeway and numerous exit and entry ramps.
Repair costs are estimated at $1.3 billion.
Thus, if Highway 10 is significantly damaged and closed for a long time, "I would see that as a big problem," says David Hensley, an analyst specializing in regional economies for Salomon Brothers.
"It would be disruptive for trucking and for people to get to work."
And however soon transportation links and power are restored, the quake will be another negative for the region to overcome, economists add.
"This is clearly bad for tourism.
Hotel occupancy rates in San Francisco's hotels did not come back after its quake," said Mr. Hensley.
Quakes also tend to give the property market, and businesses in general, the jitters.
"If we are waiting for a bigger one . . ., this one is big enough for me," said Larry Solters, owner of Scoop Marketing, a public-relations concern.
"If I could take my business elsewhere, I would seriously consider moving."
With scattered looting being reported in some hard-hit areas, and in the undamaged city center, Gov. Pete Wilson called up some members of the National Guard to help city officials impose a dusk-to-dawn curfew.
By nightfall about half a dozen looters had been arrested.
City schools were ordered to remain closed today, and private industry was asked to keep businesses shuttered.
President Clinton yesterday afternoon declared Southern California a disaster area, making available various kinds of federal aid.
Among these are grants to individuals of as much as $12,200; Small Business Administration loans of up to $100,000 to repair damage to buildings that house small enterprises and as much as $20,000 to replace damaged contents; and temporary housing, for as long as 18 months, for those who have lost their homes.
The president said that repairing damaged freeways would be the "most urgent and most expensive need that we know about now," and that he would not visit the area because "it's important that I not go out there and get in the way."
If large pockets of Los Angeles were left undisturbed by the quake, it sowed death, chaos and disaster in less-fortunate areas.
It sent what some disaster officials called "a wall of walking wounded" to area hospitals -- many of them thrown out of bed or clobbered by falling debris in the quake's violent aftermath.
For residents jolted awake and thinking the Big One had struck, no one could blame them; the view in some quarters was apocalyptic.
In Granada Hills, for example, ruptured gas and water lines sent both water and fireballs surging along residential streets.
The quake threw a 64-car train off its track, wrecking cars that then began to leak sulfuric acid.
In Northridge, near the epicenter, the Bullocks department store was shaken into a twisted pile of concrete and steel.
And a collapsing apartment building in that town accounted for at least 14 of the quake's deaths.
Northridge is quintessential "Valley," in Los Angeles parlance: a flat expanse of former orange groves lined with tidy middle-class homes, with recent Hispanic immigrants clustered in apartments near the main avenues.
"It was right under my pillow," said music producer David Weiss, a member of the rock group Was Not Was, who lives in nearby Granada Hills.
"It was like having a cricket in your hand and shaking it as violently as possible."
A seven-foot armoire tumbled onto the bed where he and his wife were sleeping; fortunately, when she had installed tall bookshelves in the children's rooms, she had had them bolted to the wall.
Mr. Weiss had just completed a major "chaos removal" in his garage and set up an expensive recording studio, with 7,000 record albums.
Most of it survived, though the chaos returned in an instant.
"It's a lesson to a pack rat," he said.
"I'm standing in the doorway with my children thinking, `Who needs that stuff.
At least we're OK.'"
Out on the street in the immediate aftermath, looting was going on nearby, and a number of elderly people were wandering the sidewalks, looking confused.
Along Corbin Avenue in Northridge, shopping-center sidewalks were littered with broken glass.
Proprietors debated how to secure their property for nightfall even as aftershocks continued intermittently.
Fouad Khoury, an owner of King Arthur Liquors, surveyed a brown, sticky river of beverages running along his floor.
The $50,000 or so of estimated damage won't be covered by insurance.
"It's impossible to get earthquake insurance on a business, especially a liquor store," he said.
He has an earthquake rider on coverage of his nearby house, but doesn't expect it to help much to correct the badly cracked walls and other damage.
"The deductible is very high," he said.
Without electricity, shop owners in the hardest-hit areas of Northridge and other communities were puzzled about what aid state and federal authorities might plan to provide.
Mr. Khoury was pondering whether to stay on to protect what was left of King Arthur Liquors or find people to watch the place for him last night.
"I really don't know," he said during a brief break from his cleanup efforts.
In Hollywood, several drugstores and supermarkets had customers lining up before daylight, while clerks led them in small groups to make their purchases.
Those gasoline stations with electricity had lines of cars at the pump.
The hills were clouded with dust from the shaking, but hill-dwellers generally came out of it better than those in the flat areas, because the hills often are carved of granite and act as shock absorbers -- or so the apocrypha go.
Along Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, the plate-glass window at Bertini, an exclusive women's-apparel retailer, shattered after several 50-pound steel mannequins tumbled through to lie on the sidewalk.
Inside, Versace gowns and Hugo Boss outfits were strewn everywhere, amid fallen ceiling panels.
"There were $5,000 outfits just sitting there on the floor," said Jason Elkin, store manager.
Despite the growing death toll, it seemed remarkable that even more weren't killed given the number of apartment complexes all over the San Fernando Valley that were severely damaged.
Tania Sellmeyer awoke as the floor of her Sherman Oaks apartment fell onto the parking garage below, "crushing my brand-new Jeep Cherokee."
She crawled on her knees and jumped out a broken window to the ground below, cutting her arms in the process.
"There was smoke everywhere.
I thought everybody was dead," she said.
She was amazed to learn later that there had been no fatalities in her building.
As darkness approached, the San Fernando Valley was still mostly without power.
Commander David Gascon, chief spokesman of the Los Angeles police, called it the worst utility emergency in the city's history.
He described the declaration of a dusk-to-dawn curfew over the whole city as "a health and safety" issue.
"We need to preserve civil order, and this is one of the ways we can do it."
Numerous businesses, large and small, suffered.
Los Angeles-based First Interstate Bancorp, which operates one of the state's largest branch systems, sustained damage estimated at more than $1 million, mainly at its credit-card processing center in Simi Valley, where water pipes broke.
Automated-teller machines at 18 of the bank's 90 Los Angeles-area branches were not working yesterday because of power outages, a bank spokesman said.
Kaiser Permanente, the big health-maintenance organization, said its Granada Hills building suffered severe structural damage, its outer walls sheared off, exposing office spaces to the open air like cells in a beehive.
Since the facility offers only outpatient services, no one was there when the quake struck.
Much of Southern California's aerospace-manufacturing infrastructure was badly rattled -- but little more.
Lockheed Corp.'s corporate headquarters, in the western San Fernando Valley town of Calabasas, took a severe early-morning jolt, damaging the company's law library.
And at General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Aircraft Co. unit, Los Angeles-area operations were closed yesterday for an evaluation of damages.
For some small-business people who suffered in the Los Angeles riots, the earthquake was another major blow.
Broken glass and plaster littered the floor of Hung Lee's Elegant Lifestyle furniture store.
Wood beams were exposed where chunks of plaster fell, and a crack ran the entire length of the brick building on the corner of Melrose and Western avenues in Hollywood.
Mr. Lee estimates the damage at $10,000.
He has no earthquake insurance, but doesn't plan to apply for emergency funds.
During the 1992 riots, his store was stripped bare by looters, and then his insurance company declared bankruptcy; he is still $80,000 in debt.
"This time I'm not even going to apply for a government loan," he said, noting that after the riots he applied for a Small Business Administration loan and was told he didn't qualify.
All in all, Mr. Lee said, "This isn't too bad compared to the riots."
