Tele-Communications Inc. said its planned purchase of a million new television set-top converters will be delayed by nearly a year because industry technical standards governing their operation haven't been finalized.
Skeptics said the delay affirms their belief that the much-ballyhooed information superhighway will take far longer, cost far more and attract far fewer viewers than is generally believed.
The new-generation converter boxes are a critical part of the cable-TV industry's promise to deliver movies on demand, computer services and an array of interactive games and services.
The delay in the boxes' deployment by TCI, the nation's largest and most powerful cable operator, signals a broader delay for the rest of the cable industry.
The holdup involves a core technology known as digital compression, which can effectively yield a tenfold increase in the number of cable channels that an operator can send to a subscriber's home.
TCI had announced its order of the digital compression boxes amid much fanfare in December 1992.
It had planned to roll them out in the first-quarter of this year.
Now the company must wait until the end of the year to begin deploying the first of the boxes, which will be manufactured by General Instrument Corp.'s Jerrold Instrument subsidiary and by Scientific-Atlanta Inc.
Larger volumes -- as many as 100,000 boxes -- won't go out until the beginning of 1995.
TCI and its manufacturers are waiting for standards to be finalized by MPEG, or the Moving Picture Experts Group, an international body set up to design standards for the way electronic products work when they receive digitally compressed signals.
"It's a complex process of negotiations involving hundreds of companies and industries from dozens of countries around the world," said Robert Thomson, a senior vice president at TCI.
"We're sitting on the sidelines waiting for this delay to end."
The delay in setting standards could trigger a ripple effect across several industries.
Until a digital-compression protocol is set, TCI can't buy large volumes of digital equipment.
And until large volumes of equipment are manufactured, prices will remain high, which will slow the spread of the "digital revolution."
The MPEG group has been trying to finish writing a standard known in industry parlance as MPEG II, but the process for building a consensus is fraught with complications.
Each company, or country, has its own political and financial motivations for lobbying the group for various changes.
A direct-broadcast satellite company, for example, has a different agenda than a cable company.
Furthermore, the standards cover several aspects of the technology, such as sound and video.
"The bottom line is that our customers -- including TCI, Comcast Corp. and Cox Cable a unit of Cox Enterprises Inc. -- have all concluded they would like the MPEG II option in their digital converters before we finish them," said Dan Moloney, director of subscriber products for General Instrument.
