Even as Philip Morris is battling the growing restrictions on smoking, the tobacco giant apparently still has a sense of humor.
In a surprising ad campaign for its faltering Benson & Hedges brand, the company is actually making light of the backlash against smoking, showing the lengths smokers have to go to in order to take a puff these days.
One whimsical ad shows smokers puffing away at their office desks, which are located outside the windows.
The headline: "Have you noticed finding a place to smoke is the hardest part of your job?
For a great smoke, put in for a window office."
The brand's new tagline is, "The length you go to for pleasure."
The advertising is clearly a change in tone from Philip Morris's most recent actions.
In February, Philip Morris sued the city of San Francisco to try to overturn a strict antismoking ordinance that bans smoking in offices and calls for ban on smoking in restaurants by next Jan. 1.
Last week, the tobacco industry railed against a proposal from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration that would severely curtail smoking in public buildings throughout the country.
The new ad strategy arose after Philip Morris executives glanced out their office windows and saw individuals on rooftops blocks away puffing away on a smoke break.
"No one is acknowledging this situation among smokers," says James J. Morgan, Philip Morris USA senior vice president of marketing.
"And empathy is what Benson & Hedges is built on.
We are the brand that understands that smokers have become pariahs.
The ads establish a connection with the consumers that is warm, humorous and whimsical."
Another ad shows smokers on the wing of a jet with the headline: "Have you noticed all your smoking flights have been cancelled?
For a great smoke, just wing it."
A third ad is a picture of home rooftops, where smokers lounge on hammocks and rocking chairs.
The ads will start appearing in May issues of such magazines as Time, Newsweek and People.
In addition, there will be outdoor billboards, including a three-dimensional execution of the airline ad on an expressway by New York's Yankee Stadium.
Philip Morris executives decline to comment on the ad budget, but Mr. Morgan says it is "just short of" a major product launch.
When the account moved to the Leo Burnett ad agency in 1991, it was estmated to have $25 million in billings.
With this latest campaign from Leo Burnett, frustrated Philip Morris executives believe they finally have solved a problem that has lingered for more than two decades: How to translate the enormously popular Benson & Hedges television campaign of the late 1960s to print?
The brand, which is 15 millimeters longer than traditional cigarettes, was introduced with cheeky commercials that showed amusing obstacles to the elongated product, such as elevator doors closing on the cigarette.
"Benson & Hedges is our only brand not to have made the transition" from TV to print after tobacco ads were banned from TV in 1972, says Mr. Morgan.
But the new ads contain "sophisticated, self-deprecating humor," the same ingredients in the TV commercials.
Marketing experts agree with Mr. Morgan's assessment that Benson & Hedges has "finally found a print home."
"The campaign uses clever illustrations to capitalize on a situation of increasing restrictions on smokers," says John Lister, chief executive officer and creative director of Lister Butler, a New York brand-identity consultant.
"Philip Morris deserves kudos for being the first out of the gate to acknowledge the restrictions with an openminded and humorous response."
Meanwhile, a new product introduced last year, Benson & Hedges Special Kings, an 85 millimeter cigarette, has been quietly dropped after a peculiar ad campaign featuring snakes and bees.
"The world wasn't clamoring for the product," concedes Mr. Morgan.
Sales of Benson & Hedges 100's slid as Philip Morris stopped its advertising in favor of the new product launch.
According to John C. Maxwell Jr. of Wheat First Securities, Benson & Hedges ranked No. 10, with 2.5% of the market in 1993, down from its No. 9 ranking in 1992, with 3.1% of the market.
Mr. Morgan uses somewhat self-deprecating humor when describing Benson & Hedges's ad odyssey, which has included 16 different campaigns since the brand was introduced in 1966.
Slogans such as "Weekends, Mornings and Me," "B&H-I Love Your Style," "That's the Breaks" and "He Likes, She Likes" were snuffed out at an alarming rate.
One ad campaign that flopped was "For People Who Like to Smoke" in 1987, which featured smoking yuppies in restaurants and at home.
The brand's longtime ad agency, Wells Rich Green BDDP, was fired in April 1991 and replaced three months later by Burnett.
Philip Morris approached Burnett with the idea for the Benson & Hedges campaign last June and all went smoothly until the Jan. 10 issue of the New Yorker hit newsstands.
On the cover was an illustration of smokers standing on the ledges of office buildings puffing away.
"It was the same concept as our office ad," says Mr. Morgan.
"We were scared that a rival would see that" and produce an ad before Benson & Hedges' ads bowed nationally.
Trick photography wasn't used in any of the executions, says Suzanne A. LeVan, vice president of brand management, premium brands, at Philip Morris.
For example, models were actually placed on the wing of a jet parked in California's Mojave Desert.
And an eight-story office-building facade was erected on a set in Los Angeles for another ad.
Mr. Morgan says there is little risk in the new campaign, except that "maybe a lot of people won't get it.
And if you don't get the joke, it might come off as silly."
The campaign could easily be sustained, he says, with additional amusing situations facing smokers as they grope for places to light up.
"This is merely observing the world around you," says Mr. Morgan.
Another strength of the campaign, he says, is that all smokers will be able to identify with the problems illustrated in the ads.
Philip Morris even sees an opportunity to "provide places to smoke in this segregated world," says Mr. Morgan, and those could be promoted through the Benson & Hedges campaign.
For instance, last December, Philip Morris said it planned to contribute $250,000 to help build 10 smokers' lounges throughout Atlanta's Hartsfield International Airport, which has banned smoking in all public areas.
Philip Morris may not stop there.
According to published reports, the company is developing Marlboro Express, a shorter cigarette for those smokers who need to spend less time puffing as they go between nonsmoking areas.
Mr. Morgan declined to comment on the prospects for a miniature Marlboro.
Five months after his retirement from professional basketball, Michael Jordan remains the most-wanted athlete pitchman by a long shot, with projected 1994 endorsement earnings of $31 million, according to the Sports Marketing Letter.
Shaquille O'Neal is a distant second, at $13.5 million.
Close behind are golfers Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus, at $12 million and $10.5 million, respectively.
Quarterback Joe Montana weighs in at No. 5, with an estimated $10 million.
Rounding out the list were Wayne Gretzky, $8.75 million; Chris Evert, $5.75 million; Charles Barkley, $5 million; Nancy Kerrigan, $3.5 million; and Dan Jansen, $3.5 million.
The Westport, Conn., newsletter ranks athlete endorsers by estimated earnings, excluding salaries and tournament winnings, and by subjective impressions of who is generating the most "heat" among advertisers.
Ad Notes. . . .
RETURN TO INDY: Bridgestone/Firestone is launching a $10 million effort to promote its return to the Indianapolis 500 in 1995 after an absence of 20 years.
The Firestone brand had been nearly synonymous with the Indy 500 after 43 straight races as the winning tire starting in 1920.
The agency is Omnicom Group's TBWA Advertising.
Bridgestone/Firestone is a unit of Bridgestone Japan.
ACCOUNT: NFL Enterprises, a unit of the National Football League, tapped Margeotes/Fertitta Donaher & Weiss, New York, to create ads for a satellite-TV service planned for June.
Billings couldn't be determined.
AT&T PITCH: American Telephone & Telegraph said a sixth agency also is contending for its big direct-marketing consumer-services advertising: Worldwide 1 on 1, a joint venture of N.W. Ayer and Ross Roy Communications.
