Kellogg Co., the nation's largest maker of ready-to-eat cereal, is raising prices on many of its popular brands for the second time in six months.
Kellogg notified grocers by letter yesterday that it is raising prices on 38 cereals an average of 2.6%.
Corn Flakes, among its biggest sellers, will increase nearly 7%, Frosted Mini-Wheats will go up 4%, Rice Krispies and Frosted Flakes about 3% each, and Froot Loops 2.5%.
Not all of Kellogg's cereals are affected.
The move is surprising, in that it runs counter to recent price rollbacks by some national-brand manufacturers, including those of cigarettes and disposable diapers, in the face of strong private-label competition.
Moreover, while cereal makers for years raised prices faster than the inflation rate without hurting sales, lately some, including Kellogg, have seen their domestic market share decline.
While it is the market leader, Kellogg may encounter competitive resistance.
The last time Kellogg raised prices, an average of 2.1% last August, only the Post cereals division of Philip Morris Cos.'
Kraft General Foods followed suit.
Previously, a price increase by one cereal maker was soon taken by everyone.
But as some brands approach $5 a box, companies have worried about consumer sticker shock, as well as the questionable economics of offering discount coupons that consumers can use to cancel out price increases.
Nearly half the cereal purchases in the U.S. are made with coupons, and in-store deals are common.
A Kellogg spokesman said yesterday the company doesn't intend to offer more coupons to offset the higher prices, although he added that "we have the will to protect our market share."
Only last month the Battle Creek, Mich., company's chairman, noting that fourth-quarter advertising and promotional expenditures were $100 million higher than in the 1992 quarter, said Kellogg hoped "to moderate promotional spending in the U.S."
General Mills Inc. -- the nation's No. 2 cereal company, with about 25% of the market compared with Kellogg's 37% as measured by volume -- decided not to follow last summer's Kellogg increase, contending that the subsequent coupon distribution needed to keep customers could have cost more than the company would have realized from the higher price.
General Mills had no immediate comment on Kellogg's decision.
Such price increases also create a marketing opportunity for private-label or house-brand cereals, which can focus on the widening gap between their products and those of the national brands.
Today private-label cereals have about a 9% share of the U.S. market.
Kellogg attributed its pricing move to variety of cost factors, including higher prices for such raw materials as wheat, corn and rice.
The company's margins also have come under pressure as it spent aggressively to maintain or increase its market share.
"Costs have increased, particularly grain, which may make competitors follow this increase," Prudential Securities food analyst John M. McMillin advised clients yesterday.
But in an interview he said, "While there have been some ingredient cost increases, I'd have rather seen some marketing rationalization rather than more list price increases."
In reporting record 1993 earnings, Kellogg's chairman and chief executive officer, Arnold G. Langbo, cited "extremely competitive conditions in the U.S. and a high level of marketing activity internationally" for the higher level of promotion expenditures.
Indeed, in recent months Kellogg has seen some erosion in its overseas cereal market share, as Cereal Partners Worldwide, a joint venture between General Mills and Nestle SA, has moved into the Mexican and Asian markets.
A spokesman said he knew of no recent price increases by Kellogg outside the U.S.
If its latest domestic price increase isn't followed by competitors, Kellogg may have no choice but to step up marketing expenditures to hold its share.
But the company is calculating that that won't be necessary.
"Our intent is that promotional spending will be down on existing products," the spokesman said.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Kellogg stock fell 25 cents, or 0.5%, to close at $52.25 a share.
