The federal government's National Institutes of Health has dropped its controversial attempt to patent thousands of fragments of unidentified genes, a move some scientists had previously criticized as biology's version of a "land grab."
The NIH said that by ending its three-year effort to patent gene fragments found by one of its scientists, the government hoped to end an international rush by companies and other countries to file similar patent claims.
But an official in the biotechnology industry said the NIH decision may be too late to stop an avalanche of patent applications by industry that was set off by the initial NIH action.
The NIH said it won't appeal a ruling by the U.S. Patent and Trade Office in 1992 stating that the gene fragments couldn't be patented because the exact functions of the genes were unknown.
The NIH had until last night to appeal the patent office decision, and many gene researchers expected it to pursue the patent claims.
But Harold Varmus, the new director of the NIH, said, "I do not believe that patenting at this stage promotes technology development, and it may impede more important research collaborations here and internationally."
Dr. Varmus's action reversed a decision by his predecessor, Bernadine Healy, to seek patents for about 7,000 gene fragments.
The fragments were identified by J. Craig Venter, using a technique he developed to pluck small pieces of previously unknown genes out of DNA, the molecule that contains all genetic information.
Dr. Healy said the applications gave the U.S. protection in case other countries used Dr. Venter's discoveries to pursue their own patents.
But the applications ignited world-wide protest from governments and geneticists involved in the international collaborative effort to decipher the entire collection of human genes.
France and Britain, among other nations, called it unethical to patent genes before knowing what they are and demonstrating a practical use for them.
Even so, Britain's equivalent of the NIH also filed patent claims for the gene fragments in order to protect its discoveries.
"I think Dr. Varmus's decision is a very sensible thing to do," said James Watson, co-winner of the Nobel Prize for discovering the structure of DNA.
As director of the government's Human Genome Project, Dr. Watson publicly squabbled with Dr. Healy over the patents.
He argued that seeking ownership over unknown genes would undermine efforts to get governments, universities and companies to work together to seek disease-causing genes.
The dispute led Dr. Watson to resign his government position earlier than planned.
Dr. Venter also has since left the NIH, helping form a nonprofit institute and private company using his technique to seek out genes.
Noting that the issues surrounding the patenting of genetic material is complex, Dr. Venter said yesterday that he "respected" Dr. Varmus's decision.
But officials at several pharmaceutical and biotech companies said the NIH decision may only postpone vexing questions related to the patenting of genes.
Many companies and research institutions have patented genes over the years, but those patents were based on the identification of a gene's complete structure and function.
New technology now allows industry and academic scientists to identify pieces of genes long before anyone knows what the genes do.
Many researchers are worried that if they don't patent these discoveries, someone else will.
Dropping the patent claims "doesn't resolve the question of what it takes to win a patent," says Francis Collins, the current director of the U.S. genome project.
But by backing out of the issue, Dr. Collins said, the NIH might "improve the scientific atmosphere" and relieve some of the building pressure to patent gene fragments.
