Grain-futures prices fell on increasing foreign competition for U.S. corn exports and expectations of a big South American soybean crop.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, corn for July delivery was down 5 1/4 cents to $2.8575 a bushel; July soybeans fell 3 1/4 cents to $6.69 a bushel; and July wheat dropped 3 1/4 cents to $3.2825.
Commodity funds, or managed pools of investors' money, were big sellers of cornfutures contracts yesterday, said Richard Loewy, president of AgResource Co., Chicago.
These funds had been holding "long" positions, or wagers that corn-futures prices would rise, because of low U.S. corn stocks and expectations of high usage of corn as feed for livestock.
But recent news about demand for U.S. corn has been a drag on prices.
The agricultural attache in South Africa predicts a crop of 14 million metric tons of corn, which would be record production for the country, Mr. Loewy said.
And import buyers such as Japan favor the starchy content of South Africa's corn.
Jordan, which had been expected to buy about 50,000 metric tons of U.S. corn this week, bought the grain overseas instead, probably from China, Mr. Loewy said.
"Good crops in Argentina, China and South Africa will give us a lot of export competition," he said.
In soybean futures, "The market is fixated on the size of the Brazilian crop," said Anne Frick, soybean analyst for Prudential Securities.
"We haven't been able to get a seasonal rally going, largely because of expectations about the size of that crop."
Analysts expect the South American crop to come in at about 38 million to 40 million metric tons, which would also be a record.
All grain traders are eagerly awaiting the contents of the March 31 U.S. Agriculture Department stocks-in-all-positions report.
Among other things, the report will estimate feed usage of U.S. corn and give traders a hint of whether higher prices have managed to cut this usage, as is necessary.
And for soybean traders, the report will confirm or dispel widely held suspicion that the USDA has previously underestimated soybean production from last summer's crop by 10 million to 20 million bushels, Ms. Frick of Prudential said.
ENERGY: Crude-oil futures fell below $14 a barrel early yesterday but recovered from most of the losses in later trading.
Crude for April delivery settled unchanged at $14.10 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Expectations that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries won't reduce production in the second quarter contributed to the sell-off in early trading.
But then traders grew cautious in advance of the American Petroleum Institute's weekly report on oil inventories.
After the close of the New York Mercantile Exchange, the API reported that U.S. inventories of crude oil increased 8.5 million barrels last week while stocks of distillate fuels and gasoline declined 3.7 million and 2.7 million barrels, respectively.
These were in line with industry expectations, although the increase in crude-oil inventories was much larger than had been anticipated.
LIVESTOCK & MEATS: Hog and porkbelly futures prices rose on speculation of diminishing slaughter.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, pork bellies for May delivery were up 1.17 cents to 58.90 cents a pound, while the price of the June hog futures-contract rose 0.25 cent to 54.97 cents a pound.
Since Valentine's Day, hog slaughter has been higher than it was last year, so far defying U.S. Agriculture Department expecations.
But traders have begun to anticipate that slaughter may taper off in coming weeks, said Dan Vaught, livestock analyst for A.G. Edwards & Sons, St. Louis.
A weekly cold-storage report released after trading yesterday showed net movement of 52,000 pounds of pork bellies into cold storage, far lower than most analysts' expectations, which ranged from one million to 1.7 million pounds net into cold storage.
Anticipation of this lower-than-expected number, an indication of good demand for pork bellies, or uncured bacon, may also have helped to pressure prices higher yesterday, Mr. Vaught said.
