A report showing that inflationary pressures remained relatively subdued in February sparked a second consecutive day of solid gains in the bond market.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose nearly a point, or nearly $10 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 93 for a yield of 6.79%, down from 6.87% on Tuesday.
With prices of Treasury securities having rebounded from last week's lows, some investors were willing to go out on a limb and say the worst may be over for now.
The catalyst for yesterday's rally was the government's consumer price index report for February, which came in at expected levels.
The Labor Department said consumer prices rose 0.3% last month from the previous month, both with and without food and energy prices factored in.
Analysts said the report showed that although inflation may yet be a problem down the road, it's not much of a threat now.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
The consumer price index report was the second piece of reassuring news on the inflation front in the past two days.
Bond prices had risen Tuesday in reaction to a report showing that producer prices rose just 0.1% in February when food and energy costs were excluded.
With the CPI failing to provide an excuse to resume selling, the bond market carved out new gains.
"The CPI came in as expected and the market decided to trend higher," said Mathew Alexy, government bond market strategist at CS First Boston Corp.
The bulk of the buying was attributed to dealers and speculative accounts closing out short positions.
A short sale is essentially a bet that prices will fall in which a trader sells a borrowed securities in hopes of being able to replace it at a lower price and pocket the difference.
"The story of the day was short covering," said Jay Goldinger, a trader at Capital Insight Inc.
Traders also reported some buying of Treasury notes tied to municipal defeasance for the first time in a number of weeks.
Defeasance occurs when a state or local government issues new debt to refund older, higher-interest securities.
Until the older debt can be called, the proceeds from the new issuance are invested in Treasury securities.
Municipal defeasance was a major factor contributing to the bond market's rally last year.
During 1993, municipalities issued more than $100 billion of refunding debt and most of that cash headed into the Treasury market.
But with the sharp increase in interest rates so far this year, defeasance buying slowed to a trickle.
Traders and investors were impressed by the market's ability to turn higher on what was essentially neutral inflation news.
Zane Brown, head of fixed income at Lord, Abbett & Co., said yesterday's price action reflected a change in sentiment.
"Prior to Tuesday any news that could possibly be interpreted as negative was seen that way," Mr. Brown said.
But now, he said, "we may be seeing a return to investing on fundamentals rather than the selling frenzy that characterized the last few weeks."
Mr. Goldinger of Capital Insight said the sellers simply exhausted themselves.
"The market grew tired of going down and the momentum just slowed," he said.
"The market is sold out."
Mr. Brown of Lord Abbett said more investors may soon be drawn back into the bond market.
If sustained, the gains of the last two days could be the stability that buyers have been waiting for, he said.
"So far what we've seen is an absence of selling and some short covering," he said.
"At some point, very close to where we are now, we will start to attract cash into the market."
But the market has one more significant hurdle to clear: due out at midmorning today is the Philadelphia Federal Reserve's report on local business conditions.
A sharp gain earlier this year in the inflation component of the Philadelphia Fed index was one of the reasons for the bond market's tumble.
As a result traders will carefully comb through the report.
Mr. Brown, however, was not too worried.
"The economy may be growing, but it doesn't have to grow with higher inflation," he said.
"We still believe that long-term interest rates will end this year slightly lower than where they began the year."
Meanwhile, the Treasury announced yesterday that it will sell $17 billion in two-year notes next Tuesday and $11 billion in five-year notes next Wednesday.
In when-issued trading late yesterday, the two-year note was yielding 4.97% and the five-year note was yielding 5.85%.
The corporate bond new-issue market showed signs of life yesterday after over a month in a coma, thanks to sharply rising interest rates.
Issuers took advantage of a market perceived as relatively stable, syndicate officials said.
About $1.61 billion of debt was sold during what many believed is a window of opportunity.
"Whether or not the storm has passed, we'll have blue skies for a few days," one syndicate official said.
For example, Federal Express 1994 Pass-Through Trust sold $377 million of pass-through certificates in three parts through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs & Co.
The trust is a special-purpose unit set up to lease 13 aircraft back to Federal Express Corp.
If Federal Express were to experience severe financial problems, the trust would not be affected.
The deal was originally expected to be launched about two weeks ago, but was postponed when interest rates began rising, noted Bob Henning, a managing director for aircraft financing at Federal Express.
"We were prepared to bring the deal but due to the volatility in the market we decided to wait," he said.
The deal was launched yesterday after the market stablized, he said.
Other deals priced included Ford Motor Credit Co.'s $500 million three-year note offering, Citicorp's $200 million offering of 10-year subordinated notes, and Pennsylvania Power & Light Co.'s $250 million two-part debt offering and three-part preferred stock offering totaling $80 million.
Ford Motor Credit is a unit of Ford Motor Co.
Trading in the investment-grade market continued light with yield spreads widening by about 0.02 percentage point.
Much of the selling was from dealers looking to lighten inventories, one trader said.
Junk-bond prices rose about 1/2 point in light trading.
One trader noted it was the first time in about three weeks that the market saw buying activity.
NWA Inc.'s 8 5/8% coupon bonds maturing in 1996 rose 2.5 points, or $25 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 94.
The yield dropped to 11.59% from 12.9%.
NWA's bonds were reacting to news that its parent, Northwest Airlines, was expected to price its initial public stock offering as soon as today.
The pricing is expected even after the likely price per share was cut to $13 to $14 from $19 to $21.
The bonds of USAir benefited from Northwest Airlines' news and traded up in sympathy, one trader said.
USAir Inc.'s 10% guaranteed notes maturing in 2003 rose two points, or $20 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 85.
The yield dropped to 12.99% from 13.5%.
USAir is a unit of USAir Group Inc.
Late in the day, ITT Floorplan Receivables Master Trust 1994-1 priced $1 billion of floating-rate asset-backed certificates.
The certificates were priced at 99.954726 to yield 3.7725% initially.
The certificates will float 0.20 percentage point above the one-month London Interbank Offered Rate.
Municipal bonds recorded gains of as much as 1/2 point, with California's 6% general obligation bonds due in 2024 up 1/4 point in late trading.
One issue that drew plenty of buyers was Pennsylvania's $491.1 million First Series of 1994 improvement unlimited-tax bonds.
A Goldman, Sachs & Co. group reoffered the bonds at yields ranging from 3.05% in 1995 to 5.75% in 2013 and 2014.
The Pennsylvania issue was snapped up by such buyers as property and casualty companies and intermediate bond funds, a Goldman Sachs underwriting specialist said.
Bonds due in 2007-09 were rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard & Poor's Corp.
The balance of the bonds were rated single-A1 by Moody's and double-A-minus by S&P.
The municipal market's rise was encouraging following recent sales triggered by the Federal Reserve's tightening early last month, traders said.
Mortgage securities moved higher as some institutional investors returned to the marketplace.
"It was a fairly active retail day," said a trader on the mortgage desk at a primary dealer in New York.
Retail buyers -- market lingo for those customers outside the dealer community, such as mutual funds -- were responding to news that consumer prices edged up only slightly last month as well as what was perceived as some bargains in the secondary mortgage security market.
Among prices of 7% securities for April delivery, Government National Mortgage Association rose 16/32 to 98 10/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Golds and Federal National Mortgage Association each rose 16/32 to 98 23/32 and 98 17/32, respectively.
