Law firms preparing to do business in Vietnam are warning corporate clients to go slowly -- and to beware the pitfalls encountered by U.S. companies in China and Eastern Europe in recent years.
The Vietnamese legal system has just begun to grapple with business issues and has no comprehensive commercial code, U.S. lawyers warn.
Its bankruptcy law, environmental law and insurance law were adopted just last year.
From ownership disputes to tax issues, it remains unclear how U.S. interests will be treated in many of the projects that American businesses envision now that the trade embargo has been lifted.
"The major pitfall is, `What is the law in Vietnam?'" says James Hurlock, chairman of White & Case, a New York law firm planning to open offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City this year.
The answer may not come any time soon.
"Like all underdeveloped countries that open up suddenly like this, there is a chance you won't know what the rules are for several years," says Anthony Williams, chairman of Coudert Brothers, an international law firm based in New York.
Mr. Williams notes that in China, for instance, developments in trademark law have only recently begun to provide the protection that U.S. companies want.
Mr. Williams compares the flurry of interest in Vietnam to the early enthusiasm that followed the fall of the Berlin Wall.
A major manufacturing client was preparing to buy a state-owned facility in the former East Germany, with the understanding that the government would protect the buyer from any environmental liability.
After months of negotiating, that promised protection disappeared, making the project unworkable.
"We're advising clients to proceed very cautiously through the froth -- and there is going to be a lot of froth before getting to the ale," Mr. Williams says.
Certainly, no one doubts the economic potential of the Southeast Asian nation.
Its population of 72 million makes it a sizable market, bigger than Thailand or the Philippines.
Its Communist government wants to spur business and foreign trade.
And after years of war and neglect, the nation has a desperate need for factories, roads and other projects -- all of which could generate millions of dollars in work for foreign companies.
Vietnam's interest in encouraging foreign investment is reflected in the recent enactment of a number of laws seeking to facilitate commerce.
But, says Irwin Jay Robinson, president of the Vietnam-American Chamber of Commerce, which promotes trade between the two countries, from an American point of view, "those laws leave a lot to be desired."
For instance, the Vietnamese bankruptcy law, which takes effect in July, doesn't clarify just what protection foreign creditors will have.
Mr. Robinson, a partner at New York law firm Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim & Ballon, says the Vietnamese business laws tend to be so specific that they are likely to prove inflexible in many situations.
Vietnam law also ensures that in foreign joint ventures, Vietnamese partners have veto power in many decisions, even when they have a minority stake.
Because Vietnam has no body of judgemade case law on business disputes and because many business issues are new to its legal system, U.S. lawyers say clients will want to avoid going to court there.
Instead, U.S. businesses are being urged to rely on detailed contracts that spell out how the parties will resolve any disagreements that arise.
Lawyers say that arbitration, usually through the International Chamber of Commerce, is favored by the Vietnamese government as a way to resolve commercial disagreements with foreign investors.
Despite their qualms, U.S. law firms see a rising demand for their own services in Vietnam.
Although American lawyers can't practice in Vietnam courts, they can advise clients on what terms the laws may impose on projects, such as in what way profits can be split with Vietnamese partners and how U.S. partners' earnings will be taxed in Vietnam.
U.S. regulatory lawyers also are helping clients determine whether their plans will run afoul of the U.S. trade restrictions that still apply to Vietnam.
Though the embargo has been lifted, Vietnam is expected to be placed in the same category of trading partners as Cambodia and Albania, meaning certain high-tech equipment couldn't be shipped there and products sent back to the U.S. would face high tariffs.
Manufacturing proposals, which could benefit from Vietnam's low labor costs, are hampered by the need for transportation and electric-power improvements.
For now, the safest business opportunities for foreign companies appear to be infrastructure projects, such as plans to improve Vietnam's millions of miles of damaged roads, as well as its harbors and ports.
The Vietnamese government is in line to receive hundreds of millions of dollars in loans from international agencies for such work.
Jeffrey Snyder, an attorney in the Washington office of Graham & James, a law firm with an affiliate in Vietnam, says he hopes U.S. companies will be more realistic than they have been in some recent foreign ventures.
"Sure, the embargo is gone, and there are tremendous opportunities," he says, "but we are at a very early stage in the economic development between the two countries."
David L. Paul, the former chief executive of failed CenTrust Bank in Miami, pleaded guilty to the U.S. government's remaining 29 charges against him.
Mr. Paul, age 54, was convicted in December of 68 counts of fraud, most involving allegations that he siphoned $3.2 million from CenTrust and spent it on his yacht and his homes during the 1980s.
A second trial was set to start early this year on 29 racketeering and securities counts stemming from CenTrust's dealings with, among others, the rogue Bank of Credit & Commerce International.
Neither Mr. Paul nor his attorneys were available for comment yesterday.
Mr. Paul's case is the first conviction of a U.S. banker growing out of the BCCI investigations in this country, said Assistant U.S. Attorney Allan J. Sullivan.
