The current attempt by Federated Department Stores to acquire R.H. Macy & Co. in bankruptcy -- and thereby win the right to file a reorganization plan of its own -- has highlighted the inadequacies of Chapter 11.
Incumbent management's ability to control the agenda in Chapter 11 is a real problem, discussed in the article that appears above.
But Chapter 11 has other problems, too.
Chapter 11 mixes two decisions.
First, what should happen to a bankrupt company -- should it be reorganized, sold or liquidated?
Second, how should the company's value be divided among various creditor classes and shareholders?
This mixing of decisions leads to a great deal of squabbling and makes Chapter 11 very slow.
The largest bankruptcy cases take an average of two to three years.
This delay is expensive in legal fees and administrative costs and can also cause a decline in a company's value.
Eastern Airlines suffered losses of about $1.6 billion in Chapter 11 before eventually being liquidated.
Chapter 11 has the laudable goal of preserving healthy companies.
But there is a way to achieve that goal without incurring Chapter 11's costs.
Together with Philippe Aghion of Oxford and John Moore of the London School of Economics, I have proposed the following market-based alternative to Chapter 11.
According to this proposal, when a company goes bankrupt, it is put up for auction.
However, in contrast to a standard auction, bidders can make noncash bids as well as cash bids.
With a noncash bid, a bidder offers to buy the company using as payment securities in the post-bankruptcy company.
A noncash bid therefore allows for the possibility of reorganization.
Suppose incumbent management believes they are the best people to run the company.
They want to retain their jobs but do not have the cash to buy the company outright.
Under our proposal, they could bid by offering shares in the post-bankruptcy company.
Another possibility would be for incumbent management to make a bid comprising cash and shares, where the cash is raised by borrowing against the company's future profit.
An outside management team such as Federated could make the same kinds of bids.
And, of course, anyone is free to make a purely cash bid.
The difficulty in evaluating these bids is that they are apples and oranges.
How does one compare a cash bid to a noncash bid or one noncash bid to another?
The answer is to transform the former creditors into shareholders via a debt-equity swap, and then let them vote on the bids.
One way to carry out this swap is to give all the shares initially to senior creditors.
However, junior creditors and shareholders don't go away empty-handed.
After the bids are announced, junior creditors have the right to buy out the senior creditors for the pro-rata amount the senior creditors are owed.
Similarly, former shareholders have the right to buy their shares back for the pro-rata amount all creditors are owed.
The merit of this scheme is that it preserves the seniority of claims without requiring an external valuation of the company.
Once the debt-equity swap has been completed, the new shareholders vote on which bid to accept.
If the vote goes in favor of a cash bid, the company is in effect liquidated or sold.
If a noncash bid wins, then the company is in effect reorganized.
Independent experts could evaluate the bids, but their recommendations wouldn't be binding.
The whole process might take around four months -- three months for bids to come in and one month for rights to be exercised and the vote taken.
This may be too quick to settle all claims disputes, but the remainder can be resolved after the company has emerged from bankruptcy.
The advantage of our proposal is that it leaves the decision over the company's future -- whether to liquidate, sell or reorganize and, if reorganize, who the new management team should be -- in the hands of the (new) owners.
And at the moment of the vote, these owners' interests are aligned, since they are all shareholders.
There is no squabbling over the division of the company's value, since the procedure determines this mechanically through the automatic debt-equity swap.
Like Chapter 11, our procedure gives claimholders the option of maintaining the company as a going concern if the company's bad fortunes are the result of bad luck rather than bad management.
Unlike Chapter 11, the procedure is cheap, quick and avoids conflicts of interest.
Also, the procedure isn't biased in favor of incumbent management.
It would allow Federated to make a bid for Macy's directly, without having to buy Macy's debt first.
Macy's next management team would then be decided by a simple vote.
Mr. Hart is a professor of economics at Harvard University.
This article reflects some material covered in the October 1992 issue of Journal of Law, Economics and Organization.
