Despite the improving economy, marketers are finding value-conscious consumers as resistant to price increases as ever.
A few companies have been able to command higher prices by introducing new "value-added" products, but many marketers are discovering that they increase prices at their own peril.
Consider the baby-formula market.
American mothers have long remained brand loyal, even though companies have regularly raised prices, sometimes twice a year.
But Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.'s Mead Johnson unit, the second largest manufacturer in the category, saw supermarket sales of its products plummet when its formula prices rose at a much higher rate than prices of other brands, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
Supermarket prices of the company's Enfamil baby formula rose by an average of 18.1% during the 52-week period ended Jan. 2 and sales fell 20.9% to $253.5 million, according to InfoScan data.
The average price of Prosobee, another Bristol-Myers baby formula, rose 17.2%, and the brand's sales fell 12.7% to $92 million.
Bristol-Myers' price increases are especially risky at a time when such new players as Nestle SA are aggressively discounting their formulas.
Bristol-Myers wouldn't comment on its pricing strategy, contending in a written statement that it raised prices last year only once by a "modest single digit."
A survey of retail prices conducted by Information Resources shows that consumers paid more for a variety of supermarket products during the 52 weeks ended Jan. 2, compared with the previous year.
But most products with significant price increases posted lower unit sales.
Consumers paid an average of 11.9% more for canned salmon than they did a year ago, but unit sales dropped 11.4%.
The average price of powdered laundry detergent rose 4%, while unit sales dropped 15.5%.
Prices take priority, at times, even over health concerns.
Although olive oil's healthful image has made the product immensely popular in the past several years, consumers quickly switched back to corn oil after companies raised prices 7% a pound in 1991, an action taken in part to reflect higher importing costs.
"Consumers are a lot smarter than they were just several years ago," says William Monroe, president and chief executive officer of Bertolli U.S.A. Inc., the country's biggest marketer of olive oil.
Alarmed by the consumer reaction, Bertolli cut prices of its olive oil by an average 13% in 1992 and 15% in 1993, and has boosted market share.
Bertolli is a unit of SME International of Milan.
Overall, olive oil prices dropped 4% in the 52-week period, helped partly by favorable exchange rates against the Italian lira.
Higher sales volume kept dollar sales at the same level as the year-earlier period.
Still, some companies have successfully persuaded consumers to pay more for new products, even in mundane areas like drain cleaners.
Last year, Clorox Co. and S.C. Johnson & Son Inc. launched plumbing-maintenance products including microorganisms that are promised to constantly eat away at the gunk building up in drains.
While these products pushed the average price of drain cleaners up 14.6%, sales in the category rose 20.1% to $140 million.
Similarly, Procter & Gamble Co. developed a bar soap version of its Oil of Olay moisturizer, which has captured a big share of the market despite a hefty price of $2.09 for two bars.
That product helped account for an 8% price increase in the bar-soap category.
Marketers will put even more effort into launching such new products this year, says Chet Kane, president of Kane Bortree & Associates, a New York new-product research company.
Companies have "hit bottom on what they could do with cost-cutting," he says.
Now, they are focusing more on new products, which allow them to set a new, higher pricing point.
It helps to find a niche where consumers are less price-sensitive.
Eastman Kodak Co. discovered that although consumers were sensitive about the price of regular camera film, they willingly shelled out extra dollars for its Fun Saver single-use cameras.
Last summer, the company introduced a version of Fun Savers that tacked on two extra exposures, and one frame that already included a burned image of Walt Disney Co.'s Aladdin cartoon character.
Those additional features cost a whole dollar more than the standard $9.95 suggested retail price, but consumers loved it: Sales of Kodak's Fun Savers doubled in the 52-week period to $16.5 million, even as average prices rose 8.8% to $10.80.
Marketers also were able to increase both prices and sales of frozen poultry and meat products by introducing new, convenient varieties.
Of course, some price changes are a commodity issue.
Bumble Bee Seafoods Inc., a unit of Unicord Co. of Thailand, says prices of canned salmon rose sharply last year because of a poor fish supply.
The average price of refrigerated and frozen orange juice, meanwhile, fell 11.8% and 12.8%, because of a glut of oranges in the market, as well as fierce promotional campaigns by Seagram Co.'s Tropicana and Coca-Cola Co.'s Minute Maid brands.
Among categories with large price drops in 1993: liquid laundry detergent, down 6.2%; shelf-stable prepared pudding and gelatin, down 8.6%; and refrigerated butter, down 5.5%.
Source: Information Resources Inc.
