Economic doctors used to sneer at the kroons, soms, lats and other oddly named currencies that sprouted up in the independent republics of the former Soviet Union.
No more.
With the Russian ruble tumbling to new lows -- and Moscow's most prominent reformers bailing out in disgust -- international institutions and others have begun to look with favor on the newly minted monies in such states as Latvia, Kazakhstan, and the Kyrgyz Republic.
"The International Monetary Fund got it wrong and Russia got it wrong in the early days when they were trying to maintain the integrity of the ruble area," says David Dyker, a senior fellow at the Royal Institute for International Affairs in London.
These days, divorcing the ruble is viewed as a step toward "escaping the chaos," says one Washington-based adviser to the republics.
So the IMF and World Bank now are sending supportive signals to the independent currencies.
Earlier this month, international donors agreed to a $1 billion package of aid and concessional loans for Kazakhstan, about five times the amount committed the previous year.
The World Bank is putting up about 40% of the package, with the Japanese government providing about 20%.
In part, the money is aimed at supporting the tenge, the currency that Kazakhstan rolled out last November.
One banker reasons that if new currencies such as the tenge can be stabilized -- as some of them have been -- "there'll be more investor and donor interest in the outlying republics" than in Russia.
By the same token, there's growing worry about Belarus, which recently agreed to join a monetary union with Russia, ending a timid experiment in monetary independence and retiring the meekly named rubel, which is nearly identical to the Russian currency but pronounced with the accent on the second syllable.
The sense of hope that surrounds some of the republics' new currencies goes along with the hopelessness directed toward the ruble, which is again vulnerable to inflation after several months of real progress toward stability last year.
The ruble zone flopped even for Russia, making it harder for Moscow to keep tabs on the money supply and control inflation.
Currently, reformers in Moscow strenuously oppose any efforts to rebuild one.
With Russia managing one of the wobblier reform programs, the reform-minded states would be held back if they were yoked to the monetary mayhem at the Russian Central Bank.
For differing periods last year, the Estonian kroon and the Latvian lat were among the world's more stable currencies; had these Baltic countries been saddled with rubles during this period, their progress toward economic reform undoubtedly would have been slowed.
One exception among the strong new currencies of the former Soviet republics is Ukraine's karbovanet, which enjoys the dubious distinction of deteriorating faster than the ruble.
The Kiev government, with only a nominal commitment to economic reform, launched a new currency in the same spirit as hoisting an independent flag.
But since the currency wasn't backed by a credible economic policy, the new money became highly inflationary, and foreign investors have steered clear.
Of course, the fledgling currencies need more than coherent economic reforms at home to remain stable.
However steadfast the former Soviet republics are, nearly all of them can expect hefty trade deficits with Russia, the region's main supplier of energy and natural resources.
They also face perilous budget deficits.
The international lending institutions will have to provide them substantial financial support.
Otherwise, they will be tempted to cope with these problems by printing money, which would erode their new currencies.
Some of the republics are better positioned to support their currencies than others.
The Baltics kept gold reserves in Paris, London, Basel and Stockholm from their days of independence before World War II; when they broke off from the Soviet Union three years ago, they got the gold back, a factor that helps bolster their currencies now.
Kazakhstan, for its part, has vast oil reserves.
More than economics is at stake in the credibility of the new currencies.
If the new currencies turn hyper-inflationary, governments may throw up their hands and slide back into a recreated ruble zone.
Philip Hanson, of the Centre for Russian and East European Studies at England's Birmingham University, warns that "there's an element of neo-imperialist drive" in Moscow's push to incorporate Belarus and possibly others into its monetary embrace.
That could be an economic and political disaster.
Says Mr. Dyker: "If it's feasible for non-Russian republics to stabilize their economies, they're far better off outside the ruble zone.
The chips are down now."
