Steven Hoffenberg, the ubiquitous debt collector who made an unsuccessful bid for the New York Post last year, hasn't gone away.
Mr. Hoffenberg, who has controlled or been affiliated with a chain of commercial debt collection companies that has bilked dozens of small businesses over the years, is now apparently operating here through two new companies -- Stratford Credit Corp. and Haley Capital Corp.
Mr. Hoffenberg faces civil fraud charges from the Securities and Exchange Commission and has been penalized in two states for keeping debts his companies had collected for clients.
Yet he has continued operating with relative ease.
This, say critics, makes him a perfect example of the problems plaguing the loosely regulated commercial debt collection business.
(Commercial debt collectors are hired by companies to recover outstanding debt from other companies.
They typically receive a 20% commission on the debt they collect.)
"It's casting a terrible pall over the whole industry when a company keeps getting away with things like this," says Kathleen O'Connor, president of the American Commercial Collectors Association Inc., a trade group based in Minneapolis.
"I just can't believe that the state attorney general's office in New York hasn't done anything.
Somebody should be after these guys."
Mr. Hoffenberg declined repeated requests for comment.
Mr. Hoffenberg's attorney, Alan Fraade, a partner in the New York law firm of Mintz & Fraade, says Mr. Hoffenberg doesn't want to be interviewed because he has been "misquoted" and "misrepresented" by the media.
For its part, the New York State Attorney General's office says that it can't address commercial debt collection scams because there are no state laws regulating the industry (a situation common in most states).
But small businesses are increasingly being victimized by commercial debt collectors, according to the Commercial Collection Agency section of the Commercial Law League of America, a trade group based in New Providence, N.J.
Unlike consumer-debt collectors, commercial agencies have received little attention and are not federally regulated.
And it is the business practices of those such as Mr. Hoffenberg that have led many to call for tightened regulations of the commercial debt collection business.
Early last year, Mr. Hoffenberg briefly enjoyed the spotlight when he made an unsuccessful bid to "rescue" the ailing New York Post.
In February, the SEC announced that it was suing his company, Towers Financial Corp., a conglomerate specializing in collecting bad hospital debt, for defrauding about 3,000 investors by doctoring the company books.
This wasn't Towers' first run-in with the law.
In 1987, the Appellate Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey in Trenton ordered Towers Collection Service, a Towers subsidiary, to pay almost $20,000 to LCP Chemicals & Plastics Inc., a small Linden, N.J., concern now operating as Hanlin Group Inc.
LCP had sued Towers, accusing it of improperly withholding debts it had collected on LCP's behalf.
While simply pocketing collected debts is not the most sophisticated way commercial collectors rip off small businesses, law enforcement officials say it is the most common.
And LCP wasn't the last business stung by one of Mr. Hoffenberg's companies.
In 1989, complaints that Towers Collection Service of California Inc., a Towers subsidiary based in Santa Monica, also pocketed collected debts of dozens of businesses led to a two-year investigation by the now-defunct California state Bureau of Collection and Investigative Services.
The investigation led Towers to settle with the state in 1991.
It promised to provide restitution to its clients, paid $31,000 in state legal costs and was placed on a three-year probation, according to the California state attorney general's office.
By the time the SEC caught up with Mr. Hoffenberg last year, seeking about $400 million in damages, Towers was nearly insolvent.
It filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in March.
That effectively put the SEC's action on hold, as court-appointed trustees began sorting through Towers' affairs.
While Towers was sinking, Mr. Hoffenberg helped a former Towers employee and old friend, Lawrence Lowy, start a new commercial debt collection company by fraudulently transferring $6 million and other assets from Towers, according to a lawsuit filed late last year by the trustees in U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York.
An attorney for Mr. Hoffenberg denies the allegations.
Although the new company, Diversified Credit Corp., operates from the same Trump Tower offices from which Mr. Hoffenberg is publishing a new weekly newspaper, Her New York, his attorneys say that he is only a consultant to Diversified.
In a letter to this newspaper, an attorney representing Mr. Hoffenberg says his services to Diversified "were limited to training sales and marketing personnel."
A classified ad Diversified placed in the New York Times last May also extolled Mr. Hoffenberg's salesmanship: "Work with the King of Accounts Receivable Collections . . . learn Steven Hoffenberg's ways of selling."
But complaints about the new business are familiar ones.
The Better Business Bureau in New York says that since last summer it has received 80 phone calls and 12 complaints from small businesses charging that Diversified has pocketed collected debts.
Apparently, Diversified's days are numbered.
Mr. Hoffenberg's attorney, Mr. Fraade, says that Diversified, which also has offices in Melville, N.Y., is in "financial distress."
He adds that "discussions have taken place with respect to the possible bankruptcy filing under Chapter 11."
Nonetheless, there is yet another debt collection company that began operating a few months ago and is affiliated with Mr. Hoffenberg.
At the behest of Mr. Hoffenberg's uncle and business partner, Eugene Sherman, Mr. Fraade incorporated Stratford Credit Corp. last August.
The company shares office space with Haley Capital Corp., a business run by Mr. Hoffenberg that, according to a classified ad in Her New York, provides financing for "buying or selling a business" and "public or private underwritings."
Stratford is peppered with old associates of Mr. Hoffenberg.
The company's president, Steven Dreyfus, was a Towers executive.
Michael Rosoff, Towers' former general counsel who also did legal work for Diversified, has an office at Stratford and represents the company on what he describes as "commercial matters."
Mr. Dreyfus says that Mr. Hoffenberg has nothing to do with Stratford.
Asked why Stratford shares offices with Haley Capital, Mr. Dreyfus replies: "Let's just say it's more economical."
