Ronald J. Kuzlik hates traveling alone.
So on a business trip to Albuquerque, N.M., the New York accountant brought along his wife, Linda, and little Samantha.
"She loved it out there," Mr. Kuzlik says of Samantha.
"New Mexico is wide-open country."
Samantha happens to be a dog, but some employees do all they can to add zest to banal business trips.
Staying over a weekend, if the weather and restaurants seem promising, or sharing a new city with a spouse or child -- or household pet, for that matter -- can be good dividends for the garment-bag and laptop crowd.
Most companies are indifferent to workers' commingling business and leisure travel, as long as the fun and games don't raise costs.
But some corporate travel managers say lax oversight enables canny employees to unethically exploit business trips for private purposes.
Of course, the distinction between business and leisure travel has always been blurry, particularly for corporate chieftains who believe socializing with other executives in Paris or Tokyo is all part of the job.
But several trends in recent years have helped many average Joes turn company travel into personal vacations.
Frequent-flier programs allow business travelers to bring along a spouse or child without spending a personal dime on air fare.
And advance-purchase discount air fares, which usually require spending a Saturday night, make it affordable for business travelers to bring along companions.
Many companies have begun encouraging employees to take the low fares by paying the bill for extra hotel and meal costs, even though liability for a traveling employee who isn't technically working is a tricky issue.
"What if there is an accident over the weekend, or God forbid the plane goes down on Sunday when the employee was supposed to come home Saturday?" asks Rudoph Monteleone, chairman of the Association of Corporate Travel Managers.
"Are you still on business?"
Having long ago cut weekend rates in response to slack demand, travel suppliers of all sorts are now actively encouraging customers to stretch a weekday business trip into a weekend adventure.
"It's an attack segment in growth opportunity," says Geoff Corbett, executive vice president of National Car Rental System Inc., a unit of General Motors Corp.
In an effort to encourage workday renters to spend the weekend, National just held a sweepstakes, in which it awarded three free trips to the NCAA Final Four Basketball Championship games in Charlotte, N.C.
Novotel New York gives out a "Saturday Night Survival Kit," which includes a bottle of bubble bath, for business travelers who stay the weekend.
The hotel practically begs its guests to bring along their significant other.
"Our reservation people specifically suggest that guests bring along their spouses," says Steve Baker, sales director of Novotel, a unit of Accor Group in Paris.
And many hotels are making it easier to bring Junior along by offering child-care facilities.
At the Registry Resort in Naples, Fla., a children's center organizes tumbling, treasure hunts, evening parties and other activities.
The center serves a growing number of children who are joining parents attending business conferences, says Alan R. D'Zurilla, the property's vice president of sales.
Some businesspeople not only permit their children to travel with them but pursue it with passion.
Consider Gary S. Spicer of Grosse Pointe, Mich., a sports and entertainment lawyer who is the father of six children, ages 10 to 21.
"As soon as they get out of diapers, we put them on an ambitious travel program," Mr. Spicer says.
Mr. Spicer has had his children accompany him, usually one or two at a time, on business trips to the John Hancock Tower in Chicago, Opryland in Nashville, the Kennedy Library in Boston and the Capitol in Washington.
A visit to the Grand Canyon in Arizona with one son, he says, "was one of the most emotional experiences I've ever had."
Do the youngsters crimp his ability to do business?
No, insists Mr. Spicer, saying his kids have actually helped by befriending clients like Don Baylor, the manager of baseball's Colorado Rockies, and the late country singer Conway Twitty.
Mr. Spicer says he pays the extra travel costs for his children, and it's worth it.
But quality time isn't always possible for tag-along spouses who find themselves in a strange city, alone, while their partners tend to business.
"You'll be eating lunch by yourself, and sometimes it's lonely," says Nancy Zeidman, a Washington, D.C., bereavement counselor who once accompanied her husband, Philip, on a grim six-day business trip to Budapest in the dead of winter.
Her solution: If she's not interested in a city, she stays home.
"I don't do Peoria but I sure do London," she says.
For companies, there is a dark side to combining business with pleasure, according to several corporate travel managers.
Problems arise when employees put their personal plans ahead of business goals and bypass company policy to get their vacations subsidized.
When employees travel with family members, these managers say, they often try to stay in larger hotel rooms or they claim as expenses meals that have no business value.
A more sophisticated deception occurs when an employee buys a full-fare unrestricted ticket for a business trip, then trades it in for two half-price advance-purchase tickets -- one for the employee, one for the spouse.
Similarly, some employees exchange a business-class ticket for two coach tickets.
The airline doesn't care -- it receives the same amount of revenue -- and the employee, if smart, can shield the switch from the company.
But the company, which could have benefited from the discount, is out of the loop.
Why do corporations tolerate such practices?
Because so many people, including top executives, benefit from lax enforcement of travel policy, travel managers say.
"If there are issues for management to take stands on, there are probably more important ones than this," says Denny Lewis, a senior vice president for the USTravel agency.
He notes that real savings occur in supplier negotiations, not by scrutinizing employees' travel plans.
Travel managers' reservations aren't enough to dissuade employees from merging work and play while on the road.
Jack A. Sullivan, for one, is grateful that his wife joined him on a business trip several years ago to Paris.
The San Francisco stockbroker ran in the city's marathon.
"The last couple miles, she coaxed me in to the finish line," Mr. Sullivan said.
Without her, "I could still be wandering the streets of Paris."
