A GLOBAL SATELLITE communications system is planned by William Gates and Craig McCaw, who will seek to raise capital and attract dozens of partners to build the $9 billion system.
The system would involve hundreds of small satellites circling the Earth in a low orbit, offering a broad array of interactive voice, data and video services at prices similar to conventional wired services.
The plan is expected to be disclosed today.
GE Capital asked Kemper for a list of its shareholders, setting the stage for what could be a lengthy battle for control of Kemper.
The request came in response to Kemper's rejection of GE's $2.2 billion bid to buy the firm.
Clinton's welfare-reform working group will recommend a gambling tax as part of a proposal to the president at a cabinet meeting tomorrow.
The 4% excise tax on net gambling revenues, except state lotteries, is expected to raise $4 billion in five years.
The bond market faces a major test this week as the Fed's policy-making arm meets.
Many expect the Fed to tighten credit again.
The benchmark 30-year bond fell nearly 7/8 point Friday.
Its yield rose to 6.90%, mainly in reaction to news of a meeting between Fed Chairman Greenspan and Clinton.
Aides called the meeting routine.
The Dow Jones industrials surged 30.51 to 3895.65 in late trading amid very heavy volume tied to quarterly expirations of futures and options.
Macy's efforts to remain independent could be threatened by a rift between Laurence Tisch and other members of the board, people familiar with the board's discussions said.
At issue is the valuation Macy intends to place on itself, which will be critical in determining who ends up with control.
Ford received two bids for its unprofitable First Nationwide Financial thrift unit, each estimated at about $1 billion, people close to the offers said.
Japanese computer-chip imports rose, easing the U.S. trade battle with Japan somewhat.
But neither side is ready for a truce as the U.S. awaits Tokyo's market-opening initiatives.
UAL said it plans to withhold promised severance payments to some members of its machinists union, in an effort to step up pressure to force a closing of its $5 billion buyout accord.
Sears plans to launch a toy catalog this year, taking another step to restart part of its failed catalog unit.
Pacific Bell is expected to unveil plans today for a test of a service that will transmit digitized movies directly to a few neighborhood theaters.
Sony plans to launch a multimillion-dollar campaign next month aimed at boosting sales of its newly redesigned MiniDisc player.
Wal-Mart signed an agreement with Michigan to not make misleading price comparisons in its Wal-Mart and Sam's Club stores in the state.
The agreement stems from an inquiry after complaints from Kmart, Dayton Hudson's Target stores and Meijer.
Modami Services' board dismissed its chairman and chief executive alleging that he had improper financial ties to a supplier of the food concern.
An investigation also found that $1.3 million of company funds in 1992 went into Florida bank accounts connected to the chairman and to the supplier.
CBS Sports President Neal Pilson stepped aside, amid a sharp scaling back of the unit after losing major baseball and football rights.
CBS hasn't yet named a successor, but one candidate is Joseph Abruzzese, CBS's senior vice president of sales.
Iberia Air Lines agreed to a $500 million bailout plan for Aerolineas Argentinas, a move expected to raise Iberia's stake in the Argentine flagship carrier to 85% from 30%, people close to the negotiations said.
Stocks: Volume 446,361,670 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 3895.65, up 30.51; transportation 1732.74, off 14.79; utilities 206.24, off 1.38.
Bonds: Lehman Brothers Treasury index 5287.21, off 52.87.
Commodities: Oil $14.88 a barrel, up six cents.
Dow Jones futures index 143.49, off 0.56; spot index 131.85, off 0.43.
Dollar: 106.10 yen, up 0.25; 1.6965 marks, up 0.0075.
