Call it the War of the Roses, or, better still, the war to deliver the roses -- fast.
The once-genteel business of floral delivery is being shaken up by aggressive marketers catering to Americans' growing demand for convenience -- even when it comes to expressing feelings of the heart.
The combatants have run controversial ads, promising greater customer satisfaction and more for the money than traditional flowers-by-wire services.
The marketing is especially intense for Valentine's Day, when florists work around the clock arranging and delivering close to 300 million flowers.
Americans, who this year will spend about $1.5 billion sending flowers, apparently are buying the new pitches.
Instead of relying only on local florists or flowers-by-wire services, more people are using 800 numbers, floral catalogs that promise overnight delivery and even personal-computer-based ordering services.
Calling a single 800 number to order flowers can be convenient, but some people want to see what they are paying for.
Shoppers using the Calyx & Corolla catalog or the computer on-line PC-Flowers service can see color photographs or four-color computer-generated drawings of what they pay for instead of relying solely on the imagination of some far-off florist.
Sending flowers was once a straight-forward business, and Florists' Transworld Delivery Association, the largest wire-transfer service, dominated it.
Traditionally, a caller placed an order with a local florist, more than likely an FTD-affiliated shop.
The florist then sent the order through the FTD Mercury phone network, or another floral-transfer service, to the shop that would make it up and deliver it.
But FTD's hold on the market is slipping.
In the fiscal year ended June 30, 1992, FTD-member florists delivered more than 19.5 million FTD flowers-by-wire orders, generating sales of more than $676 million.
But in the current fiscal year, FTD wire orders are expected to slip to about 18 million and sales to about $650 million.
FTD is up against competitors like three-year-old Flowers Direct, based in Boca Raton, Fla., which last year went for the jugular in a TV ad campaign.
"Usually when you send flowers out of town, you give your order to somebody who takes a cut.
Then he passes the order to somebody else, who takes a cut . . .
All we cut is the middleman," the voice-over said.
The FTD complained to the National Advertising Division of the Council of Better Business Bureaus that the Flowers Direct ads were misleading in suggesting that Flowers Direct takes no cuts.
Flowers Direct says it is the first national service to connect callers directly to florists who fill their order.
Callers to its 800 number punch in the zip code to which they are sending flowers and the call is routed to a selected florist in that area.
In fact, Flowers Direct takes its "cut" in the form of a fee and phone charges, totaling about $8 per order, paid by the local florist.
The Flowers Direct campaign also claimed that its customers would get "a lot more flowers for your money."
As to that, the National Advertising Review Board found that unless a survey was done of a valid sample of florists filling orders under the different delivery services, "it is impossible to say whether one mechanism delivers more for the money, or that one approach is cheaper than another."
Flowers Direct discontinued that campaign.
Its most recent TV ad campaign, ready for Valentine's Day, takes a shot at services like 800-FLOWERS and FTD, whose orders are filled by florists that callers never talk to directly.
"Sending flowers across town or across country can get a little tricky . . .
Say you want to send something special," the ad says, as a vase of roses disappears in a puff of smoke and is replaced by a mundane mug filled with carnations and baby's breath.
"She could end up with something a little more ordinary," the TV spots say.
Flowers Direct says its sales and call volume in 1993 grew about 60% from the year before, to about $3 million in sales and 700,000 calls.
The company expects big growth again this year in both call volume and revenues.
But Flowers Direct is still puny compared with 800-FLOWERS, the 800 phone service known best by its stubble-bearded owner Jim McCann, who appears often in TV ads. 800-FLOWERS, owned by Mr. McCann's Teleway Inc., was a Dallas, Texas, business losing more than $400,000 a month when he bought it in 1987.
This year, 800-FLOWERS, now based in Westbury, N.Y., and its various sister businesses such as 800-BASKET and 800-GOODIES will have sales of more than $100 million.
The company has grown by advertising to the prime flower-buying group: white-collar men between 25 and 45.
Mr. McCann's greatest asset is the service's impossible-to-forget name.
Now considered the leading 800 floral service, Mr. McCann is expanding into retail outlets.
Last year, Teleway acquired the San Antonio-based Flowers To Go chain (which in a test will soon change its stores' names to 800-FLOWERS) and became a major investor in Conroy Flowers Inc., the West Coast's largest retail flower chain.
FTD is fighting back.
The nonprofit association, based in Southfield, Mich., belatedly started a for-profit company last year that launched its own number, 800-SEND-FTD.
But the FTD unit, called Direct Access, received only 27,000 calls and reported a loss of about $5 million in its first year, which ended last month.
FTD says it expected losses in at least the first three years.
For this Valentine's Day, FTD's TV spots include another new service called the "Florist Finder," which helps customers locate a local FTD florist through a single call to an 800 number.
FTD is also negotiating with a company that makes food baskets that could be sold through FTD florists.
"People are bypassing us," says John Borden, FTD's executive vice president, "and that's something to worry about"
