The pharmaceutical industry is bracing for an attack on its pricing policies from Sen. David Pryor, who plans to release a report today aimed at buttressing his call for stronger regulation of the industry under health-care reform.
A spokesman for Sen. Pryor, an Arkansas Democrat, said the report would be released at a news conference and will show that prescription-drug price increases last year were higher than the industry claims.
It will also list the drugs and manufacturers that Sen. Pryor says last year had the highest inflation rates.
Sen. Pryor said on Friday that he would release the report today.
In a move to forestall price controls under health-care reform, 18 major drug companies -- accounting for more than two-thirds of the U.S. market -- pledged to hold price increases across their combined product lines at or below the consumer price index last year.
Their voluntary restraints appear to have worked, because the industry escaped direct price controls under President Clinton's proposed reforms -- although the industry argues that parts of the plan would indirectly regulate prices.
Sen. Pryor, in a written statement, said the report "provides hard evidence that we may need to consider more `meaningful restraints' to ensure that drug-price increases in the retail marketplace are limited to the rate of inflation."
Anticipating the report, the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association said Friday that the drug companies kept their promises -- as long as entire product lines are included in the calculation, along with all categories of customers.
The Labor Department's producer price index for pharmaceuticals last year increased 3.1%, slightly above the consumer price index's 2.7% increase.
The report, by the Senate Special Committee on Aging, is being kept under wraps by Sen. Pryor, the committee's chairman.
But a researcher who provided data for the report offered a glimpse of what it might contain.
Stephen W. Schondelmeyer, a University of Minnesota professor, said his analysis included the average wholesale prices of the top 200 drugs in the U.S., in terms of outpatient prescriptions.
While drug-price inflation overall has slowed to 3.6%, according to his calculations, more than two-thirds of the drugs in the 200 rose in price last year faster than the general inflation rate.
About 20% had increases of more than double the consumer price index increase.
"There are clearly some companies who have done a good job of holding the inflation rate of their products closer to the overall inflation rate of the economy," he said.
But, he added, his data show that "voluntary compliance may work for some companies for some period of time, but it doesn't work overall."
His analysis looked at a segment of the market that serves cash-paying retail customers, who represent 45% to 50% of all outpatient prescriptions, Dr. Schondelmeyer said.
The analysis doesn't reflect prices paid by hospitals or other institutional customers.
Sen. Pryor's spokesman added that Dr. Schondelmeyer's data were among several sources for the report.
Drug-price-inflation data vary depending on which prices are used.
For instance IMS America Ltd., a Dun & Bradstreet Corp. unit that collects data on prescriptions dispensed in chain stores, independent pharmacies and food stores, found consumers paid on average $26.93 for a prescription in 1993, a 2.9% increase over 1992.
A spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association said the only fair way to assess drug companies' price increases is in the aggregate, for all customers across all products, and weighted by sales.
Dr. Schondelmeyer cited a 13% price increase for Zovirax, a popular antiviral drug, as one of the highest among the 200 drugs he examined.
A spokesman for the drug's maker, Burroughs Wellcome Co., a unit of Wellcome PLC, said that increase applied to the 200 milligram capsule, but the average increase for all seven formulations of the drug was 6.8%.
The average wholesale price doesn't reflect discounts given to customers, which can be substantial.
Burroughs Wellcome's overall price increase for its products, weighted by sales, was 5.1% in the U.S. last year, but after discounts and rebates the net price increase was 3.5%, the company spokesman said.
