In another indication of the trouble Congress is having reaching consensus on health-care legislation, lawmakers have decided to bypass a divided subcommittee and try to hammer out a compromise elsewhere.
Unable to garner enough votes to pass key provisions of the Clinton administration's bill, the Health and Environment Subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee decided against acting on the legislation.
Instead, subcommittee Chairman Henry Waxman (D., Calif.) will send the bill to the full committee for consideration in hopes of collecting a majority there.
Mr. Waxman said he and John Dingell (D., Mich.), chairman of the full Energy and Commerce Committee, suggested it would be unproductive to compromise on controversial provisions in order to get a health-care bill out of subcommittee -- only to have to renegotiate on the same issues once the bill hits the full committee.
"We feel it would be better to negotiate compromises once," Mr. Waxman said.
Moreover, he said, the subcommittee didn't want to act before the Congressional Budget Office completed cost estimates on other alternative proposals -- including bills co-sponsored by Reps. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.) and Fred Grandy (R., Iowa) and by House Republican leader Robert Michel of Illinois and other GOP House members.
While moving the bill directly to the full committee may expedite congressional deliberations, lawmakers don't see an easier time for the Clinton bill in the full Energy and Commerce Committee at this point.
Mr. Dingell has only a 27-17 Democratic majority.
Messrs. Waxman and Dingell, both supporters of the Clinton plan, have virtually given up hope of winning Republicans votes.
That means the loss of five Democrats would put the panel in deadlock.
And at least four already are counted as lost on major elements of the Clinton plan.
These include Rep. Cooper and three fellow southerners, Reps. Ralph Hall of Texas, W.J. Tauzin of Louisiana, Roy Rowland of Georgia.
At the moment, neither the subcommittee nor the full panel has majorities for Mr. Clinton's proposal that employers be required to pay at least 80% of the health insurance premiums of their full-time workers, nor do they have majorities for limits Mr. Clinton wants to impose on health-insurance premiums.
But there isn't agreement on any other health-care proposal either.
Mr. Cooper, whose plan has received a lot of attention and interest from the business and medical communities, clearly doesn't have enough votes to win.
The House Ways and Means Committee's health subcommittee this week postponed its scheduled drafting of legislation.
Three House committees and two Senate committees have major jurisdiction over the health-care legislation.
"No one has the votes today to get a bill out of the committee," Mr. Cooper said last night.
President Clinton, meanwhile, blamed faltering support for his plan on greedy special interests.
"Look at the millions and millions and millions of dollars that have been spent by interest groups to trash the plan," Mr. Clinton complained.
He went on to call the naysayers "people that don't want to assume any responsibility for their employees, people that don't want to assume any responsibility for providing basic health care, people that think they can get just a little better deal."
But the president said he hasn't lost hope.
"The thing that encourages me is I talk to more and more members of Congress that seem to have a very practical attitude about this and want to find a way to give everybody health security, some system of guaranteed insurance on health care, without taking away the good things that we have now."
"I believe we'll get a good plan out of the Congress," he concluded.
"I think we'll get it done."
Jeffrey H. Birnbaum contributed to this article.
