Marc Rich, the Swiss-based financier who has made hundreds of millions of dollars in deals around the globe, discovered not long ago the perils of doing business in Spain.
Mr. Rich and a group of sophisticated investors bought a beach-side vacation development on the island of Majorca from two subsidiaries of Banco Espanol de Credito in 1988.
With Spain's economy booming and tourists flooding the island, the deal seemed a sure thing.
But the investors later learned that the complex -- 1,470 apartments in 19 buildings -- was built without proper zoning permits and they couldn't legally do maintenance work and wouldn't be able to sell the property to cash in on their investment.
Mr. Rich and his partners sued the bank, known as Banesto, and won 5.7 billion pesetas ($40.4 million) in an arbitration ruling in December.
Whether they will ever recover any money is unclear.
The claim is a drop in the ocean of losses recently uncovered at the Spanish bank.
Though Banesto supposedly was on the mend, with the help of J.P. Morgan & Co. of New York, regulators effectively took over Banesto after finding a financial shortfall now estimated at $4.3 billion.
Embarrassed Spanish officials are discovering that the Majorca deal wasn't an aberration.
Instead, it is part of an emerging, complex picture of inefficiency, greed and corruption at one of Spain's largest and most prestigious banks.
"When we got here, we were amazed," says one of the officials brought in by the Bank of Spain, the central bank, at year end to run Banesto.
"The bank's organization was 20 years out of date.
Its concept of risk was completely different from ours.
Most surprising of all, people didn't seem to know whom they were working for -- the board of the bank, the bank itself or just a few people within the bank."
Indeed, as investigators try to find out what went wrong at Banesto, some Spaniards wonder whether the broader question is, What has gone wrong with Spain?
A wave of optimism, set off by the death of dictator Francisco Franco in 1975 and Spain's subsequent admittance into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1982 and the European Community in 1986, has largely subsided.
Despite huge infusions of EC aid, Spain still generally lags behind most of its neighbors to the north.
Unemployment is a staggering 23%.
The gap between rich and poor is widening.
National pride is dissolving into self-doubt.
Bad loans and bad investments in nonbanking businesses aren't all that brought down Banesto and its former chairman, Mario Conde, a 45-year-old fond of extravagant living.
Spain's traditionally cozy relationships between financiers and politicians, weak bank and stock-market regulation and outside directors' failure to keep tabs on executives created the conditions for such a scandal.
(Neither Mr. Conde nor his lawyers responded to requests for comment.)
Spaniards worry that Banesto illustrates the dark side of how business is done in Spain.
"There's a lot of pessimism," says Ramon Reyes, a consultant at Egon Zehnder International here.
"People were being deluded by a mirage of growth. . . .
Now, they're beginning to realize they were taken for a ride."
Although Banesto is still operating and its stock resumed trading this week, its recent history, observes Luis Miranda Lopez, managing director of APV Baker Iberica SA, a maker of food-processing machinery, "shows how divorced finance and the productive economy have become.
Industry is fighting to survive in a crisis that doesn't seem to have touched bottom, while banks like Banesto make money through accounting tricks."
The Banesto mess is only one of a series of financial scandals.
Germany's Volkswagen AG recently alleged that its SEAT car-making subsidiary in Spain deliberately underreported losses to its parent; instead of $85 million, SEAT actually had a $1.3 billion loss last year.
In another case, more than 20,000 Spanish union members have seen their savings disappear in a $500 million real-estate scandal.
And in the biggest case of all, disclosed last year, the Kuwait Investment Office lost some $5 billion on investments in ventures organized by its Spanish representative, Javier de la Rosa.
All four scandals involved lax financial and management controls.
Though no one expects another bank collapse on quite the scale of Banesto's, some fear that in Spain's current political and business environment, lax oversight of business could cause more trouble.
"Something like Banesto could easily happen again," warns Federico Jimenez Losantos, a writer who has extensively criticized Mr. Conde.
Lax attitudes are a problem all across Spanish society.
Companies routinely pay employees part of their earnings in cash to avoid steep social-security taxes, says a partner in an engineering firm.
Tax evasion is common: When Banco Popular Espanol fired a branch manager last year for helping a client evade taxes, it got an avalanche of letters defending the manager.
High taxes and red tape, says Luis Santos, a real-estate developer, have led to "a steady erosion of moral values as people begin to move into gray areas where they classify things as only marginally illegal."
The result, some say, is a breakdown in societal norms.
"This is a country without a moral conscience," says German Sanchez Ruiperez, who owns Grupo Anaya SA, Spain's leading educational publisher.
"We need to go through the same cleansing process as Italy."
Bitterness over Banesto's downfall is all the sharper because of the hopes Mr. Conde raised when he came to the bank in December 1987.
With his eloquent rhetoric, the youthful former lawyer seemed to embody a wave of rejuvenation in Spanish society.
Together with the heir to a family business for which he once worked, Mr. Conde had just pulled off a financial coup by gaining control of Antibioticos SA and selling the pharmaceuticals company to Italy's Montedison SpA.
They invested their profits in Banesto just as it became the target of Spain's first major hostile takeover bid, from a smaller rival, Banco de Bilbao.
Promising an overhaul, Mr. Conde helped Banesto fight off the offer.
Long dominated by an oligarchy of family shareholders and weakened by a series of financial crises, Banesto was ripe for change.
Its staff was undertrained, its management aging and its technology rudimentary.
Aided by matinee-idol good looks, a brilliant mind and skillful public relations, the new Banesto chairman was soon basking in admiration.
Newspapers and magazines honored him as businessman and banker of the year.
His yacht was magnificent and his newly acquired country estate luxurious.
Swooning matrons saw him as the son-in-law of their dreams.
Would-be yuppies idolized him.
"I want to be Mario Conde," jingled a pop song at the time.
A flirtation with Spain's right-wing opposition prompted speculation that he might enter politics.
Hedging his bets, however, he simultaneously built bridges with Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez's Socialist Party.
He appointed to Banesto's board a Socialist who had run a state-owned electric utility but had no experience in banking; hired as an adviser a conservative legislator who was friendly with Alfonso Guerra, the leader of the Socialists' left wing; and named another Socialist's wife to head the bank's cultural foundation.
To win favorable publicity -- and, some believe, stifle any criticism -- Mr. Conde began investing in the media, first with his own money and then Banesto's.
For a while, he was a shareholder in El Independiente, a weekly newspaper.
After it folded, Banesto took a stake in El Mundo, a Madrid daily.
The bank also bought a 24.9% stake in Antena 3 de Television SA and 12.5% of Grupo Zeta, a magazine and newspaper publisher.
According to Mr. Jimenez Losantos , Mr. Conde used these investments to influence coverage.
The writer says, for example, that some months after Banesto first became a shareholder in 1991, Antena 3 TV switched from hawkish criticism of the Socialists to bland coverage more favorable to Mr. Gonzalez and his government.
Mr. Jimenez Losantos, who also was a political commentator for the TV station, was fired; so were several colleagues.
Despite Banesto's flashy publicity campaigns, the bank wasn't as strong as it seemed.
Neither Mr. Conde nor the team he brought with him from Antibioticos had much banking experience.
Between 1988 and 1992, the bank lavished $837 million on remodeling branches and on a new computer system.
As regulators discovered later, however, it failed to install controls to keep tabs on its burgeoning loan portfolio.
To instill new drive among staffers in its 2,300 branches, it abolished rules requiring them to seek higher-level authorization for many loans.
According to former Banesto executives, it also failed to train them in assessing clients' credit-worthiness.
When Spain slipped into recession in late 1992, Banesto's loan portfolio soured.
Last month, a member of the bank's new board said many of its large loans and approximately 20% of its small ones -- those below $177,000 -- were nonperforming or substandard.
At the same time, Banesto had charged into a costly interest-rate war with other Spanish banks for deposits, and its operating margins eroded just as it was running into other problems.
Dating from before Mr. Conde's arrival, the bank controlled an insurance company, La Union & El Fenix Espanol SA, and an array of industrial companies ranging from oil to mining concerns.
Many of them were also big borrowers from Banesto; those links had posed no problem in Spain's once laxly regulated business environment, but they suddenly threatened to contravene a new EC directive on banking practices.
Worried about Banesto's core banking business -- and the risks to depositors from its nonbanking ventures -- the Bank of Spain pressured Mr. Conde to reduce these holdings.
Ever inventive, he planned to merge Banesto's nonbanking operations under the umbrella of a new, 100%-owned holding company, Corporacion Industrial y Financiera de Banesto, or La Corporacion.
In place of historic book values for its shareholdings, Banesto would be able to bolster its balance sheet by restating their values to reflect higher market prices at the time.
To raise additional capital, the holding company would sell new shares.
But just as he was ready to launch the stock offering in 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait and stock markets plunged.
The planned offering had to be postponed.
So, Banesto resorted to increasingly complicated maneuvers to bolster its finances.
In the series of transactions, some were bargains for the buyers; others benefited Banesto at the expense of its partners, former executives say.
In a complex 1991 transaction, for example, Assurances Generales de France paid $425 million for a 2% stake in Banesto and 3.37% of La Corporacion, plus stakes in joint ventures that gave AGF an indirect 23% in Banesto's La Union & El Fenix and sales outlets for its own insurance products through Banesto branches.
The French insurer later concluded that La Union had inadequate provisions for potential claims.
Hoping to salvage its investment, AGF recently agreed to acquire majority control of La Union, but it has lost "a few feathers" in an operation that proved much more costly than expected, an AGF official admits.
Meanwhile, according to former executives, Mr. Conde was directing transactions involving the bank in ways that, while perhaps not illegal, raise questions about conflicts of interest.
According to one former executive of Banesto, Mr. Conde mixed his own and his associates' business interests with those of the bank.
In the context of asset sales by Banesto between 1989 and 1991, this executive says, up to 5% of the value of some transactions was paid in the form of commissions to law firms and advisers close to Mr. Conde.
One deal that has come under public scrutiny is the sale of the Majorca beach development by Banesto units to Mr. Rich and his group.
The development was acquired by two Dutch investment companies, whose investors included Mr. Rich, with the understanding that local administrative requirements had been met.
The arbitrators awarded the buyers their claim for the return of the purchase price; Banesto is appealing the decision.
Mr. Rich didn't respond to requests for comment.
Even more bizarre was the $135 million sale of Banesto's 11-story Madrid headquarters and nine branch buildings.
Selling real estate is a common corporate move to free up cash for better use; the companies lease the office space back.
In this case, however, the buyer was later found to be a company that had borrowed money from Banesto to finance the purchase, and the bank rented back the buildings at about triple market rates.
According to the bank's new management, this maneuver enabled Banesto to disguise some of its problems with profits from a onetime capital gain; that's because the buildings were sold at a price higher than the value stated on Banesto's books.
But over the next eight years, according to a member of the bank's new management team, Banesto undertook to pay high-enough rent to cover the purchaser's interest payments on the loan and repayment of the loan itself, in effect wiping out the capital gain.
By 1992, the Bank of Spain was voicing misgivings about Banesto, whose provisions for future pension obligations were deemed insufficient by the central bank and whose loan portfolio was deteriorating.
As the recession inflicted more loan losses and depressed foreigners' interest in buying Spanish companies, rumors of serious difficulties at Banesto began spreading.
The conservative Banco Popular stopped lending to Banesto in the interbank market.
Others, attracted in some cases by high interest rates, continued to lend money to Banesto, although at one point the Bank of Spain had to provide it with emergency liquidity.
Calling in Mr. Conde, the central bank set specific targets for the future allocation of Banesto's earnings to provisions for bad loans and its pension fund.
And the central bank began scrutinizing Banesto's loan portfolio.
Just as things seemed at their darkest, Banesto's chairman pulled off another coup.
Hiring J.P. Morgan as adviser, Mr. Conde announced a major plan to raise more capital, and that calmed financial markets.
As part of the plan, more than 40 institutional and private investors joined J.P. Morgan last summer in taking a 7.9% stake in Banesto through a Morgan-promoted investment fund.
Also last summer, the U.S. Central Credit Union, which provides financial services for some 13,000 U.S. credit unions, deposited $255 million in uninsured accounts at Banesto; Spanish government officials said, however, that the money would be fully repaid.
In December, the bubble finally burst after another Bank of Spain inspection found Banesto's loan portfolio in worse state than previously feared.
Mr. Conde and J.P. Morgan were still trying to cobble together another capital-raising exercise.
However, in conversations with the Bank of Spain, according to Spanish officials, J.P. Morgan conceded that it couldn't guarantee success.
A spokesman for Morgan declines to comment on its role.
Faced with heavy selling of Banesto shares and fears of a run on deposits, the Bank of Spain intervened.
It dismissed Mr. Conde and his board -- including Roberto Mendoza, a J.P. Morgan vice chairman -- and appointed a new management team headed by Alfredo Saenz, a vice chairman of the giant Banco Bilbao Vizcaya.
The Bank of Spain has proposed a bailout in an effort to remove the risk of a crisis hitting the country's entire banking system and to reassure small investors.
Both Mr. Conde, who financed his participation in the recent Banesto capital increase with a $50 million loan from another bank, and other investors, including J.P. Morgan's Corsair Partnership L.P., have suffered a sharp drop in the value of their shares.
When trading was resumed on the Madrid stock exchange Tuesday, after a five-week suspension, Banesto shares plunged 57% from end-of-December levels.
Yesterday , they rose 15 pesetas, or 1.8%, to a close of 870 pesetas.
A Morgan spokesman declines to comment on the share prices, but Morgan has said in the past that it regards Corsair's holding in Banesto as a long-term investment.
Looking on the positive side, some Spaniards view Mr. Conde's problems as evidence of the end of the get-rich-quick fever of the 1980s and as an important step in the modernization of Spanish society.
But change is likely to be gradual.
The Bank of Spain has opened proceedings that could lead to disciplinary action against Mr. Conde and other members of Banesto's former board in relation to such possible irregularities as failing to ensure Banesto's compliance with capital-adequacy rules.
At worst, however, they would be fined only 10 million pesetas (about $71,000) and banned from acting as bank executives for 10 years.
Few Spaniards expect any more drastic sanctions to befall Banesto's former chairman.
Even if Mr. Conde is found to have violated the law, Mr. Jimenez Losantos predicts, "nothing will happen to Conde. . . .
Taxpayers will have to pay for his yacht and his fortune."
