China and Taiwan will resume high-level talks in Beijing this week amid sharply lower expectations in Taiwan's political and business circles about what can be expected from the dialogue.
Just nine months ago, the two governments launched a hesitant -- but historic -- rapprochement that was greeted enthusiastically by many in Taiwan as the beginning of an era of cooperation between the long-estranged neighbors.
But the euphoria has evaporated, as the two sides so far have failed to find solutions to the practical problems arising from their economic links and unofficial exchanges.
Those in Taiwan who are eager to see deeper ties now understand that each government's political agenda will make accords on almost any issue difficult to achieve.
Indeed, the vast gulf was demonstrated last month when fundamental differences over notions of sovereignty blocked agreement even on an issue that both governments were eager to settle: how to stop a wave of hijackings to Taiwan from China.
"After 45 years of separation, suspicion and mistrust still exist," says Chen Chienjen, a member of Taiwan's legislature and a vice secretary-general of the ruling Kuomintang.
"It's very clear people on both sides are trying to test how far the other side wants to go."
Despite their differences, both governments want to maintain a dialogue.
As a result, they have agreed on a new tack this week -- using higher-level officials than in the past two rounds of talks, yet adopting a more-informal agenda.
Taiwan will be represented by Chiao Jen-ho, the recently appointed secretary-general of the Straits Exchange Foundation, the ostensibly private body set up to conduct talks with China while maintaining Taiwan's fictional prohibition on government-to-government contacts.
Mr. Chiao, previously vice chairman of the cabinet-level agency overseeing cross-strait relations, succeeded Cheyne Chiu, the official who led Taiwan's team to bilateral talks in Singapore in April.
Mr. Chiu resigned because of policy and personality differences with senior government officials.
Taiwan officials portray this week's talks as a get-acquainted session for Mr. Chiao, who hasn't had face-to-face contact with the Chinese before.
The agenda for his five-day visit is much freer than the past two rounds of negotiations, which involved lower-ranking representatives.
He will meet several times with Tang Shubei, head of the Chinese body set up to deal with Taiwan, and is likely to meet with more-senior officials as well.
The two sides plan to discuss stalemated issues -- including the repatriation of hijackers to China from Taiwan, and settlement of fishing disputes.
They also are slated to discuss matters related to Taiwan's extensive investments in China.
Senior Taiwan officials are going out of their way to play down hopes for any kind of breakthrough at the Beijing meetings.
They view the current phase of talks as a confidence-building stage that will help to bridge differences.
But there is considerable uncertainty in Taipei about the relationship because of the leadership issue in Beijing.
Until China's aged leader, Deng Xiaoping, passes from the scene, many of Taiwan's policy makers view it as unlikely that Beijing will change its policy toward Taiwan.
China still claims sovereignty over Taiwan as a province, even though Taiwan's government in 1991 renounced its own claim to rule all of China.
A more cynical view holds that Taiwan's government is just going through the motions at this stage.
"They're doing it for public-opinion purposes really," says a foreign diplomat.
Other observers say Taipei won't budge on any issue as long as Beijing continues to demonstrate hostility toward Taiwan in the international arena.
The continuing effort to isolate Taiwan was most evident earlier this month when France publicly promised China that it would refrain from selling major weapons systems to Taiwan.
But public opinion in Taiwan is a potent force pushing the two sides closer together -- particularly pressure from Taiwan's business community.
