These days, finding tax deductions is like striking oil.
With the new tax rates, top-bracket filers can save nearly 40 cents in federal taxes for every dollar of deductions they dig up, compared with 31 cents on last year's return.
Including state and local income taxes, a deductible dollar can save some people 50 cents or more.
"Your deductions are more valuable the higher your tax bracket," says Douglas Mueller, president of accounting firm Mueller, Prost, Purk & Willbrand in St. Louis.
To unearth every available deduction, filers need to plumb the obvious and the obscure reaches of their financial records, tax professionals say.
A quick glance down your old Form 1040s and Schedule A's will easily jog your memory for the perennial write-offs, such as mortgage interest, charitable donations and state taxes.
But tax advisers also suggest investigating several deductions people tend to overlook.
Some of your best write-offs may be forgotten holdovers from previous tax years.
In other cases, you may find write-offs that reduce your state taxes -- no small savings when top tax rates in some states are 10% or more.
And some taxpayers can still cut their 1993 tax bills by making hefty contributions to a retirement account, even one they set up now.
For starters, ask yourself if you wrote an income-tax check to your state revenue department in April for money you owed on your 1992 taxes.
The payment is deductible on your 1993 federal return.
Similarly, property taxes you paid early in 1993, even if they were for tax year 1992, are now deductible.
Many people may not realize that they can deduct automobile property taxes they pay to their state, if the state assesses taxes on cars based on their property value.
Additionally, over the years, taxpayers may have hoarded capital losses they couldn't deduct because they didn't have enough offsetting income, or for the same reason they may have investment interest expenses they couldn't deduct for 1992.
Now they may be able to use those old losses to offset gains they realized on investments in 1993.
People who owned investments like trusts or limited partnerships that were liquidated or sold in 1993 should alert their tax professionals that they may have leftover deductions from those investments.
For instance, losses from limited partnerships over the years may have been nondeductible because they were "passive" and could offset income only from similar passive investments.
In the year the investment is sold or otherwise disposed of, however, you can usually deduct all those carried-forward passive losses against capital gains or ordinary income, such as your salary.
But taxpayers should consult a tax adviser before taking such losses since "the rules do get pretty complex" says Thomas Sherman, a tax partner in Minneapolis with accountants Coopers & Lybrand.
Similarly, over the years, trusts may have incurred management fees and other expenses that were nondeductible for lack of trust income.
Such costs may be deductible when the account is terminated.
The K-1 income statements taxpayers receive from trusts or limited partnerships should list any deductible expenses, but don't bank on it, says Mr. Mueller.
Many times, the tax preparer who has sent out the K-1 is one who has "no business preparing" them, he cautions.
To find partnership deductions like syndication fees or to correct errors like improperly listed taxable income, visit an accountant who is familiar with these investments and knows what deductions to dig for.
Other elusive deductions may cut state taxes only.
For instance, taxpayers in nine states, including high-taxing Oregon and Utah, can deduct some or all of their federal taxes on their state form.
(The other states are Alabama, Iowa, Louisiana, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota and Oklahoma.)
Taxpayers should also pay attention to what income is actually taxable in their state.
"Many people do their federal return first and just carry over the numbers," says Stephen Pennacchio, a tax partner with KPMG Peat Marwick in New York.
It could come as a surprise, then, that although as much as 50% of Social Security income may be subject to federal taxes for 1993, retirees don't have to pay tax on Social Security in more than half the states.
(In addition, Colorado has a pension exclusion that can make some or all of a retiree's Social Security nontaxable.)
Additionally, Hawaii, Illinois and Pennsylvania don't tax any pension income even though Uncle Sam does.
Most other states exempt some portion of many retirees' pension income.
Such exemptions can erase the state tax burden entirely for many retirees, says Mr. Pennacchio.
Don't forget that while income from Treasury securities is taxable by Uncle Sam, it generally isn't included when figuring your income for state income-tax purposes.
And if your federal taxable income includes a state tax refund that you received in 1993, you can subtract that when computing your state taxable income in many states.
If things still look grim after you've gone through every canceled check and done a line-by-line search of your state and federal tax returns, you may still be able to generate a deduction for yourself by creating and contributing to a retirement account.
While 1994 is too late for taxpayers to increase their 401 (k) contributions to cut their 1993 taxable income, the same isn't always true for contributions to individual retirement accounts or plans available to those with self-employment income.
Some taxpayers can take a 1993 deduction for up to $2,000 that they put into IRAs, even if they are just getting around to opening the account now.
To qualify, a person and his or her spouse must either have no other qualified retirement plan available to them at work, or they must earn less than $40,000 as a couple ($25,000 if single).
Above those dollar amounts, the deduction drops for those with workplace retirement plans.
The deductible amount phases out to zero at $50,000 for couples, $35,000 for singles.
Self-employed people -- and even people with regular jobs who have qualified self-employment income, such as director's fees in some cases or free-lance writing income -- have an even better opportunity.
They have until April 15 to set up and contribute to a special retirement account for the self-employed, known as a Simplified Employee Pension, or SEP.
And their contributions can be as much as 13.0435% of their self-employment earnings, to a maximum of $30,000.
(If they get an extension from the IRS for filing their tax return, they can take until their new deadline to set up and contribute to the account.
With an IRA, the contribution must be made by April 15 to be deductible for 1993 income-tax purposes.)
Regardless of the type of SEP you use, if you later hire employees, you may have to make contributions for each worker in order to continue funding your own SEP account.
"It may be more of an obligation than you realize," cautions Mr. Mueller.
If by the end of 1993 self-employed people had already set up another type of retirement plan for themselves known as a Keogh account, they have until April 15 or their extended deadline to make a deductible contribution to it.
You can contribute up to 13.0435% of your self-employment earnings to a Keogh.
The maximum deduction: $30,000.
In some cases, you can contribute up to 20% of your earnings to retirement accounts known as money-purchase plans, but that generally obligates you to contribute year after year.
If you are just setting up a Keogh this year, however, any contributions will reduce only your 1994 tax bill.
Note: Any expenses reimbursed by your employer are generally nondeductible.
For more information, see IRS Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
