The year is 1995.
President Clinton's health care plan was recently passed, making it mandatory for all businesses, large and small, to provide health care to their employees.
The owner of Company A is trying to decide whether to hire an additional worker, increasing the total number of employees to 50.
Upon examining the matter more closely, she decides against the hire.
Because of a quirk in the health plan, annual health care costs will zoom by $7,545 upon hiring the 50th employee, assuming the employees earn $15,000 a year on average.
Given the true cost of the 50th employee is now $22,545 rather than $15,000, the owner buys another computer instead.
Meanwhile, the owner of Company B, employing 76 employees, and paying an average salary of $17,000, does some investigation of his own into the details of the Clinton health plan.
He concludes that he should fire an employee.
Upon doing so, he now qualifies as a federally approved "small business" and thus is eligible for an $11,543 subsidy.
These examples demonstrate some of the bizarre economic incentives hidden in the Clinton administration's health care plan.
Ironically, these hiring hazards are a direct result of the administration's benign attempt to make health care premiums more affordable for small businesses.
As most readers know, the keystone of the Clinton plan is the requirement that all businesses pay 80% of their employees' health insurance premiums.
This is unpopular with most small business owners, who fear these mandated costs will drive them out of business.
To win them over, the Clinton health plan later included a series of escape valves; depending on the average salary and the number of employees, owners are guaranteed never to pay more than a given percentage of their payroll.
If the premiums exceed this percentage, the government kicks in the difference.
Most analysts agree that small, low-paying businesses stand to gain the most under this plan, since they receive the largest subsidies.
In fact, coverage in the press has focused on comparing the differences in the benefits, rather than a closer examination of the costs.
For example, an article in this newspaper analyzed four hypothetical firms and showed that the size of the health care subsidy could vary tremendously, ranging from $159 to $1,706 per worker per year.
What has been overlooked, however, is a crucial fact: Businesses are not static entities -- rather, they grow and shrink.
And as they hire the 25th, 50th or 75th worker, the payroll caps abruptly change.
The result: Employee health care costs spike dramatically upward, as seen in the accompanying chart.
If a company is to the left of a "cost spike," there is a sizable hurdle in hiring the next worker.
To the right of a spike, the firm stands to gain a large amount of money in federal subsidies by firing workers.
The reason for these costs spikes is that the payroll percentage caps are constructed differently from, say, income-tax rates.
When a person earns more money, and thereby enters a higher income-tax bracket, the increased tax rate falls only on those dollars earned in the higher bracket.
If the higher income-tax rate were applied to all earned dollars, the person might actually take home less money after taxes, causing obvious work disincentives.
The same perverse incentives operate here -- that is, the percentage payroll caps operate at average, rather than marginal, levels.
So when a company crosses into a higher category, it is responsible for paying a higher percentage of its payroll on health costs for all its employees, not just the additional hire.
(Pay raises can produce the same result, since the subsidies operate on this dimension as well.)
For example, Company A, used in the introduction, pays a flat health care fee of $795 for each of its 49 workers, since the company pays a constant 5.3% of its total payroll during this interval.
But hiring the 50th worker causes health care costs to suddenly balloon by $7,545, since mandated health care costs now climb to 6.2% of total payroll, rather than 6.2% of the additional worker's salary.
On the other side of the coin, if Company A employed 50 workers, it would gain $7,545 in federal subsidies by firing a worker and thus falling into a lower payroll cap category.
It gets worse as the company expands and eventually moves into the next payroll cap category.
After paying $930 for the 51st through the 75th worker (that is, 6.2% of $15,000), the additional cost of hiring the 76th worker skyrockets by a staggering $20,310, since health costs suddenly jump to 7.9% of total payroll.
One answer is to model the payroll caps after income-tax brackets.
That is, as a company increases the number of employees and enters a higher payroll cap, the higher cap should apply only to additional employees, rather than to all of them.
The only problem here is that all companies would then receive some subsidies from the government, just like all workers pay income tax.
You may ask if this issue is really such a big deal.
The spikes occur only at certain intervals, and how many companies are even near these intervals?
The answer is that dangling $20,000 of subsidies in front of small-business owners will make them stand up and take notice, even if they aren't initially affected.
Companies with more than 75 employees may split into two smaller companies, fire employees or explore other creative options.
And smaller companies will think twice about taking out loans for business expansion, if they see enormous health cost spikes looming down the road.
Since the beginning of the health care debate, the question has been: Who will pay for the health care plan?
Of course, we all will, in one way or another.
But instituting a complicated set of regulations that create perverse incentives for small businesses is not the path we should take.
In doing so, we make an expensive proposition even costlier, in terms of lost jobs, lower output and wages, and more time spent by business owners on outmaneuvering the government's illogical regulations.
Mr. Richardson is an assistant professor of economics at Salem College, Winston-Salem, N.C.
