Corporate America's profit streak continued in the fourth quarter, but some analysts warn that future earnings gains probably will be less spectacular and harder to come by.
If they are right, the stock market could hit some potholes.
With interest rates likely to move higher in coming months, investors will look increasingly to robust earnings reports to power the market upward.
So far, Corporate America has delivered.
According to Zacks Investment Research, 60% of the 711 companies in the Dow Jones Industry Groups have reported earnings in line with or better than analysts' estimates.
Those companies that surpassed expectations did so by 2.3%, on average.
Moreover, fourth-quarter earnings from continuing operations -- before special charges and gains -- rose 25.3% from the year-earlier quarter; that figure surpasses the 19.8% growth rate in the third quarter.
But don't look for repeat performances in the quarters to come.
No one expects the economy to grow any faster than it did in the fourth quarter.
And neither will corporate profits, many analysts conclude.
"I think earnings will still grow but at a slower rate than last year," says Elaine Garzarelli, stock strategist at Lehman Brothers.
That's one reason, she says, that some other stock strategists are bearish on the market.
They feel that once earnings growth peaks, the stock market starts to decline.
But Ms. Garzarelli says one only has to look back to 1963 -- a period which she likens to the current one -- and notice that the stock market kept rising even though profits had already peaked.
No doubt the key to sustained profit growth in coming quarters will be stronger demand for goods and services and the ability for companies to raise prices.
Though profits grew at a double-digit rate as the economy soared in the fourth quarter, revenue growth continued to lag significantly, says Benjamin Zacks, executive vice president at Zacks Investment.
Indeed, as has been the case for the past four quarters, most of the profit gains were due to cost-cutting and low interest rates.
"Better pricing certainly is going to be the key to better earnings," says Mr. Zacks.
He notes that several of the companies turning in positive fourth-quarter earnings surprises had pricing power.
These included auto companies, building materials concerns, forest products firms and paper products companies.
What's more, many of the companies that disappointed investors with their earnings reports were in industries that are still suffering from a lack of pricing power.
Among them are precious metals producers, aluminum companies, container and packaging firms, airlines and computer makers.
But while pricing meant power for many corporations, Mr. Zacks doesn't expect it to become a broad-based trend.
At some stage, he says, "all of that cost-cutting reaches a point of diminishing returns for the economy as a whole."
He explains that as companies continue to cut costs and lay off workers, demand will continue to be subdued, giving firms very little leeway to raise prices.
In 1994, he projects earnings will grow 17.04%, a slowdown from last year's estimated 23.75%.
And while that's quite respectable, considering the maturity of the business cycle, some analysts fear that it won't be robust enough for the likes of stock investors.
Gail Dudack, stock strategist at S.G. Warburg, worries that the strong economy in the fourth quarter has inflated earnings expectations on Wall Street.
She thinks the stock market could take a tumble if the Street's sugar-coated earnings forecasts aren't met.
"The results of the fourth-quarter overall has bolstered corporate America and analysts who are now looking at the possibility of putting into place price increases," she says.
But Ms. Dudack is not so confident that pricing increases can easily be passed along to customers.
She says many industries are still plagued with overcapacity.
And even those companies that are facing blockbuster demand are favoring increasing their market share, over raising prices.
"The consensus is that productivity plus pricing power will combine to create spectacular earnings in 1994," she says.
"While the potential for that exists, I think it's 50-50.
My biggest concern is that the economic news has built up confidence among corporations and analysts and there are going to be some disappointments here."
While Ms. Garzarelli of Lehman Brothers remains bullish, she thinks investors can maximize their gains by unearthing sectors of the market that offer better-than-expected earnings growth.
In her view, stocks that are sensitive to the economic cycle will offer the greatest gains for investors.
For instance, she is projecting an upturn in plant and equipment spending through 1995 that should help boost heavy machinery, commodity and building stocks.
She also expects consumer durables such as autos and appliances to continue faring well, making those stocks an attractive investment.
"All these sectors should grow twice as fast as gross domestic product, so their earnings should grow twice as fast as the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index," says Ms. Garzarelli.
Edward Yardeni, chief economist at C.J. Lawrence, says investors are looking at the "best of both worlds."
"The thing to be impressed with is how well profits have come along without much top-line growth," he says.
"I think this year you are going to see some pricing power and for the first time some unit sales growth."
Stocks ended mixed in an abbreviated trading session.
Yielding to a severe winter snowstorm, the New York Stock Exchange decided to stop trading at 2:30 p.m. EST, instead of the normal 4 p.m. close.
It was the first time Big Board trading was curtailed because of the weather since Sept. 27, 1985, when the exchange was closed all day because of Hurricane Gloria.
The Nasdaq Stock Market and the American Stock Exchange also closed early.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average eased 0.56 points to 3894.78.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index gained 1.25 to 470.18, and the Nasdaq Composite Index lost 2.03 to 781.39.
For the week, the Dow industrials gained 0.6%, the S&P 500 inched up 0.08% and the Nasdaq Composite climbed 0.5%.
Volume totaled a modest 211.8 million shares, down from 325.8 million shares on Thursday.
Declining issues outnumbered advancers, 1,214 to 801.
Stocks were mixed in spite of a Labor Department report showing that inflation was well under control.
The news sparked a rally in the bond market but stock investors were more subdued.
Part of the reason was a Commerce Department report that January retail sales were not as strong as expected.
Weakness in a number of economically sensitive stocks weighed on the Dow industrials Friday.
Aluminum Co. of America slid 1 1/8 to 78 1/8, Caterpillar 1 to 105 1/8 and Goodyear Tire & Rubber 1 1/4 to 45 7/8.
The auto stocks, the recent stars among the cyclicals, fell for a third day.
General Motors dropped 1 1/8 to 61 1/8, Ford Motor 1/2 to 65 1/2 and Chrysler 3/4 to 59.
Procter & Gamble added 1 3/8 to 58 3/4.
Dean Witter Reynolds put a "buy" recommendation on the consumer products maker's shares.
The brokerage firm cited P&G's success at cutting operating costs and a potential acceleration in earnings.
Tandy Corp. gained 1 3/4 to 46 1/4.
This newspaper reported that the Fort Worth, Texas, consumer-electronics retailer expects to post fourth-quarter earnings from operations of about $1.02 a share, up 21% from 84 cents a year earlier.
That figure excludes a gain from the company's program of divesting noncore businesses.
Cisco Systems jumped 2 3/8 to 74 3/8.
The Menlo Park, Calif., computer networking system manufacturer reported better-than-expected fiscal second-quarter earnings of 29 cents a share, up from 15 cents a year earlier.
Class A shares of New York Times Co. rose 1 1/4 to 27 1/2.
The publishing concern's fourth-quarter report showed a loss of 23 cents a share, compared with a year-ago loss of five cents.
However, the latest quarter's results were hurt by a $30 million pretax charge.
Informix rallied 1 1/8 to 21 after Furman Selz initiated coverage of the Menlo Park, Calif., software developer with a "buy" rating.
Columbia Gas rose 1 7/8 to 27 3/8.
The Wilmington, Del., company reported fourth-quarter earnings of $1.37 a share, compared with $1.73 a year earlier.
Both periods included extraordinary items.
Goldman Sachs & Co. added the stock to its recommended list Friday.
Penn Central dropped 1 7/8 to 26 7/8.
The Cincinnati company said it is considering the purchase of some personal-insurance lines from a unit of American Financial Corp. for $380 million.
Dave Pettit contributed to this article.
