Aboard a Learjet soaring over the Colorado Rockies, Jerome B. York reaches for what is supposed to be the ultimate convenience for important and pressed executives: the airplane telephone.
Quickly, however, Mr. York -- the chief financial officer of International Business Machines Corp. -- becomes frustrated, as the phone proves to be anything but a convenience.
He pushes buttons furiously in a vain attempt to dial the number.
He slams down the receiver.
After numerous attempts, Mr. York asks the cockpit crew for help.
They fail, too.
Then he sits back and gives up.
In his hands, he holds the list of nine phone calls he is supposed to return.
The list is from his aide, who, fortunately for her, called the office from a pay telephone at the last stop.
"Damn phone," he mumbles in disgust.
For years now, on-board phones have promised some of the most impressive, whiz-bang technology -- and delivered some of the lamest results.
At the exorbitant rate of $2.50 per minute plus initial hookup charges, they garble words, disconnect calls or fail to make connections at all.
Then there's the privacy question: Since nothing approaching the discreetness of a phone booth exists on commercial airliners, everybody sitting within 10 or 20 feet gets to listen in as the caller tries to be heard over the jet's engines and the "whooshing" that seems to emanate from everywhere.
"The real vision of this is different from what we're actually seeing," says Barry Goodstadt, a wireless-technology consultant at Arthur D. Little Inc., Cambridge, Mass.
"It's not clear to me how much money anybody is generating out of this stuff.
Nobody is using them."
Mr. Goodstadt is being polite, given his litany of complaints: He doesn't want to talk on a plane -- or a train, for that matter -- when another passenger is sitting right next to him.
(He doesn't even like using his laptop computer.)
And the quality is so poor as to make using one unpleasant.
Moreover, Mr. Goodstadt isn't sure improvements the industry promises will be much better.
Phone executives say he shouldn't worry: They promise the next generation of airplane phones will be much, much better.
They talk about "virtual offices" in the sky, where business fliers can send and receive faxes, plug in their laptops, and then select and watch videos.
There may even be a service by which somebody can call a central number, which will then locate you on the airplane, and the phone at your seat will ring.
And, they say, it eventually will all be cheaper than it is today.
"There are unlimited opportunities," says John Goeken, a founder of MCI Communications Corp. who now heads InFlight Phone Corp., an airplane-phone maker in Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.
No doubt, it is pretty incredible to be able to make a phone call at all while sitting 32,000 feet off the ground and flying through the air at hundreds of miles an hour.
Even if the connection isn't so great, a quick call to colleagues in the next city to say the flight is delayed can be handy.
A banker who travels constantly and lives near La Guardia Airport in New York gets a kick out of calling home to say, "Honey I'm flying over the house now, send the kids out to have a look."
And despite the bad connections, some people do manage to do business this way.
One executive says he once conducted an hour-long conference call from his plane seat (though he did get disconnected several times, and the bill did run several hundred dollars).
Even Mr. Goodstadt of Arthur D. Little concedes the phones come in handy.
He recalls that he has used an airplane phone twice in his extensive travels.
Once he was caught in a snowstorm on the runway and wanted to let his children know what had happened to him.
Another time he was late for a meeting.
Still, airplane telephones as we now know them are based on an antiquated analog system.
GTE Airfone, a subsidiary of GTE Corp., Stamford, Conn., makes most of them; a few small companies cater to private jets like IBM's Lear.
GTE brought the technology to market in 1984, and was given the exclusive license by the Federal Communications Commission to install the phones on planes of United, Continental, and America West airlines, and the New York-Washington shuttle now owned by USAir Group.
But because the analog ground stations used by most airplane phones were installed over a decade ago, they were soon outdated in terms of their capabilities.
Calls are easily disconnected as the plane moves away from the ground station that originally linked up the call -- because there's no way to switch them.
You have to keep your call pretty short, or simply redial when the plane moves from the range of one ground station to the next.
In addition, analog calls are full of interference from air whooshing in the background, because the system has no way to sort the noise out.
But the airplane phone is now getting an overhaul, as the business embarks on a digital makeover.
GTE is converting almost all of its systems to digital.
In addition, its new competitors -- such as InFlight Phone and McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.'s Claircom unit -- were granted access to the skies in 1991 by the FCC, and are skipping the analog phase entirely, going right to digital.
Digital phone systems will translate sound into electronic pulses that register in ground-station computer systems as zeros and ones.
A "call handoff" will pass the pulses from one ground station to another.
As in a cellular network that transfers calls to different cells as the car is driving along, a Doppler effect detects when the signal is weakening; the system then begins phoning the next ground station to transfer the call when the plane gets close enough -- and, most important, before the call is disconnected.
The technology is so sophisticated that it can switch calls back and forth between ground stations when necessary.
So, as a flier approaches Mt. Rainier, it will switch the call from its original base to a better-located one while the plane is passing the mountain, then switch back to the first ground station.
The only sound the caller should hear is a clicking as the switch-off occurs.
(If, that is, the system works.)
A second big advantage of the digital technology is its ability to screen out background noise.
The ground-station computers are programmed to recognize voices, as opposed to things like static and whooshing.
They screen out those unwanted sounds.
Similarly, the ground computers are programmed to recognize word patterns.
If there's a blip, they fill in the proper sounds with a synthesized voice, thus making broken-up conversations whole again.
(This brings up two of Mr. Goodstadt's concerns about digital: He says that the synthetic voice gives calls a metallic quality, and that the technology causes the kind of voice delay that makes many users uncomfortable.)
It all has a lot of promise.
Will it ever be perfect?
Myra Hogan, an in-flight tester for GTE's new GenStar digital system, flies thousands of miles working out the kinks.
Calling one day from the Delta shuttle to Boston, she sounds a little underwater, but says she isn't yelling and the whole aircraft isn't staring at her.
In fact, things are going pretty well until five minutes into the conversation, when there's some clicking and Ms. Hogan's call is disconnected.
After calling back a few minutes later, she attributes the problem to a handoff hitch as she moved from the La Guardia to the Staten Island ground station.
"I'm really surprised," she says.
"That's never happened before."
Ms. Hays is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
