Fast-growing CompUSA Inc. announced a series of moves to get a handle on its expenses, resulting in a loss for the fiscal second quarter and a 13% jump in the company's stock price.
The computer superstore chain's steps include reorganizing and consolidating its management structure, resulting in the dismissal of an unspecified number of executives.
In an interview, CompUSA's chief executive officer, James F. Halpin, said the job cuts range from the store level to a "very senior" rank.
Nevertheless, CompUSA said it plans to continue its rapid expansion and predicted a quick return to what it called acceptable profitability in the current quarter.
The moves sent CompUSA stock surging $2.375 to $20.125 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
For the quarter ended Dec. 25, the company posted a loss of $5.5 million, or 30 cents a share, after a $9.9 million pretax restructuring charge.
A year earlier, CompUSA earned $3 million, or 16 cents a share.
Revenue surged 65% in the latest quarter to $536.9 million from $324.5 million a year earlier.
The moves unveiled yesterday mark the first major steps by Mr. Halpin, who became CEO in December, succeeding Nathan P. Morton, who resigned as chairman and CEO amid dissatisfaction with the company's profitability.
Mr. Halpin is "obviously taking a scalpel to the company's expenses," said retailing consultant David Goldstein of Channel Marketing Corp.
"He's a bottom-line-driven manager."
The retailer decided to transfer its manufacturing operation, which makes the company's private-label Compudyne brand of personal computers, to Acer America of San Jose, Calif., a unit of Taiwan's Acer Group.
It didn't give details about the move.
The Compudyne brand accounts for a little less than 10% of CompUSA's sales, Mr. Halpin said.
The company also decided to centralize part of its inventory management and to suspend for 18 to 24 months its search for sites to open stores in foreign countries.
CompUSA, which has 70 superstores, said it still plans to add 12 stores during the rest of the fiscal year, for a total of 30 new outlets for the year.
In fiscal 1995, it plans to open another 30 stores.
Mr. Halpin emphasized that the company isn't closing any stores.
"Our model works.
Our concept works," he said.
"We let expenses get ahead of ourselves."
James M. Meyer, an analyst at Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. in Philadelphia, said CompUSA's cost-cutting steps are "hopeful signs."
But, he added, "they still have a ways to go."
