Roger Altman, deputy Treasury secretary and charter Friend of Bill, testifies before a grand jury next week.
This gives his college chum and boss, President Clinton, plenty of time to do the honorable thing and pardon him.
While he's at it, Mr. Clinton might also examine the others who make up the Whitewater 10.
Lisa Caputo, press aide to Hillary Rodham Clinton, testified yesterday for the high crime of having taken a phone call from another government flack.
Or take Mark Gearan, the earnest, idealistic 37-year-old White House communications director; he's had to hire an attorney though everyone agrees he's too nice to be nefarious.
Then there's the first lady, the erstwhile "St. Hillary."
A year ago only a few raised doubts about a dual presidency; we were suspected of Neanderthal tendencies.
Now the same liberals who put her on a pedestal are discovering that a first lady can't be fired like a Bernie Nussbaum.
Anna Quindlen hath no greater fury than for a feminist icon who screws up.
It somehow doesn't seem right that Mr. Clinton would subject these loyal, perhaps over-loyal, colleagues to the tender mercies of a special prosecutor.
Mr. Altman's case may be the most poignant, and not just because his chance to become Treasury secretary is probably dashed.
Under the criminal standard of ethics established here in the 1980s, Mr. Altman really does have a legal problem.
His controversial testimony to Congress, we are now learning, bears an eerie resemblance to that of Elliott Abrams during the Iran-Contra mess.
President Bush took his time but in the end stepped up and pardoned Mr. Abrams.
Would Mr. Clinton do anything less for his old Georgetown pal?
Mr. Abrams, remember, wasn't punished for telling Congress an untruth.
He ran afoul of not telling all that he knew.
As the point man on Contra policy, he was asked at a hearing if countries other than the U.S. had given money to the Contras.
He said no, which was technically true.
But Mr. Abrams knew that the sultan of Brunei had promised some, though the money hadn't come through.
Mr. Abrams corrected his testimony on Brunei a week later.
For this conscientiousness, special persecutor Lawrence Walsh used a felony threat and the risk of bankruptcy to force Mr. Abrams to plead guilty to having withheld information from Congress.
The New York Times, panting heavily, declared that "Elliott Abrams Is Guilty."
Under this standard, Mr. Altman ought to be petrified.
The former Wall Street banker touched off a furor when he told the Senate Banking Committee that he had met with White House aides about a Resolution Trust Corp. inquiry into the Whitewater matter.
(He was running the RTC at the time.)
This looks like a blunder -- "a piece of awful judgment," Mr. Altman now says -- not a crime.
But the trouble is, that may not have been his only meeting.
The New York Times, panting less heavily (the story appeared on page A20), reported yesterday that Mr. Altman failed to disclose "two contacts between him and the White House about the agency's investigation."
The Times quotes White House officials as saying Mr. Altman now intends to disclose those additional contacts to Congress.
If this seems like a technicality, what about special counsel Robert Fiske?
Is he now going to throw out Mr. Walsh's Abrams Standard after it was blessed by the New York Times, Rep. Barney Frank and other liberal ethicists?
A Treasury spokesman says Mr. Altman didn't disclose the other conversations because he didn't think they were "substantive."
But how will a grand jury define "substantive"?
If this all seems amusingly weird, it certainly didn't seem so to Mr. Abrams and his family.
And rest assured it doesn't to Mr. Altman, his family and his newly retained lawyer.
But this is what happens when politicians try to criminalize political differences instead of debating them out in the open.
In essence, the standards of the '80s are coming back to haunt the children of the '60s who are governing in the '90s.
No doubt the Clintonites never imagined this as they savored the woes of Mr. Abrams, Ted Olson, Ray Donovan and other Reaganites unjustly persecuted.
But rules don't change just because the players do.
In a bitter irony, it's the same Democratic fear of normal politics that is causing such hell for the Whitewater 10.
In the '80s, Democrats criminalized politics in order to win arguments they thought they'd lose to Ronald Reagan.
Now Democrats are afraid that Whitewater hearings in Congress will prove a boon to Republicans.
So Louisiana Sen. John Breaux avers that "we don't need more political hearings.
We need more legal hearings."
Tell that to Lisa Caputo.
George Mitchell, who wrote a book praising the Iran-Contra hearings, now says that calls for Whitewater hearings are "partisan politics."
Well, sure.
But the state of our polity would be healthier if we had more free-wheeling "politics" in Congress and fewer TV-camera stakeouts in front of grand juries.
Which is why Mr. Clinton should pardon the Whitewater 10, then send them to Congress to explain what they did and why they did it.
Of course, I'm not holding my breath.
