With few apologies and even fewer regrets, the Clinton administration is walking away from El Salvador, slashing aid almost 60% from $230 million in 1993 to what officials say will be $94 million this year.
The administration's big-picture planners argue that with a peace settlement holding in El Salvador and its economy rebounding, U.S. aid can be better spent elsewhere, most notably in Russia.
A flurry of recent news reports detailing the Reagan and Bush administrations' misalliances with death squads and other assorted thugs in El Salvador has only reinforced their decision to declare victory and retreat.
That victory may prove fragile, and the U.S. may quickly regret the loss of leverage.
A recent spate of killings has raised fears that the death squads may be contemplating a comeback.
And some U.S. analysts worry that the front-runner in the March presidential elections, rightist San Salvador Mayor Armando Calderon Sol, may be unwilling or unable to restrain extreme elements of his conservative Arena Party.
U.S. officials say they aren't sure who is behind the killings last year of four guerrilla-commanders-turned-politicians, deaths originally dismissed by the Salvadoran government as "common crimes."
But they were worried enough to dispatch Assistant Secretary of State Alexander Watson in November to warn against a renewal of political violence and to hint at a cutoff of aid.
Last August, when it looked like tens of thousands of Salvadoran voters might not be registered in time for the March 20 elections, a temporary freeze on $70 million in U.S. aid helped persuade Salvadoran officials to speed up the process.
While U.S. officials say they now believe the elections will be fair and comparatively peaceful, they clearly are nervous that the expected victor, Mr. Calderon Sol, will be even less amenable to U.S. persuasion than his predecessors.
U.S. analysts give Mr. Calderon Sol good marks for his tenure as mayor, and say he has run "a moderate and respectable" campaign for the presidency.
They also say they have no "hard evidence" that Mr. Calderon Sol was ever personally involved with the death squads.
At the same time, they describe him as "an enthusiastic acolyte" of the Arena Party's late founder and alleged deathsquad leader, cashiered Maj. Roberto D'Aubuisson.
Moreover, unlike the current president, Alfredo Cristiani, Mr. Calderon Sol has very little affection for the U.S. and far less sophistication when it comes to the workings of American politics, the U.S. officials say.
Mr. Calderon Sol was furious when the State Department recently declassified a diplomatic cable, one of thousands made public, alleging that his home had been used to plot a right-wing kidnapping more than a decade ago.
"He saw it as a plot by Washington to get him," says one American analyst.
Whoever wins the election -- leftist leader Ruben Zamora is running a distant second in the polls, with Christian Democrat Fidel Chavez Mena even further behind -- will need both goading and support from the U.S. to solidify the peace.
A promised land reform that was at the heart of the 1992 peace accord has lagged badly, while judicial reform "has gone nowhere at all," according to U.S. analysts.
Efforts to create an impartial police force -- another key portion of the peace agreement -- have been mixed.
The notorious Treasury Police and National Guard have been abolished, while new units of a less-politicized, human-rights-conscious National Civilian Police have been placed in five of El Salvador's 14 departments.
At the same time, the government continues to fund and train the old police force, and it has transferred members of the old security forces to key positions in the new police.
Last week, Mr. Zamora charged that right-wing death squads are again operating from inside both the army and the police, albeit with less institutional support than in the past.
Struggling to put the best face on a bad situation, one U.S. official points out that with a relatively strong economy -- growth last year was 5%, with the same level expected in 1994 -- El Salvador may be better prepared than other countries to weather what will be across-the-board cutbacks in aid to Latin America this year.
Overall aid to the region is expected to drop by more than a third.
"If you really want trouble, look at Nicaragua," says the official, who adds that Nicaragua's foreign reserves "are next to nothing, and their economy is going nowhere."
U.S. aid to Nicaragua will be halved this year to $52 million from $101 million in 1993.
