Shoichiro Toyoda, the chairman of Toyota Motor Corp., laments the yen's rise against the dollar, which is blowing away the profit margins of much of Japan Inc.
Toyota, he says, wants "a rate of 120 yen."
That would be considerably weaker than yesterday's yen quote in late New York trading of 103.70 to the dollar.
With the possibility of a U.S.-Japan trade war looming, the yen's strength is making things grim again for corporate Japan.
And that's bad news for economies around the globe.
The yen's surge since the breakdown of U.S.-Japan trade talks last Friday could cancel the stimulative effects of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's bitterly fought tax cut and spending package, an initiative backed by the Clinton administration.
If sustained, this year's 10% appreciation of the yen could wipe as much as 0.5 percentage points of growth from Japan's annual gross domestic product.
That almost equals the 0.7-point boost many expect from the $53 billion tax cut announced after much delay last week.
Thus, the yen may make the difference between growth and contraction for the Japanese economy this year.
According to an estimate by Consensus Economics London, economists expect Japan's gross domestic product to inch ahead just 0.2% in 1994 -- a margin that would be wiped out by a long-term attack of yen strength.
Jesper Koll, economist at S.G. Warburg, estimates that even with the yen between 105 yen and 110 yen to the dollar, fewer than 5% of Japanese exporters can cover their costs.
The situation has prompted finger-pointing on both sides of the Pacific.
In Tokyo yesterday, the Japanese government seemed overwhelmed, and had no clear strategy to deal with this latest crisis.
News reports said Mr. Hosokawa has ordered his cabinet to study emergency measures to cut the trade surplus, but top bureaucrats denied any such plan.
Mr. Hosokawa, meantime, faces a fight within his own cabinet over personalities and policy that could lead to a reshuffle soon.
On the currency markets, the Bank of Japan intervened heavily to dent the yen's rapid rise.
There was speculation that the currency moves could lead to a further half-point cut in Japan's benchmark discount rate, already pegged at a postwar low of 1.75%.
Tokyo stocks plunged for the second consecutive day, on fears that a new bout of yen strength would chill any recovery and thus lead to a feared "triple-dip" in the long-running economic slump.
Japan Inc. was dusting off its worst-case economic scenarios -- and making them even bleaker.
"The biggest problem in the economy at this point is the psychology, the bearishness of firms and households," a senior Bank of Japan official said yesterday.
"This is only going to make that worse."
This new yen appreciation is all the more cruel because Japan was whipsawed in the same way last year.
Last spring, many believed the economy had hit bottom.
Then, the yen's sharp surge helped toss the economy into a double-dip slump.
And until last week, things had been looking up.
Mr. Hosokawa had put together a 15.25-trillion-yen package of tax cuts and government spending to boost Japan's economy.
The yen had retreated from last August's heights.
In a symbolic display of corporate Japan's resilience, Toyota managed to avoid posting the interim losses that many analysts had feared.
Suddenly, analysts are again saying that the high yen could indeed push the likes of Toyota into the red -- and lead to much higher import prices for American consumers.
Worst of all, it could produce the triple dip in Japan's slump.
The repeat of the yen roller-coaster ride "could throw cold water on prospects for the economy when expectations of a recovery are strengthening," said Tadahiro Sekimoto, president of NEC Corp., the world's second-largest semiconductor maker.
By talking up the yen, he warned, Washington "will negate the effects of the economic measures the Japanese government finally produced.
It won't help at all to improve the trade surplus."
To be sure, the yen's run-up could prove to be temporary.
The U.S. government could act, as it did last year, to reverse the yen's slide.
Many analysts say economic fundamentals -- chiefly the weakness of Japan's economy relative to the U.S. boom, and differences in the interest-rate cycle -- support a weaker yen.
Still, many business leaders and analysts fret that appreciation may linger, largely as a result of perceptions that the U.S. hopes to use the lower dollar as a way to dent Japanese exports, and boost U.S. imports, to Japan.
That perception feeds a painful cycle: Consumers are afraid to spend, because they worry about their wages and their jobs, at a time when their employers are hurting.
At the same time, companies aren't cutting costs, especially labor costs, fast enough to improve their earnings.
They are afraid of breaking Japan's taboo against firing workers and thus further spooking consumers.
"There's no easy way out from this vicious circle," says Noboru Kawai, economist at Morgan Stanley Japan Ltd.
"It will take many, many quarters more."
As Washington and the financial markets turned up the heat, the Japanese government had virtually no response yesterday.
Political and bureaucratic leaders actually appeared bewildered that the period for "cooling off" and "reflection," the words both heads of state used after the summit's collapse, barely lasted the weekend.
"Reflection is reflection," an irked foreign-ministry official told reporters demanding to know Japan's next step.
"I think we should reflect."
But few in Japan have much sympathy for U.S. demands to open up Japan's market by setting import targets.
"The U.S. has clearly gone beyond the limit," said Yukio Okamoto, a former foreign-ministry official who now runs a consulting company.
The solution to this bilateral fight is so hard to find because, in a nutshell, each country is right when it blames the other.
The yen's strength is a direct result of the huge trade surpluses Japan has racked up over the years -- a record $120.4 billion last year, nearly half with the U.S. alone -- and new numbers to be released in Tokyo today could fan the trade-war flames.
When Japan's ultracompetitive exporters repatriate their huge profits, they buy yen, driving up their home currency's value.
At the same time, Japan imports relatively little for a trading nation of its might.
As a result, it doesn't recycle enough of its dollars to offset the upward pressure on the yen.
On the other hand, Mr. Hosokawa's government counters that it is trying as hard as it can to deregulate and open its markets to greater competition.
In the meantime, it blames the U.S. for allowing the dollar to fall, making growth prospects worse.
In a way, allowing the dollar to slide is the ultimate trade sanction, affecting the Japanese economy indiscriminately.
Compared to the stiletto of formal sanctions, the high yen is a sort of bomb in the world of trade weapons.
Auto makers stand to bear much of the brunt.
Already, Japanese car makers are pricing their cars some $2,000 more than U.S. models.
Mr. Toyoda and other auto executives say that because of the yen's strength, there is no end in sight to the gap.
If anything, smaller businesses are getting hit even harder.
A recent survey of small businesses taken by the Japan Finance Corporation for Small Business shows that a majority of companies expect their profit to fall in the first and second quarters of this year.
The outlook is going from bad to worse.
Just ask coin dealer Toshio Oshima.
On a side street in Tokyo's gritty Kanda district, Mr. Oshima sits in his shop surrounded by piles of U.S. silver dollars and the odd greenback.
The volatile currency market is playing havoc with his business, complains Mr. Oshima.
The powerful yen means he could import more coins.
But with the value of his inventory down more than 40 million yen because of the currency's recent surge, buying is the last thing on his mind.
"I'd like to liquidate, but I can't," he says, waving at a stack of dusty coins.
"No buyers."
His problems are widely shared.
NLI Research Institute predicts that the nation's average annual potential growth rate will slow to 2.7% in 1995 to 2000, and to 2.1% in the second half of the next decade.
One of the major restraints on growth, says the institute, is Japan's relative loss of competitiveness with other nations, a problem brought on by the steady appreciation of the yen since the late 1980s.
