FBI searches of the home and CIA office of Aldrich Ames show that he has given the Russians some of the nation's top secrets, including what the U.S. knows of the evasive tactics of Russian nuclear submarines, according to court testimony.
Leslie Wiser Jr., who heads the Federal Bureau of Investigation's probe of Mr. Ames, said that in return, the Russian payments included the promise of a "dacha," or summer home, in Russia along with well over $2.5 million stashed in 11 bank accounts in the U.S., Colombia, Italy and Switzerland.
In a preliminary hearing, Mark Hulkower, the assistant U.S. attorney handling the case, said it involved "one of the most heinous crimes imaginable."
Mr. Ames and his wife, Rosario, he asserted, "have sold out their country" to support a lavish lifestyle evidenced by more than $500,000 of credit card charges.
Federal Magistrate Barry Poretz, who presided over yesterday's hearing here, ordered them both held without bail.
Testifying in a packed, hushed courtroom, Mr. Wiser said a nine-page document from Mr. Ames's Russian "handlers" was found in a box in a closet of the Ames home in nearby Arlington.
It showed Mr. Ames's top priority from the Russians was to reveal Central Intelligence Agency penetrations of Soviet and later Russian intelligence services.
Using coded computer disks, Mr. Ames revealed the names of CIA employees in the field and the names of counterintelligence agents hired by them to operate against the Soviet Union.
One agent, known as "GT Motorboat," was an East European intelligence official who disappeared after his identity was disclosed, according to Mr. Wiser.
Among the evidence are five color photographs of land on what appears to be a river in Russia that was described by the Russians as a future site for a dacha "which belongs to you forever."
Mr. Wiser said the FBI still has only a partial picture of the total amount of the payments and believes they are at least twice the amount paid to any other U.S. spy or spy network in U.S. history.
"They {the Russians} are notoriously thrifty with repect to payments to agents," he said.
The payments began in Washington in 1985 and accelerated when Mr. Ames was transferred to Rome, where he continued to examine and recruit promising counterspies, Mr. Wiser said.
"He was specifically warned about traps that the CIA sets for moles."
Mr. Wiser said the FBI didn't begin to investigate Mr. Ames until May 12, 1993, after he had been transferred back to CIA headquarters.
In November, FBI agents followed Mr. Ames to a meeting with Russians at a bowling alley in Bogota, Colombia.
As a cover story for his undisclosed trip to Colombia, he said Mr. Ames had instructed his wife "if anybody in the office called, that he would be in Annapolis for the day."
Some of the most damning evidence in the case against Mr. Ames comes from his wife, who first told FBI agents after she was arrested that Mr. Ames's money came from handling investments for a rich relative in Chicago.
Later, according to Mr. Wiser, she admitted she lied and that the money had come from the Russians for selling secrets.
Wiretaps on the Ames home, he said, showed that Mrs. Ames gave her husband tips on how to conceal the money and told him that returning from foreign meetings with receipts showing "big hunks" of money from the Russians was risky.
One of her stratagems, the FBI agent added, was to use a bank account in the name of her mother, a Colombian citizen.
The Ameses, both wearing tan-and-green prison uniforms, didn't testify at the hearing, which was held to determine whether bail would be set.
The couple sat in a front row seat separated by a U.S. marshal.
Their lawyers both argued that the U.S. had failed to make a case that was based on more than mere "innuendo."
Apparently under suspicion within the CIA, Mr. Ames was transferred into a counternarcotics operation during the final months of his 31-year career in the spy agency.
There, according to Mr. Wiser, he accumulated in his office top-secret documents unrelated to his job, including the data on what the U.S. knew on Russian nuclear submarines' evasive tactics and activities of double agents used by the CIA against Russia.
The FBI agent said investigators found more than 100 secret CIA cables in Mr. Ames's home computer and are continuing to find new information in its database that Mr. Ames wasn't allowed to take home.
In one of his letters to his Russian agents that began "My dearest friends," Mr. Ames described that his wife "has accommodated herself to what I'm doing in a very supportive way."
Mr. Wiser said that some of the Russian payments to Mr. Ames were accumulated in three bank accounts in Switzerland and later $600,000 of it was brought into the U.S. by wire transfers.
As yet, he said, the U.S. hasn't been able to gain access to the Swiss accounts.
He and Mr. Hulkower said the bank accounts, plus the fact that the couple appears to own two apartments and a seaside ranch in Colombia, made it likely if either of the defendants were released on bail, they would never appear for trial.
