Use of stock-options contracts to hedge stock portfolios and speculate in the market is surging, pushing options trading to levels not seen since the 1987 stock-market crash.
Investor wariness as the Dow Jones Industrial Average continues to set records has helped bring new life to this previously moribund sector of the U.S. financial markets, as has the protracted takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc.
"This long, drawn-out tender offer has proven to be very profitable for the options business," said Michael Schwartz, senior vice president at Oppenheimer & Co.
"But there also has been a steady turnaround in the business, with an influx of new users and a change of direction from index options to equity options."
Many participants attending the Chicago Board Options Exchange convention here this weekend are wondering how long the nation's four major options exchanges can maintain their momentum.
Before last month, when these markets posted their highest daily and monthly volume totals in more than five years, the consensus in the U.S. options industry was that it had never really recovered from the crash.
Thousands of overly aggressive investors, who used options contracts in risky, leveraged trading strategies, had been devastated in the 1987 cataclysm.
And options trading fell sharply in the years that followed.
Now, some in the options industry are predicting that the industry's five-year slump may be finished.
"I think the strength will continue," said Henry Nothnagel, senior vice president in charge of derivatives at Kemper Securities Inc.
"In 1994, I think we'll have a very volatile market, and that lends itself to the options, whether you're a speculator or a hedger."
Other options specialists caution that their industry's recent gains haven't matched the growth of trading in the red-hot U.S. stock market.
And, indeed, January's average daily volume of 698,872 options contracts was dwarfed by stock trading volume of roughly 400 million shares a day.
Before the crash, skeptics said, options volume accounted for a bigger percentage of stock-trading volume.
Yet last month's total volume of 14.7 million options contracts represented the best January that U.S. options markets have ever had, and the highest total for any month since October 1987.
"Options don't exist in a vacuum," said Paul Stevens, president of the Options Industry Council, a trade group.
"The economy seems to be improving, the stock market won't quit and options are participating in that boom.
Still, investor volume seems to be up more than total volume.
That shows people are using options in intelligent ways to hedge equity positions and do more long-term things."
In particular, investors can use options to lay off the risk of heavy losses in the event of a major stock-market correction.
"The market is at record highs; a lot of analysts are looking for a pullback to some level," Mr. Nothnagel said.
"We've had three years without any kind of sizable correction.
Now people are looking to protect some of their gains.
We're telling people here that this might be the time to hedge themselves."
Perhaps the most popular technique for doing this is buying "put" options, which confer the right to sell stocks for prespecified prices.
For investors worried about a correction, the strategy amounts to arranging in advance to sell stocks for today's prices at some point in the future.
The cost of the strategy is the "premium," or fee, an investor pays for the option, plus the stockbroker's commission.
For blue-chip stocks, options usually cost a few hundred dollars apiece; each option confers the right to sell 100 shares.
Another popular way to hedge a big stock portfolio is to buy stock-index options, which represent a broad basket of stocks such as the Standard & Poor's indexes of 100 and 500 leading stocks.
Yet trading of these index options, which was all the rage before the 1987 crash, is becoming less prevalent than trading ordinary stock options, in part because of the increasing specialization of investors.
"We're trading more equity options, whereas we used to see more index options trading," said Thomas Hart, senior options strategist for PaineWebber Inc.
"January ended up being a pretty good month for us.
My trading business has actually been pretty good over the last six or seven months."
The most heavily traded stock options contract in the U.S. last month was Telefonos de Mexico, the big Mexican telecommunications company.
Options specialists say investors view Mexico as an emerging growth area, and Telefonos represents one of the few opportunities to invest in the region.
A total of 1.1 million Telefonos options changed hands last month.
Next most popular among options investors was Paramount Communications, which traded 694,005 contracts in January.
Strategists say the way the tender offers for Paramount are structured is, in itself, a major boon for previously sleepy Paramount options contracts, which are traded at the CBOE and at the American Stock Exchange in New York.
"This has been very good for the options contract," says Mr. Schwartz of Oppenheimer, "both as an investor hedge vehicle and for its market makers at the CBOE and Amex, who are now actively trading an option that wasn't previously among the leaders."
More broadly, a surge in merger and spinoff activity -- such as the January spinoff of Eastman Kodak Co.'s chemical business as Eastman Chemical Co. -- has benefited the options business as a whole, strategists say.
"We've seen more mergers in optionable stocks than we've ever seen, smaller companies being taken over by recognizable-name companies," said Laura Holder-Makos, vice president for equity options at A.G. Edwards & Co.
"The January options expiration was probably the biggest expiration that we have had since 1987."
