After last week's earthquake, many small businesses here are grappling with the classic post-disaster temptation to gouge.
Some are succumbing eagerly, and many consumers are expecting the worst.
But other business owners are turning the disaster to a different purpose, that of building their reputations.
Even beyond the moral considerations, they think it will pay in the long run.
Take Dave Pannu, owner of a seven-employee structural engineering firm.
He was approached after the quake by a nervous Tajdin Punch, who says he was prepared to spend thousands of dollars to reinforce the foundation of his house.
But Mr. Pannu told Mr. Punch the house didn't need reinforcing work, despite a crumbled chimney and some surface cracks in the foundation.
"I only recommend what is necessary," says Mr. Pannu.
"My philosophy is, you'll never find a thief getting rich."
While Mr. Pannu lost some business, he won a fan.
When talk at Mr. Punch's convenience store turns to earthquake price-gougers, Mr. Punch offers a ringing endorsement of the engineer.
"He was extremely aboveboard.
He totally impressed me," says Mr. Punch, who adds that other engineers were asking as much as $500 for the inspection that Mr. Pannu made for $250.
The obvious temptation for entrepreneurs whose products or services are suddenly in big demand after a disaster is to charge what the market will bear.
"The second-oldest business is mining misery," says Jon P. Goodman, director of the entrepreneur program at the University of Southern California.
"Since time immemorial, tragedy has been a tremendous economic opportunity."
Already, for example, eight 7-Eleven franchisees in the Los Angeles area have had their franchises terminated by Southland Corp. for quake-related gouging, the Dallas-based franchiser says.
But Ms. Goodman and others argue that entrepreneurs would do well to resist the urge to make a quick buck and concentrate instead on winning long-term customers.
"One of the hardest things is to develop repeat business," says Ms. Goodman.
"The mark of a solid business is a loyal clientele.
That's what allows you to project your revenues and your expenses.
Otherwise, you're flying blind."
Dennis Black, who owns a novelty shop, says that on the day of the quake his son was charged $16 for two small bottles of water.
While Mr. Black says he would like to "hang" the owner of the convenience store where his son bought the water, he will settle for trying to persuade neighbors not to shop there.
Some profiteers may lose more than customers.
Violators of a price-gouging ordinance that Los Angeles enacted following the 1992 riots face a $1,000 fine and six months in jail for each violation.
A toll-free phone line has received more than 500 complaints since the quake, says a spokeswoman for the city.
Of course, it is possible to cash in on a disaster without ripping off the public.
Two hours after the California quake, Roger C. Stull, president of Penhall International Inc., an Anaheim construction company, began developing a plan to notify the state of his firm's availability and to provide cost estimates.
But that was just good business, he says.
"We wanted to be able to perform as fast, and as efficiently, and as safely as we could," he adds.
Mr. Stull predicts quake-repair work will produce $10 million to $20 million in new business for his firm over the next year or two.
Currently, the company has about $74 million in annual revenue.
A transportation-related business that will prosper in the aftermath of the quake is Thomas Bros.
Maps, which makes the book-size street guides that many here find indispensible.
Telephone inquiries were up 15% to 345 calls a day in the week after the quake.
"People in Los Angeles have relied on freeways for years," says Ted Holt, the company's vice president of sales and marketing.
"But now, they've got to rely on surface streets that they're not familiar with."
As Southern Californians recalculated their commutes because of collapsed freeways and blocked streets, wholesale sales of Thomas Guides in the Los Angeles and Ventura County regions immediately jumped 10%.
But Thomas Bros. says it has no plans to increase prices.
Pacific Glassworks Inc., which does glass-repair and board-up work, saw its volume of customer calls jump sixfold after the earthquake, says Gale Klaver, the firm's co-owner.
Some would-be new customers offered to pay as much as double the firm's normal prices for quick service.
She says she turned them all down and told them her company would get to the work as soon as it could.
"It's not the time to increase the rates," Mrs. Klaver says.
"It's time to recuperate and help people get back on their feet."
Joe Goodman, owner of Mark the Carpetbagger, says his carpet-cleaning firm received more than 65 calls from potential new customers immediately after the quake, about twice the usual number.
But he turned away practically all of them, because he is booked through mid-February.
Mr. Goodman says he never even considered putting off his regular customers in favor of higher-paying jobs from quake victims.
A price increase isn't necessarily price gouging, of course.
Chris Davis, marketing director of Chimney Charm Inc., says the chimney-servicing firm has boosted rates by 10%, but for a reason.
He says the extra revenue is necessary to cushion the business against liability from injury to his workers and damage to buildings that adjoin chimney repair sites.
"We've had a lot of discussion on prices," Davis says.
"But there's no bluebook for this business, so we're trying to remain ethical and deliver a decent product at an ethical price."
