As one who lived through the myriad investigations launched as a result of the failure of Charles Keating's Lincoln Savings in 1989, I have more than a passing interest in the allegations surrounding the Clintons' involvement with Whitewater Development Corp. and Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
The Clintons and their defenders repeatedly argue that because the Clintons (allegedly) suffered a loss on their investment in Whitewater, they could not have engaged in any wrongdoing.
Yet even if the Clintons did lose money on the specific Whitewater investment, the relationship they developed with their business partner and Madison owner, Jim McDougal, profited them handsomely in terms of campaign contributions, handshake loans and access to powerful people.
More important, the cozy relationship between the Clintons and Madison may have kept Madison alive longer than it should have, magnifying the bill to the taxpayers.
Indeed, many of the issues that appear relevant to Madison and Whitewater are identical to those scrutinized so exhaustively with respect to Lincoln.
Here are a few comparisons that merit scrutiny by the special counsel appointed by Janet Reno to investigate the case:
-- Unfair influence.
Charlie Keating was pilloried for his generous donations to politicians, including the "Keating Five" in the Senate, who went to bat for him in dealing with zealous regulators.
Without diminishing the significance of the political pressure those senators could impose upon the regulators, ultimately it was only pressure they could bring; the Keating Five had no direct control over Lincoln's supervision, and the regulators eventually triumphed over both Lincoln and the senators, ruining a few careers in the process.
In contrast, Bill Clinton as governor had the power to hire and fire the Arkansas securities commissioner, responsible for supervising all state-chartered thrifts.
In 1985, shortly after Madison had received a negative regulatory audit noting its "unsafe and unsound" practices, and shortly after Mr. McDougal raised $35,000 to "knock out" a personal debt Bill and Hillary Clinton owed from the latest gubernatorial race, Mr. Clinton fired the sitting commissioner and replaced him with a longtime friend and political supporter.
Thus, Mr. Clinton had life-and-death power over the bureaucrat with life-and-death power over Madison.
Never mind the Clintons' small investment with Whitewater.
Mr. McDougal had just proved his usefulness to Mr. Clinton in other ways.
How useful would he be if his S&L were taken over?
The Clintons at the very least had an incentive to provide as sympathetic an ear as possible to Mr. McDougal and Madison, and they seem to have done it.
-- Cronyism.
Another of Mr. Keating's actions that outraged the public was the hiring, on a monthly retainer, of a California law firm whose senior partner was one of Gov. George Deukmejian's closest political advisers.
This firm represented Mr. Keating's interests before the California Securities Commission, headed by a lawyer formerly employed by the same firm.
After Lincoln was seized, the firm and its lawyers were accused of using their connections with the Deukmejian administration to prop up a tottering institution.
They, along with other Keating lawyers, were sued and ultimately settled for several million dollars.
Mr. McDougal went Mr. Keating one better, taking a belt-and-suspenders approach to the state regulatory process.
Not content with the knowledge that a Friend of Bill's was now the securities commissioner, he went to Hillary Rodham Clinton for his legal representation, placing her on a monthly retainer.
Mrs. Clinton's assignment was to represent Madison before the Arkansas securities commissioner after the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. issued its report of Madison's "unsafe and unsound" practices.
Mrs. Clinton's lobbying apparently succeeded: Armed with an independent audit, she persuaded her friend the state regulator to keep Madison open.
During the next year, Madison more than doubled in size and left a bigger crater for the taxpayers to fill when it was finally seized.
-- Misleading the regulators.
One of Charlie Keating's biggest sins was allegedly misleading the regulators by "file-stuffing" -- creating documents that, although created after the fact, were written in the present tense to leave the impression that loan and real-estate underwriting was thorough and complete at the time a particular transaction was entered into.
In the Keating case, such conduct involved criminal penalties, since making "false entries" and misleading the regulators are strictly forbidden.
Yet Hillary Rodham Clinton's law firm, which had represented Madison for several years before it failed, flagrantly misled the FDIC after the agency seized Madison in 1986.
The FDIC elected to sue the accounting firm that had pronounced Madison healthy and whose report Mrs. Clinton had vouched for in arguing for Madison's continued existence.
The FDIC lawsuit against the accountants should have been a big deal; Madison's failure cost $60 million against reported total assets of $120 million, meaning that 50 cents of every dollar held by Madison and allegedly examined by the auditors was phony.
As with Lincoln's accountants, Madison's accounting firm represented a deep pocket with which to cover some of the losses to the taxpayers.
Amazingly, Mrs. Clinton's law firm bid for and was awarded the representation to sue the accounting firm.
How could a law firm that only a year earlier had used the accountants' report to help keep Madison alive now sue the accountants for the report?
Normally, in the S&L carnage that resulted from deregulation and then reregulation, legal counsel to institutions that failed as spectacularly as Madison (at least equal, on a percentage-of-assets basis, to Lincoln's failure) expected to find themselves on the receiving end of major litigation almost as a matter of course.
Mrs. Clinton's law firm, in fact, was an "institution-affiliated party" as defined in section 901 of FIRREA, and thus its own dealings with Madison should have been scrutinized closely.
Mrs. Clinton's law firm escaped such a fate the old-fashioned way, apparently flagrantly misrepresenting prior ties to Madison.
Late White House Deputy Counsel Vincent Foster, Mrs. Clinton's partner at the law firm, wrote to the FDIC in an effort to get the representation against the accounting firm, stating, in pertinent part: "the firm does not represent any savings-and-loan association in state or federal regulatory matters."
The present tense chosen by Mr. Foster makes the statement literally accurate, but any first-year law student knows that fraud can arise when one omits material facts necessary to make a statement not misleading -- i.e., that the law firm had represented Madison in the extremely recent past.
Lincoln's lawyers got sued for hundreds of millions of dollars; Madison's lawyers not only got off scot-free, but also collected a $400,000 fee for suing the accountants and "winning" a paltry $1 million settlement.
Moreover, if it can be established that Whitewater or its partners received one dollar of benefit from Madison, indirectly or directly, diverted any business opportunity rightfully belonging to Madison, or otherwise profited at Madison's expense, then a whole new area of investigation opens wide, with possible prohibited affiliate transactions of the kind that were fatal to Mr. Keating.
It must be noted that the contributions to the Keating Five, the cozy relationships with state supervisors, the employing of influential law firms, and so on, did not, directly, convict Charles Keating.
But those things did focus such widespread attention on Lincoln and its operations that the full power and wrath of the U.S. government eventually came down on Mr. Keating's head.
It would seem only logical that when the same, or more extreme, indicators of questionable conduct are present in a case involving the highest elected official in the country, the same standards of scrutiny be applied.
Let's be fair: Applying the Lincoln test to Madison will show that we do have a government of laws, not men.
Mr. Thompson is a Cincinnati attorney who was a vice president and corporate counsel for Lincoln Savings from 1985 to 1989.
