In Wisconsin, politicians don't just dance around the issues.
They polka.
The state legislature is set to vote Tuesday on a bill making the polka the official state dance.
The plan was spearheaded by a Pulaski, Wis., elementary school class, and it's expected to win passage in the statehouse.
Polls show voter approval for the bill at 80%.
But while polka fans are cheering, some lawmakers aren't.
Senate president Brian Rude contends the bill "degrades the integrity of the legislature."
Not only that, but lawmakers have other bills to vote on -- like a proposal to make Colby cheese the official state cheese.
Other bills would make "the badger state" the state nickname and the hodag the official state mythical beast.
"I hate these bills," says Sen. Rude, a Republican from Coon Valley.
"I love to polka, but this leaves the implication that it's all we're trying to do."
Wisconsin already has plenty of symbols.
Corn is the state grain.
Milk is the state beverage.
The state dog is the water spaniel, and here's the dirt on the state soil: It's Antigo silt loam.
"It's just nauseating," says Mordecai Lee, a former state senator from Milwaukee who killed a muffin bill by adding an amendment that made the ragamuffin the state child and the Egg McMuffin the state breakfast.
"I fear for the day when fourth-graders take up something like capital punishment," he adds.
Still, the polka bill seems headed for the law books.
More than 200 supporters came to the committee hearing on the bill.
Radio stations have begun playing daily polka tunes.
And schoolchildren have written letters to lawmakers saying, "Let's move forward on the Polka Bill."
Vi Bergum, the teacher whose class created the legislation, says polka music helps schoolchildren avoid the dangers of drugs and gangs.
"It's a symbol of hope for our children," says the spry 62-year-old, who gives her students a "polka break" twice a day.
That hasn't won over the square dancers, though.
State Sen. Gary Drzewiecki, co-sponsor of the polka bill, says some constituents want lawmakers to allemande right past the polka and give official state status to the square dance.
In fact, they may.
A proposed resolution would make the square dance the official folk dance.
Responds Sen. Rude: "I think we need an image reality check."
