Durham, N.C. -- The college basketball season hasn't proceeded without a few mysteries, not the smallest of which has been the performance of the University of North Carolina Tar Heels.
Here's a crew that returned four starters from a team that won the national championship last year, then hit the recruiting jackpot with a freshman class some said might find college a mere holding pattern between high school and the National Basketball Association.
Yet, somehow, the Heels managed to lose six games and give up the ghost for a regular-season Atlantic Coast Conference title before the schedule had been played out.
A loss Saturday night here at Duke, a Sargasso Sea for teams of any stripe, would have sent them tourneyward with a distinct slosh.
During the last 10 minutes of that game, however, the Heels got out of the tar, possibly for good.
Running the floor, hitting their shots and preventing the Blue Devils from doing the same, they turned a 61-61 tie into an 87-77 victory.
And while they couldn't keep Duke's hands off the ACC trophy, everyone knows that the shiniest crowns remain to be claimed.
"I think they were ready to play tonight," Dean Smith, the Carolina coach, said of his boys, leaving the sense that it was about time.
The venerable Smith, the Mr. Chips of college hoops with a shoe contract, could have been excused a bit of exasperation.
He's had good teams and better ones in his 33 years down the road at Chapel Hill, but this one was supposed to have been his best.
It had size (more seven-footers than it can use), veteran ballhandling in senior Derrick Phelps and a shooter (Donald Williams) with the best touch since the lad with the baggy shorts and the initials M.J.
It began the campaign with the No. 1 ranking in the national polls, and many felt it'd end it that way on the court.
That number, apparently, didn't include Carolina's opponents, especially some of the last few.
The Heels came to Duke with three losses in their last six games, a 23-6 won-lost mark and a No. 5 poll ranking it owed partly to the name on their jerseys.
In their last outing, a 69-61 road loss to Wake Forest, Smith's charges shot but 33.8% from the field, a mark that, probably, your local high school team tops with regularity.
One thing that indisputably has hampered Carolina was injuries; guard Phelps and senior forward Brian Reese had missed a few games with single ailments, and Williams, the smooth-gliding junior guard who scored a total of 50 points in last year's Final Four, had missed nine with a variety of problems before returning.
Another difficulty was harder to pin down and harder still to describe diplomatically.
"Some of our people had trouble finding their roles," Williams allowed after Saturday's fray.
Translated, that meant mostly that Carolina's two showiest freshmen -- forward Jerry Stackhouse and center Rasheed Wallace -- had experienced trouble making the transition from being top bananas to members of a bunch.
If any team could have been expected to exploit that situation it was Duke.
The Blue Devils are not strangers to number onehood, having won national championships in 1991 and '92, and the current team fields veterans of one or both of those squads.
They were 22-3 before Saturday, No. 2 in the Associated Press poll and a secure No. 1 in the ACC with a 12-3 mark, to second-place Carolina's 10-5.
They were hot, having won five straight, and at home, where they'd won 14 of 15 this season, and, going back further, 76 of 80.
Furthermore, they were not without motivation, Saturday being the last home game for seniors Grant Hill, Antonio Lang and Marty Clark.
Hill is especially beloved, his number (33) having been retired right off his back, as it were.
The 6-foot-8 son of Calvin Hill, the old Dallas Cowboy running back, leads his mates in both scoring and assists and is, maybe, the nation's best all-around player.
Young Hill has been in Durham long enough to know why any Duke-North Carolina game is big stuff.
"If we lose to them again {Carolina won the season's first meeting between the teams, 89-78, in Chapel Hill in February}, and win the {national} championship, then everyone would say `OK, you're the champions, but you couldn't beat Carolina,'" he said before the game.
With the heat in its Cameron Indoor Stadium home turned up to the usual 80-or-so-degrees, and with 6,800 Dookies bouncing and hooting, Duke started out like it would make barbecue fare of its visitors.
Hill scored 12 of his team's first 21 points, and the Devils led 28-22 with seven minutes left in the first half.
But Carolina shaved the margin to a point (40-39) by halftime and played Duke even through the first 10 minutes of the last period.
The run that was to vault Carolina into the lead for good was triggered by a slam by freshman Wallace to end a fast break, and a three-point field goal by Williams on its next trip down.
Carolina outscored Duke 19-7 in the late going, and the final margin would have been wider if the home team hadn't scored the last, meaningless four points.
Williams led Carolina in scoring with 20 points after a five-point first half, and all nine Tar Heels who saw action scored six points or more.
Wallace had 14 and the praise he received from Duke coach Mike Krzyzewski ("He's such a presence.") indicated that the skinny Philadelphian was finally fitting in fine.
There are, of course, more games to be played.
The ACC tournament starts Friday, and the NCAAs follow.
Duke and UNC will be in the latter; it's kind of a rule that they don't hold it without them.
It's also kind of a rule that coach Smith never praises his players unreservedly until nothing's left to win.
Yes, he said, Williams' three-pointer that helped break the game looked good going in, but he had a hard time saying "nice going" because Wallace was open underneath on the play.
"I guess," he sighed, "the great shooters don't see those people.'
