Viacom Inc., embarking on the daunting task of combining three companies, announced a "transition" management team that will consolidate the assets of recently acquired Paramount Communications Inc. and those of Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. after the completion of Viacom's separate merger with Blockbuster.
Viacom said the transition team will include two of its executives and one from Paramount, all of whom will report to Viacom President and Chief Executive Frank Biondi, 49 years old.
Viacom General Counsel Philippe P. Dauman, 40, will become executive vice president and chief administrative officer, while Thomas E. Dooley, 37, who heads Viacom's corporate development, will become executive vice president of finance, corporate development and communications.
As reported, Paramount Chairman Martin Davis and President Stanley Jaffe will leave their executive posts, though Mr. Davis is working informally on the management transition, a Paramount spokesman said.
Paramount's formal representative on the transition team is Ronald L. Nelson, 41, executive vice president and chief financial officer.
Whether he will have a longer-term role at the merged companies and what it will be haven't been determined, though Viacom executives say they want to keep him at the company.
The Blockbuster merger is expected to be voted on by its shareholders in May; if it is completed, Blockbuster President and Chief Operating Officer Steven R. Berrard, 39, will join the transition team.
Viacom, which acquired Paramount for nearly $10 billion after a five-month bidding contest with QVC Inc., is swallowing two companies considerably larger than itself; Paramount has some 12,500 employees to Viacom's 5,000.
Blockbuster, meanwhile, has close to 40,000 employees, mostly in its retail stores nationwide.
Though Viacom officials decline to discuss layoffs, Wall Street analysts expect the company, now heavily laden with debt, to sharply cut staffing levels in such areas as television distribution, where the three companies combined have four different overlapping units.
John Tinker, an analyst at Furman Selz, said he expects Viacom management to take $250 million in pretax restructuring charges that include staff cutbacks in corporate and operations areas.
During the bidding contest for Paramount, Viacom's advisers at Smith Barney Shearson said Viacom expected annual cost savings of $200 million at the minimum from, among other things, "elimination of duplicate television production, distribution and sales" and savings on overhead and administration costs.
Speculation about cutbacks and executive changes has been rampant at Paramount's Hollywood studio, where Mr. Biondi and Viacom Chairman Sumner Redstone recently had a week of intensive meetings.
Later, at the annual gathering of theatrical exhibitors in Las Vegas, Paramount Pictures studio chief Sherry Lansing made reference in a speech to the "turmoil" the studio has endured recently.
Following her at the podium, Mr. Redstone told the audience, "the turmoil is just beginning."
Mr. Dauman and others at Paramount who attended the session said Mr. Redstone's remarks were made in a jesting manner, and noted that Mr. Redstone went on to make a number of positive remarks about the studio.
Mr. Biondi told the same gathering that Ms. Lansing and her motion picture team "is our team," and he said yesterday that Ms. Lansing has agreed to stay on.
Still unclear is whether Viacom will name an executive to oversee Paramount's entertainment operations, which include the studio, TV operations, theatrical exhibition, theme parks and Madison Square Garden.
Mr. Biondi declined to comment, although he acknowledged the company is examining that option.
