Jackson Entertainment Complex, a much-ballyhooed joint venture between singer Michael Jackson and Sony, has fallen far short of its hype.
In the spring of 1991, Sony Corp. confidently predicted that its new venture with the pop star, whose album "Thriller" is the best-selling record of all time, would produce movies as well as records and would generate retail sales of "entertainment software" in excess of $1 billion.
Four years later, with charges of child molestation swirling around Mr. Jackson, Sony's ambitious plans to make the singer the centerpiece of a profitable long-term franchise have failed.
Mr. Jackson has settled a civil suit against him for a sum said to be about $20 million; a criminal investigation is continuing.
Though sales of his records continue strong, it is unclear when and if he will produce a new album.
But even before the charges surfaced, Mr. Jackson hadn't developed other recording stars under his own label as promised.
Mr. Jackson's ambitious plans to star in a series of fantasy movies aimed at kids never came to fruition, and last year a movie and television development deal with Sony's Columbia Pictures unit was quietly ended after producing nothing.
High-tech visual projects with Sony's consumer electronics unit also never materialized.
Sony won't comment on the financial impact of its big star's troubles, though executives say Sony faces no serious risk -- mostly lost opportunity and a tarnished asset.
Sandy Gallin, Mr. Jackson's business manager, couldn't be reached for comment.
To some observers, Michael Jackson is an example of how much hype lies behind these glossy deals with stars.
Most deals, such as those struck with Mr. Jackson, are regarded with skepticism even within the entertainment companies.
In order to stroke the egos of recording stars like Mr. Jackson, Prince and Madonna -- and get them to sign new record contracts -- Sony and Time Warner Inc. have set up entertainment companies for the artists and promised funds for movie development.
Time Warner even made Prince a vice president of its Warner Bros. record unit.
But most of the time, the recording artists just keep on making albums, and movie projects -- if there are any -- don't make money.
And the pacts typically don't cost the companies much if the artists don't deliver.
The actual cost to Sony under the Jackson pact is said by people close to the company to be $50 million to $60 million, and most of that will be paid only as each album is delivered.
Sony reportedly paid Mr. Jackson $18 million as a signing bonus for "Dangerous," the first of six albums, to be followed by $5 million to $8 million (reports varied) in advances for each of the next five albums.
Mr. Jackson was supposed to get $5 million for every movie in which he acted, but since he hasn't acted in any, Sony hasn't had to pay.
"In my mind, there is very little impact on Sony at this time, just some lost opportunity due to his inactivity," says Joe Smith, a longtime industry executive now working as a music consultant to Blockbuster Entertainment Corp.
"God knows when Sony will get a record out of this guy again.
He's very fragile emotionally and even under the best circumstances he only delivers an album every couple years. . . ."
One part of Sony's lost revenue -- at least so far -- is a Greatest Hits album that was widely expected to be issued in 1993.
Early last fall, executives at Mr. Jackson's label, Epic, wrestled with whether to release a Michael Jackson Greatest Hits album in time for Christmas.
Last fall, an attorney for Mr. Jackson said that Epic executives had estimated world-wide sales for Vol. 1 of a Greatest Hits package at 12 million units -- generating revenue of more than $75 million.
(The company is said to have a 50-50 profit split with Mr. Jackson.)
He also said Vol. 1 was to contain 11 hit songs from old Michael Jackson albums plus three new songs, which would help get radio exposure for the album.
In any case, Epic finally announced, as the sex allegations were being made, that "due to Michael Jackson's hectic touring schedule, he was not able to complete recording for the Greatest Hits record, so it has been postponed to next year."
Sony can take consolation from the fact that its music company is in better shape than it was at the time it signed Mr. Jackson's contract.
Sony's labels ended 1993 with their biggest market share ever, with a strong artist roster that includes such acts as grunge rockers Pearl Jam and veteran superstar Billy Joel.
Michael Shalett, chief operating officer of SoundScan, which tallies album sales at stores nationwide, notes that Mr. Jackson's "Dangerous" has been in the top 200 for 113 consecutive weeks since its 1991 debut, selling 5.4 million copies in the U.S. alone.
In one week in late December, at the height of the allegations, "Dangerous" sold 18,000 copies, according to SoundScan.
One record industry executive close to the situation noted that Sony's contract with Mr. Jackson was costly in one measurable respect.
Other artists on Sony's record labels, this person said, demanded far more expensive deals in the wake of the hoopla surrounding Mr. Jackson's contract.
"Suppose you are another artist, and you read about the new $1 billion Jackson deal.
What do you do?" the executive said.
"You tell your lawyer to go get the same deal.
And when the lawyer says, `You're not Michael Jackson,' the artist says, `Get me half of that.'"
