General Motors Corp. has decided to end a contract with Bankers Trust New York Corp. to service its $11 billion employee savings fund, apparently due to a dispute over fees.
GM's decision comes as Bankers Trust has been trying to increase activity at its asset-servicing unit.
"It's clearly a big account, and losing such an account is not an occasion for rejoicing," said Arthur Soter, an analyst with Morgan Stanley & Co.
"But it's not the kiss of death.
When you're trying to grow something, you have some bumps in the road."
The GM employee savings fund involves 401k plans for 270,000 participants, or about 10% of the number of individual accounts serviced by the Bankers Trust unit.
Bankers Trust keeps track of participants at centers in Los Angeles, Jersey City, N.J., and Nashville, Tenn.
Bankers Trust and GM declined to comment on the status of the service contract.
A Bankers Trust internal memo, however, cited "continuing serious differences" between the bank and GM during contract negotiations, which had lasted three months.
According to the memo, dated Jan. 31, the two companies have "mutually terminated the negotiations" and GM is seeking another company to handle the accounts.
An announcement is expected in the next couple of weeks.
The servicing contract involves the $11 billion GM employee 401k plan, called GM Savings Stock Purchase Program for salaried personnel and GM Personal Savings Plan for hourly employees.
According to people familiar with the situation, Bankers Trust and GM failed to reach an agreement on fees.
The memo said "service quality was not a factor," but "compensation" was the issue in dispute.
The memo indicated that GM intends to transfer the contract to another company in early 1995.
Bankers Trust has serviced the employee pension fund since 1991.
Some insiders assert that Bankers Trust submitted a low bid to land the contract initially, and that GM balked when Bankers Trust sought higher fees in a contract renewal.
Bankers Trust officials declined to comment on what would happen to employees involved in the GM contract.
According to an employee in Bankers Trust's Los Angeles office, about 70 people worked solely on the GM account.
The employee, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said management has told those who work on the "GM Team" that they would be given buyout packages and/or outplacement help.
"They didn't offer to place us somewhere else in the company," the employee said.
