Motorola Inc. has resolved its high-profile dispute with a Japanese cellular-telephone company, striking an accord that is likely to prevent U.S. trade sanctions against Japan, individuals close to the discussions said.
Under the terms of the agreement, which were tentatively scheduled to be announced Friday afternoon in Tokyo by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Motorola will win improved access to the densely-populated cellular-phone corridor that runs from Tokyo to Nagoya.
Motorola's complaints about alleged Japanese attempts to block it from that market have blossomed into a major U.S.-Japan trade fight.
Individuals familiar with the agreement said that IDO Corp., the only cellular operator licensed to use Motorola's cellular-telephone equipment in that market, will accelerate its deployment of Motorola technology in the region.
During the next 18 months, IDO will install sufficient cellular "base stations" to give its Motorola-style network coverage over 95% of the Tokyo-Nagoya area population, up from about 45% now.
More important, Motorola also has won two important guarantees from IDO that will ensure IDO's commitment to its Motorola system.
In April, IDO will ask Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications to transfer 1.5 megahertz of radio spectrum from IDO's main cellular system, which was developed by Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp., to Motorola's TACS system.
Nippon Telegraph is both competitor and partner to IDO, and Motorola has long complained that IDO has been swinging customers to its Nippon Telegraph-style system.
That agreement represents a compromise from Motorola's earlier insistence on transferring a full three megahertz of spectrum.
Motorola has sought such a transfer as a guarantee that IDO would "cap" its spending on the NTT system and instead turn its attention to the TACS system.
The spectrum transfer will take 15 to 18 months, individuals said.
Under the current agreement IDO will also pledge not to further develop its NTT system.
Both sides also have agreed to a quarterly progress review, although it wasn't immediately clear whether the U.S. and Japanese governments would be involved in certifying that review.
While ostensibly a victory for Motorola and the U.S. government, settlement of the Motorola case also means that the U.S. has lost its main point of trade leverage over Japan.
Trade talks between the two countries collapsed in mid-February, and the U.S. has sought to use the Motorola case to pressure Japan into accepting its demands for measureable progress.
