NOBODY REALLY knows when the law business will emerge from the doldrums, but there is one indicator that seems to be pointing toward a strong recovery in 1994.
We'll call it the lawyers' travel index.
A travel agency that specializes in lawyers' business trips reports that it has tallied the number of such trips taken last year by attorneys at about 100 firms and compared the total with that from the previous year.
The agency's findings: Lawyers' business travel soared 17% last year, the first time it has risen at all since the 1980s.
Measuring future legal billings based on current business travel is akin to predicting Christmas sales based on purchases of wrapping paper.
Though a rough gauge, it beats guessing and seems more reliable than counting on the rosy projections offered most years by law-firm managers.
Legal business trips, after all, translate directly into fees for law firms.
Not only do lawyers charge clients for the work performed on their behalf but also, typically, for all of the travel costs.
Since the travel occurs months before the bills are paid and get reflected in a firm's revenue, the travel index may provide the earliest sign that legal work is picking up.
Lawyers could surely use some positive news.
In its most recent survey of law-firm performance, the law-office consulting group at Price Waterhouse reported that earnings (though high by most mortals' standards) remain depressed.
In 1992, net income per partner sagged to $230,000, off quite a bit from the 1988 high of $242,000.
MANY LEGAL consultants and other industry watchers continue to stand by grim predictions that law firms will have to shrink as much as 30% in coming years.
Meanwhile, lawyers have had to sit on the sidelines while positive reports rolled in from other economic sectors: Indexes of consumer spending, home building and factory production are up.
Paul Metselaar, president of the Lawyers' Travel Service, based in New York, says his company's nationwide numbers are the first drumbeat of a coming boom in the profession.
"Clearly, what's happening is that law firms are about to start getting a lot busier, for the first time in several years," he says.
Mr. Metselaar sees a surge in billable hours, especially at law firms with international practices, based on his information that overseas travel is way up.
"American lawyers are going much more frequently to Latin America, Europe and the Far East.
That's really where the playing field is going to be in the '90s."
The company, which books flight, hotel and related arrangements for half of the country's 30 largest law firms and a host of others, also gathered data on law firms' recruiting patterns.
(Most law firms request that Lawyers' Travel keep track of recruiting trips separately from other business trips, Mr. Metsalaar says, because travel on behalf of the firm can't be billed to clients.)
Here, too, the lawyers' travel index hints of happier days, both for firms themselves and their prospective employees.
Recruiting trips last year were up 34% nationwide from the prior year, Mr. Metsalaar says.
Lawyers' Travel reports that its overall sales for recruiting-related trips in 1993 were up 40% over the year before.
That suggests firms are seeking to build up their ranks again, after years of downsizing and layoffs.
Lawyers in practice areas that had been "basically dead" for the past three years, such as real estate, are on the prowl again, Mr. Metsalaar says.
Additionally, with mergers and acquisitions work coming back to life, lawyers are again flying around the country looking to clinch deals.
The travel executive isn't quite sure what to make of a third indicator: Lawyers' vacation trips also are up substantially, about 15% over the past year.
"Lawyers are clearly starting to spend more money on themselves," Mr. Metsalaar says.
"Maybe it indicates partners are starting to increase their income draws, or maybe associates are feeling more confident.
But then again, you'd think if they were busier, they would have less time for vacations.
Then again, maybe if they weren't so busy, the vacation numbers would be higher."
The lawyers' travel index also makes regional calculations.
Law-firm finances, it seems, are likely to start looking better sooner in the Northeast than in Southern California.
Last year, lawyers' business trips were up 18% for lawyers based in New York and up 19% for Washington firms, and down 10% for Los Angeles operations.
Attorneys at 10 of New York's 25 largest firms took 7,191 business trips in the second half of last year, up from 5,878 during the same period in the previous year, according to the index.
IN GENERAL, the index shows that New York litigators are a peripatetic lot, taking an average of 18 business trips a year.
How far they are going, though, isn't clear: The travel service didn't supply an "average miles per lawyer" estimate.
Ward Bower, a principal at the legal consulting firm Altman Weil Pensa Inc., says the regional travel patterns track his sense, based on anecdotal evidence, that the legal business is recovering in the Northeast while still struggling in California.
When he puts a wet finger to the economic winds, Mr. Bower senses "optimism" in the legal business as a whole.
"Quite a few firms had a better year than projected in '93, and volume appears to be better than it's been at this time of year for the past two or three years," he says.
But Mr. Bower cautions against betting the ranch on the lawyers' travel index.
The trips could be shorter than in the indulgent '80s, and some clients have struck tough deals with their law firm about how much they will reimburse for travel.
"Even if the premise is correct," he adds, "there's no way to prove it yet because of the lag time in client bill-paying."
