Your Dec. 29 editorial "The Diversity Standard" gets many things wrong.
-- You state our accrediting document sets forth "a new diversity standard."
It does nothing of the kind.
Rather, it is an effort by the accrediting commission to offer assistance to member colleges in living up to standards to which they have subscribed since 1988.
-- The document clearly states that accreditation will not be denied any college that is thoughtfully considering the matter of diversity in the context of its own institutional mission and values.
-- The document addresses principally matters of ethnic diversity.
All three of these points have been abundantly clear in all drafts of the document circulated in the past six months.
You ask your readers to believe that the efforts of our accrediting commission regarding ethnic diversity are found within "an atmosphere blighted by censorship, speech codes, quota hiring and other symptoms of political correctness."
Our document on diversity specifically reminds colleges of their obligation to support freedom of inquiry and expression.
The document does so by quoting the following language from the existing standards:
"Those within an educational institution have, as a first concern, knowledge, evidence and truth.
This concern should not be undermined by particular judgments of institutional benefactors, of public or social pressure groups, or of religious or political groups."
Surely, this excerpt places our accreditation process squarely on the side of academic freedom.
Another important matter: You deride as a "suddenly discovered dogma" the idea that diversity and educational quality are linked.
Surely, this is not dogma, or evidence of "zealotry" as you suggest, but a compelling condition of America today and tomorrow.
Given our ethnically diverse society, what would you say of the quality of an education that provided no familiarity with the ways and histories of the groups to which fellow students, citizens and co-workers will belong?
We say that would represent a serious gap in educational quality and ultimately compromise America's future.
Donald R. Gerth
Sacramento, Calif.
