Get ready for Sprint to come out slugging with new financial muscle in the Darwinian fight for survival among telecommunications companies.
According to the buzz on Wall Street, Sprint has decided that if it can't beat the competition, it should join 'em.
So -- the speculation goes -- the company is about to ally itself with a partner or sell off a chunk of its stock to shore up its balance sheet and make it a stronger competitor in the brewing battle.
Yesterday, the stock closed at 34 3/4, up 1/2, on volume of more than 1.3 million shares -- or more than twice the average daily volume.
A Sprint spokesman declines to comment about the possibility of either a stock sale or a pending partnership.
But that hasn't stopped investors from singling out favorite candidates for a Sprint alliance.
Blake Bath, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. named Unisource, a consortium of Spanish, Swiss, Dutch and Swedish phone companies, as his choice in comments to clients yesterday.
Mr. Bath also upgraded Sprint's stock to "outperform," in part because he believes such a partnership agreement will be announced soon.
He said an announcement could come before Feb. 16, when the company has scheduled a meeting with analysts.
Mr. Bath says his recent discussions with Sprint management "implied that issues regarding Sprint's limited international partnerships and limited financial flexibility could be addressed shortly, conceivably prior to Sprint's analyst meeting Feb. 16, the first such meeting in several years."
Sprint's 60% debt-to-capital ratio is considered a particular handicap in facing competitors on the information superhighway.
"Sprint President Ron LeMay indicated that international agreements would be among the company's top few priorities and acknowledged the need for additional financial backing to pursue wireless, access and international opportunities," Mr. Bath said in comments to clients yesterday.
Other investors named Motorola and Italian phone company STET as possible investors or partners for Sprint.
Based on recent similar deals between U.S. long-distance companies, including British Telecommunications' investment in MCI, such a linkup could boost Sprint's stock.
Some analysts figure a stake in Sprint could go for around $40 a share, a nearly 30% premium to yesterday's closing price, implying the stock may be a bargain.
Sprint has long been viewed among investors as an also-ran in the long-distance business.
"No one has given them credit for doing anything right," says Paul Rissman, an analyst at Alliance Capital Management.
As a result, Sprint's stock price has traded at a multiple below those of AT&T and MCI.
Sprint has suffered from a big image problem among investors since it announced its merger with Centel in 1991.
At the beginning of 1993, it looked like Sprint's results were finally improving, but in the third quarter, revenue growth slowed and the stock took another fall.
But Sprint has looked particularly left out in recent months as rivals' strategies dominated the headlines.
AT&T made news with its planned $12.6 billion merger with McCaw Telecommunications, not to mention numerous deals it signed with overseas telecommunications concerns.
Meanwhile, MCI trumpeted its new capital infusion from British Telecommunications.
Both transactions are aimed at making the long-distance companies more competitive as regulators have allowed new rivals into the telecommunications businesses.
The biggest cloud over Sprint's stock has been the company's inability to gain market share at the same rate as MCI.
While Sprint's share of the U.S. long-distance telephone market has edged up about 1/4 percentage point a year, MCI has been expanding its share at an annual rate of 1/2 to 1 percentage point, says Mr. Rissman.
Hooking up with a new partner could make Sprint's lackluster performance irrelevant to investors.
"If there is a strategic partner, it could change investors' view," especially if that partner is willing to pay a good premium for a Sprint stake, says John Weber, a telecommunications analyst at Putnam Investment Management, who is recommending Sprint to portfolio managers at Putnam.
And, even without a deal, Sprint's stock has other factors going for it, investors say.
The company's long-distance business is doing better than expected, Mr. Bath says.
And profit margins are improving, too -- partly because AT&T has raised prices, he says.
"If, as we expect, Sprint follows AT&T's most recent price increase, results could be particularly strong in the first half of 1994," he says.
Mr. Rissman estimates that every percentage-point increase in Sprint's operating margin would increase earnings 3% to 4% a year.
Meanwhile, as chronic "collect" callers already know, Sprint, like its rivals, is saving money by using automated "voice activated systems" to replace human operators for collect calls.
Rather than telling an operator their names, callers now speak into a voice-activated system and the people being called press a number on their touch tone phones to accept the charges.
An annoying change to customers perhaps, but such steps are sweet beeps to investors' ears.
