A big trade group for health maintenance organizations is joining the Clinton administration's effort to boost vaccination rates among U.S. children.
The Group Health Association of America said more than 250 HMOs will work toward developing strategies for raising vaccination rates to 90% by 1996.
Currently, about 60% of children are fully immunized with diphtheria-tetanuspertussis, or DTP, polio, and measles-mumps-rubella vaccines, and only about 40% of all children get them on the recommended schedule.
One result: in the three years ended in 1991, some 136 children died in measles outbreaks that, public health officials say, could have been prevented with better vaccination rates.
Legislation aimed at achieving the 90% goal was passed by Congress last year and officials at the National Vaccine Project in the Department of Health and Human Services figured HMOs, which emphasize preventive care, could help lead the effort.
"We need someone out front to demonstrate that it's possible to do it," said Anthony Robbins, of the National Vaccine Project.
Under the program, participating HMOs will determine their 1993 vaccination rates for their members to establish a baseline, set annual goals for improvement and report on strategies that work and those that don't, said Pamela Middlestat, director of medical affairs at GHAA.
By disseminating such information, even among HMOs that might compete in local markets, the hope is that overall immunizations will increase and that models for both HMOs and non-HMO organizations can be developed.
HMOs that serve Medicaid patients will be among the participants.
Experience at some 20 HMOs operated by United HealthCare illustrates some of the hurdles facing the initiative.
Even though all the HMOs provide free vaccines, rates average about 65% to 70%.
Dr. Newcomer said a study showed that physicians frequently missed opportunities to vaccinate children when they were brought in for other reasons.
But rescheduling a visit was difficult because while parents can get time off from work to take a sick child to a doctor, they can't get time off to take a well child for a shot.
