With Congress already recoiling over China's refusal to bend to U.S. pressures on human rights, a key branch of the U.S. intelligence community is arguing that Beijing has transferred advanced missile technology to North Korea.
The upshot is further trouble for China's Most Favored Nation trade status.
Its status is slated for renewal in June, but President Clinton has said he will revoke it if the Asian nation fails to show significant progress in improving its human-rights record.
The reports on North Korea stem from Defense Intelligence Agency analysts, who contend that the diameter of a new long-range missile being developed by the North Koreans is evidence that China has helped Pyongyang build the missile, according to individuals familiar with the analysis.
The DIA assessment isn't likely to provoke any immediate shift in administration policy toward North Korea, partly because analysts at the Central Intelligence Agency disagree with the DIA analysis.
They contend that the new missile could have been developed indigenously.
However, the DIA analysis can only complicate the debate over whether the U.S. should renew China's trade status -- which gives China the same standing as most U.S. trading partners.
Reacting to Beijing's resistance to most U.S. pressures on human rights, and its crackdown on dissidents last week, key members of Congress said critics of the Beijing government were gaining ground.
Meanwhile, Secretary of State Warren Christopher concluded a largely disappointing three-day visit in Beijing, leaving with a few modest concessions that fall far short of Washington's demands.
"If we had to vote today, there would be no MFN for China," said Rep. Lee Hamilton, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and one of a group of Democrats who oppose making the trade relationship hostage to China's human-rights record.
But, the Indiana Democrat continued, "there's over two months to go, so things could change."
Majority Leader George Mitchell said he would vote against renewing trade-status for China, if a vote were held now, and that he will have to see "sufficient progress" on human rights, and on compliance with trade and nuclear nonproliferation policies, to change that stance.
Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) said she doesn't believe the administration will renew the trade status "unless there's significant progress" on human rights.
But if China trade status is renewed without signficant improvements, she predicted that a congressional resolution revoking that status would pass the House "like wildfire."
Meanwhile, U.S. investors voiced new worries that the impasse would disrupt U.S. trade ties with the world's fastest-growing economy.
Donald Anderson, president of the U.S.-China Business Council, which represents U.S. firms doing business in China, said Mr. Christopher's trip there "makes it harder for us."
President Clinton, who also expressed disappointment over the impasse, has said he'll preserve China's trade status if the Asian giant makes "significant progress" in human rights matters, including the release of political prisoners, the international inspection of prisons and the protection of Tibet's religious heritage.
Mr. Christopher did report some small gains in which the two sides managed to narrow some differences.
But he stressed: "I wouldn't describe it as a breakthrough."
The two nations signed a joint declaration implementing a 1992 agreement under which the U.S. tries to make sure China doesn't ship goods to America made by prison labor.
And Mr. Christopher said Beijing agreed to work with the U.S. to resolve some outstanding emigration cases.
Mr. Christopher also said China "affirmed support for the universal declaration of human rights," and indicated for the first time that it would review information about the jamming of Voice of America signals beamed at China.
He also noted Beijing was having discussions with the International Committee of the Red Cross, which is negotiating for the right to inspect Chinese prisons.
Businesses are increasingly afraid that if U.S.-Chinese relations sour further, and favored nation status is denied, they'll be shut out of China's economic surge.
For example, McDonnell Douglas Corp. estimates that China will buy $40 billion worth of commercial aircraft over 20 years.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. says China presents "opportunities that are almost indescribable" in telecommunications.
Moreover, the companies argue that encouraging China to move in the direction of a market economy ultimately will lead to improvements in human rights.
Some business groups blame the tension in Beijing on bad timing for Mr. Christopher's visit, which coincided with the annual session of the National People's Congress, China's ceremonial parliament.
"The timing of the secretary's visit wasn't conducive to a conciliatory position by the Chinese on human rights," said Calman Cohen, co-chair of the Business Coalition for U.S.-China Trade, an alliance of companies lobbying for retention of favored nation status.
The coalition plans a letter signed by several hundred business and trade groups supporting MFN, and will pepper lawmakers with information on the number of jobs in their states tied to exports to China.
But the lobbying drive will be more difficult if Beijing is found to be supplying the renegade government in Pyongyang with advanced weapons technology.
If the reports turn out to be well-founded, the implications go beyond the trade battle.
Japan and South Korea would view the situation with alarm.
And if the North Koreans actually develop an accurate long-range missile, the U.S. would be forced to reassess its defense stance in the Pacific and perhaps to re-emphasize anti-ballistic missile defenses.
Information about the dispute within the U.S. intelligence community is mainly being provided by conservatives who advocate a tougher stance against North Korea and a more vigorous missile defense program at home.
The dispute within the intelligence community turns on the perceived diameter of the new North Korean missile, referred to as the TD-2.
If there is a "smoking gun" in the debate, said Henry Sokolski, who oversaw Pentagon counter-proliferation policy during the Bush administration, it is that the diameter of the new missile is very close to the diameter of the Chinese CSS-2 missile.
"Presumably, the only way they would know how to build something the size of the CSS-2 is either by physical transfer of such a beast, or of engineers familiar with the program," said one person who has recently been briefed by Pentagon officials on the situation.
But others disagree.
The CIA view that the new missile is home-grown is probably wrong, said one person involved in the dispute, but it doesn't necessarily follow that the DIA's charge against China is correct.
There is some evidence, this person said, that some of the necessary technology to drive a two-stage missile, such as a digital guidance system, could have come from Russia or even from Japan.
Arguing for the CIA's view is the question of what might motivate the Chinese to provide advanced missile technology to Pyongyang.
"Based on the very limited information we have now, I'd be hesitant to see a Chinese role in this," said Douglas Paal, former director of Asian affairs for the National Security Council.
"My own inclination is to believe that this is a self-generated missile system derived from technologies that are available in the literature."
Robert Greenberger and Bob Davis contributed to this article.
