Workers at Cummins Engine Co.'s main plant here don't have to worry about negotiating a new labor contract.
By the time their pact with the diesel-engine maker expires in the year 2004, all 1,800 of them will be eligible to retire.
"We didn't want people laid off in the past to get laid off again," says Larry Neihart, the union president who helped negotiate last year's 11-year contract with Cummins.
In return for job security and higher pensions for about 3,000 workers at six Indiana plants, the Diesel Workers Union made concessions on health care and granted years of labor peace.
Most new labor contracts still expire in this century, with three years the most common duration.
But a growing number of unions and employers are finding that steady, low inflation makes it easier to agree to longer contracts because it makes costs for companies and living expenses for workers more predictable.
Five-year agreements at two Whirlpool Corp. plants show "a higher level of trust," maintains William Marohn, president and chief operating officer of the Benton Harbor, Mich., appliance maker.
These contracts also indicate the reality of global competition and the reduced clout of labor.
With foreign competitors ready to step in, many companies say they can't afford to grant big wage increases or costly new benefits.
For unions, there's less incentive for a quick return to the bargaining table if they can't easily come away with economic gains.
The Labor Department said recently that the average contract negotiated in 1993 was for 35.8 months, the highest since the department began keeping such figures in 1972.
The statistics most likely understate contract duration.
The Labor Department, for example, counts recent six-year agreements in the steel industry as three years because wages are open for negotiation halfway through the contract.
But the workers can't strike, and differences are to be settled through binding arbitration.
"It all relates to job security," says Gary Hubbard, spokesman for the United Steelworkers of America.
While he says his union doesn't favor longer contracts alone, it will agree to them in return for items such as clauses barring layoffs and a greater say in decision-making at the steel companies.
The appeal to the steelmakers is steady production.
In the past, the mere threat of a strike caused customers to stockpile steel, only to cut orders after a settlement was reached.
Others took business elsewhere.
"Some customers would simply start placing orders with foreigners," says Dick Coffee, vice president for human resources at National Steel Corp. in Mishawaka, Ind.
But companies also like the promise of cooperation in efforts to boost productivity.
At National Steel, says Mr. Coffee, cooperation "is a strategic issue."
A major goal for Cummins in its 11-year pact with the Diesel Workers Union was the right to move to a team-based work system starting in 1996.
The system has brought flexibility and cost savings at other Cummins plants where it already is in place.
Still, long-term contracts carry obvious risks.
If companies perform better than expected, unions can't return to the bargaining table to negotiate contract improvements.
In November, the Teamsters Union ratified a four-year agreement covering 165,000 workers at United Parcel Service, ending a long history of three-year deals.
But the union rejected the notion of a six-year agreement, says a spokesman, "because the world can change tremendously" in that time.
Businesses can be hurt if sales turn down and they're locked into agreements they can't afford.
A Cummins executive says company officials argued strenuously among themselves whether they should forge an 11-year pact with the Diesel Workers.
If times get tough at National Steel, "you don't have a real opportunity to get back in and bargain something that gives you relief," says Mr. Coffee.
The "safety valve," he says, is the hope that the union would renegotiate before putting the company in danger.
Some think the traditional view that longer contracts favor management is outdated.
With shorter contracts, unions are "always in a reactive, crisis mode," argues Joseph Uehlein, an official in the AFL-CIO's industrial union department.
With more time between negotiations, unions can focus on priorities such as organizing new members.
United Mine Workers President Richard Trumka vows to do just that now that the union has secured five-year deals with coal companies.
