For years, Rep. Charles Rangel fought against higher cigarette taxes.
Now, he has pledged to kick the habit.
"I never had a contract with" cigarette makers, notes Mr. Rangel, a prominent member of the House Ways and Means Committee who has received more than $34,000 in campaign contributions from the industry over the past decade.
The New York Democrat, who recalls getting cartons of smokes as gifts from tobacco companies when he was first elected 24 years ago, used to argue that cigarette-tax increases would hit his poor Harlem constituents disproportionately hard.
But he says that this year he will support a "substantial" increase in the levy -- probably along the lines of the 75 cents a pack that President Clinton has proposed -- to pay for health-care reform.
Facing the most bruising legislative session in its history, the once-invincible tobacco lobby is showing signs of strain.
In addition to the tax, a slew of other antismoking measures are gaining momentum, including a proposed national ban on smoking in most public buildings and advertising restrictions in some cities.
The latest evidence of the tobacco lobby's waning influence came this week when a House subcommittee voted to finance the proposed health-care overhaul by raising the current 24-cent-a-pack federal tax on cigarettes even more than the president requested.
The panel voted for a $1.25 increase -- less than the $2 urged by antismoking groups but still a huge jump.
For decades, cigarette makers spent millions of dollars buying influence in Congress, and they largely escaped tough regulation.
In addition, cigarette taxes remain far lower in the U.S. than in most industrialized nations.
But some of the industry's long-time friends on Capitol Hill have fallen silent -- or, even more remarkable, are reversing their positions on key issues.
"The coalition has fallen apart," frets Democrat H. Martin Lancaster of North Carolina, an industry champion.
Like the National Rifle Association, which has been hurt by the outcry over gun-related violence, the tobacco industry faces a crescendo of concern about the health damage caused by cigarettes.
When the debate is "driven by emotion, it becomes almost impossible for us to control," says the Tobacco Institute's Walker Merryman, puffing away on a Benson & Hedges.
His office is a shrine to political incorrectness: A placard says "Thank You For Not Asking Me Not to Smoke," and a bulletin board features a sign promoting the rights of handgun owners and another that declares, "I Love Animals.
They're Delicious."
While the federal government estimates that cigarettes kill more than 400,000 Americans a year, legislators say the tobacco industry has undermined its own credibility by being so unyielding in its denial that cigarettes are harmful or addictive.
At the same time, critics have successfully portrayed cigarette makers as intent on hooking minorities, women and young people on their product.
"It is getting politically unacceptable to be seen as an advocate for tobacco," Rep. Bill Richardson says.
The New Mexico Democrat admits to having been a "high-profile" defender of the industry in the past, once taking the lead in derailing a proposal to restrict its advertising.
But after a visit by a group of angry voters, he says he decided he wouldn't take such a position today.
"If we are going to deal effectively with health care, we have to reduce the influence of tobacco," he says.
Facing more and more isolation on Capitol Hill, the industry is increasingly resorting to new, hardball tactics.
Philip Morris Cos., the nation's largest tobacco company, now is frequently going to court to seek redress.
Since last year, it has sued the Environmental Protection Agency, challenging the agency's report on second-hand smoke, and the city of San Francisco, seeking to overturn a strict smoking ban; the suits are still pending.
The company is expected to announce a new lawsuit today, challenging an ABC News report that suggested the industry was adding nicotine to cigarettes to hook smokers.
Yet despite setbacks, the industry remains one of the most potent players in town.
It showered lawmakers with $2.3 million in campaign contributions during the 1991-92 election cycle -- including $55,998 to Sen. Wendell Ford of Kentucky, a staunch industry defender who may run for Senate majority leader.
Philip Morris continues to underwrite generously civic events all over Washington.
And the industry has hired top-flight lobbyists, including Charles Black, a top campaign adviser for President Bush; Howard Liebengood, former sergeant-at-arms of the Senate; Frank Donatelli, former White House political director under President Reagan; and Rob Leonard, formerly the top staffer at the Ways and Means Committee.
Despite the mounting pressure, some tobacco-state lawmakers remain confident that their ranks will hold and that they can beat back any proposal that would truly cripple the industry.
The tobacco lobby's muscle is set to be tested again soon by a House subcommittee vote on the bill that would seriously restrict smoking in most public buildings; the outcome is too close to call.
A big question mark is New York Democratic Rep. Edolphus Towns, who first suggested to colleagues that he would favor the bill but now appears to be leaning against it.
Sometimes known as the "Marlboro Man of Brooklyn," Rep. Towns has taken honoraria from Philip Morris, RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. and other tobacco interests.
During the last election cycle, the tobacco industry gave the North Carolina native $21,245 -- more than what it donated to all but four other congressmen.
Mr. Towns didn't return phone calls seeking comment.
But increasingly, those on Capitol Hill seem interested in lashing out at the tobacco industry, not just enjoying its largess.
A record 58 lawmakers now belong to the Task Force on Tobacco and Health, a congressional antismoking group formed in 1989.
For the first time, task-force members say they outnumber the 40 to 50 core tobacco supporters in Congress.
"We're doubling our efforts," says Democratic Rep. Richard Durbin of Illinois, an ardent foe of the cigarette makers.
"We feel this is exactly the right environment to make some real progress."
The tobacco lobby is also getting no sympathy from a vehemently antismoking White House.
When Hillary Rodham Clinton banned smoking in the executive mansion even before the First Family had unpacked its bags, "everyone got the message that they should look at their agency and see what they could do to further the objective," says Craig Fuller, Philip Morris's top in-house lobbyist and a former chief of staff to George Bush.
So the Food and Drug Administration is considering regulating cigarettes as a drug, following the uproar over the charges about manipulation of nicotine levels.
The Justice Department has taken up an unusual antitrust case against the industry.
The Pentagon recently banned smoking in military workplaces.
And despite a full-bore lobbying effort, the industry failed last year to block release of a damaging EPA report asserting that second-hand smoke causes cancer.
Not only has the tobacco lobby lost influence; its foes have become increasingly sophisticated and well-organized in their own lobbying and publicity campaigns.
Logging on a computer network, they communicate daily on strategy for spinning the latest tobacco news, complete with suggested "media bites."
One attack on Joe Camel: "Of course cartoons are designed to appeal to adults only; and teething rings are designed exclusively for fretful adults."
Moreover, the tobacco industry's defeats have been piling up even faster at the state and local levels.
Earlier this month, the Baltimore City Council passed an ordinance prohibiting cigarette advertising on billboards, on the sides of buildings and on free-standing signboards.
"We fought rather hard on it," says Dennis McCoy, a lobbyist in Maryland for Philip Morris.
An even bigger loss took place this month in Michigan, where the industry poured $3.3 million into an ill-fated campaign against the tripling of the state's cigarette tax as part of a broad package to finance public education.
Tobacco money bought glitzy television ads, color brochures and an expensive direct-mail campaign, but the plan backfired when supporters put a spotlight on the industry's lobbying.
A cartoon in the Detroit Free Press pictured the tobacco lobby, represented by Joe Camel, lying in bed with a woman, who represented other Michigan political interests opposing the tax.
Many of the industry's allies now regret ever taking tobacco dollars.
"It was a liability," says Patrice Elms, the chairwoman of Michigan Citizens for Fair Taxes, the tobacco-industry-sponsored group that fought the tax package.
"The tobacco lobby is not nearly as strong as I thought it was," she adds.
"Their days for being strong, at least on the state level, are pretty much over."
In 1993, cigarette-tax increases were approved in 15 states, after six the year before, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.
"The national concern about the health effects of using cigarettes has rolled over the tobacco lobby," says Ron Snell, the group's fiscal program director.
With its clout sliding, the industry is increasing its spending on lobbying in key states.
In its unsuccessful battle against a sharp increase in cigarette taxes in New York State last year, Philip Morris tripled its spending to more than $600,000, becoming the highest-financed lobby there.
Another blow to the industry stems from its increasing isolation.
With the Clinton administration singling out tobacco products for higher federal taxes and linking them specifically to health care, tobacco companies can't find many allies in Washington.
The Coalition Against Regressive Taxation, a broad-based group that includes truckers and whiskey producers, has in the past vigorously fought excise-tax increases.
But this year, it is virtually silent.
The White House considered raising taxes on liquor as well as tobacco but worried that liquor had already been hit hard in the 1990 budget deal.
Although liquor companies have escaped for now, they are concerned about lawmakers who argue that it isn't fair to raise taxes on tobacco alone.
"We don't look kindly at one side trying to drag us into the tax package," says Fred Meister, president of the Distilled Spirits Council of the U.S.
The support of other traditional tobacco allies is also muted.
William Apfelbaum, who heads Transportation Displays Inc., which sells advertising space on bus kiosks and buses, used to be an outspoken critic of cigarette ad bans.
In the 1980s, he attacked Boston politicians for restricting tobacco ads on city buses.
"It cost us the contract," he complains, and he has given up the fight.
"I learned my lesson."
Even remaining allies avoid getting too cozy.
Convenience-store clerks are fast replacing the tobacco farmer as the industry's favorite "poster child."
An increase in tobacco taxes would hurt convenience stores, which account for about one-third, or $10 billion, of U.S. cigarette sales.
Nevertheless, tobacco lobbyists failed to persuade convenience-store clerks to hand out fliers opposing higher taxes.
A spokeswoman for the retailers says they didn't want to bother customers.
Meanwhile, the Washington-based Tobacco Institute saw its budget slashed last fall by the cigarette companies in the wake of severe price cuts.
Its staff has dwindled 40%, to 40 employees, and this year it canceled its annual winter conference for lawmakers near Palm Springs, Calif.
In an effort to battle back, the companies are stepping up their "grass-roots" lobbying.
Some 16,000 of their employees recently marched on the Capitol; the companies gave their factory workers the day off.
In addition, Philip Morris helped create the recently formed National Smokers Alliance, which is signing up members nationwide at $5 a head.
The group has 60,000 members so far and is sending a mailing to hundreds of thousands of others to join the fight for smokers' rights.
Although the alliance stresses that it represents individuals, William Althaus, its chairman, admits that the organization was the "brainchild" of Philip Morris and Burson-Marsteller, the company's public-relations firm.
Mr. Althaus, a former mayor of York, Pa., says most of the start-up money came from Philip Morris, which saw an industry need to re-evaluate its lobbying tactics.
"Name a significant battle they have won recently?" he asks.
He notes that Philip Morris also provided the names of smokers to contact.
The alliance, which is also being advised by former Republican Rep. Guy Vander Jagt, former Reagan aide Lyn Nofziger and Republican National Committee Co-Chair Jeanie Austin, is above all campaigning against the proposed excisetax increase.
But for industry backers on Capitol Hill, a sense of resignation has set in that a tax increase -- and probably a hefty one -- is almost sure to pass this year.
Rep. Charlie Rose of North Carolina, long the House's pre-eminent defender of tobacco growers, now finds himself calling a doubling of the cigarette tax "reasonable" -- terms that would have been unimaginable just a year ago.
Crowding into an elevator this week on the way to a vote, Mr. Rose playfully dug his finger into Rep. Pete Stark, the chairman of the subcommittee that passed the $1.25-a-pack increase.
"So, what did you do today," Mr. Rose asked, only half-jokingly, "$2 or $3 a pack?"
