U.S. Healthcare Inc., one of the nation's largest health-maintenance organizations, is seeking partnerships with as many as 200 hospitals in its service areas.
The negotiations represent a major switch in strategy for U.S. Healthcare.
Traditionally, the Blue Bell, Pa.-based HMO, has avoided direct involvement in health-care delivery.
Instead, it has contracted with vast numbers of independent doctors and hospitals in its territory, which stretches from Pennsylvania to New Hampshire.
Like many HMOs, U.S. Healthcare has been known as a tough bargainer, pressing hard for discount prices.
But an executive close to the talks said U.S. Healthcare "wants to be more cooperative" in its dealings with hospitals.
He said the HMO doesn't want to buy hospitals outright, but has proposed giving stock options to hospitals or setting up profit-sharing "trusts" that would be jointly owned by U.S. Healthcare and individual hospitals.
A U.S. Healthcare spokeswoman confirmed that discussions are under way, but declined to comment further.
If the talks succeed, they could produce a health-care juggernaut on the East Coast.
Already, U.S. Healthcare provides coverage for more than 1.5 million people.
For 1993, the company's net income soared 50% to $299.7 million on revenue of $2.65 billion.
It's unclear, though, whether hospitals will want to embrace U.S. Healthcare's overall package.
Along with its new incentives, the health plan also is likely to push for stricter contracts that will align hospitals more closely with the HMO's own priorities.
In some cases, hospitals could be required to share the financial risk of caring for a large pool of patients, rather than being reimbursed after the fact for each treatment.
Such risk-sharing systems, known as "capitation," are favored by HMOs but evoke mixed feelings, at best, among hospital executives.
Another potential sticking point involves how much control a hospital's management team would have to share with an outside partner.
Several hospital executives who have been approached by U.S. Healthcare said they are weighing its proposals against a different way of boosting their market clout, forming alliances with local hospitals, doctors and outpatient centers.
Elliot Sussman, chief executive officer of Lehigh Valley Medical Center in Allentown, Pa., said he has been holding talks with U.S. Healthcare but hasn't decided which options to pursue.
"There are all kinds of conversations going on among providers now," Dr. Sussman said.
He termed U.S. Healthcare's proposals "one possible model" but said he is looking at other choices, too.
The head of Princeton Medical Center in New Jersey, Dennis Doody, said he has begun talks with U.S. Healthcare and "is interested in finding out more."
But Mr. Doody questioned whether the profit-sharing arrangements alone would be enough to make a community hospital align its destiny with U.S. Healthcare.
A more upbeat view came from Nancy Brunton, executive director of managed care at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J. "Given that U.S. Healthcare has been a leader in the industry, anything new that they try has a good chance of success," she said.
Ms. Brunton speculated that if the partnership concept catches on, other East Coast HMOs are likely to copy it.
Some hospital executives think U.S. Healthcare may be wooing them as a defensive strategy.
The hospital market is changing rapidly in U.S. Healthcare's main markets, concentrating power in the hands of potential rivals to the big HMO.
In Philadelphia, a rival insurer, Independence Blue Cross, recently negotiated to buy seven hospitals.
Meanwhile, various New Jersey hospitals are exploring ways to band together.
Those alliances could undercut U.S. Healthcare's ability to negotiate favorable contracts with individual hospitals.
U.S. Healthcare wouldn't say which hospitals it is wooing.
The HMO is referring to its project as the "community hospital network," suggesting that it is targeting midsize hospitals in suburban locations, rather than giant urban teaching hospitals or small rural facilities.
As part of its package, U.S. Healthcare is considering ways that hospitals could get options on the HMO's stock if they meet certain performance targets.
Because most hospitals have nonprofit status, that may be hard to implement in some states.
But U.S. Healthcare evidently sees stock options as a potent lure.
Over the past three years, U.S. Healthcare's stock has tripled in price.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday, the stock fell $1.50 to $58.125.
