Last fall, when Aldrich and Rosario Ames arrived in their Jaguar to attend parents' night at their son's private school, they must have seemed like many of the other prosperous, middle-aged parents in attendance.
But, U.S. investigators say, instead of returning to their $500,000 home in a northern Virginia suburb, the Central Intelligence Agency operative, who once ran Soviet counterintelligence operations, and his Colombian-born wife cruised into Washington, D.C., and pulled into a cul-de-sac.
They were looking for a signal left on a mailbox that would let them know whether top-secret intelligence Mr. Aldrich had earlier left in a "dead drop" had been picked up by his Russian contacts, the investigators say.
Though it sounds like something out of a novel by John Le Carre, it's in fact a post-Cold War espionage case, with wide implications.
President Clinton yesterday called the case against the Ameses, who were arrested on espionage charges Monday, "very serious," and said it will add strain to the evolving relationship with Russia.
For Mr. Ames not only spied for the KGB for more than five years, according to a criminal complaint filed yesterday, but was also an agent of the Russian Federation foreign intelligence service, the KGB's successor.
The Ameses each face life imprisonment and $250,000 fines.
The Clinton administration yesterday pressed Moscow to withdraw a number of Russian diplomats in Washington who are implicated in the Ames affair.
According to administration officials, the Russians who were involved will be expelled if Moscow doesn't repatriate them.
A highly detailed 40-page government affidavit filed in connection with the case and released by the Justice Department discloses that Mr. Ames met with his Russian contacts as recently as November.
While no one was so naive as to assume that the U.S. and Russians had dismantled their elaborate spying capabilities, the Ames case comes at a sensitive juncture in the administration's campaign to keep U.S. aid flowing to economically beleaguered Russia.
Mr. Ames, 52 years old, worked for the CIA since 1962 and rose to become chief of the agency's Soviet counterintelligence branch from 1983 to 1985.
In that capacity, he was privy to an array of top secret documents and had extensive knowledge of the U.S. government's espionage activities inside the Soviet Union, including the identities of intelligence and counterintelligence operatives.
Since the mid-1980s, the CIA has suspected that there was a "mole" working inside the agency and worried that the identities of several agents, including a Soviet official working secretly for the U.S., had been compromised.
Mr. Ames and his wife, whose full name is Maria del Rosario Casas Ames, have been under government surveillance for two years.
It was unclear what tipped the government off, but its affidavit indicated the Ameses' lavish spending clearly outpaced Mr. Ames's government salary of less than $70,000.
The affidavit says that the $40,000 Jaguar, for example, was purchased with a $25,000 cash down payment; that various credit-card balances ballooned to more than $500,000; that securities accounts at Morgan Stanley & Co. and Pierpont Funds contained more than $165,000 in stocks; that the price of their Arlington, Va., home, which they bought in 1989, was $540,000; and that the couple spent $100,000 on home improvements.
The government further says that the Ameses, who were married in 1985, also purchased two condominiums and a farm in Colombia, Rosario Ames's native country.
There was also a stream of unexplained bank deposits, the government says.
In all, the government says the Ameses received more than $1.5 million in payments from the Soviets and Russians from 1985 to the fall of 1993.
The CIA analyzed a string of operations that had turned sour, looking for "the common denominator."
Said an official familiar with the analysis: "This guy rose to the top of the class."
Moreover, investigators secured information from intelligence sources from the former Soviet bloc that pointed to Mr. Ames's alleged work on behalf of Moscow, according to persons familiar with the case.
Information from ex-Soviet bloc informants was "a very important factor," said one law-enforcment official involved in the case.
Stanislav Levchenko, a KGB agent who defected in late 1979, says that the ultimate coup within the Soviet spy agency was to be able to recruit somebody in U.S. counterintelligence.
"To recruit such a person is the ultimate success because it neutralizes the efforts of many thousands of people and millions of dollars spent on spy operations.
Usually in many cases such knowledge permits them the Russians to neutralize the efforts of a foreign country.
They can also deflect them by feeding back false information."
Mr. Levchenko says that the KGB was split up into two groups after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
One was internal security, the second is the Russian Federated Intelligence Service.
The Russians have announced that 20 old KGB offices abroad were closed, but Mr. Levchenko says he believes they were able to keep the same espionage effort in the U.S. by switching people from the closed offices, mainly in Africa.
"I strongly believe that the force which is working against this country is as big as it was before and is probably as effective," says Mr. Levchenko.
The government suspects that Mr. Ames, who worked for the CIA in Turkey, New York, Mexico City and Rome, as well as several stints at CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., turned over vast amounts of sensitive material to his Soviet and Russian masters.
Brent Scowcroft, former President Bush's national security adviser, calls this case "extremely important. . . .
My impression is this guy did a lot of damage.
He's been in place for a long time."
Mr. Scowcroft says that when the Bush administration left office there were "suspicions" of such a mole.
When KGB agent Vitaly Yurchenko defected to the U.S. in 1985, one of his debriefers was Aldrich Ames, said Ronald Kessler, author of "Inside the CIA" and several other books on intelligence operations.
"Here was one of the top KGB defectors spilling out his guts, and it was all going back to the KGB," Mr. Kessler says.
Mr. Yurchenko subsequently fled from his CIA handlers while dining at Au Pied du Cochon, a Georgetown restaurant, and re-defected to the Soviets.
In June, agents searched Mr. Ames's office at Langley and found a cache of classified documents, many stamped top secret, unrelated to Mr. Ames's assignment at the time in antinarcotics efforts.
They concerned highly sensitive intelligence, counterintelligence and military information about the Russian Federation or the Soviet Union.
The affidavit says Mr. Ames's spying activities may have begun as early as March 1984 when he was authorized by the CIA to meet with Soviet officials at their embassy in Washington in an effort, ironically, to recruit them as intelligence sources for the U.S.
He was supposed to report all such contacts to his superiors but began having secret, unreported meetings in the mid-1980s, the affidavit says.
By 1986, unexplained cash deposits began appearing in the Ameses' Virginia bank accounts, the affidavit says.
According to electronic surveillance of the Ameses' banking records, authorized by Attorney General Janet Reno, the couple also opened bank accounts in Switzerland and Venezuela, and an additional Swiss account was opened in the name of Rosario's mother, who lives in Colombia.
Wire transfers of more than $1 million were made from the Swiss accounts to other bank accounts controlled by the Ames family, all of it, the government alleges, with proceeds from the Ameses' spying activities.
The government says wiretaps placed inside the Ames home and at Mr. Ames's office disclosed more evidence of the secret activities of the nondescript-looking government worker, who has glasses and a moustache.
There were trips to South America to meet his Russian contacts, one as recent as October.
The government says a typewriter ribbon that investigators retrieved from Mr. Ames's trash showed that the CIA official was trying to arrange "some safer, paper transfer of some sort of a large sum" during a trip to Caracas.
Investigators said a June 1992 message retrieved from Mr. Ames's computer demanded that his Russian "handler" place $100,000 in cash in a designated drop and said his cash flow was "a very tight and unpleasant situation!"
If the Ameses struck their neighbors, who thought Mr. Ames worked for the foreign service, as an average suburban couple, many of the conversations contained in the affadavit do seem rather mundane for such a high-powered spy couple.
In one, Aldrich, or Rick as Rosario calls him, says he hadn't checked the signal on a drop site because it was raining.
"Why didn't you do it today for God's sakes," his wife gripes, adding, "I hope you didn't screw up."
In another conversation about his trip to Bogota, Rosario urges Rick to be "more imaginative" about how he stows his secret documents.
"You always have this envelope with this big hunk," she huffs.
"I mean, really."
Joe Davidson contributed to this article.
-- 1985: Retired Navy Warrant Officer John Walker Jr. pleads guilty to charges of spying for the Soviets, and admits recruiting several other people, including his son and brother.
-- 1985: Former CIA officer Edward Lee Howard flees the U.S. while under FBI investigation for spying for the Soviets.
-- 1986: Former National Security Agency employee Ronald Pelton is convicted of selling signals intelligence information to the Soviets.
-- 1986: Jonathan Pollard, a civilian intelligence analyst for the Navy, pleads guilty to spying for Israel.
-- 1994: Aldrich Ames, former head of Soviet counterintelligence for the CIA, is arrested on charges of spying for the Soviet Union and later for Russia.
