Apple Computer Inc. said for the first time it wants other manufacturers to build personal computers that run Apple's vaunted Macintosh software.
At its annual shareholders meeting on Wednesday, Michael Spindler, Apple's chief executive officer, talked openly of his efforts to persuade other PC makers to essentially sell clones of the Macintosh.
Yesterday, a spokesman for Mr. Spindler said the Cupertino, Calif., company was in active talks and expected to sign at least one agreement before the end of the year.
But he said Apple hasn't finished work yet on a portable version of the Macintosh operating system.
Apple shares closed yesterday at $34.125, up 62.5 cents, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Since introducing the Macintosh a decade ago, Apple has been the sole supplier of machines that run its software.
But the benefits of controlling both hardware and software have faded in recent years, especially as a software package from Microsoft Corp. called Windows has blurred some of Macintosh's benefits in the minds of many PC enthusiasts.
Apple is trying to boost Macintosh's position by cutting prices, and licensing software to others could make its approach more popular.
Enthusiasts welcomed the prospect of Macintosh clones.
"They have to do it, they have no choice," said David Winer, president of Userland Inc., which supplies software for the Macintosh.
Besides sparking the creation of more Macintosh software, clones would increase the variety of hardware.
Apple, for instance, has yet to introduce a pocket-size computer such as one sold by Hewlett-Packard Co.
But PC makers seem underwhelmed by Apple's licensing offer.
Mr. Spindler indicated Apple had failed in earlier efforts to persuade manufacturers to couple Macintosh software with machines built around Intel Corp.'s processors.
Compaq Computer Corp. and Dell Computer Corp. are widely believed to be among those who brushed off Apple.
Both companies declined to comment.
An industry executive familiar with the negotiations said International Business Machines Corp. also rejected Apple's plea.
But an IBM spokesman said the computer giant would consider offering Macintosh software as an option to customers who purchase its Power PC computers, if Apple complies with industry standards.
Mr. Spindler told shareholders he wants PC makers to consider embracing the Macintosh in combination with the new Power PC processor, which Apple is developing with IBM and Motorola Inc.
"Apple may be a number of years late because there's such an entrenched business in" Microsoft-Intel PCs, said Mal Ransom, a vice president at Packard Bell Electronics Co., a big PC maker.
"We would want to make sure demand existed before it made sense to divert our efforts."
Mr. Spindler isn't helping Apple's prospects by dilly-dallying with plans for the proposed Macintosh clones, say critics.
"Before Apple earns our attention with talk of clones, it has to convince us it will do something significant in terms of licensing Macintosh software," said Steven Levy, author of "Insanely Great," a history of the Macintosh.
"So far, Apple only has been teasing us."
A spokesman for Mr. Spindler said Apple was intent on sharing the Macintosh software with other PC makers, but that he hasn't decided on a specific approach yet.
Laurie Hays and Kyle Pope contributed to this article.
