Retailers puzzled about why women aren't buying as many clothes need look no further than Sue Busby's closet.
On the top shelf of Mrs. Busby's "auxiliary" closet in her suburban Chicago home, where she keeps clothes she doesn't wear everyday, are dusty boxes of former had-to-have shoes, like Cherokee sandals with wedge heels and white shoes that lace up the ankle (labeled on the box "goodcute," which means, "don't throw away").
"You never know when they might come back," says Mrs. Busby, 33 years old, a human-resources manager.
At least 100 belts hang like a technicolor waterfall in the auxiliary closet, although she did just throw away all but one of the ultra-thin ones (she kept the black one because you "never know . . .").
Draped with her scarves are rosebud ties left over from the power-suit era.
She keeps a Gloria Vanderbilt jeans skirt and other trendy items of the past in a box on the floor.
Mrs. Busby loves new clothes.
But she already has plenty of them, and the older she gets, the less she likes to shop.
"I was actually prepared to spend more last year" than she did, she says.
Mrs. Busby's closet is a recycler's dream.
From her main wardrobe, she pulls out a pleated Outback Red skirt bought five years ago at the Limited.
"I'm wearing it again," she says proudly.
Mrs. Busby then discovers a herringbone suit jacket and calculates its age: eight years.
"You know what?
I could get the skirt shortened and wear this again," she says.
A 10-year-old tapestry vest that long sat idle now looks good with a new denim shirt.
"They say if you don't wear it for more than a year, get rid of it," she says.
"I don't listen."
There are few holes Mrs. Busby needs to fill.
She's got the navy suit dress; the floral-print dress with lace collar; at least six black skirts (long, short, culotte, linen, wool, crepe).
Ten varieties of white blouses hang together on the upper rack, most still covered with dry cleaning plastic.
"I don't know why I bought these," she says.
"I guess it was a weight thing.
When I feel heavy, I go all black.
This must have been a light phase."
Mrs. Busby recycles a lot of pants because she's confused about skirt hemlines.
Her short skirts "aren't out, exactly . . . they're just different."
She recently found some black-and-white checked suspender pants from seven years ago and thought, "Oh, these are kind of cute."
Colleagues complimented her all day.
