WESTINGHOUSE Electric announced fourth-quarter aftertax charges totaling about $906 million to cut its work force, sell businesses and shore up its underfunded pension plan.
The restructuring under its new chairman, Michael Jordan, is the company's latest attempt to clean up problems stemming from a disastrous foray into financial services as well as sluggish growth in its power-generation and defense-electronics units.
The White House proposed exempting telecommunications companies from some state and local regulations if they operate in competitive markets and set up video and information networks open to all programming.
Toys `R' Us plans to spend as much as $1 billion to repurchase its shares over several years while mounting an aggressive expansion drive, opening 115 toy stores in 1994.
Seventy of those stores will be in international markets that are targeted for fastest growth.
Sustained economic growth will help create 200,000 manufacturing jobs in 1994, the National Association of Manufacturers forecast.
The sector hasn't added new workers since 1988.
PepsiCo agreed to sell its U.S. distribution rights for Stolichnaya vodka to Grand Metropolitan, in a surprising move likely to step up competition.
The move comes four months after Seagram won the distribution rights for Absolut away from Grand Met.
The UAW struck GM's truck plant in Shreveport, La., in a clash over GM's campaign to boost productivity.
Analysts said the strike could cost GM $2 million to $3 million a day.
In addition, the car maker said it will shut a parts plant in Connecticut and put an Ohio factory on three-year probation.
Merry-Go-Round said it filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
National Medical took a $287.4 million write-down in the quarter ended Nov. 30 related to expected plans to dispose of its psychiatric hospitals.
Procter & Gamble and Syntex won FDA approval of an over-the-counter pain reliever based on the prescription drugs Naprosyn and Anaprox.
The drug, Aleve, will challenge such brands as J&J's Tylenol, American Home's Advil and Upjohn's Motrin.
A federal judge refused to extend the deadline for limited-partnership investors to opt out of a $120 million settlement by Prudential Securities.
Kodak's new CEO, George Fisher, said its copier division isn't for sale, ending over a year of speculation.
Chemical's Darla Moore, a managing director who turned lending to companies in bankruptcy protection into a booming business, resigned.
National Semiconductor plans to unveil a data-security technology based on a microchip that can be put in pocket-sized cards or other hardware to protect computer messages.
The Chicago Board of Trade appears poised to leave the Globex after-hours electronic futures trading system, as a rift widens with its partners, the Chicago Merc and Reuters.
Two Southeastern banks, Barnett and SunTrust, reported strong gains in fourth-quarter earnings, attributing the increases to improved operating efficiency and better loan quality.
The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board plans to provide surveillance reports on the muni-bond market to the SEC and other regulators.
The plan, which would give regulators a new tool for enforcing securities law, is the latest sign that the market will be subject to heightened oversight.
Mellon Bank is offering a new credit card that promises to refund all interest paid over 20 years, the latest lure in a battle to win card users.
Banco Espanol de Credito's former chairman plans to appeal the central bank's de facto takeover of the bank.
But J.P. Morgan, Banesto's investment adviser, said it won't join him.
Stocks: Volume 304,614,870 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 3850.31, off 15.20; transportation 1812.29, off 7.29; utilities 222.19, off 2.04.
Bonds: Lehman Brothers Treasury index 5609.37, up 7.84.
Commodities: Oil $14.85 a barrel, up 18 cents.
Dow Jones futures index 140.56, off 0.08; spot index 128.28, up 0.84.
Dollar: 112.40 yen, up 0.15; 1.7416 marks, up 0.007.
