"On the whole, Japan is one of the poorest and most barren lands in all the Orient, for the people hardly carry out any trade. . . ."
Things have changed a bit since an Italian Jesuit wrote those words four centuries ago.
The problem today, most of the world contends, is too much Japanese trade of a one-way nature: a lot going out and not enough going in.
Other nations find the imbalance onerous, and the U.S. has chosen strong measures to inject equality into this commerce.
Dangerously strong, respond many worried American authorities on Japan.
Though the Clinton administration thinks it's doing right, these experts find the harsh, new methods troubling on two grounds: They could damage long-term U.S. political, economic and security interests.
And they won't solve the problem.
Our bilateral relationship is threatened by current disagreements over trade," warns a study group organized by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
It says "a real gulf" between the two nations "would create fear and uncertainty in Asia with unpredictable consequences."
That's not the official Washington line.
Clinton officials call Japan an economic "outlier" that exploits the global trading system while refusing to pay its fair share of the running costs; they want the Japanese nation to "act like a grown-up."
So they try harsher tactics to force changes, while insisting this won't corrode the rest of a vital relationship.
Just yesterday, the Clinton administration announced a decision to activate a process of trade reprisals.
Japan's $132 billion annual trade surplus ($59 billion of that with the U.S.) clearly is more than trading partners want to bear.
Nor have past efforts to resolve disputes done much to shrink the surplus, despite partial successes.
So what would the critics do differently?
Quite a lot.
White House officials might respond they've heard -- and tried -- it all before.
Yet dissenters recommend these adjustments to U.S. policy:
-- Concentrate on broad economic issues.
The Carnegie group wants Japan to enact both a multiyear economic stimulation package and a concrete program for abolishing regulations that restrict foreign business there.
This would raise consumption, increase imports and dull the export machine, without risking trade retaliation by others.
A similar part of the Clinton message often gets lost in the furor over specific trade matters.
-- Drop quantitative measures.
Clinton officials want "objective criteria," like market share, to measure whether Japan is open to foreign goods in a fair manner.
Critics say this suggests the government should tell Japanese companies and consumers what to buy, strengthening the very protectionist bureaucrats whom the U.S. wants to weaken.
Though the White House claims otherwise, dissenters insist the reality would be managed trade -- with specific goals becoming mandatory targets, causing endless friction.
-- Support Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and his fellow reformers.
He wants to deregulate his economy and open a closed political system.
If he succeeds, internal changes should then bring programs like those the U.S. seeks -- without fostering a nationalist resentment of the U.S. Otto Lambsdorff, former German economics minister, calls Mr. Clinton's coolness to the Hosokawa government "a terrible mistake."
-- Pick trade disputes more selectively.
Dissenters agree that Japan practices all sorts of protectionist outrages.
But some critics want the U.S. to select a short list of grievous cases and seek remedies as firmly yet quietly as possible -- abandoning other grievances for a while.
This could include targeted reprisals in egregious cases, as with the telephone troubles of Motorola Inc.
Critics say the current "blunderbuss" approach overloads the system, while even total success wouldn't do much for the trade deficit.
-- Tell the president to shut up.
Mr. Clinton should remain above the fray, rather than be a garrulous salesman of auto parts or life insurance.
Let trade negotiator Mickey Kantor and others be the political hit men (but tone him down, too).
The proper Clinton role is that of statesman, applying discreet persuasion, when useful, for the sake of a greater U.S.-Japan cause.
Critics believe America needs many years of close Japanese cooperation on crucial issues -- North Korean nuclear ambitions, an emerging China, global problems of environment and poverty.
Beating on Tokyo about specific commercial disputes won't solve broader economic problems, but could turn Japan into "an ally like France under de Gaulle," says one former U.S. ambassador, and that's not really what Washington needs.
