Ethnic Chinese buyers from overseas are quietly checking into the U.S. hotel industry as Japanese investors check out.
Over the past several years, these Chinese buyers -- mostly from Hong Kong, Taiwan and Southeast Asia -- have taken advantage of a slump in the U.S. market to snap up hotels at prices far below replacement costs.
In some cases, they are buying hotels from Japanese investors whose financial troubles have forced them to retreat from the market.
The Chinese buyers have a different approach from the Japanese who went on a U.S. hotel-acquisition binge in the 1980s.
"The Chinese are more cautious," says Kevin Mahoney of lodging consultant Kenneth Leventhal & Co. of Los Angeles.
"They're buying existing midmarket hotels with proven cash flow, and they're paying cash."
By contrast, the Japanese spree was marked by inflated prices, lots of debt and a hands-off approach to management.
With the slump of the property market, many of the Japanese acquisitions in the U.S. turned into financial black holes.
Five years ago, "I was searching Tokyo and Osaka for investors" for U.S. hotels, says Tom Timmons, an investment adviser for the property-consulting firm Vigers Hong Kong Ltd.
"Now we are looking for sellers in Japan and buyers in Southeast Asia."
Many of the new buyers amassed fortunes in other industries back home in Asia over the past decade.
Now they are seeking to hedge their bets.
Some "are just beginning to diversify into offshore investments," says Mr. Timmons.
"The U.S. is politically stable relative to other markets, and U.S. real estate has been in the dumps for the past three years."
While the bargains last, ethnic Chinese are buying everything from budget motels in Texas to all-suite hotels in Chicago to historic properties in Nashville, Tenn.
In the past two years alone, they have spent at least $1.5 billion on U.S. hotels in transactions for which the prices can be determined.
The real figure is probably far higher than that; many sales aren't registered as foreign investments or are handled through intermediaries.
Ethnic Chinese have been bigger buyers recently than even Europeans, who long have been active in the U.S., says Ken Wilson, a Boston-based senior vice president of Landauer Hospitality Advisory Group.
The new Asian buyers are finding bargains that would have been unthinkable just five or six years ago.
Today, reflecting overbuilding, the U.S. savings-and-loan crisis and a cutback in travel, many hotels are on the block at 30% to 40% of their replacement cost.
Central Plaza Hotel Group, a publicly traded Bangkok company controlled by a Thai-Chinese family, last September purchased a new 178-room hotel at Los Angeles International Airport from the Japanese owner-developer for $10 million in cash.
The Japanese company, Maruko Inc., a subsidiary of the construction concern Kajima Corp., had sunk $16 million into the hotel but never opened it.
The same month, MUI Group, a Malaysian conglomerate headed by an ethnic Chinese, bought for $18 million the 300-room Marriott Hotel in Houston, along with an adjacent office building and parking garage.
MUI says the replacement value for the properties is $50 million.
Even companies from mainland China are looking around.
Yukuo Takenaka, president of Los Angeles-based Takenaka & Co., says his investment company's mainland clients are seeking individual U.S. hotels to purchase.
At least one mainland Chinese company already has taken the leap.
In 1992, Air China, the Beijing-based airline, purchased the 150-room Ramada Inn at San Francisco International Airport.
But the bulk of the Chinese buyers continue to come from Hong Kong and Taiwan.
Sam Chang, a U.S.-based Taiwanese who represents investors from Hong Kong and Taiwan, is an example.
Mr. Chang and his partners since 1991 have bought 13 hotels in the northeastern U.S.
Their investment vehicle, Orient Hotels Group of Stamford, Conn., spent $100 million on the acquisitions, half in cash.
But in many cases, not a lot of cash.
Mr. Chang says they paid $4.3 million to buy the 380-room Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza in Stamford, a hotel that would cost about $30 million to build today.
The Cheng family of Hong Kong, whose publicly traded New World Development Co. already owns Renaissance Hotels & Resorts, last summer purchased Stouffer Hotels & Resorts from Nestle SA.
The 38-unit Stouffer chain, which includes a big chunk of real estate, went for more than $1 billion, according to a source close to the Chengs.
Another big player from Hong Kong, Wharf (Holdings) Ltd., which already owned the Omni Hotels chain in the U.S., has grown the past two years through purchases of posh hotels in Boston, Houston, Dallas, New York and Chicago.
Overseas Chinese are expected to continue shopping for at least another year or more.
But nobody expects the Chinese to get caught up in bidding fever and overpay.
While the U.S. hotel business remains weak, the fundamentals are looking up.
Fewer than 200 new hotels started construction last year, compared with 1,600 in 1986.
Management contracts have become more advantageous to hotel owners.
Room rates and occupancy levels are creeping back up, and Bjorn Hanson, head of the hospitality practice at Coopers & Lybrand, predicts that the next couple of years will be very good for the industry.
But for now, purchase prices remain low and profits are often illusory.
James Choi, vice chairman of Renaissance, concedes that the company hasn't yet produced profits for New World, which made the acquisition four years ago.
"But the pain has been incurred," he says.
"There will be a turnaround.
We have been containing our losses."
Likewise, Wharf isn't finding Omni a huge money-spinner.
While the Chinese gain kudos for sniffing out good values and applying keen financial control over their investments, some observers question their experience in the U.S. and in the lodging industry.
"I'm sure they will buy at the right price," says Mr. Takenaka, the Los Angeles investment banker.
"But whether they buy the right property is another question.
And what happens after the purchase?"
Such concerns are being addressed, though.
A few months ago, the Taiwanese-American Hotel-Motel Chamber of Commerce was established to help Taiwanese new to the market.
Last April, some former Hilton International executives formed a Taipei-based hotel-management company to work with ethnic Chinese buying hotels.
And many Asian investors simply buy local talent and form their own management companies.
Mr. Chang says, "I'm the only Oriental on the executive committee" of his Orient Hotels Group, which expects to turn a profit this year.
His group is continuing to shop for more properties.
Mr. Chang says he tells brokers: "I don't want to buy any more hotels.
But I don't mind stealing some."
