John Sculley and Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. laid down their arms and walked away from each other, declaring a cease-fire in the legal fight that followed Mr. Sculley's abrupt resignation as chairman a month ago.
Mr. Sculley had sued Spectrum President Peter Caserta for $10 million, contending he had been lied to and misled about Spectrum's troubles.
Spectrum had countersued for $300 million, charging Mr. Sculley with mismanagement and theft of trade secrets.
Now both cases have been dropped without any money changing hands, and battered shareholders continue to sue both sides.
Now that Mr. Sculley is gone, however, Spectrum is in search of the high-minded strategy he was supposed to craft.
Lost in the legal cross-fire, and in the collapse of Spectrum's stock price, is the most pressing issue confronting the company and Mr. Caserta: What do we do now?
Mr. Sculley had crisscrossed the country in search of new acquisitions to build Spectrum into a wireless powerhouse that would supply network software, make data-communications devices, and design wireless services.
In the near term, Mr. Caserta appears more intent on building Spectrum as a patent portfolio.
Spectrum is coaxing companies to sign licensing deals, even as it makes a new push for claims far broader than were ever envisioned when it first filed for patent protection in 1987.
But the near-term outlook on income for licensing fees is bleak.
Even in the most optimistic case, Spectrum would bring in less than $20 million in fees this year and only about $50 million next year from nine current licensees, according to a forecast prepared for the company by Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
In the patent pursuit, Mr. Caserta is no high-tech visionary.
He used to run a company that rented out engineers.
Lately, his Caserta Group, which dispenses financial advice to small businesses, has engaged in testy legal jousting with a number of dissatisfied clients.
A U.S. attorney has subpoenaed Spectrum records in a new probe that is believed to also focus on Mr. Caserta's activities.
A spokesman in the U.S. attorney's office declined to comment.
Now he must master the arcane acronyms -- AMPS, CDPD, CDMA, TDMA, and such -- that define the wireless world.
Past associates say Mr. Caserta is long on persuasion, which could be a valuable tool.
In just a two-year period he started as an outside consultant to Spectrum, became its president, replaced its board and management team, and ultimately convinced founder Dana Verrill to step aside to make room for Mr. Sculley.
"I can't figure out how he did it," a former Spectrum board member says of Mr. Caserta.
"He would just wear you down, keep repeating the same thing, and finally you're overwhelmed."
Yesterday Mr. Caserta declined an interview, issuing a written response to questions.
In it, he described the patents as "our most significant asset at the moment" and said he would seek alliances instead of acquisitions.
He hopes to build "infrastructure services," such as consulting to the wireless industry.
(Spectrum just paid $4.2 million to buy a small engineering company from Mr. Caserta's nephew.)
If he seeks a successor to Mr. Sculley, he or she won't be "so much a visionary as a hands-on operating executive."
Spectrum owns four patents and has licensed five others, mainly covering how computer data can be sent over the cellular-phone network.
Its original patent covered a simple black box that handled the conversion of computer data to cellular format.
Now it is pursuing more than 100 new claims, contending the patents cover almost any kind of computer message sent over almost any kind of wireless system.
Indeed, Spectrum hopes to apply its patent grip to messages sent over regular phone lines, as well, when computers have modems that can switch to cellular transmission.
Patent experts say the new push amounts to an audacious reach for a small Manhasset, N.Y., company that has failed to turn an annual profit in 10 years of existence.
In the competitive wireless world, Spectrum may have a difficult time finding sanctuary beneath the umbrella of its original patents.
The U.S. Patent Office has awarded broad protection in software and electronics before, but lately it has come under fire for going too far.
It recently withdrew one controversial patent under such criticism and has begun a review of whether it protects techniques that are too obvious or too broad.
"The office tries to do a good job and grant companies the patent protection they deserve, but sometimes it makes mistakes," says Thomas Giannetti, a partner at Fish & Neave, a New York patent law firm.
Other observers say rapid changes in the wireless world could render Spectrum's current patents obsolete, especially as all-digital networks take hold.
"The new digital-data networks will send traffic in packets using a completely different kind of connection" from the Spectrum method, says Rob Mechaley of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.
Anyway, he adds, "People engineer around patents."
Christopher Franco, Spectrum's general counsel, counters that the company is "very comfortable we have patent coverage" for the new digital networks.
"Our strategy now is not to be threatening companies, but to work with them, though we will keep all of our options open -- which would include lawsuits."
The company is betting on the projections for patent fees in the Smith Barney report, a copy of which was obtained by this newspaper.
It claims that annual income from patent fees in a best-case scenario could double to more than $100 million in 1996 and double again six years later, if everything goes right.
That rosy scenario, however, assumes Spectrum can escape any legal challenges to its patents, sidestep any tectonic shifts in technology, and survive long enough to reap fees into the next century.
Even the best-case projection, moreover, falls short of the hyperbolic claims of Spectrum's own president.
Last May, when Mr. Caserta hailed the signing of the company's first patent licensee, American Telephone & Telegraph Co., he said that deal alone would mean "hundreds of millions of dollars in royalties" over several years.
His exuberance led to a surge in Spectrum's stock price, followed weeks later by a sudden plunge when AT&T disavowed the claim.
The Securities and Exchange Commission stepped in, and an investigation continues.
Yesterday, Spectrum's stock rebounded nicely, jumping 50 cents or 17% to close at $3.44 a share in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Other Spectrum documents show that AT&T agreed to pay only $150,000 in upfront fees and no more than $1.50 for each "chip set" per modem.
Neither AT&T nor Spectrum would comment.
So far, Spectrum has won just $7.2 million in sign-up fees from five big licensees, including Rockwell International Corp., the biggest contributor.
None will pay more than $5 per modem or chip set -- which would mean well under $50 million in fees, given estimates that about 10 million modems will be shipped this year and only a fraction will be used for wireless purposes.
Megahertz Inc. won't be paying Spectrum much, either.
Megahertz general counsel David Hardy confirms that the modem maker agreed to pay $1.5 million plus $1 for each modem.
In its most recent quarter Megahertz shipped only 150,000 modems.
The small sum was one reason why Megahertz signed up, rather than challenging Spectrum in court.
"We saw it as a necessary cost of doing business," Mr. Hardy says.
"As the market leader, it was important to go forward unfettered" by a patent fight.
