America's governors are now in Washington attending their annual meeting.
If history is any guide, they will be seeking more federal dollars to help balance their budgets while blaming their fiscal crises on Uncle Sam.
While some of the blame rests with Congress's mandates, the truth is that states have faced four consecutive years of imbalanced budgets primarily because of their own spending and tax policies.
In the 1980s state budgets more than doubled, setting the stage for an era of fiscal deterioration in the 1990s.
Most governors tried to close those deficits by raising taxes.
State lawmakers have justified these tax hikes by insisting that new revenues were coupled with deep spending cuts.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Nationwide, state spending grew by 10% in 1991 and an enormous 12% in 1992.
Not coincidentally, the governors who rammed through large tax increases in the early 1990s have also approved the fastest growth in government expenditures.
Fortunately, not all governors have pursued the tax-hike route.
The accompanying table shows the results of a just-released fiscal policy report card prepared by my colleague Dean Stansel and myself.
It relies on 14 indicators of fiscal performance as measured by the Census Bureau and the nonpartisan National Association of State Budget Officers.
These include such variables as per-capita spending and the change in tax revenues and rates.
The different strategies adopted by governors in the early 1990s have translated into dramatic changes in state tax burdens and spending.
Here is a summary of the performance of some prominent governors:
-- Pete Wilson of California rammed through the Legislature a gigantic $7 billion tax increase in 1991 -- the largest state tax hike in American history.
In three years Mr. Wilson has raised virtually every state tax imaginable: the income tax, the sales tax, the gasoline tax, the cigarette tax and a host of other fees.
The tax increases have so devastated the economy that only a fraction of the projected revenues have been delivered, and thus big budget deficits remain.
-- Mario Cuomo has governed as if he never met a spending program he didn't like.
In 10 years Mr. Cuomo took the New York budget from less than $50 billion to $75 billion.
New York spends $6,000 more per family today than it did when Mr. Cuomo was first inaugurated in 1983.
New York is now saddled with what the New York Times calls "a rotten credit rating, the worst among the 50 states."
But Mr. Cuomo's tax policies have been supply-side.
He chopped the top tax rate in the state to 8% from 14% -- a policy that helped to produce a revenue windfall.
Unfortunately, Mr. Cuomo eagerly spent it.
-- Ann Richards boasts of being a fiscally moderate Democrat, but the evidence suggests otherwise.
In her first year the Texas budget grew by an enormous 11.5% in real terms, or more than $650 per family.
That spending burst outpaced all but a small handful of states.
Texas has no corporate or personal income tax, but Gov. Richards has wasted no time resorting to an assortment of other business taxes and gas tax hikes to bring more revenue into Austin.
-- John Engler has helped catapult Michigan, once derided as the rust-belt state, into one of the fastest growing states in the union.
Last year, Michigan's unemployment rate fell below the national average for the first time in 25 years.
Mr. Engler has cut the state work force by 4,000 workers; eliminated an entire department; and halved spending on the arts, commerce, labor and civil rights.
He abolished the state's general assistance welfare program for some 80,000 employable adults -- thus disproving the iron rule that entitlements cannot be eliminated.
-- Lowell Weicker of Connecticut has won the mantle as America's champion tax-and-spend governor -- edging out New Jersey's Jim Florio for this ignominious distinction.
Following a decade when Connecticut's budget increased by 150%, Mr. Weicker's solution to the resulting red ink was to enact a massive tax hike in 1991.
Mr. Weicker won narrow support in the Legislature for the state's first personal income tax in exchange for a decline in the state sales tax.
For the average Connecticut taxpayer this was a rotten deal: The real tax burden has climbed by $2,000 per family.
Over roughly this same period, 1989-92, real income per family in Connecticut has dropped by some $2,000 and jobs have been disappearing.
-- Kirk Fordice is Mississippi's first Republican governor in 115 years.
A self-made businessman, Mr. Fordice has pursued an unapologetic pro-business, pro-jobs agenda.
He has refused to consider any tax hikes as promised, instead trimming the budget by nearly 5% over his first two years in office.
Because of Mr. Fordice's tightfistedness, the budget is now running a surplus and he wants to erase it by cutting income taxes.
-- Mike Lowry of Washington has set out to, as the Almanac of American Politics puts it, "make Washington a laboratory for liberal reform."
Mr. Lowry pledged during the 1992 campaign to raise taxes "only as a last resort."
Then he raised taxes by $1 billion as a first resort.
The money will be used for a universal health care program, which requires businesses to provide insurance for all employees.
The taxpayer cost to cover the uninsured is expected to top $2 billion by 2000.
So far, Mr. Lowry looks to be the Jim Florio of the West.
The major fiscal policy lesson from the states in the 1990s so far has been that those governors who tried to combat budget deficits with major tax increases harmed their states' economies while having very little success slowing the tide of red ink.
California, Connecticut, New Jersey, Rhode Island and Pennsylvania are all unhappy testaments to the economic consequences of raising state taxes.
Meanwhile, the budget-cutting fiscal strategy employed by Govs.
Engler, Fordice, Merrill, Weld and Wilder has led to balanced budgets and improved economic conditions.
In fact, most of these governors have now proposed tax cuts to further encourage business and job formation.
There is a lesson here -- not just for state policy makers but for Congress and the White House as well.
Mr. Moore is director of fiscal policy studies at the Cato Institute.
{See related article: "REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial): ...and
Federal Mandates Crush States" -- WSJ Jan. 31, 1994}
