Dennis Hendrix watched the value of his company's stock slide 25% last fall.
Nevertheless, the chairman and chief executive of Panhandle Eastern Corp. has just agreed to continue being paid entirely in the natural-gas company's stock.
Mr. Hendrix is a lonely bull in the stalled U.S. natural-gas market.
Despite sluggish demand, which grew just 3% last year, he says he'll boost capital spending by 42% this year to expand the company's 27,000-mile pipeline, already the country's second-longest after Enron Corp.'s.
And his ambitious expansion plans focus largely on the Northeast, where distributors in the rival fuel-oil business have long dominated the home-heating market.
Mr. Hendrix demands the same optimism from his top lieutenants.
When he promoted Paul Anderson to president from executive vice president last fall, he says he offered his No. 2 executive "no raise, just more stock options."
Mr. Anderson already received a significant salary, but Mr. Hendrix is paid 25,000 common shares per quarter.
No severance, no golden parachute and no retirement plan.
No matter, because the stock, despite its recent slide, has more than doubled since November 1990, when Mr. Hendrix took over.
Says Kevin Murphy, an associate professor at the Harvard Business School who studies executive compensation, "I have absolutely no problems with him making a mint when the stock performs so well."
Mr. Hendrix currently owns 430,000 shares, with an indicated value of $10.8 million at the recent trading level of about $25.
His stake is less than 1% of the company's 120.2 million outstanding shares.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, the stock closed at $24.375, down 37.5 cents.
Says the 53-year-old Mr. Hendrix, "It keeps me very focused on the market value of the company."
This is the season when plenty of attention is also focused on the performance of the pipelines themselves.
In these recent days of lingering subzero cold in some of his Northeastern markets, Mr. Hendrix is ecstatic over the successful operation of the system, something that his industry has been waiting to see proven.
"The pipeline system works.
There are no shortages.
We can get the gas to the people," he says.
Doubts about the nation's burgeoning gas-pipeline system had remained as it expanded over the last decade without being tested by a lengthy and widespread cold spell, such as the one that parts of the nation have endured during the last month.
Not that he's a blind optimist.
Mr. Hendrix is subdued about Panhandle's prospects for maintaining the fast pace of the turnaround he started in 1991, when the company posted net income of $85.1 million, or 86 cents a share, compared with a net loss in 1990 of $218.2 million, or $2.46 a share.
Panhandle's profit more than doubled in 1992 to $187.1 million, after nonrecurring net gains of $57.7 million.
Last week, the company reported 1993 net income of $148.1 million, or $1.29 a share, after a charge of $60.2 million.
That charge was partially offset by a gain of $28.7 million from a proposed settlement of certain customers' complaints over gas-supply contracts, among other things.
"We can't produce the percentage increases in net income that we have had in recent years," he says.
His answer to the expected slowdown in earnings growth is to sharply raise spending on pipeline expansion.
"We feel good about the outlook, about the demand for electricity and the opportunity for gas supplying the fuel for that," he says.
Thus he's zeroing in on the Northeast market, where fuel oil has a 60% share of the home-heating business.
That's likely to increase, he says.
He reasons that by 1995, federal clean-air rules may force conversion to natural gas of some oil-fired, as well as some coal-fueled, electric plants.
Although Mr. Hendrix yearns for a growing gas market, he doesn't beat the industry's well-worn drum for higher prices.
"At some point we may be adversely affected by the higher price of gas, relative to other competing fuels," he says.
Panhandle and the other gas pipeline companies, nudged by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, have gradually extricated themselves from the risky business of buying and then selling the gas they carry on their pipelines.
All of the gas currently being moved through Panhandle's pipelines is either owned by producers or such customers as utilities, factories or other commercial users.
Less than a decade ago, Panhandle acted as a buyer and seller for nearly all the gas it carried.
In other words, Panhandle is now selling reserved space on its pipeline, which it calls "capacity," to utilities and other customers.
"The world is awash in gas, but not all of it is in the right place," says Mr. Hendrix.
Thus Mr. Hendrix says he plans to raise Panhandle's capital spending in 1994 by 42% to $425 million, much of that for expansion in the competitive Northeast.
He's doing so even though he has previously said that one of his goals is to reduce Panhandle's debt as a percentage of capital below 40%.
It is currently 46%.
Despite the debt load, Mr. Hendrix has made a believer out of Wall Street since he was named Panhandle's top executive in November 1990.
Mr. Hendrix cleaned up Panhandle's books by settling $500 million in disputed claims by several utilities.
Panhandle agreed to pay half.
Separately, the company wrote off $200 million in unprofitable assets.
Now he's taking a stab at diversifying the company by marketing a sort of natural-gas automated teller system to industrial customers.
Under the brand name "Link," the system's software allows them to quickly place their orders, alter them and plan routes for gas through the interconnecting pipelines of various companies.
One early customer: British Gas PLC in London, the largest diversified gas company in the world and a possible model for future vertical integration efforts as envisioned by Mr. Hendrix.
"We need to look for new revenue sources," he says.
And what of Mr. Hendrix's holdings?
He says he hasn't sold any of the Panhandle shares he has been paid so far -- although he has placed some of the stock in grandchildrens' trust accounts.
He says he's living mainly on Panhandle's quarterly dividend of 20 cents a share.
Small wonder he's considering asking the board for an increase that analysts forecast at 5% for later this year.
