Hong Kong's Legislative Council deserves praise from the colony's people for making its first serious attempt to preserve their rights after 1997.
On Thursday Legco members stood up to Beijing's threats and approved the first stage of Gov. Chris Patten's electoral reform.
Only hours after the vote, Beijing predictably vowed to wipe out Legco and all other vestiges of democracy after it takes over.
That's all the more reason for Legco members to raise the ante by approving the second stage of Mr. Patten's reforms as well.
Assuming Britain and China don't cut a deal over their heads in the meantime, they will get that chance March 9.
Thursday's vote lowers the voting age to 18 from 21, lets voters select local councils and adopts the first-past-the-post system for choosing Legco members who are elected directly.
But it is the second stage that really counts.
If it passes, it would convert Legco into a genuinely representative legislative body.
China would have to override a real parliament if it chooses to abuse Hong Kong's rights after it takes jurisdiction in mid-1997.
That's the good news.
There's also disquieting news from Hong Kong as well.
Last month the U.S. State Department, in its annual report on human rights world-wide, warned about the decline in the freedom of speech in the colony.
According to the report, self-censorship is on the rise.
Local journalists apparently fear offending China.
The report cites two reasons, both of which say a lot about the dangers to Hong Kong after 1997.
One is "the admission by China's Ministry of Public Security that it has been gathering information on Hong Kong residents who are `against the Chinese government.'"
It is taken for granted in Hong Kong that China is compiling detailed dossiers on so-called enemies.
Needless to say, if a journalist -- or a source -- has to worry about getting a black mark entered on his secret file, it has a chilling effect on free speech.
This is all the more true since there is no concept of loyal opposition in China, where criticism is interpreted as subversion.
The second reason is the growing interest among Hong Kong's media companies in the China market.
A media organization that wants to expand commercial ties with China may well be reluctant to risk potential business interests by reporting anything that might give offense.
This may explain, for example, TVB's apparent refusal to air a controversial BBC documentary on Mao.
TVB, a local television station, has hopes of expanding into adjacent Guangdong Province.
Press freedom is by no means dead in Hong Kong, of course.
There are at least five TV channels and more available via satellite.
Dozens of magazines exist, and 20 newspapers are published every day.
The debate on most issues is vigorous.
There is much the Hong Kong British government could do to help ensure that it remains so.
Sunshine laws would help, as would a freedom of information act.
Most crucial of all, Hong Kong needs to repeal a dozen or more ordinances, rarely enforced by the British, that could be used to squelch a free press under a less tolerant tradition.
Such laws are ripe for abuse by China come 1997.
Hong Kong journalists also bear some responsibility for ensuring press freedom.
Self-censorship starts with the individual, and news organizations need to foster a climate that encourages full reporting.
Sad to say, they are not always willing to do so.
The local Ming Pao newspaper, for example, seems to have forgotten about its reporter, Xi Yang, a mainland citizen, who was arrested in China in September for allegedly releasing state secrets on banking.
Mr. Xi has not been heard from since.
Hong Kong's people also bear responsibility for helping to preserve their other rights after 1997.
Toward this end, Mr. Patten has done Hong Kong great service by giving Legco an opportunity to turn itself into a self-assertive parliament.
We hope fervently that Legco will be allowed to vote on the second stage and that it will pass it emphatically.
If Hong Kong's future is to be protected it will have to be defended by Hong Kong's people themselves.
