No question, John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946) exerts a powerful influence.
Not only has he moved national economies into inflationary excess, but his biographer as well.
Robert Skidelsky, the author of a much-praised first volume on Keynes, has just produced a second one.
At a staggering 731 pages, this volume is 284 pages longer than the first, and even that wasn't enough.
Mr. Skidelsky discloses that the final chapters have been deferred to yet a third volume.
"John Maynard Keynes: The Economist as Savior" (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50) covers the years 1920 through 1937, the period in which, the author reminds us, "persisting mass unemployment" became "the problem which was to be his life's work to solve."
It ends with the publication of his solution, "The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money."
Along the way, Mr. Skidelsky warmly describes Keynes's surprising marriage to the ballerina Lydia Lopokova, a loopy half-wit with a faltering command of the English language who annoyed his Bloomsbury friends.
Anybody with a nodding acquaintance with Keynes's life knows that the inflation problem springs from his very core.
Keynes suffered from personality inflation: economist, investor, journalist, author, patron of the arts, homosexual, heterosexual, Bloomsbury boho, city man, committeeman, politician, bureaucrat, professor.
Mr. Skidelsky gives a pretty good account of all these personae, including one that was a nasty surprise to me: anti-Semite.
There is the Keynes who doubts that communism "makes Jews less avaricious"; there is the Keynes who describes Germany as under the "ugly thumb of its impure Jews," who have "sublimated immortality into compound interest"; and the Keynes who comments: "I still think the race has shown itself, not merely for accidental reasons, more than normally interested in the accumulation of usury."
Keynes also suffered from self-image inflation.
As Mr. Skidelsky puts it, from the first Keynes thought that he was saying something new and that "his elders were too stupid or conventional to understand it."
And not just his elders.
At one point or another, Keynes found businessmen, bankers, politicians, artists, friends and colleagues to be stupid.
In fact, the whole notion of Keynesianism is based on the idea that, as Mr. Skidelsky tells us, "the world was being ruined by stupidity."
Mr. Skidelsky adds to the image inflation by pronouncing Keynes a savior, the man who saved the world from this stupidity.
He talks about Keynes's mind being "habituated to responsibility and duty," and says that Keynes set out to save the world from "its folly," even though he disliked capitalism.
But aside from Mr. Skidelsky's assertions that Keynes was a savior, there is little evidence that Keynes was motivated by a sense of duty or responsibility.
Rather, there are ample examples that Keynes was motivated by ego, arrogance and personal pique -- and an enormous will to prevail.
Moreover, it is not clear that capitalism needed saving.
What got Keynes cooking on all four burners, apparently, was the world-wide Depression in the late 1920s and '30s.
A world depression should command attention.
But the fact of one does not necessarily mean that laissez faire had failed, or that a self-regulating, self-adjusting market was not sustainable, as Keynes thought and Mr. Skidelsky repeats tirelessly.
(Mr. Skidelsky doesn't help his argument when he misattributes the cause of the Depression to the stock-market crash of 1929.
Actually, the crash was ancillary to the Depression -- a dramatic expression of the recession then occurring.
What turned that recession into the long Depression were other factors, such as the tight monetary policy by the Federal Reserve and a protectionist trade policy by Congress.)
Further, it is certainly not clear, and Mr. Skidelsky skims over this point, that Keynesian policies were undertaken.
Even if the case could be made convincingly, Keynesianism didn't save capitalism.
That was accomplished by World War II.
Indeed, when Keynesian policies were clearly and forcefully tried in the U.S. in the '60s and '70s, they were a bust.
In fact, two decades of increasing government spending and intervention in the economy left the U.S. with low growth, high inflation and sluggish productivity.
But Mr. Skidelsky is very coy on the larger question of whether Keynes's theories were right or just a lot of hot air.
Sometimes he suggests that Keynesianism was tried and its only fault was naivete because Keynes failed to foresee incompetence, bad judgment and/or corruptibility on the part of government bureaucracies.
Sometimes Mr. Skidelsky argues that what was practiced and called Keynesian had nothing to do with Keynes: "The uncertainty which imposed mediocre performance on unmanaged market economies applied equally to the effects of government policy.
Keynes's disciples, the policymakers of the '60s and '70s, could not hold this balance in their minds.
They actually did start to act as though they believed that the power of economists over economics was virtually unlimited.
This is because they inherited Keynes's machinery, but not the philosophy which sets limits to the scope and effectiveness of that machinery."
And sometimes Mr. Skidelsky is indifferent to the question of whether Keynes was correct.
Indeed, Mr. Skidelsky works himself into a creative lather trying to describe "The General Theory" in terms other than economic, calling it a "work of art and imagination" and implying that it is a sort of poetic work on money.
There are two things that make this book worth reading, and I am going to tell you both of them now -- thereby saving you nearly $40.
The first is what Virginia Woolf had to say about Keynes and Lydia in 1923.
On the mister, Woolf writes: "Maynard is grown very gross & stout, especially when he wraps his leopard spotted dressing gown tight around his knees and stands in front of the fire.
He has a queer swollen eel-like look, not very pleasant."
And on the missus: "Lydia has the soul of a squirrel; anything nicer you can't conceive: she sits by the hour polishing the sides of her nose with her front paws."
The second worthy is Mr. Skidelsky's own description of Lydia: "She sometimes acted as an eccentric conduit for Maynard's ideas, repeating parrot-like that `higher prices create more employment' but `I do not know why.'"
Actually, she had it down perfectly.
Ms. Lee is an economist.
