RUSSIA'S REFORM CZAR RESIGNED, one day after Clinton's departure.
The rift in the Russian government broke into the open as its architect of economic reform, Gaidar, said he was stepping down.
In a letter to President Yeltsin, Gaidar cited "unceasing pressure on the part of conservative political circles" against reform.
His abrupt move came despite Yeltsin's pledge, made at the just-completed summit with Clinton, that Russia would press ahead with market reforms.
With Gaidar out of the cabinet, reforms are likely to proceed more gradually.
There was speculation that two other radical reformers also would resign: Finance Minister Fyodorov and Russia's privatization chief, Chubais.
SYRIAN LEADER ASSAD AGREED to seek normal relations with Israel.
During talks with Clinton, the Syrian president offered Israel "normal, peaceful" relations under certain conditions.
Clinton hailed the overture and said Assad had decided to "take the risks" needed for peace.
Asked if Assad's definition of peace would mean open borders, free trade and diplomatic relations, as Israel has sought, Clinton said, "The short answer is yes."
Israel's Rabin withheld comment until he is briefed by U.S. officials.
Hundreds of Israeli settlers living in the Golan Heights clashed with police, burned tires and blocked a road to protest the U.S.-Syria summit.
Mexico's president stepped up pressure on Mexican rebels to negotiate peace, announcing that an amnesty covering their rebellion would expire.
Salinas said that the four-day-old amnesty offer for "all the participants in the violent acts" that began on Jan. 1 was ending, effective yesterday.
Secretary of State Christopher cast doubt on exiled Haitian President Aristide's Feb. 7 target date for resuming power, saying it "probably is not workable."
Aristide, hosting a weekend conference in Miami, urged foreign governments to help restore him to office by early next month.
The Forest Service said it intends to cancel a contract that provides large amounts of cheap timber to Alaska Pulp Co.
The contract is one of two 50-year pacts that environmentalists and many U.S. forest managers say have promoted severe overcutting in the Tongass National Forest in southeast Alaska.
Japanese officials are conducting an investigation into the flow of high technology from Japanese companies to North Korea, which is widely suspected of developing nuclear weapons.
Tokyo police said they are making searches and questioning officials at nearly a dozen different companies.
Elders of Somalia's rival clans signed a peace accord mediated by Islamic leaders, but it was uncertain whether the two main faction leaders in Mogadishu would heed calls to lay down their arms.
The two leaders, Aidid and Ali Mahdi, didn't send representatives to the conference.
Figure skater Tonya Harding insisted in a written statement that she had nothing to do with a Jan. 6 attack on rival Nancy Kerrigan, and Harding's coach said she deserves to compete in the Olympics next month.
Harding's bodyguard and two other men have been charged with conspiracy to assault Kerrigan.
Italy's president dissolved Parliament and rejected Premier Ciampi's resignation, asking him to remain as head of a caretaker government until elections are held.
The early parliamentary elections were scheduled for March 27.
Ciampi had offered his resignation last week during a no-confidence vote in Parliament.
Rebel jets dropped cluster bombs on the Afghan capital, killing and wounding many people, the official Kabul Radio said.
Air strikes were carried out both by forces loyal to President Rabbani and by his opponents led by Prime Minister Hekmatyar and northern warlord Dostum, according to Afghan sources in neighboring Pakistan.
A militant black group suspended its armed struggle in South Africa, saying it wanted to ensure peace for the country's first multiracial election in April.
The head of the Pan Africanist Congress also said his group was negotiating with the government on joining a national peacekeeping force and a transitional administrative body.
