California and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency are squaring off again -- this time over sewage sludge.
The state's EPA yesterday told the federal EPA that it will refuse to administer a federal sludge control, disposal and monitoring program.
The state won't go along with the program's regulations, either.
The sludge program was mandated by Congress as part of the original Clean Water Act passed in 1972; the EPA only recently got around to working out regulations for the sludge program.
The agency has been asking states to run it and abide by its standards -- principally because the EPA doesn't have the funds to run the program itself.
The federal agency can't force states to comply, but can fine individual violators of the program's sludge standards.
James Strock, head of California's EPA, said the state already has plenty of sewage-sludge programs, some of which are tougher than required by federal rules.
He said the state, which is facing yet another yawning budget deficit, can't afford to implement the federal program, either -- particularly because the federal government hasn't provided any money to help it do so.
"Even in the best of economic climates, it will no longer be an option for the state to completely absorb implementation costs of new federal programs," Mr. Strock said in a letter to Felicia Marcus, head of the EPA's regional office in San Francisco.
Ms. Marcus couldn't be reached for comment, but the federal EPA wasn't happy with California's stance.
In recent months, the state and the federal agency have increasingly been at odds over resource policies.
For example, the state refused to go along with certain federal smog standards, prompting the federal government to threaten to cut off federal highway funding.
The federal government relented after the EPA and the state reached a compromise.
California also recently rejected EPA water-quality standards for the troubled San Francisco Bay delta, from where 20 million people get drinking water.
Delta water frequently violates federal drinkingwater standards, largely because of heavy and environmentally damaging pumping to provide irrigation water for farms.
The conflict partly reflects political and philosophical differences between California's Republican governor, Pete Wilson and federal policymakers and bureaucrats, whom Gov. Wilson believes are usurping state control of resource policies.
But it also underscores growing displeasure among many states with the federal government's practice of mandating programs for states without providing any funds to help implement them.
Many of those mandated programs deal with environmental matters; many environmentalists expect increasing confrontations between cash-strapped states and environmental regulators throughout the nation.
William Pierce, a sludge and waterquality expert for the federal EPA, said the agency will try to get the state to reconsider, but he wasn't optimistic.
"We haven't been getting along too well lately," he said.
He added that he could relate to the state's money concerns.
"We're in the same boat -- we don't have the resources to run this program ourselves," he said.
Ironically, California's Mr. Strock used to be the top enforcement official at the federal EPA; he held that job from 1989 to 1991 -- when the agency was formulating many of the mandates the state now opposes.
