First to arrive on the European scene were Apple, Compaq, and the other big U.S. personal-computer manufacturers.
Then came the big PC-software houses, such as Lotus and Borland.
Now comes the latest wave of U.S. PC technology into the European market: the networking firms.
From Moscow to Dublin, most of the major U.S. companies that specialize in gadgets and software to connect PCs have been rushing to expand their European operations.
The biggest, Novell Inc., based in Provo, Utah, has doubled its European staff in the past two years to 500.
Another, Cisco Systems Inc., Menlo Park, Calif., is opening sales offices and lining up big European phone companies as allies.
A third, Banyan Systems Inc., Westboro, Mass., has announced that Hewlett-Packard Co. will distribute some of its software in Europe.
"There is growth here in Europe for our product area," says Gregory Fallon, vice president in charge of Novell's European operations.
Indeed, after years of lagging behind the U.S. market in connecting PCs, the European market is coming alive.
Sometime this year, market-research firm Dataquest Inc. expects the number of PCs linked together in networks, rather than working by themselves, to pass the 50% mark.
Last year, it says, 45% of PCs in Europe were interconnected, compared with 60% in the U.S. and 11% in Japan.
It estimates that Europeans last year bought $4.5 billion of software, adaptor boards and other components to connect PCs.
"Over the last few years we've really seen an explosive growth of software for connectivity, as U.S. vendors have focused on the European market," says Dataquest analyst David Taylor.
That doesn't mean Europe's an easy target: Novell last year hit a rocky patch, with its European revenue rising just 4% to $325 million, partly because of the recession in Germany.
But Mr. Fallon says he expects Novell "to get back to growth rates similar to the past over the long haul."
Meanwhile, smaller niche players such as Cisco, have been doubling their European revenues despite recession.
And even Microsoft Corp. in Redmond, Washington -- the dominant force in PC software world-wide but a newcomer to networking products -- is finding the grass greener in Europe.
While declining to disclose any sales figures, Cameron Myhrvold, a Microsoft marketing manager in Europe, says his company's network-software sales are "doing a little better in Europe than we have done in the States."
A few factors are fueling the American optimism.
First, just as happened in the U.S. and Canada a few years earlier, the more PCs are used in Europe, the more people want specialized help interconnecting them; demand rises fast.
Second, once here, the U.S. houses find little local competition; most of Europe's major software firms are still focusing on big clients or big computers, ignoring small-business customers and packaged PC-network software.
Third, as with most computer products, network-software prices here are 10% to 30% higher than in the U.S., allowing for fatter profits.
Of course, the U.S. firms bring with them the same rivalries they have back home.
As in the U.S., Novell is dominant, with about 60% of the European market for network-operating systems, according to Dataquest.
Microsoft is gaining, with about 10%.
But there are big differences between U.S. and European PC networks.
Newer European networks tend to be used for simple tasks -- like connecting several PCs to one printer, or just swapping files, says Gerard Gabella, managing director in Europe of the Software Publishers Association, a U.S. trade group.
For example, in the first nine months of 1993 -- the most recent period reported -- the group counted less than $20 million of "groupware" sold in Europe, a third the U.S. figure.
Groupware is software that helps several people on a PC network work together on the same projects.
There are also differences from one European country to the next.
French companies, with their strict management hierarchies, for example, often treat PC networks with caution.
"A French manager is a manager because he knows more than his people, and he isn't going to share all the information he has with them" by buying lots of democratic groupware for their PCs, says Mr. Gabella, himself a Frenchman.
But Eastern Europeans are suddenly wild about networked PCs.
Having fewer computers and less cash to spend on mainframes, many Eastern European companies are turning to PC networks as a cheaper way to computerize quickly.
To capitalize, Novell is rapidly lining up new dealers and distributors in Eastern Europe -- and getting an enthusiastic greeting.
The Eastern Europeans, says Mr. Fallon, "understand the technology quite well."
