What makes the fire burn deep inside Jay Rockefeller?
Make no mistake, there is a fire raging inside the 6-foot-6 frame of West Virginia's junior senator.
It is fueled by what he calls his "sustained rage" over the country's system for delivering health care, and his passion to change that system.
If you doubt the fire's intensity, just ask Robert Winters, the chairman of Prudential Insurance Co. of America and leader of the Business Roundtable's health-policy task force.
After the Roundtable rebuffed President Clinton's health-care reform plan and endorsed a far more modest one offered by Rep. Jim Cooper, Sen. Rockefeller didn't just denounce the business group.
He declared that there is a "special place in hell" for Mr. Winters.
That wasn't a premeditated attack, the senator says now: "I wasn't thinking of that; that came out."
Nor did that bit of rhetorical excess advance either the national debate or Sen. Rockefeller's own advocacy of the Clinton health plan.
But it reflects a passion that has been visible in a series of informal talks with Sen. Rockefeller over the past year.
And it raises the question: Exactly what can generate that kind of intensity in somebody who, as heir to one of America's great business fortunes, has never had much personal worry about his own health security?
Sen. Rockefeller's initial explanations don't give the whole story.
He talks of his experience leading the Pepper Commission, a bipartisan congressional group that struggled for two years to solve the twin problems of uninsured Americans and costly longterm care.
He refers to the painful story of one insuranceless young couple, who told the commission how their newborn baby died in their car after they were denied admission to a private hospital and sent to the public hospital down the road.
But as he sits in his office one cold February night, Sen. Rockefeller offers a deeper explanation.
Like almost everyone else in the health debate, it turns out, he is driven by a searing personal experience.
That was the painful death of his 83-year-old mother, Blanchette Rockefeller, from Alzheimer's disease.
Recalling it now, almost two years later, nearly moves him to tears.
Mrs. Rockefeller was, of course, wealthy and socially prominent, but status doesn't make Alzheimer's any less ugly or painful.
Like most victims of the disease, she had spurts of violence and incoherence.
"She would get up at two o'clock in the morning.
She would fully dress in two sets of dresses and walk into the kitchen and say, `Where's breakfast?'"
Sen. Rockefeller recalls.
Living alone, she just as easily could have turned on the gas or walked off her 11th floor balcony.
So the family hired a squad of nurses to give 24-hour-a-day care.
Still, Mrs. Rockefeller contracted pneumonia and was hospitalized.
"My family had built the goddamned hospital, and so they just couldn't give us enough attention," Sen. Rockefeller recalls.
Yet the care left her in agony, with an oxygen mask over her face and tubes poking into her body.
Finally she lifted her head, looked her only son in the eye and said: "Help me.
Help me."
That night, Sen. Rockefeller rushed her out of the hospital and returned her to her home of 51 years, where she was cared for until she died in relative comfort two weeks later.
Afterward, something nagged at her son: If death is this horrible for somebody whose every need can be met, how is it for others?
"We've got all this money. . . .
What happens if I'm Hispanic?
What happens if I'm Appalachian?
What happens if I've never been to a hospital? . . .
It just is not fair."
So Sen. Rockefeller's passion burns.
Although he knows compromises will have to be made, he pleads with President Clinton not to compromise now but later this year, after the public is more "energized."
He quietly organizes regular, informal meetings of the crucial Finance Committee to search for consensus.
He gingerly reaches out to unlikely Republican colleagues, such as Iowa's Charles Grassley, in hopes they'll eventually be allies.
He criticizes Rep. Cooper's plan as dangerously minimalist, but, unlike the White House, also praises the Tennessee Democrat for composing it long before doing so became stylish.
Sen. Rockefeller may be naive.
He thinks a plan with all the basic Clinton components -- universal coverage, alliances, premium caps, an employer mandate -- will pass.
Whether that's true or not, the passion of Jay Rockefeller helps explain why it's still a good bet something significant will happen this year.
