The recent purchase of almost $450 million of R.H. Macy & Co.'s debt by rival Federated Department Stores has set off speculation about a merger when Macy's emerges from bankruptcy.
Macy's chairman, Myron Ullman, has already said that he is not interested in a merger with Federated, or presumably with anyone else.
In the meantime, after two years of bankruptcy, Macy's has yet to propose any plan for reorganization.
This situation brings to the forefront the biggest flaw in our bankruptcy system: Many courts are all too willing to give the bankrupt company the ability to monopolize the right to propose a plan of reorganization.
So long as the company has this monopoly, no one except the debtor -- no creditor, shareholder or anyone else -- can propose a plan and get the company out of Chapter 11.
Although the Bankruptcy Code gives the company this reorganization monopoly for only 120 days, the bankruptcy court has the ability to extend this exclusive period -- or "exclusivity" -- indefinitely.
Such extensions have been routinely granted to Macy's.
Perpetual extensions of exclusivity make sense primarily in those highly unusual situations where the debtor is enmeshed in litigation that requires resolution before the debtor can begin to reorganize its affairs.
In recent years, two companies involved in this type of case were Manville Corp., which faced billions of dollars in judgments from parties harmed by asbestos; and LTV, which faced a multibillion-dollar Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. claim.
In both Manville and LTV, most observers recognized that no plan of reorganization could be confirmed without the support of the litigants, so perpetual extensions of exclusivity made sense.
By far the more common occurrence is a situation like Macy's.
Macy's is typical of most recent bankruptcies in that, although it may have been underperforming its competitors, the primary cause of its filing for bankruptcy was that it simply had too much debt relative to its ability to service its debt.
The argument made by this kind of debtor for extensions of exclusivity is familiar: Due to the complexity of its case, the need to complete an operational turnaround before emerging from bankruptcy, and the "chaos" that would result from letting anyone file a plan, it is supposedly in the best interests of the estate to let the debtor monopolize the reorganization process.
Macy's has thus pursued the typical debtor strategy of preserving exclusivity as long as possible.
But it has also shown no urgent desire to exit bankruptcy, and that is unusual.
In failing to come forth with a plan, Macy's must have believed that it could not operate out of bankruptcy in 1993 or 1994, even if all its pre-bankruptcy debts were converted to equity.
It is illustrative to compare the Macy bankruptcy to the recent bankruptcy of Zale Corp., the nation's largest jewelry retailer.
The Zale bankruptcy involved as complex a set of legal and valuation issues as have been faced in any other major bankruptcy in recent years.
In addition, Zale had no chief executive and faced virtually a complete operational makeover.
Notwithstanding these facts, the Zale bankruptcy court set up a rigorous timetable with the aim of seeing that the bankruptcy lasted less than 18 months.
In addition, the Zale bankruptcy court ignored the debtor's desire to keep exclusivity.
In fact the court made reference to the uneven playing field that would result if only the company itself could continue to file a reorganization plan.
Zale's bankruptcy counsel, Weil, Gotshal & Manges, which is also Macy's counsel, made the predictable argument that "chaos" would ensue if any interested party could file a plan for Zale.
Well, chaos of a sort did in fact ensue, but it led to Zale confirming a plan of reorganization within 18 months of entering bankruptcy.
One reason the Macy bankruptcy has not been handled this way is that it is being heard in the Southern District of New York, a location that has sometimes been referred to as "Debtor's Paradise."
The courts there always seem to presume that the debtor is innocent until proven guilty -- an admirable standard in criminal law but not in bankruptcy matters.
The Southern District's courts seem to agree with virtually every argument a debtor makes so long as it sounds reasonable.
Some observers believe that if Macy's had promptly come up with a reorganization plan that, among other things, converted all its pre-bankruptcy debt to equity, it might have obtained post-bankruptcy financing that would have enabled it to emerge from bankruptcy in January 1993.
Even if that date was overly optimistic, January 1994 was certainly possible.
But for reasons that are difficult to comprehend, Macy's has delayed.
There is no need for an operational makeover to occur only while a company is in Chapter 11.
And if an equity infusion was needed to help Macy's make an early exit from Chapter 11, it appears that Fidelity Investments and perhaps others would have been willing to buy up debt in exchange for equity.
In 1993, the Milwaukee-based P.A. Bergner department store chain emerged from bankruptcy thanks in part to an equity infusion from a group of debtholders following a reorganization plan.
It would not have been unreasonable to expect a similar solution in the case of Macy's.
Instead, for the past two years Macy's has failed to come up with any plan of reorganization, and it has petitioned the court to prevent any other interested party from filing one of its own.
To date, the court has acquiesced.
Now Macy's is reaping the bitter harvest it has sown.
When major creditors such as Prudential and Fidelity see Macy's making no progress toward exiting bankruptcy, and when the court denies these creditors the right to file their own plans of reorganization, it should come as no surprise that they begin to look to Macy's competitors to help speed up the process.
Congress has not totally ignored what is happening in Debtor's Paradise.
The proposed Bankruptcy Reform Bill now in Congress would direct the courts not to extend exclusivity beyond a year unless "the need for an extension is attributable to circumstances for which the debtor should not justly be held accountable."
Theoretically, that provision would help.
But many observers fear that, given the pro-debtor bias of many bankruptcy courts, finding the circumstances to justify an extension of exclusivity will become routine.
During an exclusivity hearing in the Zale bankruptcy, one attorney made the following statement: "With apologies to Spike Lee, mo' plans, mo' better."
In the Zale bankruptcy at least, the court agreed, with good results.
In the case of Macy's, however, an end to exclusivity is nowhere in sight.
Mr. Dickstein was a participant in the Zale bankruptcy and is chairman of Carson Pirie Scott, the successor corporation to P.A. Bergner.
