The Agriculture Department, preparing an attack on malnutrition, is considering urging Congress to give women a tax break if they breast-feed their newborns up to six months.
Other options under review in the government's effort to improve the American diet include encouraging more restaurants to accept food stamps to feed the homeless and securing transportation for rural elderly to ensure that they eat at least one wholesome meal a day.
Food companies also should be urged to develop more-nutritious products, and the impact of their advertising could be monitored, suggests a draft policy document making its way through the USDA's Food and Nutrition Service.
While there's no certainty that such ideas will be proposed and enacted -- and every likelihood that some would encounter stiff resistance -- the document provides a map of policymakers' thinking about an important adjunct to health-care and welfare reform.
Although its genesis was an international nutrition conference two years ago, the department's "U.S. Plan of Action for Nutrition" thus far has received little public attention.
Commenting on the document, a copy of which was obtained by The Wall Street Journal, a spokesman for Assistant Secretary Ellen Haas, who oversees the nutrition service, called it "extremely preliminary" and said it was certain to be "significantly and extensively revised" before being put out for public comment.
None of the ideas is reflected in the department's fiscal 1995 budget, the spokesman added.
Much of the document focuses on ways to close gaps in the government's attempts to reduce malnutrition.
It says that while diets have improved, additional steps "could produce substantial health gains, leading to improvements in individuals' quality and length of life."
Underpinning the "action plan" is an assumption that far too many people aren't receiving proper nourishment, often because of ignorance or poverty.
The document calls for a concerted educational program, beginning with children four years old, in part to see that the new nutrition food labels now appearing in grocery stores across the country help consumers make better buying decisions.
Some proposals presumably could be implemented with little cost, while others would require hundreds of millions of dollars, according to accompanying cost estimates.
Among the more costly items: More than $100 million to improve what's called "household food security."
That refers to a panoply of ways to add to the food-purchasing power of households with limited incomes, including expanding the current food-stamp program.
To counter what it calls "a bottle-feeding culture," the "action plan" suggests using government offices as models of employer support of breast-feeding women."
The document calls for evaluating current efforts in the workplace to support breast-feeding, to see what reductions in health-care costs and absenteeism might result.
And it suggests including breast-feeding in high-school curriculum and encouraging schools to promote in-school breast-feeding by student mothers.
Among the more-radical suggestions would be amending the current tax code "to provide a maternity allowance for women who fully breast-feed their infants for four to six months."
A related idea: Change the Family Leave Act so that working mothers can take a minimum of four months of maternity leave; the law now allows a three-month unpaid leave.
The department's goal should be to increase to at least 75% the proportion of mothers who breast-feed newborns, and to have at least 50% continue to breast-feed until infants are six months old, the paper's drafters argue.
In a related matter, the document suggests an interagency review to consider ways to better monitor advertising campaigns by makers of infant formula "for false and misleading statements," including the impression that formula is as good as mother's milk.
On another advertising front, the report's drafters said they are looking for ways to attack "much nutrition misinformation and faddism/quackery in the billion-dollar nutrition/weight-control marketplace."
The panel also indicated it wants to make sure that health claims for foods are supported by "significant scientific agreement."
Although the document gives no specifics, it cites regulatory impediments that prevent food companies from producing more nutritious products and suggests eliminating those barriers.
The document also favors steps to improve the taste of low-fat products.
Another section calls for better links between nutrition and agricultural policy and suggests possibly requiring "a nutrition impact statement" when charting federal farm policies.
Finally, the report calls for a hard look at the school lunch program, long a target of many nutritionists who question how well it is feeding young people.
Among the ideas for improving it is to have states establish mandatory "nutrition competencies" for teachers and food-service staffs.
It also urges states and local programs to remove "the stigma associated with getting a free lunch," so that more needy avail themselves of such aid.
