An economy set to post the highest growth rate in Europe.
Moderate inflation pressure, with consumer prices climbing at their slowest rate in decades.
Rising corporate profits.
A stable currency likely to boost the country's export sector.
It sounds like the perfect recipe for a stock market boom, but instead, equity prices in London have hit the skids.
The FT-SE 100 Index, for instance, has shed 5.7% in the last month, the steepest drop of major European countries.
The index tumbled 1.3% Friday to end at 3191.90.
Over four weeks, German stocks have actually posted a 0.9% gain, while U.S. shares have eased about 1.8% and Japanese stocks are up 0.7%.
So what's ailing British equities?
It appears to be a bad case of bond market blues.
Government bond yields, which move inversely to prices, have risen about 0.50 of a percentage point in the past four weeks.
The benchmark 10-year government gilt issue now yields 7.17%, up from 6.70% in mid-February.
The climb in yields, which often translates into higher borrowing costs for industry and higher mortgage rates for homeowners, has come about despite the apparent lack of inflation worries.
Instead, the panic is a kind of sympathetic response to the bond market across the Atlantic.
Prices of U.S. Treasurys have been climbing steadily following the Federal Reserve's surprise interest-rate increase Feb. 4.
U.K. market watchers are puzzled why rising interest rates in the U.S. should prove such a damper for the market at home.
"It's like a new version of the old song that soldiers used to sing: `We're going down because we're going down,' " says Peter Cartwright, head of research at brokers Williams de Broe PLC in London.
"Part of this is worries that as U.S. bond rates go up, they will suck a lot of U.S. funds that had been propping up overseas markets like ours," Mr. Cartwright says.
"It's not likely to be a brilliant year."
Logic would suggest that British stocks should be rising steadily as the economy gathers pace after having bottomed out nearly a year ago.
Now, more private-sector forecasters expect gross domestic product growth to come in at 2.6% this year and next.
A steady string of upbeat assessments in the past two weeks by companies such as BTR PLC, Hanson PLC, Barclays PLC and B.A.TT Industries PLC should also be helping sentiment.
"The recovery is coming through, but the turbulence in the bond markets is playing havoc with investor confidence," says George Hodgson, head of U.K. equity strategy at S.G. Warburg Securities Ltd. in London.
"We need bonds to find a base first and then stocks can move from there."
Mr. Hodgson's year-end prediction for the FT-SE is 3700, or about a 16% rise from current levels.
"All the near-term indicators are surprisingly good," he says.
"Wage settlements have been modest, producer prices are under control; we're set for low-inflation growth."
That sanguine outlook could free up U.K. monetary authorities to cut official interest rates a further 1/4 percentage point sometime over the six weeks.
Such a reduction, however, is widely considered to be factored into the current level of interest-rate futures contracts and into equity prices.
Further drops in interest rates could well pave the way for future inflation, a scenario the research team at UBS Ltd. is considering.
"We're very optimistic about both inflation and growth over the short-term," says economist John Marsland.
"But medium-term the country is likely to revert back to the traditional inflationary economy with a balance-of-payments problem and a steadily devaluing currency."
Mr. Marsland predicts an 8% inflation rate by the end of 1995 including mortgage payments, and 5% excluding mortgages.
This week promises to be a busy one for data watchers, both inside Britain and beyond.
The U.K. Producer Price Index for February is scheduled to be released today and is expected to show a rise of around 0.3% from the previous month but down 2.5% from a year earlier, confirming the very moderate inflation trend.
The U.S. PPI for February is due out tomorrow , along with the country's industrial production figures.
Wednesday should see data on Britain's public-sector borrowing requirement for February, with a figure around #5.6 billion ($8.41 billion) anticipated.
Retail sales in the U.K. should be up around 0.25% in February from the previous month
The main event of the week is likely to be the consumer price index in the U.S., expected Wednesday.
An increase around 0.3% is anticipated by most economists; anything higher than that could send global markets reeling.
Thursday sees the Bundesbank's fortnightly central bank council meeting.
Most market experts aren't looking for a cut in official rates, but then the men in Frankfurt love to catch the pundits off-guard.
Frankfurt prices plummeted 1.8% on nervousness about falling U.S. equities and bonds.
But Tokyo stocks rose slightly, as the special quotation for the settlement of March index futures and options gave the market a moderate boost.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.47, down 0.02, reflecting lower European markets and higher Asia/Pacific and American markets.
Casino stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 202.54, up 2.55, or 1.3%, with Promus of the U.S. posting a 3.1% gain in its local currency.
Containers and packaging stocks trailed at 104.59, down 1.45, or 1.4%, with Hokkai Can of Japan sliding 6.4% in local currency.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index shed 37.61 points to 2103.49, more than wiping out the previous day's gain of 25.01 points.
Trading was quiet but jittery.
Share prices were buffeted by declines in the bond market, as June government bond futures were weak in response to the U.S. bond market.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which advanced 251.53 points Thursday, rose 24.60 to 20115.31.
In trading Monday in Tokyo, the Nikkei rose 328.23 points to close the morning session at 20443.54.
Friday's first-section volume was estimated at 750 million shares, surging from 426 million shares a day earlier.
Turnover was inflated by trading tied to the special quotation; in the first hour alone, about 400 million shares, or 53% of the session's total, changed hands.
Gainers outnumbered losers, 609-422.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which gained 11.02 points Thursday, added 3.39 to 1619.90.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
