Drew Days, the U.S. solicitor general, is auditioning for the Supreme Court.
As the government's top lawyer in high court cases, the 52-year-old Democrat is an obvious candidate to fill the next court vacancy -- which could come as early as this spring if Justice Harry Blackmun, 85, decides to retire.
Liberals, in particular, are entranced by the idea of a Mr. Justice Days, and not just because the former litigator with the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund happens to be black.
"He has been a brilliant advocate, a respected assistant attorney general for civil rights in the Carter administration, and his integrity is beyond dispute," says Ralph Neas, executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights.
Working in his favor is the fact that Mr. Days is friendly with the president and Hillary Rodham Clinton, with whom he shares Yale Law School alumni ties.
Now on leave from his professorship at the school, Mr. Days has framed on the wall of his book-filled Justice Department office a $1 McDonald's gift certificate inscribed to "Drew Days, A fellow traveller. -- Bill Clinton."
Yet Mr. Days's strength as a Supreme Court aspirant is also a weakness.
His strong liberal inclinations make him a magnet for criticism from Republicans, of course.
But the too-liberal label is also hurting his standing among some people within the Clinton camp.
It isn't that Mr. Days has been trying to make waves.
His oral arguments before the Supreme Court have been understated, even deferential.
When asked by the White House to craft legal positions to fit political needs, Mr. Days dutifully complies, even if it means contradicting his own past views.
But senior Senate Republicans, and some members of his own party, are convinced that Mr. Days remains at heart an unreconstructed liberal activist who came of age professionally in the 1960s and 1970s.
They fear that if freed to follow his instincts, Mr. Days would pursue an agenda that would not only enrage conservatives but would even be out of step with the crack-down-on-crime, "New Democrat" rhetoric of the administration he now serves.
Moderate Democrats cite such evidence as the solicitor general's reversal last fall of the government's position in a child-pornography case, in which Mr. Days came across as soft on crime.
His action brought quick condemnation from Congress and even an extraordinary public rebuke from Mr. Clinton himself.
Others fret that he is from the same old-liberal school as the Justice Department's departed No. 2 official, Philip Heymann, who resigned suddenly in January and then blasted both parties for trying to outdo each other in proving their toughness on the politically explosive crime issue.
Some Democrats also fret that Mr. Days's liberal reputation would attract heavy flak from Republicans eager to score points in the crime debate.
Such fears are well-grounded, says Orrin Hatch, the top Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee.
"Personally, I like Drew Days; he's a very talented lawyer," says the Utah lawmaker.
But "his nomination very well could face severe opposition" because "many senators on both sides of the fence feel the one thing they don't need are judges who are soft on obscenity, especially pornography."
In addition, some Republicans are still bitter over Mr. Days's testimony against Justice Clarence Thomas's confirmation in 1991.
Until a high-court opening focuses the president's attention, it will be hard to calibrate Mr. Days's prospects precisely.
The potential candidate himself politely declines to discuss the matter.
Much of the solicitor general's work representing federal agencies is arcane and nonpartisan, but he inevitably must juggle politics and law in some cases.
Mr. Days has reversed Republican positions in such cases as one in which the administration now supports a ban on the common trial lawyer's tactic of asking for the removal of jurors based solely on their sex.
Mr. Days told the Supreme Court that taking this step is a natural extention of past rulings forbidding the elimination of jurors on the basis of race.
When faced with assignments that clash with his personal views, Mr. Days so far has followed the example of most of his predecessors: compromise.
The most striking example has been his role in helping hammer out the legal problems in the administration's slight relaxation of the military's ban on homosexuals.
Deeply opposed to this form of discrimination, Mr. Days chose to put aside his own principles in the name of gradual change.
As part of the deal under which the Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed to the modest Clinton reforms, the administration is continuing to do battle in court with service members excluded under the old total gay ban.
But when possible, Mr. Days has inserted language in government filings to limit them strictly to the military context.
His goal: to lay the groundwork for possible future arguments in which the administration would seek to reverse the Supreme Court's toleration of civilian antigay laws.
In a starkly different field -- that of corporate taxation -- Mr. Days has done the legal work necessary to fulfill a Clinton campaign promise to California officials.
Mr. Clinton vowed that if elected, he would support California against a multibillion-dollar challenge to its aggressive tax on multinational corporations.
In a tortuous brief filed recently in a pending Supreme Court case, Mr. Days repudiated the federal government's prior filings, which had opposed such state levies as harmful to U.S. trade relations.
While generally cooperative with the White House, Mr. Days has taken some positions that he knew would spark discord.
Before he began work last summer, for instance, career Justice Department lawyers had strongly urged the high court not to hear an appeal by a transsexual inmate who claimed federal prison officials subjected him to "cruel and unusual punishment" by transferring him to a prison where he was raped by another inmate.
After the court took the case anyway, Paul Bender, Mr. Days's handpicked deputy, intervened.
Mr. Bender asserted that the government's position would block legitimate inmate suits.
Career department lawyers exploded.
In a series of meetings punctuated by yelling on both sides, the career officials warned that Mr. Bender's approach would expose prison officials to tremendous court liability.
Mr. Days ultimately brokered a compromise: The administration's brief proposed a somewhat ambiguous liability standard that isn't far from what the inmate himself asked for.
The case is still pending.
