Yep, it's true, says new country music star Tracy Lawrence.
He did wear a bulletproof vest when he performed at the Texas State Fair in Dallas.
And the way things are going, he intends to keep one on hand for any big, open-air concert where things could possibly get out of hand.
These precautions, practically unheard of 10 years earlier in this most accessible of art forms, illustrate the Faustian bargain at the soul of current country music.
Performers, and record labels, are starting to attract the fanatic following, and sales, once reserved for big-time rock stars.
Along with the attention comes a host of new demands; country stars have to look younger and sexier, -- more "visual" as they say -- they have to sell more records to keep their contracts, and they have to worry about occasionally violent audiences.
Rock music learned the importance of professional security at its large arena shows after some celebrated disasters in the '60s.
Country music is now mulling over the same lesson.
Lawrence, a slender 6-foot blond with a heartthrob ballad style, has had more than one harrowing encounter with overenthusiastic fans.
"There was one lady who grabbed me when I was getting on the bus after a show," he remembered over lunch in a midtown Manhattan Italian restaurant where to everyone's relief no one seemed to recognize him.
"They couldn't get her to let go.
She got away with a hank of my hair," he winced.
Lawrence, to be sure, isn't a typical case study.
For a while, he was stalked by a woman with a violent criminal record, and when he first came to Nashville, he was shot five times in a holdup on Music Row.
(His assailants then were muggers, not fans.)
More routine security risks don't faze country musicians, who are more than happy to draw a younger and more boisterous crowd, when they also bring in great batches of money.
Live performances by overnight sensations Garth Brooks and Billy Ray Cyrus sometimes sound like Nuremberg rallies, but they are hitting the top of the pop charts as well as the country listings and generating a cash flow that is literally transforming the face of Nashville's Music Row.
Country-music tours, the bread and butter moneymakers for most performers, are beginning to show up in industry lists of the "top grossing acts" for all genres.
The Judds, in their last year together as a mother-daughter duet in 1991, placed fourth in the overall list compiled by Performance Magazine, the industry journal for concert productions, and daughter Wynonna's solo tour last year did almost as well.
Eight years ago, Reba McEntire, one of country's superstars, would just stand up on stage and sing.
Her current tour features multiple costume changes and background video and animation projections on a 25-by-60-foot screen.
It takes eight Peterbilt trucks to transport the production.
In another notable example, Oklahoman Joe Diffie's "Honky Tonk Attitude" tour recreates a western honky-tonk on the arena stages he played.
The set, carted around on trucks, went on to the next stop when Mr. Diffie played real honky-tonks.
The sometimes heavyset Mr. Diffie also illustrates the pressure on stars to stay fit, often a difficult task when they spend up to 300 days a year on the road, living on fast food.
Mr. Diffie solved the problem by bringing a personal trainer along on his tour bus.
(The decision, he admitted, was highly encouraged by his record label.)
After weeks of daily jogs, sit-ups and careful eating, he lost 30 pounds and found he could keep a higher energy level through his concerts.
"I'm seeing a lot more younger women at my shows," he added.
Today's emphasis on the "visual" in country music probably can be traced to the advent of the country-music video.
Stan Hitchcock, one of the founders of Country Music Television, dates the shift to 1983, the debut of the all-country music video cable network.
At the time, he said, "there were only 20 country videos in the world."
His network, he said, brought a boom in videomaking, now a state-of-the-art industry in Nashville, whose products spilled over to the rock-video channels and permanently changed the way country musicians were marketed.
Before the video, Mr. Hitchcock said, fans knew the performers primarily through the radio.
Mr. Hitchcock, who has sold his stake in CMT, and earlier this year launched the 24-hour Americana Television Network, devoted to American "roots" music and folk life, said he learned the importance of the visual component for a young audience when he once put an old LP on his stereo and noticed that his four-year-old son immediately turned toward the television.
The "multisensory" vehicle of the video, said Mr. Hitchcock, not only attracted a younger audience, it helped breakout artists that radio wouldn't touch.
His prime example is a group called the Kentucky Head Hunters, whose genially scruffy, straggly haired members mixed Bill Monroe and Hank Williams Sr. with heavy-metal guitar cadenzas.
Once video won them an audience, the radio programmers jumped on the bandwagon and kept it going.
Although many executives won't say so outright, and the Head Hunter example may argue otherwise, the visual element often boils down to sex appeal.
It's a favorite speculation among musicians whether earlier great performers as homely as Ernest Tubb and Patsy Cline would have won record deals under current conditions.
"I think there once was a time when the visual component meant very little," said Ray Wunsch, president of Columbia Records-Nashville.
"Now it's a preferred priority."
This shift certainly helped Mr. Lawrence to an early start on his career.
The Texas native landed a contract with Atlantic Records just seven months after his arrival in Nashville in 1990, at the age of 23.
Wrangler jeans signed him up for a product endorsement, another booming sideline for country stars, even before he released his first single.
Then one night after a mixing session, as he walked a visiting girlfriend to her hotel, he ran into a pair of muggers.
He concluded that the incident wouldn't stop at robbery, and jumped one of the gunmen.
The robbers fled, but not before they poured five shots into the young singer.
Even though he survived, the shooting could have ended his career.
Mr. Lawrence had no medical insurance, and, as Rick Blackburn, head of Atlantic Records-Nashville recounts it, he was taken to a university hospital that gave him only cursory treatment.
He was discharged six days later with a bullet still lodged in his knee.
Mr. Blackburn stepped in, personally taking Mr. Lawrence to his own doctor and arranging for surgery at another hospital.
The label also stepped up its support for the recuperated singer.
After releasing the obligatory video, Mr. Blackburn personally hosted four showcase performances to introduce Mr. Lawrence to disk jockeys and the press, hitting about 50 radio stations each in markets from Atlanta to Los Angeles.
(Mr. Hitchcock observes that after an initial period of hostility, radio now feeds off video promotions, much as Hollywood and television now feed off each other.)
The effort paid off in spades.
Since his debut, Mr. Lawrence has hit the top of the Billboard chart with seven singles.
His album "Alibis" went platinum last August, the industry designation for sales of more than one million.
The Los Angeles-based Academy of Country Music named him the best New Male Vocalist last year.
He has also remained accessible to his audience, recently marrying a young lady he met backstage after one of his shows.
It was the dream of every female fan come true -- not just a lock of hair, but the whole star forever.
For Lawrence, however, this ultimate act of reaching out to his audience did nothing to stop the nightmare of fear that his celebrity has brought him.
He remains acutely aware of the dangerous reactions that could be stirred by his appeal to the emotional longing of his followers.
If one of them could grab him, why not ALL THE OTHERS?
Mr. Adams is a former Journal editorial writer.
