The planned sale of Continental Bank Corp. brings to an end one of the most tumultuous corporate stories in U.S. history.
This summer, when BankAmerica Corp. is expected to complete its $1.9 billion acquisition of the Chicago bank, will mark the 10th anniversary of the federal government's $4.5 billion bailout of Continental.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. is still selling the last of the bad loans it took off Continental's hands, and the agency estimates its total loss on the bailout at $1.03 billion.
But beyond the cost, Continental's place in history may be as a warning against too-rapid growth and against placing too much emphasis on one sector of the banking business -- in this case energy lending.
The story of Continental also suggests that government bailouts, while fine for calming the financial markets, can't undo the damage a reckless institution inflicts on itself.
In the 10 years since the bailout, Continental has returned to health, but only by steadily dwindling in size and importance amid an industry consolidation that is producing megabanks.
"I don't think Continental had much chance of ever catching up," John E. Swearingen, the former Amoco Corp. chairman who initially ran the bank for the FDIC, said from his retirement home in Palm Springs, Calif.
"This is a good solution."
Continental had already had its second chance, way back in 1933 when it was bailed out for the first time by the Depression-era Reconstruction Finance Corp.
The bank played it safe for the next 40 years, but when Roger E. Anderson took over as chairman in 1973, that changed.
Management consultants told him to give junior officers more lending authority, and he did.
Dun's Review, a business magazine, in 1978 named Continental one of the five best-managed U.S. companies, and Mr. Anderson let out the throttle.
The worst of the loans came through a shopping-mall lender, Penn Square Bank of Oklahoma City, and when it was closed in 1982, Continental's tailspin had begun.
Built on a fragile base of institutional deposits, or "hot money," confidence collapsed by May 1984 in a breathtaking $20 billion international deposit run that threatened the entire banking system.
Grim humor took hold as Uncle Sam pleaded for a buyer: A merger with Manufacturers Hanover could create ConMan Bank; a sale to Nomura Securities and Continental would be Nomura Bank; bank insiders joked they were in line to receive stock puts, instead of options.
Regulators brought in as supposed coequals Mr. Swearingen and William S. Ogden, a career banker, and they brought back the deposits, kept many customers and employees, and began selling some of the FDIC's stake to shareholders.
They also fought.
Mr. Swearingen, the swaggering oilman, had never had much regard for bankers and liked to tweak the competition.
Mr. Ogden, stiff and chainsmoking, loved banking and thought such sniping was poor form.
Before their first year was finished, Mr. Swearingen had demanded the FDIC's backing as undisputed chief executive.
When Mr. Swearingen threatened to quit, William Isaac, FDIC chairman at the time, nearly took him up on the offer.
"We just made a $4.5 billion investment in this institution and you're telling me to shove it," Mr. Isaac protested, according to an official familiar with their talks.
But Mr. Ogden was demoted, and denied the top job when Mr. Swearingen retired in 1987.
The oilman brought in Thomas C. Theobald from Citicorp.
He ditched any notion of consumer banking and made Continental into a 100% commercial bank, a poor man's J.P. Morgan.
But with a crummy credit rating and weak deposit-gathering power, Mr. Theobald could compete with the likes of Morgan in offering exotic financial instruments and big hunks of credit.
Continental did what it could for its extremely loyal customer base -- it has some sort of relationship with 75% of the Fortune 100 companies and 40% of the Fortune 500, Mr. Theobald said -- but steadily lost ground to bigger banks.
Now, BankAmerica hopes that, with its financial muscle, it and Continental's clients will do a lot more business.
