By all appearances, the stock market is in the grip of rising interest rates.
With every spike up in rates, stocks take it on the chin.
Last week's sharp stock market volatility was only the latest evidence of interest-rate-driven stock trading.
Many investors even worry that the climb in interest rates heralds the death of the bull market.
But a closer look shows that in fact the stock market has been wriggling out of its interest-rate shackles.
While bond prices have slumped 12.4% since long-term interest rates hit their low in mid-October, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has climbed 5.8%.
Sure, many stocks are suffering and the market currently is slogging through what appears to be a small-scale correction.
But buying and selling patterns over the past several months clearly indicate that investors have made great strides in delinking the stock market from the bond market.
"You may not see it day to day but there's no question the markets have delinked," says Peter Canelo, chief investment strategist at NatWest Securities.
"In any one day they may move together but the relative rate of change is quite clear: bonds have gone down big time and stocks have held or risen."
To counter the rise in interest rates, investors have dumped interest-rate sensitive stocks such as banks and utilities and snapped up earnings-driven stocks such as heavy machinery and auto makers.
"The only investments that will do well in an uncertain interest-rate environment are earnings-driven equities that can ignore rates and benefit from the improving economy," Mr. Canelo says.
The stock-and-bond-market decoupling may not be evident to many observers because their attention often focuses only on the major stock market indexes rather than on individual groups of stocks.
But a look at industry group performances since mid-October shows the shift from interest-rate sensitive stocks to economically sensitive shares.
"If you exclude financials and utilities and other interest-rate sensitive stocks from the averages, the indexes would clearly be much higher than they are," Mr. Canelo says.
That's because near the bottom of the performance list stand such groups as securities brokers, with a 17% loss since mid-October, electric utilities, with a decline of 13%, savings and loans, down 11%, and central region banks, off 9%.
During the same period, economically sensitive heavy-machinery stocks have climbed 28%, auto manufacturers have gained 23% and heavy construction, 18%.
Mr. Canelo thinks the delinking will help the Dow industrials weather the current correction and drive the average back through its high and beyond 4000.
"It's precisely because the Dow contains many earnings-driven companies that historically tend to do well as rates begin to rise," he says.
Don Hays, director of investment strategy at Wheat, First Securities/Butcher & Singer in Richmond, Va., contends that the decoupling has progressed so far that the recent turmoil in the stock market isn't really related to the rise in rates.
"Even though it appears the bond market has been unsettling stocks, that's not really the reason behind it," Mr. Hays says.
He argues that the stock market is simply undergoing a necessary pause after its January rally sent the Dow industrials very near the 4000 level.
"You need a little shaking out of the tree because people got a little too enthusiastic," Mr. Hays says.
Now that so much worry has stormed into the market, the Dow is poised for its next move upward, Mr. Hays predicts.
He says several indicators, including a sharp drop in speculation, are pointing to a renewed rally that will push the Dow to 4200 by September.
"We have refilled the kettle of fear," Mr. Hays say.
"We need that because the bull market has to climb a wall of worry."
Of course, stocks can never be entirely immune to rising interest rates.
If rates climb significantly, investors may increasingly favor secure, higher yielding fixed-income investments over stocks, reducing the money flows into the stock market.
Worse, sharply rising rates could interrupt the economic recovery and impair earnings growth.
With the turmoil in the markets since the Federal Reserve boosted short-term rates on Feb. 4, the jury is still out on the final level of interest rates.
Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer at First Albany Corp., says the recent sharp rise in rates casts some doubt on the ultimate success of the delinking.
"We're at that point in the cycle where the stock market can manage a modest increase in rates," Mr. Johnson says.
"The problem is that what we've had since Feb. 4 has been interest-rate shock.
It nearly broke the back of this bull market but it hasn't quite done it."
Mr. Johnson thinks that the sharp rise in rates indicates the markets have swiftly discounted most of the future bad news on inflation and Fed tightenings.
He notes that investors are behaving as they normally do late in a bull market, buying cyclicals and dumping interest-rate sensitive stocks.
Still, he worries that the dust may not yet have settled in the interest-rate arena.
"The shock of the last four weeks has raised the question: Have rates gone up enough to derail the economy and earnings?"
Mr. Johnson says.
"The answer so far is no.
But if we get another spike up, we'd have to ask the question again."
Edward Yardeni, chief economist at C.J. Lawrence, argues that delinking is irrelevant.
Stocks don't need to decouple from bonds because the rise in interest rates is overdone and will likely reverse, he contends.
Mr. Yardeni expects the economy to continue growing and inflation to remain subdued.
He agrees that stronger earnings will help propel stocks higher.
"If the economy continues to perform well with low inflation, that's bullish for stocks," Mr. Yardeni says.
He stands pretty much alone these day in arguing that a new upward trend in interest rates wasn't necessarily inaugurated with the Fed rise Feb. 4.
"I may be overstaying my welcome in this camp but I don't think there's been a sea change in the direction of interest rates," Mr. Yardeni says.
Indeed, he blames the Fed for raising unrealistic fears of inflation and roiling the markets.
He contends that more than anything the Fed has confused investors by laying out a wide range of indicators it deems important in assessing inflation risks.
"The Fed now focuses on everything and nothing," Mr. Yardeni complains.
"We don't know what carries weight with them anymore."
What's worse, he argues, are the mixed signals being sent by the usually tightlipped Federal Reserve Board members.
He points out that Fed chairman Alan Greenspan said in his congressional testimony that gold is a good indicator of future inflation.
But shortly afterward, Fed governor Lawrence Lindsey discounted the importance of gold.
"Now we have the open-mouth committee," Mr. Yardeni says.
"At some point, the markets are going to realize we shouldn't pay too much attention to this jibberish and focus on the fundamentals."
Stock prices were pushed higher by a strong employment report.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 7.88 points to 3832.30.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index rose 1.73 to 464.74 and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index added 1.02 to 257.70.
The Nasdaq Composite climbed 5.97 to 790.55.
The Dow Jones Equity Market Index was up 1.63 to 440.25.
The American Stock Exchange Market Value Index edged up 0.83 to 466.48.
Volume on the Big Board climbed to 310.8 million shares from 291.8 million Thursday.
Rising issues outnumbered decliners 1,279 to 829.
For the week, the Dow industrials fell down 6.48, or 0.2%, and the S&P 500 lost 1.33, or 0.3%.
The Nasdaq composite gained 6.77, or 0.9%.
World-wide, stock prices rose Friday in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index gained 0.17 to 115.04.
Prices rose amid a Labor Department report that nonfarm payrolls jumped by 217,000 in February, exceeding analysts' expectations.
The unemployment rate slipped to 6.5%, below the 6.7% level analysts had forecast.
The news helped the Dow industrials climb more than 20 points before fading somewhat.
Economically sensitive stocks, as measured by Morgan Stanley's Cyclical index, far outpaced the overall market.
The index jumped 3.23, or 1.04%, to 312.40.
Cyclical gainers included General Motors, which rose 1 1/2 to 62; AlliedSignal, which climbed 1 3/8 to 77 3/8, and United Technologies, which gained 1 1/2 to 67 5/8.
TakeCare surged 7 7/8, or 11.7%, to 75 1/4 on the Nasdaq Stock Market after the Concord, Calif., health maintenance organization agreed to be acquired by FHP International for cash and stock.
Shares of FHP, a Fountain Valley, Calif., HMO operator, dropped 1 3/4 to 26 3/4.
International Game Technology, a Reno, Nev., maker of microprocessor-based gaming machines, advanced 3 7/8 to 32 1/4 on news of a planned expansion.
The company's IST-North America unit said it will hire 500 new workers and expand its main manufacturing plant to a seven-day work week.
Circuit City Stores Inc. improved 3 3/8, or 18%, to 22 1/2 after reporting same-store sales for February rose 18% and total sales grew 39% to $334.9 million.
Scientific-Atlanta climbed 3 1/2 to 31 1/8 on volume of more than 1.3 million shares, compared with average daily turnover of 315,900 shares.
The jump was spurred by a deal calling for Time Warner to buy 500,000 home communications terminals, or set-top boxes, from Scientific-Atlanta in the next two years, and up to one million in three years.
Wireless communications company PacTel, a unit of Pacific Telesis Group spun off in a December 1993 initial public offering, advanced 1 3/4, or 8.1%, to 23 3/8 after Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities upgraded the stock to a "buy" and added it to the firm's recommended list.
Apple Computer gained 1 to 36 3/4.
As previously reported, the company said it will unveil a new version of Newton that is cheaper and corrects some shortcomings in the original product.
Walden Residential Properties edged up 5/8 to 20 1/4.
The newly public self-administered real estate investment trust, which was formed to continue the Walden Group business of owning and managing apartment properties, said it bought 2,694 apartment units for $71 million.
Price/Costco dropped 1/8 to 21 on volume of nearly eight million shares, compared with average daily volume of 1.5 million.
Prudential Securities downgraded the company to "hold" from "buy" on a price basis after the stock reached a 52week high Thursday of 21 5/8, its highest since the company was formed in October through the merger of Price Co. and Costco Wholesale Co.
