Given President Clinton's taste for industrial policy and global economics, it is doubly dismaying that his health care plan includes a populist demonization, rather than a New Democrat's embrace, of the U.S. pharmaceutical industry.
The president has submitted legislation that is certain to drain away innovation, competitiveness and global market share.
Though still on the drawing board, the health care plan -- with its national board appointed to set prices for breakthrough drugs -- has already scared off investment capital and scuttled the plans of American drug and biotech companies.
Internal and external risk capital has dried up, forcing companies to shelve new products, cut R&D, cancel waves of recruitment, and issue tens of thousands of pink slips.
This is indeed a sad state of affairs for what amounts to only 7% of total U.S. health care costs, delivered by a net exporting industry that turns basic research into marketable products while creating and sustaining high-skill jobs.
Research by Brandeis University's Robert Goldberg reveals that, among global competitors, there is a perfectly inverse relationship between drug price regulation and new product innovation as measured by product introductions and world-wide market share relative to domestic market size.
Every time a non-Japanese nation has instituted price controls on drugs, its drug companies have rechanneled development efforts toward commoditizing existing products rather than pursuing breakthrough cures, and each nation's drug industry has collectively lost market share to U.S. firms that were capitalized by a free market to pursue the next big cure.
And then there is Japan, which exerts widespread price controls, but in a manner that aggressively encourages and rewards new drug R&D.
The prices for existing products systematically decrease every two years, while new compounds enjoy a premium two to three times that of free market U.S. prices.
This strategy is Japan's recognition of a natural product cycle that is precisely what those in Washington deny in the debate and then seek to destroy through legislation: Premium prices lead to profits that accelerate the development of better products.
A drug's price is high not only because the cost of developing that one compound is enormous; the price is high also because for each compound that flies, hundreds do not.
Restrain prices on the drugs that do fly, and you must improve the odds from the outset.
This translates into a commensurate reduction in risk-taking and innovation, which in turn translates into forsaken cures.
Under this scenario, we end up with precisely what government-mandated price controls promise: companies that function more like public utilities, producing low-risk commodities indistinguishable from each other instead of products of excellence that command premium dollars.
Under the threat of drug price controls, $520.8 million in drug and device issues (public and private stock offerings) were canceled in 1993, according to CommScan, a monitor of equity deal activity.
While such deals typically fund highly capital-intensive R&D, they also manage to create one full-time job for every $135,000 raised.
At this rate, 1993's canceled financings thwarted the creation of 3,858 jobs.
Add this figure to the 35,000 pink slips issued by pharmaceutical makers since the health care debate began last winter, and the Clintons can take credit for nearly 39,000 lost jobs.
And every one of them was a "high-wage, high-skill-based, high-tech job," the kind Candidate Clinton promised to create.
Of course the obsession with controlling drug prices may be less demagogic and more the result of the government's need to lower its own drug bill, especially now that it has offered prescription coverage to Medicare beneficiaries.
But if the government wants to control health care costs, it should do everything it can to encourage premium drug prices.
The result would be more R&D on ever superior drug therapies, which in turn would supplant more of the expensive medical interventions the government now buys.
This reasoning follows the fundamental paradox of medical care, known as "pharmacoeconomics," that expensive drugs lower health care costs.
Pharmacoeconomics is the reason drug companies are so profitable.
Higher-tech drugs bring tremendous, measurable value as substitute goods in a competitive therapeutic marketplace.
A new drug that has the potential to prevent a hospitalization, eliminate a surgery, or get a patient out of the ICU faster has every right to be priced for value, not cost, and the value in the case of reduced resource consumption is usually enormous.
Every study of hospital clinical patterns conducted by our firm indicates that the cumulative differences between the least efficient medical pathway and the best approach represent multibillion-dollar potential savings for the health care economy.
Hospitals are actively pursuing such savings; their continued progress, the most profound "reform" of all, will require continual development of ever better, if premium priced, medicines.
Unfortunately, a pharmacoeconomic cost-benefit is difficult to convey during the 30-second attention span of popular political discourse.
The drug industry recognizes the difficulty of convincing voters insulated from the $46,000 price tag for a coronary bypass of the value of a $60 per month cholesterol-lowering drug that postpones or prevents thousands of bypasses every year.
If Clinton drug price controls become law, it will be harder still to explain that $10 of this $60 could have gone into developing a product that might have spared Americans from the now incurable disease that will eventually claim them.
Mr. Kleinke is a principal with HCIA, a health care data analysis and research firm headquartered in Baltimore.
