Hydro-Quebec and Consolidated Edison Co. of New York said they are negotiating to scale back a contract under which Quebec would export electricity to New York state for 20 years, starting in 1999.
The contract had been valued at an estimated $5 billion, as originally signed in 1990.
The value of the revised contract is uncertain; unlike the 1990 accord, it wouldn't involve fixed annual purchases.
But Hydro-Quebec acknowledged that the "quantity and the price of the energy to be delivered will be substantially lower than in the current contract," reflecting changed market conditions.
The announcement came as S. David Freeman, president of the New York Power Authority, testified before a New York State Assembly committee hearing that he would recommend cancellation of the contract, as originally signed.
Mr. Freeman, who took over as president on Tuesday, said the agreement no longer makes economic sense because fuel prices have dropped and there is an oversupply of power in the state.
Under an existing 800,000-kilowatt-capacity contract, which runs through October 1998, the New York State Power Authority has been buying energy from Quebec during the summer months and delivering it to Con Edison over the authority's transmission facilities.
But the arrangement doesn't require fixed annual purchases of electricity.
By contrast, the contract that was to take effect in 1999 would have required the New York authority to buy three billion kilowatt-hours of electricity a year.
The power authority, Con Edison and HydroQuebec, a utility owned by the Quebec provincial government, have the right to terminate the contract by the end of this year.
William A. Harkins, vice president of Con Edison, told the state assembly hearing that the purchase of summer capacity from Quebec has reduced the company's dependence on imported oil and contributed to improved air quality in the New York City area.
Con Edison's demand for electricity peaks in the summer because of heavy air conditioner use.
Con Edison now wants to revise the arrangement based on current market conditions, while retaining the benefits of the purchases, Mr. Harkins said.
He said Con Edison anticipates that negotiations will result in Hydro-Quebec's continuing to supply Con Edison with 780,000 kilowatts of capacity beyond 1999.
The new contract would be a capacity contract, however, and wouldn't include guaranteed energy sales.
