Ricki Tigert removed herself from any regulatory matter concerning President and Hillary Rodham Clinton in order to head off growing Republican opposition to her nomination to head the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
Ms. Tigert's action heads off a potentially messy confrontation between Senate Republicans and Democrats over the ability of the FDIC to investigate the Clintons' connection to Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, a failed Arkansas thrift.
As a result, Senate action on Ms. Tigert's nomination is expected to proceed without becoming a platform for Republican charges about the Clintons' business and political dealings with Madison Guaranty.
During Ms. Tigert's confirmation hearing last week, two Republicans on the Senate Banking Committee, Lauch Faircloth of North Carolina and Alfonse D'Amato of New York, cited news accounts of Ms. Tigert's friendship with Mrs. Clinton and asked her to recuse herself of any FDIC matter involving the president and his wife.
Ms. Tigert refused, saying only that she would follow the advice of FDIC ethics counselors on any matter involving a potential conflict.
She told friends that she had only a casual relationship with the Clintons and that she was reluctant to agree to a blanket recusal in advance.
But over the weekend, she learned that Senate Republicans were looking for ways to block her nomination unless she recused herself from issues that could involve the Clintons.
To end concerns about conflicts of interest, she decided on the recusal.
In a letter to Sen. D'Amato, Ms. Tigert said: "I have no such personal knowledge of any such matter other than what I have read in the press, but I am very mindful of the concerns you have raised.
I want to resolve this issue as expeditiously as possible."
She included a notarized statement saying that, if confirmed, she would recuse herself from participation in any FDIC "investigation, inquiry or determination" concerning President or Mrs. Clinton "in their personal capacities."
Asked about the letter, Mr. D'Amato said that "it's helpful to dispel concerns raised about her independence" while the FDIC is investigating matters that involve the Clintons.
In fact, the FDIC is only marginally involved in the Madison Guaranty affair, which is being investigated by an independent counsel.
The agency hired Rose Law Firm of Little Rock to sue an accounting firm that had done work for Madison before it failed.
Mrs. Clinton was a partner in the Rose firm and was at one time retained to do legal work for Madison.
Now the FDIC is trying to decide if the firm accurately informed the agency of its connections to Madison.
The agency's report is expected in several days.
The Chicago Tribune reported last week that Mrs. Clinton had represented the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., a now-defunct agency, in negotiations with a friend and political supporter of Mr. Clinton's when he was governor of Arkansas.
But yesterday, after looking into the report, FDIC spokesman Alan Whitney said the newspaper had mischaracterized Mrs. Clinton's role.
"The best we can tell, Mrs. Clinton wasn't involved in the settlement," he said.
Separately, GOP senators stepped up their efforts to press the Resolution Trust Corp., which sells off the assets of failed thrifts, to take action against the people connected with the failure of Madison Guaranty before the statute of limitations runs out for civil actions.
The statute expires on Feb. 28.
Forty Republican senators signed a letter to Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman, the interim head of the RTC, asking what the RTC is doing to file civil claims against people who may have been responsible for Madison Guaranty's failure or to win agreements extending the statute of limitations.
Madison Guaranty's failure cost the government $47 million, and the RTC could file suits to recover some of that money.
One question the Republicans want answered is whether any business or political dealings between the thrift and the Clintons may have contributed to the thrift's failure.
Rep. James Leach (R., Iowa) contends that there may be such a connection.
White House officials dismiss this suggestion as "ridiculous."
Mr. Altman, a longtime friend of Mr. Clinton's, has said that the RTC "is conducting a thorough review of the potential civil claims" related to Madison.
