With spring retail order trends still sluggish, Liz Claiborne Inc. doesn't expect any significant pickup in its business in the first half.
"We don't see ourselves breaking out of the malaise that hit us in mid-1993 until the third quarter," Jerome Chazen, chairman and chief executive officer, said in an interview.
But the rebound in the second half should provide an "improvement in earnings" for all of 1994 compared with 1993, he said.
Claiborne plans to release its fourth-quarter and full-year results Feb. 14.
Mr. Chazen continues to stick by the apparel company's projections that 1993 net income was about 40% lower than 1992's $218.8 million, or $2.61 a share, on sales of $2.19 billion.
He declined to comment on analysts' estimates that fourth-quarter earnings were 15 cents to 22 cents a share, compared with 63 cents a year earlier.
In the first nine months, Claiborne had net income of $112 million, or $1.37 a share, on sales of $1.67 billion.
Ever since July, when Claiborne discovered that it would be saddled with higher-than-anticipated inventories, the company has been laboring to revitalize its business, particularly the core sportswear division that generates about half of Claiborne's sales.
Claiborne, which manufactures goods in 34 countries, has focused particularly on shortening production lead times to help it adapt more quickly to shifting fashion trends.
For much of its merchandise slated for fall delivery, he said Claiborne has cut production lead time 25%, to 30 weeks instead of 40.
Mr. Chazen expects that "within the next six to nine months," practically all of Claiborne's collections will fall within the 30-week window.
In 1994, Claiborne expects to "see a lot of progress," in its Russ Togs division of women's apparel, which is priced lower than its Claiborne label.
"The most difficult part of taking over Russ has been setting up the infrastructure and hiring practically all new people," he said.
Though sales of the division -- which includes the brands Villager, Crazy Horse and Russ -- rose to nearly $100 million from $21 million in 1992, Mr. Chazen said it was still unprofitable in 1993.
Claiborne plans to open 20 to 25 new stores in its 55-store First Issue women's apparel chain this year, he said.
The company also will add about three more Claiborne factory outlet stores to the 40 it now operates, he said.
Earlier last week, Robert Bernard, the president of Claiborne's international division, resigned to become president and chief operating officer of J. Crew Group Inc.
Claiborne plans to fill Mr. Bernard's position from within.
