Guangdong Kelon Electrical Holding Co., China's biggest maker of refrigerators, has a new trophy parked outside its head office here: a Mercedes Benz 600.
The company, set up a decade ago by the government of this booming city in Guangdong province, already was the proud owner of five other Mercedeses, including a convertible.
"Our president will, of course, ride the 600 model," says Zhang Chengyao, a deputy director of Kelon.
"The problem," he adds, "is that there aren't enough Mercedes for each of our vice presidents."
Shunde city officials see the problem differently: They think managers of companies like Kelon, still government-owned, are too busy pampering themselves instead of preparing their companies to withstand the inevitable pressures of foreign competition.
"Many state factories have become an empire, with the general manager as the emperor who is accountable to nobody," says Liu Shiyi, a vice mayor of Shunde.
This change comes as China's economy passes through a sort of twilight zone between central planning and capitalism.
The country's economic reforms over the past 15 years have freed thousands of state-owned enterprises from rigid regulation.
As a result, managers who once dutifully followed the party line now often have so much autonomy that they can treat state assets like personal property; some even pass managerial control on to their sons or other relatives.
Although economists generally assume that autonomy will prove more profitable than rigid central planning, no clear system of accountability has emerged.
China's central government late last year endorsed the idea of privatization, and sales of state-owned businesses are proceeding at varying rates throughout much of the country.
But no city has embraced privatization with more zeal than Shunde, home to several of the country's leading makers of home appliances.
Within three years, city officials aim to reduce the city government's stakes in local manufacturers to an average of about 30%.
The hope: that new majority owners will whip the companies into shape and wean them from reliance on official bailouts.
But many of the managers, fearing for their perks, hope to slow down or stop Shunde's privatization drive.
At Kelon, for instance, managers take a distinctly proprietarial attitude toward the enterprise despite its government ownership.
Kelon President Pan Ning and his colleagues built up the company "with a lot of sweat and blood," Mr. Zhang, the deputy director, says testily.
"We can't just hand it over to some foreigners with both hands."
Thus, Kelon's managers are resisting pressure from the city to find a foreign buyer for a large chunk of the company.
Last year, a subsidiary of General Electric Co. of Fairfield, Conn., held talks with Kelon on the possible acquisition of a stake in the Chinese company's air-conditioner plant.
Bruce Albertson, president, Asia, of GE Appliances, says negotiations have been snagged by complications involving Kelon's licensing agreements with Japanese manufacturers.
But Mr. Zhang says the talks stalled because GE wanted majority control of that plant; GE's Mr. Albertson denies that the degree of ownership was the issue.
One reason Shunde officials are eager to sell stakes in local companies is that they see the firms as a drain on city finances.
The city guarantees the companies' debts and bails out the ones that run into trouble, but it gets little in return.
"They hardly pay taxes," grumbles Vice Mayor Liu.
"Instead, they squander the money on fancy office buildings and fast cars, and we have no way of restraining their lavish spending."
City officials also worry that the companies have put on too much fat to survive the next economic downturn.
By selling stakes in these businesses, Mr. Liu says, the city will achieve two goals: "marrying its daughters while they are still young and beautiful," and forcing them to become more competitive.
The trouble with such solutions is that some of China's state-owned companies have grown so big and powerful that they pay little heed to bureaucrats.
One example is Shougang Corp., a Beijingbased steelmaker.
Over the past two years, Shougang has bought a 22-story oxygen-fired furnace in California, a vast iron mine in Peru and half a dozen publicly listed companies in Hong Kong.
It aims to spend roughly 100 billion yuan ($11.5 billion) to build what would be China's largest steel mill.
The overall goal is to more than double Shougang's steelmaking capacity within the next six years, making the company one of the world's biggest steelmakers.
"We want to become a major multinational by the year 2000," says Zhou Beifang, son of Shougang's chairman, Zhou Guanwu.
Shougang's managers can pursue such grand visions largely because they have exploited the extraordinary freedom available to some Chinese managers.
Unlike private-sector steelmakers in the U.S., Shougang doesn't have to justify its strategy or results to the stock market.
For example, no shareholders questioned the company's purchase of the iron mine in 1992 for $120 million, more than double that offered by the next highest bidder.
On the other hand, unlike state-owned steelmakers in Europe, Shougang needn't worry about annoying questions or interference from politicians.
The company reports directly to the country's powerful State Council rather than dealing with functionaries at the Ministry of Metallurgical Industry, as other Chinese steelmakers do.
As a result, while Shougang's managers are free to run the business as they see fit, they can still count on help from the government in a pinch; amid China's credit crunch last year, for example, Shougang received emergency loans from the People's Bank of China.
