The Clinton administration faces a backlash from high-tech companies over its decision to plow ahead with a plan to push one system for protecting telephone and computer communications.
The decision comes after a lengthy review started last April, when the administration unveiled the new computer chip, which would be included in encryption devices attached to telephones to scramble sound or information for privacy.
Law enforcement agencies, however, would have access to the code for unscrambling the encryption.
Computer companies called for the review, complaining the government's access to the codes would turn off prospective buyers, particularly those overseas.
But, in basically deciding against a policy shift, the White House was buoyed by arguments from agencies such as the National Security Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In announcing the decision, Vice President Al Gore dubbed encryption "a law and order issue" because criminals use it to bypass wiretaps.
The Clinton administration wants to make the new technology, called the Clipper Chip, the standard for private industry and government.
The new technology, started during the Bush administration, was prompted by the increasing number of commercial encryption technologies out on the market today.
Under the administration plan, officials at the Treasury Department and the Commerce Department's National Institute of Standards and Technology would hold the so-called electronic keys to unscramble the Clipper Chip's code, and FBI agents or other law enforcement officials would have access with a court order.
The issue has become a controversial one between law enforcement officials and the computer industry and civil libertarians.
In unfolding details of the administration's decision, Mike Nelson, an official at the Office of Science and Technology Policy, said the issue was so difficult it represented "the Bosnia of telecommunications policy."
Jerry Berman, executive director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a Washington-based computer users' civil rights group, said the administration's handling of the Clipper Chip policy could make it "as successful" as the Bosnia policy, which has come under widespread criticism.
The Clinton administration tried to acknowledge the worries of high-tech companies by pledging to "streamline" export licensing procedures for communications coding products, but it said it wasn't going to lift current restrictions for these products.
The Business Software Alliance, a trade group representing software makers, said the restrictions "threaten the continued viability and success of the American software industry."
David Peyton, a vice president at Information Technology Association of America -- a group whose members include General Motors Corp.'s Electronic Data Systems Corp., Arthur Andersen & Co.'s Andersen Consulting unit and Microsoft Corp. -- said that, "It's a completely unsatisfactory situation.
This proposal met a tidal wave of public opposition when they put it out.
There's been no change."
