When a neighbor asked Washington state homemaker Dorothy Benson to tear down her fence last spring, she used a home computer to skim relevant state laws.
Then she kept the fence where it was.
She made her decision after slipping into a public, electronic law library, an increasingly popular stop on the Washington information highway.
For the first time in their lives, nonlawyers like Mrs. Benson have the resources to hunt down state laws and regulations that relate to problems at work and home.
Some attorneys warn, though, that people can trip themselves up by playing lawyer.
Though Washington appears to have the most comprehensive, best organized computer law library, users of other electronic bulletin boards around the country are increasingly exchanging legal information informally.
And people in some 20 states have inquired about starting systems similar to the one in Washington, said William J. Sorcinelli, a Spokane attorney who runs the Washington bulletin board, called Legal Ease.
The Legal Ease library contains the complete text of state laws and regulations, as well as fill-in-the-blank legal documents that entrepreneurs have transferred into computer files.
Consumers can get the information, often free, by logging onto an electronic bulletin board.
One of the library's 2,000-odd users found Washington laws that helped him quash a school proposal to drop his children from the bus route.
Another person showed the local dogcatchers that they weren't allowed to peek over fences to find unlicensed dogs.
Mrs. Benson learned that the fence surrounding her sheep pasture probably could stay because it had been up so long.
The dispute seemed headed for a courtroom, but the neighbor backed down.
"I've told all my friends that if they need legal information, then they can call us, and we can get it off of this board," she said.
Chances are, Mrs. Benson's local courthouse has books with the same laws that she dug up by computer.
But she lives 30 miles outside of Spokane.
And it would have taken hours for a nonlawyer like herself to find the information she got in 30 minutes by typing the right search words.
"I would never have gone somewhere else to get the information, most likely," said Mrs. Benson of Elk, Wash.
"I would have said, `It's out of my league.'
This gave me the presumption that I had some rights."
Besides looking up laws -- most frequently those covering family matters and traffic court-consumers also swap advice.
Similar legal-chat lines exist on numerous bulletin boards and computer networks such as America Online Inc. of Vienna, Va.
These legal exchanges are particularly popular among law students.
And even an expert witness, Stephen Hollander, used such a network for legal advice about a year ago, when he was involved with a class-action lawsuit in Ontario.
The Canadian province didn't allow class actions until 1992.
"We had the legislation in place, but nobody really knew what to do," said Mr. Hollander of Ottawa.
"How do we go about getting in contact with class members?
A whole raft of practical questions like that."
He posted a query on a legal-chat section of Columbus, Ohio's CompuServe Inc., a unit of H&R Block Inc., and the next day had the name of a class-action expert.
Attorneys, who use similar networks themselves, generally say they see nothing wrong with making state and local laws available electronically.
But they warn that consumers may not be getting the full picture by just reading a law.
Mrs. Benson, for instance, had focused on a state law that she read to mean that she could keep the fence in place because it had been up longer than seven years.
What she didn't know is that courts generally require that, to have a chance of being protected, a fence must be standing for 10 years in such disputes, said Ellen Conedera Dial, chairwoman-elect of the Washington State Bar Association's real property section.
That wouldn't have made a difference in Mrs. Benson's case, since the fence had been up 15 years, but it is something she should have known before going to court.
"Just looking up the statute can really lead one to the wrong conclusions," said Ms. Dial.
Other lawyers point out that courts often re-interpret laws, so that the legal meaning isn't the literal one.
And even the literal meanings can be a puzzle for the layperson.
"I think everybody ought to have access to the statutes," said Mark Brifman, an Encino, Calif., attorney and self-described computer nut.
"The real issue is, `Can somebody who isn't a lawyer understand most of the codes that are written?'"
With just such dangers in mind, Spokane computer consultant Miles E. Crawford used Legal Ease mainly as a tool to shave attorney fees when he set up his corporation.
He used information from the bulletin board, including do-it-yourself forms, to draw up incorporation papers himself.
Then he asked an attorney to double-check the work.
"He wasn't exactly pleased," Mr. Crawford said, laughing.
"I think he was expecting to make more money."
