UAL Corp. posted a substantially narrower loss for the fourth quarter and said its two biggest unions approved a plan for employees to acquire a majority stake.
The parent of United Airlines had a loss of $64 million, or $3.02 a share, after a $25 million charge related to reorganizing its computer reservations system.
That compares with a year-earlier loss of $224 million, or $9.27 a share, including a $16 million restructuring charge.
On an operating basis, UAL swung to a $19 million profit from a $326 million loss.
Revenue rose 14% to $3.64 billion from $3.2 billion.
But approval of the proposed $5 billion employee-led buyout by United's pilots and machinists was less than the stirring endorsement expected by labor leaders, who negotiated the deal on their behalf.
Among pilots who voted, 73% favored the concessions-for-equity transaction.
But fully 1,972 of United's 8,200 pilots opposed the measure in straw polls.
Meanwhile, machinists union members narrowly ratified the plan, with only 56% voting in favor.
Under the proposal, the pilots and machinists unions and thousands of noncontract employees would exchange wage and work-rule concessions for an initial 53% stake in UAL.
The plan also would permit United to set up a separate lowfare, short-route carrier with lower labor costs, making it a stronger competitor to no-frills Southwest Airlines and upstart carriers.
The vote shows that rank-and-file workers and union leaders differ sharply in their expectations for the airline industry's recovery.
The broad opposition also highlights how difficult it was to meld diverse employee interests into a single, palatable package.
The financial improvement UAL enjoyed last year, capped by yesterday's results, fueled employee skepticism about the need for sizable pay cuts and work-rule changes.
UAL had repeatedly indicated that if the unions didn't find some way to slash labor costs, it would have to contract out maintenance work and flight operations, threatening thousands of jobs.
With UAL's momentum gaining last year, it became harder for some workers to stomach the kinds of deep wage concessions proposed.
In the case of machinists, for example, a mechanic earning $21.89 an hour would see his hourly wages fall to $19.77 for nearly six years.
Said Len Cipressi, a United mechanic in Los Angeles who opposed the buyout, "I'm really skeptical that they would contract out our jobs."
"A number of people seemed to think a bluff was going on," acknowledged Dave Mitchell, secretary and treasurer of United's machinists union.
But he noted that the majority "didn't think so.
The alternative would have reduced thousands of jobs."
Some older pilots opposed the deal because of the planned reduction in company pension contributions, said pilots union advisers.
Moreover, some pilots feared they would enter retirement holding new UAL stock that could take some time to appreciate.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, UAL shares rose 75 cents to $145.75.
UAL management and union negotiators have spent the past couple of weeks hammering out details of a definitive agreement.
UAL faces the task of selling the transaction to shareholders, who so far have seemed lukewarm toward the deal.
Shareholders are expected to vote this spring.
United said its fourth-quarter traffic rose a healthy 8.4%, with the carrier gaining passengers as a result of the strike by American Airlines flight attendants in November.
Also, United's yield, or revenue per seat, grew 3.2%, partly reflecting higher ticket prices.
In a statement, UAL Chairman Stephen M. Wolf called the fourth-quarter and 1993 results a "vast improvement," but said they still were "unacceptable."
He said United had "severe losses" on its short domestic routes, and the proposed buyout offers provisions to fix that problem.
