The dollar gained against the yen yesterday as promising trade figures and a fresh trade agreement kindled optimism that the U.S. would accept a softer yen in return for Japan opening its domestic market to U.S. products.
However, the dollar eased against the mark as traders bet that the Bundesbank won't cut its key interest rates at its policy-making meeting today.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7460 marks, off from 1.7465 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 111.35 yen, up from 110.75 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4925, down from $1.4960.
About midday Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 111.43 yen and at 1.7466 marks.
The dollar dropped in Asian trading to an intraday low of 110.28 yen following comments by U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen critical of the slow pace of U.S.-Japan trade talks.
But the U.S. currency then began to take off after U.S. Commerce Department data showed November's trade gap with Japan narrowed to $5.72 billion, from $6.09 billion in October.
In addition, the overall November merchandise trade deficit was $10.17 billion, a cut beneath the market forecast of $10.51 billion.
Traders said the dollar gained more muscle after the Clinton administration extolled a Japanese plan to open its construction market to U.S. companies.
"The government of Japan has addressed all the major U.S. concerns," said U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor, in voicing approval of the pact.
The statement proved noteworthy because much of the dollar's recent slide against the yen was predicated on tough U.S. talk over the state of the trade talks, which triggered fears that the U.S. would again press for a stronger yen as a way to narrow the trade gap.
Traders took further comfort on reports of Mr. Bentsen's scheduled weekend meeting with Japanese Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii, agreeing it could ease the way for the remaining unresolved trade issues.
"The market is now beginning to realize that there are signs of improving U.S. trade relations with Japan," said Rich Shimokawa, vice president, foreign exchange, for Sumitomo Bank Ltd. in New York.
But Mr. Shimokawa also noted pressure still remains for a complete resolution by the Feb. 11 deadline, when Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa is scheduled to visit the U.S. for talks with President Clinton.
"There is still too much distance," Mr. Shimokawa said.
"The construction agreement signifies progress but the main focus should be on semiconductors and cars."
Indeed, U.S. negotiators demanded that Japan take emergency steps to increase foreigners' share in the Japanese semiconductor market, adding that Japan is failing to meet the goals agreed in a 1991 pact.
But Tokyo said no action is necessary, insisting that U.S. chip makers are generally satisfied with their access to Japan.
Traders nevertheless saw the progress in U.S.-Japan trade issues as a reason to return to more basic market factors -- such as the weakness of Japan's economy -- in determining the dollar's direction against the yen.
"The dollar had been in a medium-term uptrend against the yen," said William Arnold, chief dealer at Chemical Bank, noting the problems facing the Japanese economy.
