LAST YEAR, MOST Americans who bought new cars and trucks wanted them white.
But green, the earthy favorite of the 1960s, is staging a big comeback, according to the 42nd annual survey of vehicle color by DuPont Automotive, the DuPont unit that provides paint coatings for the Big Three auto makers.
Green ranked behind white in all but one category: sport and compact cars, where it was No. 1.
Nearly 20% of all vehicles purchased last year were white, down from 24% in 1992.
Green's popularity doubled, to more than 15% of vehicles purchased in North America.
Medium red was the No. 3 choice, accounting for 10.5% of vehicle purchases.
Bright red was No. 4 at 8.8%, and black, at 7.2%, ranked No. 5.
The shift toward green reflects consumers' changing lifestyles, says Roseann Forde, DuPont's fashion director of women's apparel.
"People who select green are socially well adjusted, civilized and suburban," says Ms. Forde.
"The fact that green is overtaking white indicates security is the big issue now.
In these uncertain times, people are looking for more security."
Green will remain popular for the next several years, says DuPont.
"No new color appears to be making a move that would rival the greening of the auto industry," says Bob Daily, DuPont Automotive's color styling manager.
"Nevertheless, change is clearly coming."
He predicts purple will become increasingly popular, as will gold.
PROTECTING YOUR car or truck from thieves used to be as simple as buying an alarm.
But as bandits become more sophisticated and aggressive, the types of antitheft devices are proliferating.
Malvy Technology of Oklahoma City has a system it claims makes it virtually impossible for car thieves to drive away.
With it, the steering wheel will spin freely without turning the tires.
"If you can't steer the car, you can't steal it," says J. Stephen Smith, Malvy's president, chairman and chief executive officer.
The system is sold in Europe and will be available in the U.S. by year's end for between $700 and $800.
Gaining popularity are tracking systems that lead police to stolen vehicles.
LoJack of Dedham, Mass., is the best-known provider.
LoJack is activated when a car is reported stolen; a transmitter in the vehicle leads police to its location.
The company says it has a 95% recovery rate, compared with with 64% nationally for stolen cars not equipped with LoJack.
The company said that in most cases, cars with the LoJack system are recovered within two hours.
It sells for $595.
More conventional antitheft devices are steering-wheel bars, such as The Club.
Such devices can be bought at automotive accessory and equipment stores for about $40.
Despite these gizmos, "nothing is foolproof," says Clarence Ditlow, director of the Center for Auto Safety.
To him, the most effective deterrent is common sense: Lock the doors and park in well-lighted areas.
AUTO COMPANIES love to boast about the "Car of the Year" awards they receive.
They take out full-page ads and flaunt their victories in TV commercials.
Consumers, the auto companies assume, will be impressed.
Not necessarily.
In recent years, the number of automotive awards has soared to more than a dozen.
This year, the Honda Accord is Motor Trend magazine's Import Car of the Year.
Mercedes-Benz's C-Class was named North American Car of the Year by a panel of automotive journalists.
The Acura Integra was ranked the Most Improved Car of 1994 by "America on the Road," a national radio program.
And the Ford Ranger XLT was crowned the Best American Truck Value by IntelliChoice, a San Jose, Calif., research firm.
"The more awards there are, the less impact they have.
People start tuning them out," says Peter Levy, president of IntelliChoice.
Auto experts say consumers and auto companies value some awards more highly than others.
Prizes given by J.D. Power & Associates, Motor Trend magazine and Consumer Reports magazine are especially valued, they say.
"The awards are indicative of all the things you're doing right," says John Maciarz, a spokesman for General Motors.
"You always appreciate that kind of recognition."
But winning an award doesn't guarantee sales success.
Consider the 1993 Mazda RX-7, Motor Trend's 1993 Import Car of the Year.
Its sales dropped 15.7% last year to just 5,062 vehicles.
AUTO MAKERS HAVEN'T recommended 10W-40 oil for engines since 1988, but many car owners continue to use the thick, gooey lubricant.
"People who grew up in the 1960s still put 10W-40 in their cars," says Jim Steiger, an oil specialist with the American Automobile Manufacturers Association.
About 32% of all automotive oil sold in the U.S. is 10W-40, even though the much thinner 10W-30 or 5W-30 is recommended for virtually every new gas-powered vehicle.
Even most cars built before 1988 run better with 10W-30 or 5W-30, auto makers say.
The W-30 oils flow more easily through a car's engine and are best for catalytic converters and engine maintenance, experts say.
The 10W40 oil takes longer to circulate through a vehicle's engine, which could make it difficult to start in cold weather.
And oil's thickness forces the engine to work harder.
Auto makers and the American Petroleum Institute have teamed up to steer consumers in the right direction.
The proper oil has always been listed in owner's manuals, but now auto companies and the oil industry are putting a seal of approval on cans of W-30 oils that meet certain performance requirements.
For instance, certified oil must pass cold-start tests and meet standards for fuel economy and engine wear.
