As gold struggles toward $400 an ounce, carrying gold-share prices higher, insiders at two big U.S. gold-mining companies are bowing to temptation and taking profits.
At Denver-based Echo Bay Mines, insiders sold more stock in the fourth quarter than in any entire prior year.
Recent Securities and Exchange Commission filings show that 11 insiders, including the chairman, jettisoned around 400,000 shares at an average price of $12.50 each in the October-December period.
And at Homestake Mining, of San Francisco, the level of insider selling is also at record levels, with more than 500,000 shares being dumped in the $19-to-$23 range between Nov. 1 and Dec. 27, SEC data indicate.
In nearly all the most recent instances of insider selling, the shares sold were first acquired through the exercise of options.
Option-related selling is generally viewed as a less significant indicator of insider sentiment than the sale of long-term holdings.
That's because options are often a large part of executive-compensation packages.
But analysts who follow insider trading argue nevertheless that record option-related sales by insiders shouldn't be ignored.
The top executive at Homestake begs to differ.
"The sales at Homestake were option-related and don't express any lack of faith in the company's prospects," says Harry Conger, chairman and chief executive officer.
After more than a decade of weak bullion and gold-equity prices, these industry insiders appear to be hedging their bets that the 10-month-old gold rally -- fueled in part by concerns over inflation -- will be long-lived.
Gold for February delivery closed yesterday at $393.60, up $1.40, on New York's Commodity Exchange.
While many gold analysts think bullion can climb into the low $400s this year on supply-and-demand fundamentals alone, there's considerable doubt whether gold can breach stiff resistance at $420 and above (particularly when oil prices, a major influence on inflation, have sagged to lows below $14 a barrel.)
Yet, rather than concede any heightened level of uncertainty about gold's future course, insiders at gold-mining companies argue that gold-equity profits "in the hand" are better than potential gains.
"We expect our executives to take profits periodically," says Echo Bay's chairman and CEO, Robert Calman, who sold 65,000 shares in December after the exercise of options priced at $5.75 a share.
"We tell our people: `When you get a chance to make some money on your option shares, do it, and put the profit away for old age.
"Last year," he adds, "was a good year for gold prices and a good year for our stock -- our shares were up 160% in 1993."
Echo Bay's shares began 1993 at $4.938 and closed at $12.875.
Yesterday, the stock rose 12.5 cents to close at $15, a 52-week high, in American Stock Exchange composite trading.
The stock ranked as the most active issue on the Amex in 1993.
Not surprisingly, Mr. Calman says Echo Bay share prices track gold prices closely.
"Our shares are doing well because gold is doing well," he says.
"We did a study that showed there's been an 80% correlation over the past decade between Echo Bay's share price and the price of gold."
It helps, of course, to have greatly reduced the company's debt-servicing costs and to have significantly cut the cash-based cost of production to around $215 an ounce, from an average of $240 in 1992, he adds.
But analysts note that Echo Bay could miss out on any major gold-price rally this year and in 1995 because it won't have full access to important reserves in Alaska for several years.
A lengthy construction schedule and a complex permitting process stand in the way of Alaskan production before 1997 at the earliest.
The "proven and probable" reserves at Echo Bay's two sites in Alaska are put by the company at 4.4 million ounces.
"Because Echo Bay's production profile is stable for the next several years, they won't benefit as much from a rising gold price as would a company with a more aggressive production" campaign, says Leanne Baker, a precious-metals industry analyst with Salomon Brothers.
She is maintaining a "hold" rating on the stock, with a target price for 1994 of $16.50 a share, assuming a $400 gold-price average on the year, and a target of $20.50 for 1995, assuming a $425 average price of bullion that year.
She expects Echo Bay to earn an operating profit of 11 cents a share in 1994 after what she expects to be an operating loss of about three cents a share for all of 1993.
Other analysts are less enthusiastic.
Marc Cohen, an industry analyst at Kidder Peabody, rates the stock an "underperformer," or, more bluntly, a "sell."
"I'm not even sure if the company's current valuation would be warranted if they had a spectacular exploration program, but they don't," he says.
"On top of that, they're a high-cost producer.
Yet people do want to own this stock.
It mystifies me."
Mr. Calman counters that the delay in tapping the Alaskan reserves is mitigated by the company's ability to sell forward up to a million ounces of unmined gold from those Alaskan reserves before production begins.
Last year, he said, the company sold 300,000 ounces forward from those mines.
Last year, Echo Bay produced an estimated 874,000 ounces of gold, up from 764,200 ounces in 1992, according to the company's preliminary figures.
Homestake shares doubled to $22 last year, and the stock rates a hold from Ms. Baker.
She says most of the good news is already reflected in the company's share price.
The stock closed yesterday at $24.125, off 75 cents and shy of its 52-week high of $24.875, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
"They've made tremendous strides in improving the profitability of their flagship Homestake Mine in South Dakota, but there are simply some better values to be found within the group" of large-capitalization gold producers, she says.
Mr. Cohen, the Kidder analyst, rates Homestake an "outperformer," or a notch below a "buy."
The stock has hit his near-term price target of $23-$24, but the company's announcement late last year that it had discovered a promising deposit near Eureka, Nev., was encouraging.
"We think it's a property well worth watching," he says.
"The stock now provides an exploration play."
