The Clinton administration and Congress are about to try to alleviate the superheadache known as Superfund.
At a news conference and congressional hearing today, Environmental Protection Administrator Carol Browner will unveil details of the administration's plan to rewrite the Superfund law, which governs the cleanup of abandoned hazardous-waste dumps.
Of all the nation's environmental laws, it is arguably the one most hated by businesses, having already cost them an estimated $5.7 billion in cleanup and litigation costs, with no end in sight.
Administration officials claim their proposal is designed to reduce the cost to businesses without diminishing the benefits for the environment.
In fact, both business groups and environmentalists will likely have complaints with the new proposal.
But in general, the new Superfund plan provides further evidence that the Clinton administration is far more pro-business in its approach to the environment than its campaign rhetoric would have suggested.
What's wrong with the current Superfund law?
In his first speech to Congress last year, President Clinton declared: "I'd like to use that Superfund to clean up pollution for a change, and not just pay lawyers."
From businesses and the environmental community as well, the main complaint is that the law, enacted in 1980 and revised in 1986, has led to too many lawsuits and too little cleanup: Of the $13.4 billion that business and government have spent on Superfund, according to an estimate by the Congressional Budget Office, $3 billion has been spent on litigation.
Most of the business community blames the litigation explosion on the fact that, as currently written, the law calls for "joint and several liability" in cleaning up toxic-waste sites.
That means an individual company can be held financially liable for cleanup of an entire dump site, even if the company dumped only a minute amount of waste there and even if that waste was dumped lawfully at the time.
Any company held liable then has a strong incentive to turn around and sue the other companies responsible.
The result is a flurry of lawsuits that can delay cleanup.
Business groups, and especially the insurance companies which often end up paying cleanup bills, argue that they shouldn't be held liable for toxic wastes dumped before the law was enacted in 1980, or even before 1986, when federal record-keeping requirements made it easier to determine which companies dumped which materials at a site.
Not coincidentally, 1986 is also when insurers started writing policies that explicitly exclude liability for hazardous-waste cleanup.
Environmentalists, on the other hand, like the current system because it strengthens the government's hand in reaching out-of-court settlements and enforces the principle that, no matter what the law said at any given time, it is the polluter, and not the general public, that pays for cleanup.
How would the Clinton plan change liability under the Superfund law?
The president's plan, which is expected to be introduced in the House by Democratic Rep. Al Swift of Washington and in the Senate by Democratic Sen. Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey, would limit, though not eliminate, lawsuits based on the two controversial types of liability.
Under the president's plan, a nongovernmental arbitrator, such as a nonprofit group, would determine which companies are responsible for which wastes at a given dump, and allocate costs among them accordingly.
Companies wouldn't have to accept this nonjudicial decision, but if they did, they couldn't be sued by other businesses seeking to rid themselves of part of their liability for site cleanup.
For companies that fight the Environmental Protection Agency in court, joint and several liability would still exist.
Businesses would still be liable for dumping that occurred prior to 1986.
But the federal government would create a new fund to settle lawsuits between polluting businesses and their insurers, with an aim toward reducing such suits by 95%.
The fund would be created by taxing property and casualty insurers $500 million in each of the first two years after the law takes effect, and as much as $700 million a year in the following three years.
Depending on the laws of the state in which they are suing, polluting companies could get 20%, 40% or 60% of their cleanup costs for wastes dumped before 1986 from the new fund.
In states that tend to favor insurers in such cases, such as Florida and New York, the fund would likely pay 20%; it would likely pay 60% in states that tend to favor polluting companies, such as New Jersey.
What other significant changes are in the bill?
Reflecting a longstanding consensus between the EPA and the business community, the Superfund plan would allow federal officials greater flexibility to approve different levels of cleanup for a Superfund site, depending on that site's expected future use.
In other words, the standard would be different if the site is going to become a parking lot or if it is going to become a playground.
But the EPA would move more quickly on "hot spots," or areas within waste sites where danger from contamination is particularly high.
Overall, the administration estimates the changes in standards will reduce cleanup costs by roughly 25%, though that could change as the bill makes its way through Congress.
In addition, purchasers of abandoned urban properties that have already been designated as Superfund sites would be exempted from Superfund liability, a move that is aimed at easing financial barriers to revitalizing urban areas.
What are prospects for the bill's passage?
Environmental and business groups are both likely to be critical of parts of the bill, but will probably focus most of their efforts on quietly changing the bill as it makes its way through Congress.
The strongest criticism of the administration bill will come from an unlikely alliance between Rev. Ben Chavis, executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and several insurance and other businesses, including American International Group Inc., Texaco Inc., Shell Oil Co., Phillips Petroleum Co. and Olin Corp.
Mr. Chavis, a leader of the "environmental justice" movement, says that the quickest way to clean up Superfund sites, which are disproportionately located in minority communities, is to eliminate the two controversial types of liability and pay for cleanup entirely with taxes on businesses and individuals.
Virtually everyone agrees that the legislation isn't likely to move quickly through Congress, and that final passage may not occur before the present law expires next fall.
If that is the case, Congress will have to pass a stopgap bill later this year continuing funding for the program.
Such a move, however, is likely to slow the pace of cleanups.
How will the tax on insurers be assessed?
The "fee," as the administration prefers to call it, will be determined by two formulas, one of them based on premiums charged for property and casualty policies written between 1970 and 1985, and the other for policies written after 1985.
