A few months back, it was the odd-economist-out who predicted a 7% Treasury bond yield in 1994.
But now a 7% yield seems just around the corner and what's hard to predict is this: Will anybody buy it?
Despite what some say is a bargain price for long-term government bonds, many big investors were sellers last week.
And there's fresh evidence that small investors are joining their ranks.
Mutual-fund investors withdrew $598 million from government-bond funds in the week through Wednesday, says AMG Data Services of Arcata, Calif.
That pace could quicken as small investors get February mutual-fund statements showing reduced values for their bond-fund shares.
But a few big money managers are taking the plunge back into the market.
And the recent buyers include one of the biggest players, the mutual-fund giant Fidelity Investments.
"I have found it very difficult to make money playing the trends," says Curt Hollingsworth, who manages seven Fidelity bond funds with combined assets of $3 billion.
"We've made the bet that interest rates will come down again.
We just don't know when."
The uncertainty doesn't faze Fidelity, given current economic fundamentals: "We'll be more aggressive buyers as interest rates move higher and higher," Mr. Hollingsworth says.
Friday the bond market seemed to be stabilizing.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond inched up to 92 18/32, a gain of 2/32.
The yield was 6.83%, unchanged from Thursday but lower than the 6.9% hit in intraday trading earlier in the week.
For the entire week, the price of the long-term Treasury bond fell 2 1/8 points, or $21.25 for each $1,000 of bonds.
Rates certainly could move higher; few bond investors are willing to suggest that the rough ride is over.
At a conference last week in Orlando, Fla., organized by the Public Securities Association, an industry group, queries about the status of the nation's bond market were met with weary looks.
"I don't know that the worst is over," says Nathan J. Kornfeld, managing director of risk management in the fixed-income division at Lehman Brothers Inc.
He does describe the performance of the bond market during the latter part of last week as "heartening" -- but mainly because prices didn't plunge as much as earlier in the week.
The massive selling by private-investor "hedge funds" and other speculative investors looking to unwind unprofitable leveraged positions may be over now, Mr. Kornfeld says.
Now the big risk is sales by individual investors.
If they redeem their mutual-fund shares en masse, disturbed by the lower values revealed in the monthly statements, money managers could be forced to sell debt securities to cash them out.
And that could send the bond market into another tailspin.
It's fear of such redemptions that has kept many money managers from buying as bond prices have cheapened of late.
And some, such as Van Kampen Merritt, a Chicago mutual fund company, have already sold some bonds, for profit-taking and "to build up a cash reserve," says Peter Hegel, a Van Kampen senior vice president.
"Certainly mutual-fund managers like us are unclear about the future: Are we going to start seeing redemptions?"
Mr. Hegel says.
"You have to be fearful of that."
The outflow of $598 million from government-bond mutual funds comes from mutual funds that report to AMG Data Services weekly.
Included are funds holding just Treasurys and those holding Treasurys and government-backed debt.
It was the fourth consecutive weekly outflow from those funds, and the largest in those weeks.
Also hard hit were junk-bond funds.
But AMG's numbers indicate that investment-grade corporate bond funds actually saw significant inflows in the latest week.
At Fidelity, Mr. Hollingsworth's Government Securities Fund shrank in the past week to $732 million in assets from $759 million the week before, reflecting both redemptions and decreased asset value.
Mr. Hollingsworth says he's buying 30-year Treasurys because he believes the yield more than compensates investors for inflation.
His theory is that inflation is tamer than investors generally believe.
He notes, for instance, that "unit labor costs" -- a blend of labor costs and productivity -- "have continued to drop."
The long-term Treasury bond is attractive above 5.75%, he says, and Fidelity has felt that way for six months.
Since mid-October, he has added a net $165 million in long-term Treasurys to the fund.
In the past week, the average maturity of the fund's bonds has grown to 16.19 years, up from 15.76.
Paul Kuhn, president of Bradford Investment Management, a Nashville affiliate of brokerage firm J.C. Bradford & Co., also is a buyer of debt securities.
But "we're chickens" when it comes to the more volatile 30-year bond, he says.
His firm advises private and institutional clients to buy debt with maturities of as much as 12 years.
James J. Cooner, senior vice president of tax-exempt bond management at Bank of New York, has recently been buying municipal bonds maturing in six to eight years.
Many of his clients are wealthy individuals looking to shelter savings from taxes.
Mr. Cooner says he has received many calls from such clients in the past week as the bond market plunged, but most aren't panicking.
In fact, Mr. Cooner is predicting a rally in municipal bonds because "in the next six weeks more people are going to belly-up to the bar, sign 1040 forms" and realize their taxes have risen.
That demand -- and a big slowdown in new issuance of municipal bonds -- should pump up prices, he says.
Several actively traded long-term muni bond issues were yielding between 5.53% and 5.59% Friday.
After a wild morning ride as investors sifted through confusing February employment data, bond prices ended mixed.
The 6 1/4% 30-year Treasury bond bested the rest of the market, edging up 2/32 to 92 18/32 to yield 6.83%, the same yield as on Thursday.
But the yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 6.36% from 6.33%.
The 10-year issue's price fell to 96.12 from 96.17.
"Trading has been more sane today Friday than it has been for a while," said Ward McCarthy, economist with Stone & McCarthy Research Associates Inc.
The calm after the storm could mean the market has reached a point where investors might be ready to push prices back up, he said.
But the morning was nerve-racking.
A 217,000 rise in February nonfarm payrolls initially touched off a wave of selling that was soon reined in as economists examined the data more closely.
The overall rise was larger than expected; economists were looking for a boost closer to 139,000.
But unusually severe weather throughout much of the country was said to have distorted the data.
Also, as economist Doug Schindewolf of Smith Barney Shearson Inc. noted, the data wasn't universally positive.
The average workweek, for instance, dropped by 0.5 hours, indicating a drag on economic growth.
"It's not a clear-cut strong report," he said.
But, he added, the data warn of enough economic strength for the Federal Reserve to justify tightening monetary policy.
But speculation that the Fed would tighten quieted immediately after the Fed injected reserves in the banking system through a $1.5 billion customer repurchase agreement at its usual 11:30 a.m. EST intervention period.
