An excerpt from the Aug. 10 press conference at the Justice Department discussing the Park Service Police report on the death of Deputy White House Counsel Vincent Foster.
Carl Stern is the department's Director of Public Affairs; FOIA refers to the Freedom of Information Act.
Mr. Stern: Thank you.
Thanks a lot.
Q: Wait a minute, sir!
Q: From which office are we getting the report?
Mr. Stern: The report --
Q: When is it being released?
Mr. Stern: As soon as the FOIA section processes the report, it'll be available to you.
That has already started before this meeting even took place.
Q: Do you have to file a request or is it going to be released to everybody at once?
Mr. Stern: The normal practice of the FOIA section is to call the people who have requested it and let them know that it's available and to ask them whether they would like it mailed or would they like to pick it up.
Mr. Stern: If you'll send an FOIA to Philip Heymann, the deputy attorney general, or to me, we'll make sure that it gets up to that section.
Q: The question is to both of these gentlemen here.
You say this man was in great depression and he'd been dissatisfied with the government.
Therefore we certainly need to know what departments and what agencies of government he talked with recently, and that would be in the telephone log, and you're not going to make that public?
Mr. Stern: Sarah, if you put in a Freedom of Information Act request, we'll make sure that it's handled.
Q: (Off mike) -- Freedom of Information Act -- (off mike).
I want to know what
Mr. Stern: Sarah, I don't think we have that available at this -- at this point.
Q: Well, why don't you?
Mr. Stern: You want some special servicing?
Is that it?
You're not content to wait and do it the normal way, through a Freedom of Information Act request?
Q: No.
Hell, no I'm not
Mr. Stern: Okay
Q: -- going to wait on that.
Mr. Stern: Thank you very much.
Upon reading this exchange, we did what we thought we were being asked to do, submit a FOI request to Mr. Heymann.
We received a letter dated Aug. 25 from Charlene Wright, Deputy Chief of the Initial Request Union of the Office of Information and Privacy at the Justice Department, acknowledging receipt of our letter on Aug. 18 and explaining:
This Office has a backlog of initial requests, as well as limited personnel resources.
As you may be aware, documents responsive to your request will require consultations with other Department of Justice components and agencies.
Accordingly, I must inform you that we will be unable to comply with the statutory time requirement for processing of this request on behalf of the Office of the Deputy Attorney General.
In October, we visited Mr. Stern's office to take up the invitation, also issued at the Aug. 10 press conference, to view an actual copy of the note discovered at the bottom of Mr. Foster's briefcase.
The text had been released but copies had been withheld "to respect the family's wishes."
To the untrained eye, the handwriting on the note corresponded well enough with a sample of Mr. Foster's writing we had independently obtained.
At that time Mr. Stern predicted the FOI request would be honored within the month.
It is now the last day of January.
An independent counsel has specified that Mr. Foster's apparent suicide must be part of his inquiry into the activities surrounding Whitewater Development Corp.
Yet the report the FOIA section started work on prior to the Aug. 10 press conference has not yet been released.
What's more, the New York Post enterprised its own report, based for example on interviews with George Gonzalez, a Fairfax County paramedic who says he was the first rescue worker to view the body; Kory Ashford, a technician who helped put the body into a body bag; and Park Policeman Kevin Fornshill, the first police officer at the scene.
According to the Post, they found the body in a neat condition, still clutching the revolver with arms peacefully at its side, and with only slight traces of blood.
Homicide detectives interviewed by the Post uniformly said that when someone puts a revolver in his mouth and pulls the trigger, the result is "a mess."
The Post reports of last Thursday and Friday, which also detail apparent discrepancies over ballistic testing of the revolver, are either wrong or right.
If they are wrong, it's a great pity the complete Park Service Police report has not been released to still such speculation.
If they are right, the Justice Department and the Park Service Police have had a great deal to hide.
Either alternative suggests that the report should be released forthwith.
Accordingly, we filed suit in Federal District Court in Manhattan Friday in an attempt to get the government to comply with the requirements of the Freedom of Information Act.
We have also sent Mr. Heymann an additional FOI request for an actual copy of the Foster note; given what we now know about previously secret visits to his office the night of his death and the removal of papers, it's time the handwriting were studied by more than an untrained eye.
Strange things are happening at the Justice Department.
Mr. Heymann has just announced his resignation.
On the same day, Janet Reno's personal aide Lula Rodriguez departed amid an investigation of abuse of absentee ballots in a relative's Florida election campaign.
Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell has had to recuse himself from Whitewater, the department's most serious and sensitive business.
The Park Police are now telling the Post that if it wants further information on Mr. Foster it should use the FOI process.
The White House is refusing to comment on the Post stories on the grounds that the special counsel, Robert Fiske, "has now included that in the scope of his investigation."
While of course we have not polled all major news organizations, those our counsel has queried report that they did not go through the FOI formalities on the Park Service Police report, relying instead on private assurances it would routinely be released.
We might suggest, however, that they take some note of our lawsuit.
With all the backing and filling, we are starting to smell the issue of whether FOIA, and for that matter special counsels, can be invoked as part of a coverup.
