As the world focused on Norway on the eve of the Winter Olympics, thieves in Oslo stole the most famous Norwegian painting, Edvard Munch's "The Scream" (1893).
It had been moved from an upper-story gallery in the National Museum of Art to a ground-floor exhibition space showcasing the museum's best works on the occasion of the Games.
Adding insult to injury, the burglars left behind a note, thanking the museum "for the poor security."
Had some frustrated Munch lover seized the day?
Or was the taunting message a prelude to a demand for ransom, for media attention to a cause or for a political payoff?
No explanation has yet emerged, and the thieves are still at large with their booty, although they and their Mercedes station wagon were captured on a surveillance video.
The Oslo theft eclipsed what appears to have been the first major art theft of 1994: A 1928 Picasso painting, "Tete," in oil and sand on canvas and valued at $500,000, was stolen on Jan. 3 from the Richard Gray Gallery in Chicago.
The floor-to-ceiling glass wall of the second-floor premises was smashed, and while the silent alarm rang, the thief or thieves escaped.
Also taken was an acrylic-on-canvas landscape by Harold Gregor, a contemporary American artist whose Indiana scene is long and narrow at 9 inches by 28 inches.
A reward of $50,000 is being offered by the insurers for information leading to the recovery of the two paintings.
If you are offered a Roman stucco relief of a dancing girl wearing floating, leg-revealing garments but missing her head, beware!
Such a figure was stolen from the Tombs of the Claudii in the Ostia Necropolis near Rome in July, Interpol reports.
She is lovely, much-photographed and well-published.
As such, she is distinguished from many antiquities on the market whose previous ownership is a mystery.
The Republic of Greece sued the Michael Ward Gallery in New York in May 1993, demanding the return of an entire exhibition of ancient gold from Mycenae that Michael Ward was offering for $1.5 million.
The gallery claimed that since it had contacted Greece's culture ministry and been told that there was no evidence the gold items came from Greece, the suit should be dismissed.
Neal Johnston, Greece's attorney, argued that all known Mycenaean artifacts come under its cultural patrimony laws, because the city was only discovered in the 1870s and ancient trade in Mycenaean objects is unknown.
He added that Greece had reason to believe the objects were looted from a previously undiscovered tomb in Greece.
The objects date to the middle of the second millennium B.C.
In late December the parties settled, cutting short what would have been long and costly litigation.
The gallery donated the gold to the Washington-based not-for-profit Society for the Preservation of Greek Heritage, which plans to exhibit it.
A headless Khmer female deity from the late 12th or early 13th century will travel from Paris back to Angkor Wat in Cambodia.
Stolen last year and published last fall in "Looting in Angkor; One Hundred Missing Objects" by the International Council on Museums (ICOM), the figure was returned by J.M. Beurdeley, a Parisian dealer in Oriental antiquities, in a ceremony in Paris late last year.
The color booklet, with excellent illustrations and descriptions in French and English of the 100 objects declared missing after thefts on Feb. 9 and April 7, 1993, appeared in the fall.
It was prepared in collaboration with the Ecole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient.
ICOM sees this first return as evidence of the effectiveness of its publication.
The council is planning to issue comparable booklets about looting of cultural heritage in Latin America, Africa and Eastern Europe.
On the second day of trial, after eight years of wrangling, a dispute about the ownership of a small early gouache by Marc Chagall has been settled out of court.
"Menageries" or "The Cattle Dealer" now belongs to Rachel Lubell, who purchased it at a Madison Avenue gallery in the late '60s, around the time the Guggenheim Museum noticed that the Chagall was missing from its inventory.
When the museum discovered that Mrs. Lubell had the picture and she refused to give it back or bequeath it to the Guggenheim, the museum sued.
Mrs. Lubell in turn sued her vendor's estate, which then sued the gallery's source, another dealer who denied having acquired it from a former mailroom employee of the museum.
All the parties have agreed that Mrs. Lubell is now the owner of the gouache, and that the museum will receive a total payment in the neighborhood of $200,000, with each defendant contributing an undisclosed amount.
Had the court decided in favor of the museum, Mrs. Lubell and the other defendants faced huge expenses: payment of current value plus the legal costs of the trial.
For the Guggenheim's part, its claim to have been the true owner is left intact by the settlement, and it will live without this Chagall.
Indeed, not long ago, the trustees deaccessioned several other, more impressive works by the artist.
Ms. Lowenthal is executive director of the International Foundation for Art Research (IFAR).
