When Kim Young Sam campaigned for president in late 1992, he got some of his biggest ovations by vowing to tame chaebols, the huge conglomerates that dominate South Korea's economy.
A year after President Kim's inauguration, his campaign rhetoric has slammed into the reality of Korea's industrial culture.
A campaign aimed at breaking up the mostly family-owned chaebols has all but evaporated, and big business now appears stronger than ever as it prepares to monopolize a 12-year, $50 billion program to upgrade telecommunications services.
"Nothing has changed," says the chairman of a midsize conglomerate.
"The administration had a chance to reform the chaebols, but the weak economy forced it to back off."
Most economists agree on the need to restrain the chaebols, which spearheaded Korea's economic development but now are considered too big and clumsy to compete in mature export markets.
Their habit of using their successful affiliates to subsidize their money-losing units also makes it hard for small competitors to break into the market.
Industrialists are quietly scoffing at a government plan, unveiled last month, offering incentives to encourage the chaebols to focus on two or three core fields.
A similar program introduced in 1991 failed.
"We will continue to focus on our main businesses," the chairman of one of Korea's largest chaebols said recently over lunch at Seoul's tony Metropolitan Club.
"But we have no intention of selling off our other businesses."
Rather than regroup, the administration appears to be rolling over.
In December, President Kim asked the Federation of Korean Industries, an association of chaebols, to choose a single consortium to build the country's second cellular-phone network.
The government's decision to wash its hands of the matter is so it can avoid the mistakes of a previous tender for the same project.
In late 1992, the government awarded the contract to a consortium led by Sunkyong Group but withdrew it amid charges of favoritism; the group's chairman, Chey Jung Hyon, is the father of ex-President Roh Tae Woo's son-in-law.
But leaving the decision up to the chaebol federation bothers some bidders, because so much is at stake.
The system will be part of a mobile-telecom business expected to produce around $6 billion of revenue annually by 2000.
Korea Mobile Telecom Co. serves the country's existing mobile-phone users, which number about 400,000.
The nation's total number of users is expected to grow to four million within the next six years.
Three foreign firms -- GTE Corp. of the U.S., Hong Kong's Hutchison Telecommunications Ltd. and Britain's Vodaphone PLC -- were all part of the Sunkyong-led group.
They have waited a year for the second tender to take shape, along with a covey of other foreign companies, including Southwestern Bell Corp., Bell Atlantic Corp. and Nynex Corp., all of the U.S.
The federation is expected to name the leader of the mobile-phone consortium this week after reviewing tenders.
Later this month, after consulting with the winner, it will decide which companies will round out the group.
People close to the negotiations say the bidding has set off a feeding frenzy among the country's top business groups.
"The lack of transparency in this thing is remarkable," says a Western diplomat who is representing some foreign companies in the negotiations.
The chaebols "are all cutting backroom deals so that everybody's happy."
Ironically, the Federation of Korean Industries is headed by Sunkyong's Mr. Chey.
Late last month, Sunkyong said it was pulling out of the cellular-phone tender.
A week later, it emerged with a 23% stake in Korea Mobile Telecom, acquired through a government auction of 80% of the company's shares.
Similarly, the Tongyang Group abandoned its bid to lead the cellular consortium after snatching a 10% share of Daecom, Korea's No. 2 carrier of international telephone and data traffic, following a government auction of Daecom shares late last year.
Sunkyong's foreign partners threatened to take legal action in response to the chaebol's decision to bolt the mobile-phone tender but have since fallen silent.
Some observers suspect they have been mollified with promises of a stake in future telecommunications projects or are simply holding out for a piece of the cellular consortium.
GTE, Stamford, Conn., is "deeply concerned about the proceedings" of the tender, said Anthony J. Knight, vice president of the international-business division.
He said GTE has "studied its legal position in depth and . . . will protect its interests and the interest of its shareholders," but he wouldn't say if the company plans to take legal action against Sunkyong.
According to terms of the second tender, 20% of the equity in the new consortium can go to foreign companies.
That is down from the initial tender's 33% ratio, which has irked U.S. trade officials.
During bilateral trade talks in Washington earlier this month, U.S. negotiators tried in vain to have the foreign-equity portion returned to its original level.
With Sunkyong and Tongyang apparently out of the running in the mobilephone bid, a company named Kolon Group is now the prime candidate to lead the consortium.
Pohang Iron & Steel Co., Korea's leading steel manufacturer, had expressed an interest in running the group but will content itself with an exclusive contract to provide fiber-optic cable systems, people close to the bidding say.
