"Earlier today, I received a call from the White House . . ."
That's how Lodwrick Cook, chairman of Atlantic Richfield Co. (Arco) and pal of President Clinton, began a Jan. 12 faxed letter urging his fellow CEOs not to oppose the Clinton health care plan.
So far he's failed, but the opera isn't over until the First Lady sings.
Let's peek behind the curtain at what has become a frantic White House lobbying campaign to prevent further political damage to its redesign of one-seventh of the U.S. economy.
Collars must be tightening in the warroom.
Keep in mind that one secret to Mr. Clinton's political success has been at least some business support.
In 1992 he reeled in Silicon Valley entrepreneurs upset with Darmanomics.
During last year's tax battle he enlisted 68 big-time CEOs to provide the political cover of a White House photoop.
Arco's Mr. Cook was one of them.
Mr. Clinton has a similar strategy this year for health care, only more so.
Because voters refuse to pay higher taxes, business is supposed to be the tax collector for the health care state.
This is done in the Clinton plan through the "employer mandate," which means that businesses must provide health insurance to all workers while government sets all of the rules.
It's a sly scheme of stealth financing, because it disguises state control (and responsibility) through a business middleman.
But such a scheme won't sell in Congress unless enough businesses volunteer to play tax collector.
Small business hit the barricades against the plan early.
So the White House has been counting on Big Business, which it hopes it has lured with special favors (such as a $6 billion-a-year bribe for early-retiree health benefits).
Well, maybe not.
The biggest shock for the Clintons is opposition from the Business Roundtable, which is hardly a bastion of Reaganite free enterprise.
The Roundtable includes the biggest of the big in corporate America, established managers more than risktakers.
Its CEOs are respected pooh-bahs who don't like political fisticuffs.
Yet when the Roundtable's health care task force inspected the Clinton plan, it voted 14-1 to reject it.
(Chrysler, which gets a big bribe in the Clinton plan, was the dissenter.)
Instead, the task force threw its support behind the more free-market bill sponsored by Tennessee Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper.
The CEOs don't like everything about Cooper either, but they favor it "as a starting point."
The Cooper bill "avoids unnecessary governmental regulations and new off-budget entitlement programs," says a draft of the Roundtable position leaked to me.
That's when the White House hit the phones.
Bob Rubin, Roger Altman and even the Rose Law Firm's most famous former S&L lawyer lobbied the CEOs not to back Cooper.
In case charm failed, Energy and Commerce Chairman John Dingell was also asked to weigh in.
"He told them that if they endorsed a specific plan, it would make it hard for them to fix the Clinton plan some time later," says Mr. Dingell's spokesman.
Sure, and the Grand Inquisitor was only interested in saving souls.
A few CEOs naively fell for this line.
In his letter to other Roundtable members, Arco's Mr. Cook wrote that "the White House tells me they are making some progress in developing a final plan but need additional time."
Final plan?
The White House listened to business for a year while writing the Hillary plan, ignoring the advice.
Its strategy now is to prevent any credible opposition from forming, brazen the Clinton plan through the House on a partisan vote, force moderate Democrats to compromise on its terms, then break a Republican Senate filibuster.
Most of Hillary's plan would then be law.
The last thing the White House wants is for a moderate alternative such as Cooper to emerge, since that could let a coalition of Democrats and Republicans stop the Clinton plan cold.
That's why Mr. Dingell wants to railroad a bill through his committee by early April, before an alternative can gel.
It's also why he and the White House want to deny Mr. Cooper the Roundtable's support.
So far their lobbying has only half worked.
Despite the arm-twisting, the Roundtable Policy Committee voted 45-14 in a conference call last week for Cooper over Clinton.
But bowing to Arco's Mr. Cook and others, the CEOs put off a final decision until they meet face to face on Feb. 2.
This gives the White House time to schmooze more CEOs to stay neutral, or to impress them with State of the Union salesmanship.
Perhaps Mr. Cook and other Clinton CEOs are just politically naive, mere babes in the Beltway.
But it's also fair to point out that Arco wouldn't suffer the way small companies would under the Clinton plan.
With 26,000 employees it is big enough to opt out of bureaucratic "health alliances."
It could also pass on its early retiree health costs to Uncle Sam.
And it's always nice to have a friend in the White House to help with those nasty Clean Air rules.
If these CEOs are motivated by more than self-interest, they might recall the fate of poor Roy Vagelos.
The Merck CEO was schmoozed himself in 1992; he even lent the Merck campus for a Clinton speech.
Yet within weeks Merck was being denounced as just another drug profiteer.
Politicians on a mission don't listen to reason; they only heed the raw power of a united opposition.
