The National Association of Securities Dealers Inc. announced disciplinary actions against a number of firms and individuals for violations of its rules and securities laws.
Powell & Satterfield Inc., Little Rock, Ark., was expelled and principal Scott A. Welch was fined $50,000 and barred.
They didn't admit or deny operating a securities business with net capital below the required minimum, among other violations.
Princeton American Equities Corp., Phoenix, and principal Robert E. Holbert were fined $22,500 jointly and severally, and the firm and principal Cary W. DePriest were fined $7,500 jointly and severally.
The firm was suspended for 20 days, and the two men each suspended for 15 business days.
The charges involved net capital and bookkeeping violations, as well as the sale of securities on a principal basis without a current registration statement in effect.
Commenting on the proceeding, Dale Eyman, chairman of Princeton American Corp., parent of Princeton American Equities, said, "a great deal of that was because of an illness of an employee, but I can't disclose the name of the employee."
AAM Securities Inc., St. Louis Park, Minn., and principal Michael Gerardy Awes were fined $13,000 jointly and severally, without admitting or denying allegations that they made unsuitable investment recommendations to customers.
Mr. Awes was suspended in a principal capacity for 10 business days.
Colonial Securities Inc., New York, and principal Yee Yee Wong, Flushing, N.Y., were fined $20,000 jointly and severally, and Mr. Wong suspended for 10 business days.
They didn't admit or deny that they allowed an individual to act as a broker without being properly qualified.
Mr. Wong said the problem involved a bookkeeper's mistake, adding that he consented to the sanctions because of legal costs.
Unless otherwise noted, none of the firms and individuals could be reached or had any comment.
Consolidated Investment Services Inc., Littleton, Colo., and principals James Fainter, Bellevue, Wash., and Norman Rounds, Littleton, Colo., were fined $15,000 jointly and severally -- each responsible for the entire amount -- on findings that the firm failed to adequately supervise a broker.
Mr. Rounds said the decision doesn't reflect the fact that the broker failed to disclose outside sales activities to his firm, according to the company's legal counsel.
Masters Financial Group Inc., Little Rock, Ark., was the subject of two separate proceedings.
Masters and principal Hale Ray Spiegelberg, Atlanta, were fined $35,000 jointly and severally and the firm was required to pay $12,131 in restitution to public customers.
Mr. Spiegelberg was suspended in any principal capacity for five years and required to pay $129,166 in restitution.
They didn't admit or deny findings of selling securities at unfair prices and acting as an underwriter for unregistered shares, as well as recordkeeping and other violations.
In the second proceeding, Masters, principal Richard E. Torres and principal Gandy L. Baugh, and Mr. Spiegelberg were fined $15,000 jointly and severally, without admitting or denying allegations that they conducted a securities business while failing to maintain required minimum net capital, and that Mr. Spiegelberg functioned as a controlling person without properly registering.
Bey Securities Corp., Atlanta, and principal George Beylouni Jr. were fined $10,000 jointly and severally for net capital violations.
Mr. Beylouni said he is in the process of paying off the fine, and called the penalty "very, very harsh relative to the little amount of business we did."
Donald C. Alaimo, Mount Laurel, N.J., was fined $20,000 and barred, without admitting or denying charges; Matthew R. Arnott II, Mobile, Ala., fined $6,000 and barred, without admitting or denying allegations; Joseph S. Baba, Cary, Ill., fined $20,000, suspended in any capacity for 45 days, and suspended in any principal capacity for two years; he didn't admit or deny allegations.
Joseph K. Barbara, Yardley, Penn., fined $20,000 and barred; Alan G. Bingaman, Seabrook, Md., fined $70,000, barred, and ordered to pay restitution to customers; he didn't admit or deny allegations.
William Jackson Blalock, Atlanta, was fined $50,000, barred, and required to pay jointly and severally with a member firm $118,300 in restitution.
Principals Charles Lee Bradley, Duluth, Ga., and John Wilson Ringo, Marietta, Ga., were each fined $10,000.
The NASD said a member firm, acting through Mr. Ringo, conducted a securities business without sufficient net capital, and failed to make a record of customer funds received and forwarded.
The NASD said the firm, through Mr. Blalock and Mr. Bradley sold shares at unfair prices, and that the firm, acting through the three men, permitted Mr. Blalock to function as president and sales representative of the firm without proper NASD registration, among other violations.
The three men have appealed the action to the Securities and Exchange Commission and it isn't in effect pending consideration of the appeal.
Robert L. Bootes, Louisville, Ky., was fined $40,000 and barred, without admitting or denying allegations.
Mr. Bootes said the rules he is accused of violating are vague and that after fighting the NASD over the matter for two years, he decided it wasn't worth fighting anymore.
John William Brosemer, Winter Springs, Fla., was fined $50,000 and barred.
John Joseph Capano, New York, was fined $30,000 and barred, without admitting or denying allegations; George F. Cerwin III, Palm Harbor, Fla., was fined $10,000 and suspended for 60 days and Darryll W. Rathburn, Palm Habor, Fla., was fined $7,500 and suspended for 60 days.
They were required to jointly and severally pay $34,000 in restitution to public customers.
They didn't admit or deny findings.
John Lyle Clements, Novi, Mich., was fined $7,500 and suspended for 15 days, without admitting or denying allegations.
Dennis Michael Depping, Springfield, Mo., was fined $5,000 and barred, without admitting or denying allegations; Mark Ross Elston, Shawnee, Kan., was fined $10,000 and suspended for six months, without admitting or denying allegations; Edward C. Farni II, Excelsior, Minn., and William S. Wright Jr., Bloomington, Minn., were each fined $10,000 and suspended for 30 days; Mr. Farni has appealed the action to the SEC.
Kenneth David Freeman, Swansea, S.C., was fined $40,000 and barred, without admitting or denying charges; Francis W. Glampa, Philadelphia, was fined $5,000 and suspended for 10 business days and ordered to pay $10,500 in restitution; the action has been appealed to the SEC.
Steve A. Goddard, Haleyville, Ala., was fined $5,000 and suspended for 30 days; H. Barry Goodman, Deerfield, Ill., was barred, without admitting or denying allegations; Richard T. Greenfield, Hermitage, Tenn., was fined $15,000 and barred, without admitting or deny allegations; Vincent John Higgins, Cape Coral, Fla., was fined $50,000, barred and required to pay $57,568 in restitution, and George Cable Kelley, Fort Myers, Fla., was fined $5,000 and suspended for 10 business days.
Mr. Kelly didn't admit or deny charges.
Salvatore Anthony Iradi Jr., Monmouth Beach, N.J., was fined $25,000, barred and required to pay $41,900 in restitution, without admitting or denying allegations; Francis A. Jacob, Lakeland, Fla., was fined $100,000 and barred; Harold Frank Janecky Jr., Excelsior, Minn., was fined $20,000 and barred; Ida M. Jantz, Oklahoma City, was barred, without admitting or denying charges; Robert M. Kaplan, Paradise Valley, Ariz., was fined $50,000 and barred, without admitting or denying allegations; and Larry William Kennaugh, Mount Vernon, Wash., was fined $25,000 and suspended for 30 days.
Mr. Kennaugh said: "The NASD never substantiated its charges against me.
They fined me for buying an unapproved shell broker dealer that had never done any business."
Brian Gerard Krause, St. Clair Shores, Mich., was fined $15,000 and barred, without admitting or denying charges.
An attorney for Mr. Krause said that Mr. Krause denies the NASD charges brought against him.
Mr. Krause, he said, was a salesman at his company at the time the allegations occurred and was "assured by principals of his company that the investment opportunities they were selling to people didn't require registration as securities."
The attorney also said Mr. Krause has previously entered into an agreement with the NASD by which he wouldn't have to pay a fine "provided he not work in the securities industry in the future."
Joseph L. Lachermeler, Northglenn, Colo., was barred; Stephen Lentz, Peabody, Mass., was fined $100,000 and barred, and required to pay restitution totaling $25,820, without admitting or denying charges.
George Locklear, Pembroke, N.C., was fined $75,000 and barred.
Steven W. Marzett, Broken Arrow, Okla., was fined $50,000 and barred, without admitting or denying allegations; David T. Nadell, Chair Shores, Mich., was fined $2,500 and suspended for 60 days, without admitting or denying allegations; Roderick Odom, Selden, N.Y., was fined $8,000 and barred.
Michael W. Overly, Dayton, Ohio, was fined $8,000 and suspended for 30 days, without admitting or denying allegations; Chris G. Padgett, Aiken, S.C., was fined $120,000, barred, and required to pay $60,000 in restitution; Greg S. Passales, New York, was fined $20,000 and barred.
Daniel Bruce Perry, Henderson, Nev., was fined $25,000, barred, and ordered to pay $21,554 in restitution.
David James Pompo, Romeo, Mich., was fined $50,000 and barred, without admitting or denying allegations; Anthony I. Putman, Detroit, was barred, without admitting or denying charges.
Martin Rodriguez, Salinas, Calif., was fined $8,390 and barred; Michael K. Roglen, Xenia, Ohio, was fined $65,000 and barred, without admitting or denying charges.
Helene R. Schwartz, Maple Shade, N.J., was barred in any capacity, with the right to reapply after one year; the action has been appealed to the SEC.
Joel Eugene Shaw, Greenville, S.C., was fined $10,000 and barred, an action appealed to the SEC.
Curtis Lester Thomas, Burnsville, Minn., was fined $20,000 and barred.
Glenda Zoe Tolliver, Kansas City, Mo., was fined $100,000 and barred, without admitting or denying charges.
Troy A. Wetter, Greenview, Ill., was fined $20,000 and barred.
Mr. Wetter said that the fine wasn't justified and that he couldn't properly defend himself.
"I was never provided a complete layout of the complaint filed against me.
The NASD based their judgment off records that I didn't have in my possession," he said.
John D. Wilshere Jr., St. Albans, W.Va., was fined $10,000 and suspended for 30 days.
Robert A. Lacey, Marietta, Ga., was fined $10,000, without admitting or denying charges.
Klaus Langheinrich, Murray, Utah, was fined $10,000, an action that has been appealed to the SEC.
Mark A. Perosi, Staten Island, N.Y., was fined $10,000, without admitting or denying allegations.
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SECURITIES DEALERS INC. said David T. Nadell, St. Clair Shores, Mich., was fined $2,500 and suspended in any principal capacity for 60 days, without admitting or denying allegations.
An article Friday incorrectly said Mr. Nadell was suspended in any capacity.
(WSJ Feb. 24, 1994)
