Oded "Ed" Aboodi, the deal-making adviser to Time Warner Inc., is negotiating with the Securities and Exchange Commission to avert possible charges of insider trading in the company's stock, according to people familiar with the investigation.
Mr. Aboodi's attorneys are discussing a deal that would require Mr. Aboodi to pay as much as $800,000 in fines to settle an insider-trading investigation against him and his son, David.
If the deal were to be concluded, Mr. Aboodi would neither admit nor deny guilt.
Whether David Aboodi will face any SEC or criminal charges remains uncertain.
He couldn't be reached for comment.
An SEC official declined to comment.
The elder Mr. Aboodi, who advises Time Warner through his Alpine Capital Group investment-banking firm, was traveling, his office said, and couldn't be reached.
And Dennis Block, one of his attorneys, didn't return calls seeking comment.
Time Warner also declined to comment.
A person close to the senior Mr. Aboodi said that his position is that he did nothing wrong, but is willing to settle the matter to shield his son from possible charges.
However, individuals familiar with the investigation said that government lawyers believe the elder Mr. Aboodi may have been responsible for questionable trades, which were executed for the Aboodi family's personal account.
Several people familiar with the investigation said it is focused on suspicious trading in Time Warner shares before the company announced a stock-rights offering in 1991.
As Time Warner's principal financial adviser, Mr. Aboodi helped structure the offering.
According to these people, David Aboodi allegedly sold Time Warner common shares several days before the company announced the offer, which was intended to raise $3.5 billion from current shareholders.
The announcement of the offer instead sparked a steep week-long decline in Time Warner's share price, as holders rebelled against a pricing feature.
In the wake of the shareholder protest, the SEC eventually blocked the Time Warner offer as it was then structured.
At the same time that he sold common shares, the younger Mr. Aboodi purchased Time Warner convertible preferred shares, according to people familiar with the investigation.
The preferred shares were deemed more attractive because Time Warner, in announcing the stockrights offer, also said it would repurchase as much as 10 million shares of the preferred issue.
Negotiations with the SEC are continuing, individuals with knowledge of the matter say, and any possible settlement is now more than two weeks away.
