But one analyst says the stocks of alarm companies, while risky, are worth considering.
They stand to benefit from both high-tech innovations and, unfortunately, persistent crime.
"Police forces everywhere are being strapped," says George Fraise of Smith Barney Shearson in New York.
"The private sector will be increasingly relied upon for security, or at least the perception of security."
Mr. Fraise is a 30-year-old electronic-equipment analyst, who usually follows such giants as General Electric and Westinghouse Electric.
But he recently published a special report on electronic security that focuses on four small, relatively neglected New York Stock Exchange issues for which he sees potential.
He issued a "buy" recommendation on only one, Checkpoint Systems, despite a 64% drop in annual earnings that the New Jersey company reported last week.
Checkpoint's earnings have been depressed by expansion costs, but it and Sensormatic Electronics are leaders in the growing area of "electronic article surveillance," electronic tags attached to clothes, videocassettes and other products to trip up shoplifters.
Ever steal a hotel towel?
One day, most hotels could have alarm tags on the towels to nab you, says Mr. Fraise.
Sensormatic and Checkpoint, he adds, are also positioned to benefit from "source tagging," or putting tags in products like compact disks during manufacturing.
"Retail theft is a $30 billion-a-year problem; employee theft is a $20 billion-a-year problem," says Mr. Fraise, who can tick off just about any ugly crime statistic you care to know.
"Household burglary represents $5 billion in losses, but the fear of crime is even greater" than that number suggests.
Mr. Fraise says Checkpoint is a speculative stock, adding, "This is not for grandpa to retire on."
But he is betting the stock will rebound from last year's 34% plunge.
His target for the stock, which closed Friday at 13 3/8, is 17 over the next nine to 12 months.
Checkpoint officials weren't available to comment Friday, due to the Northeast's snowstorm.
But Mr. Fraise expects the company to earn at least 51 cents a share this year, a big improvement over 16 cents last year.
Poor earnings have soured many investors on the stock and helped drive down its price.
But Mr. Fraise says investors are overlooking the beefed-up product lines and sales force that Checkpoint has built.
Mr. Fraise says Sensormatic shares are less of a risk, but he can muster only a "neutral" rating, judging them too pricey at Friday's finish of 36 5/8.
"If it was at 28, it'd be a screaming buy," he says.
The same neutral rating applies to two alarm-monitoring stocks that Mr. Fraise is optimistic about: ADT and Automated Security Holdings.
Both ADT and Automated Security could benefit from an expected consolidation among alarm companies.
Many smaller ones have gone out of business because they couldn't keep up with the technology, particularly for "verification" systems that cut down on false alarms.
For example, authorities can now look through a tiny camera on a microchip to determine whether a burglar tripped an alarm, or just a cat.
If that kind of technology sounds exciting, it's worth mentioning again that investors have been beaten in the past by electronic-security shares.
"This is not a group for the faint of heart," says Mr. Fraise.
"These stocks are highly volatile and prone to earnings disappointments."
But what other industry has such a steady source of business?
Magellan going short?
It could happen if shareholders approve.
The $34 billion Fidelity Magellan Fund, the nation's biggest mutual fund, is seeking shareholder consent for several proposals.
Most are technical but one is eye-catching: If approved, Magellan could be allowed to sell stocks short, or make bets that they will decline.
Some state regulations restrict short-selling by mutual funds.
But if those rules are eased it would be interesting to see the impact that mighty Magellan could have in shooting down high-flying stocks.
Fidelity says the short-sale proposal is one of several rule revisions it hopes to make for all its funds.
