The home of the bean and the cod . . .
BOSTON -- Soon Boston may be just the home of the bean.
Years of overfishing and mismanagement have drastically reduced the cod population in local waters.
Fishermen are nervous.
Fish markets are scrambling to find other sea life to sell.
And New England consumers -- steeped in a cod-eating tradition that predates the first Thanksgiving -- are reeling from higher prices, waxy-yellow imports and strange new creatures on shelves once laden with cheap, fresh cod.
At the Purity Supreme supermarket fish counter in Weymouth, Mass., Margery Penney reluctantly snatches up a pound and a half of what they call "pre-frozen" cod.
"It doesn't compare to fresh," Ms. Penney says.
"My boyfriend refuses to eat it -- even if I try to fake him."
Things were simpler in the old days when the ocean teemed with cod -- including lunkers over 100 pounds.
When the explorer John Cabot reached North America in 1497, cod were so thick his crew caught them with baskets.
For centuries, the bottom-feeding cod fed New England, helped fuel its economy and framed its regional identity.
Generations grew up salting cod, eating codfish cakes -- and swallowing cod-liver oil.
A "Sacred Cod" hangs from the rafters of the Massachusetts House of Representatives -- put there in 1784 "as a memorial to the importance of the cod-fishery to the welfare of this Commonwealth."
"Cod was the economic building block of the region," says Kenelm Coons, executive director of the New England Fisheries Development Association.
"All these trendy seacoast towns in New England used to be lined with racks of cod drying in the sun.
The tonnage of fish that moved through Boston was really something."
But today, the beloved cod is in deep trouble.
Spawning stocks are at historic lows across one of the most fabled fishing grounds in North America, stretching from the Georges Bank off Massachusetts, through the Gulf of Maine to the Grand Banks of Newfoundland.
The 1993 U.S. cod catch was only about 49 million pounds, according to a federal estimate.
That's down 19% from 1992, and the lowest since 1973.
The catch is expected to decline further, fisheries scientists say.
Canada is even worse off: Cod fishing on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland is now banned.
Cod has been called "commercially extinct," and more than 30,000 people have lost jobs.
"It's a terrible shame," says chef Jasper White, owner of a seafood restaurant in Boston's North End.
"And it's not just cod.
All the popular species are dwindling.
We're depleting the ocean."
On Feb. 28, a flotilla of fishing boats chugged into Boston Harbor to protest the new federal rules -- which apply to haddock, hake and other bottom-feeding fish, too.
In New Bedford, Mass., the home of many fishing families, Mayor Rosemary Tierney wants the town declared a disaster area.
Yesterday, President Clinton, offering $30 million in federal aid to the industry, said fishing in New England is in "virtual collapse."
But what most crabs New Englanders generally are the changes in the marketplace.
No longer is shopping for seafood -- or ordering fish in a restaurant -- a simple task.
Today, it's more like taking a class in marine biology, as deep-sea delicacies once scorned show up on ice and on dinner tables.
At Mr. White's restaurant, you can dine on "grilled skate spareribs" sliced from the carcass of a thorny skate.
Not long ago, this voracious fish, with eyes on the top of its head and skin like a rosebush, was cursed by fishermen and thrown overboard as "trash fish."
At Skipjack's Seafood Emporium in Cambridge, cod is a no-show on the luncheon buffet.
In its place is a golden mound of deep-fried smelts -- sardine-like fish, popular elsewhere but new to Skipjack's.
Al Burns isn't interested.
"They look disgusting -- small and wimpy," says Mr. Burns, a Harvard University equipment buyer.
But after a few reassuring words from chef Andrew Wilkinson, Mr. Burns goes for the bait.
"I'd never seen them on a menu before," he says.
"They're very good -- very tasty."
Another newcomer: ocean catfish, also known as wolffish.
"It's a sweet, good-tasting fish," says Roger Berkowitz, owner of Legal Seafoods restaurants.
"But people envision it with whiskers, as a scavenger.
They just feel funny about it."
In some places, you will find pout -- also known as congo eel.
At $2.99 a pound, pout is one of the best bargains around.
But fillets -- two feet long and two inches wide -- kink and curl when cooked.
"Some chefs whack it with the side of a knife to relax it," says Mr. Coons.
Going With the Flow "We're venturing into new ground," says Matthew Faro, retail manager at Bay State Lobster Co., where cod sales are half what they were a year ago.
"You better be willing to change or you'll be swallowed up."
But in New England, known for its love of bland foods, traditions die hard.
That'll never sell, believe me.
And who wants to buy eel?
It sounds disgusting," says Tom Dillon, a retired teacher on Cape Cod who has eaten the peninsula's namesake for years.
"Haddock and cod are pleasing to the ear.
I'm not a prude.
But I am a fussy eater."
Cod and haddock still show up in New England markets.
But often, they come frozen from Iceland, Norway and Russia, where stocks are more abundant.
Fresh retail cod prices jumped to all-time highs at certain times this winter -- to as much as $9 a pound -- and are expected to climb higher.
And haddock -- another New England favorite even more imperiled than cod -- is pricier still.
One reason for the cod's decline is the Star Wars-like, satellite-based navigational equipment that guides boats unerringly to their prey.
"I believe it is now possible to catch the last haddock in the ocean," says commercial fisherman John Williamson of Kennebunk, Maine.
"We are wrenching the system out of balance."
To restore cod and other bottom-feeders to New England waters, the federal government has imposed a moratorium on new fishing permits and a 50% reduction in the days fishermen can spend at sea.
Even so, Mr. Coons thinks it could take 15 to 20 years for cod to recover.
In the meantime, fishermen and ports will be hurt.
The "new" fish on the market may help to some extent.
But they have problems of their own.
Consider the spiny dogfish -- a common New England shark increasingly popular among exporters.
"It's a slow-growing fish," says Mr. Coons.
"It gives birth to only a few young a year.
The market prefers females because they are larger.
It has all the ingredients of a species that could be easily and quickly overfished."
And then there's the problem of getting people to eat such things.
"Too many people eat with their ears," says Mr. Berkowitz, who would like to bring more poetry to sea names, hake for instance.
Mr. Berkowitz says it would sell better were it called "golden fillets."
A little linguistic legerdemain has worked for others, particularly the orange roughy -- an Australian fish popular in the U.S.
"I have to hand it to the Australians," says Mr. Berkowitz, "because they know how to market it.
You know what the name of the fish is in Australia?"
The answer: "Slimeheads."
