The big guy won.
For all the talk of clashing egos and grand corporate alliances, it was sheer size and financial clout that determined the outcome of the $10 billion takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc.
That's the lesson many investment bankers and analysts drew yesterday at the end of the monumental five-month battle.
They say it was the greater size of Viacom Inc., particularly after it agreed to merge with Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., that enabled Viacom to make a stronger bid for Paramount than QVC Network Inc.
The size mismatch between Viacom and QVC was often obscured by the excitement surrounding QVC Chairman Barry Diller, who promised that he could wring more long-term value from Paramount's assets than Viacom.
"The fact is, the guy who had more money won," says one investment banker involved in the deal.
Mr. Diller aside, this banker said, QVC bidding for Paramount "was like the minnow swallowing the whale."
Lisbeth Barron, who follows media companies at S.G. Warburg & Co., says that Viacom's "breadth of assets," with cable TV programming plus the planned addition of Blockbuster's videotape rental business, "gave Viacom's bid a psychological solidity."
According to the Value Line Investment Survey, QVC had estimated 1993 revenue of $1.26 billion and a year-end stock-market value of $2.16 billion.
Viacom, by contrast, had estimated 1993 revenue of $2.04 billion, and its year-end stock-market value was $5.6 billion, dwarfing QVC.
QVC's last bid for Paramount called for it to issue about 97 million additional QVC shares and warrants, nearly twice the 55 million QVC shares currently outstanding.
By comparison, Viacom is proposing to issue about 108 million additional shares and warrants to buy Paramount, less than the 124 million Viacom shares already outstanding.
Mr. Diller tried to make up for QVC's more limited financial resources by negotiating investments from outside partners which eventually totaled $3.5 billion.
But the cobbled-together alliance became too cumbersome when it came time to strengthen QVC's bid to match Viacom's promise to make additional payments if Viacom stock doesn't perform well.
When he explored strengthening his bid by arranging for future purchases of QVC's stock, Mr. Diller faced a split between his outside investors.
BellSouth Corp., which had already agreed to invest $2 billion in QVC, was reluctant to buy more QVC stock because other QVC partners were balking.
When Viacom Chairman Sumner Redstone negotiated his $8.4 billion merger with Blockbuster last month, he got access to Blockbuster's strong cash flow and nearly debt-free balance sheet.
Because he held 85% of voting control due to his ownership of supervoting Viacom Class A shares, Mr. Redstone was able to negotiate a deal in which he would issue stock to acquire Blockbuster.
"Sumner had one big chip to play with; he could issue a boatload of stock without giving up control," said Frederic Seegal, co-head of corporate finance at Salomon Brothers Inc.
"Barry didn't have that option.
Barry couldn't do what he had to do without giving up control."
Mr. Diller, arguing that the stock he would be issuing to acquire Paramount should trade at a premium based on his track record for creating entertainment properties, made a bid in which QVC common stock represented nearly 30% of the value, without any protection against a weak performance by QVC shares.
But Viacom offered a less volatile mixture of cash and securities that was composed of only 20% common stock; and unlike QVC, Viacom added a security that gave extra value if Viacom's stock didn't perform well over the next one to three years.
Mr. Diller may have been reluctant to match Viacom's stock-performance guarantee because the stock was riding more on his own perceived abilities to create future earnings than on any current earnings or cash flow coming in from existing businesses.
Although the Blockbuster deal will require the issuance of 177 million more Viacom shares, when that happens Viacom will be gaining access to a huge source of current cash flow.
While the Blockbuster acquisition carries clear long-term risks that new technologies will overrun the tape-rental business, analysts say the incoming cash should stabilize the combined companies' finances in the short run.
The epic Paramount takeover battle also marked the first appearance of huge alliances between companies in different sectors of the media business, particularly regional Bell operating companies.
Some bankers believe that such alliances are well suited to the fast evolving technologies of the media business, where companies with different delivery mechanisms, from cable TV to telecommunications, may join forces to gain a critical asset like the Paramount movie studio that fills their need for programming.
$69.14-a-share, $8.2 billion merger with Viacom Inc. Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. for possible Paramount bid for Paramount acting to monopolize cable TV business of financing Entertainment Corp. to sweeten bid Corp. to sweeten bid former programming subsidiary for stock whose value could top $20 billion Enterprises Inc. and Advance Publications Inc. 38% bid to $85 a share for 51% Liberty agrees to divest its QVC investment conditional Paramount chairman Martin Davis negotiated Viacom merger to avoid possible hostile bid by QVC chairman Barry Diller should have considered higher QVC bid saying Paramount directors must seek `best value available to shareholders' topping Viacom which asks for more time bidding process continues with deadline for final bids of Feb. 1 Blockbuster Entertainment, new Paramount bid with $105 a share in cash for 50.1% but reduces value of securities offered for 49.9%; traders still prefer QVC bid $107 a share cash for 50.1% plus security that rises in value if Viacom stock doesn't rise Viacom's for greater cash, extra value if stock doesn't perform P
