Welcome to the bazaar.
The legal marketplace used to function like a grocery store, where all shoppers paid the same price.
Now it's beginning to resemble a street fair, where savvy customers haggle for good deals and rubes are rooked.
Many companies have learned that attorneys will negotiate for volume discounts and other concessions.
But other clients haven't caught on, and inequities are developing.
The tougher, more vigilant clients are frequently paying less for the same lawyers.
Moreover, passive clients may not just be missing out on the benefit of the bargain.
In some circumstances, they may be unknowingly underwriting the sweetheart deals given to others.
John Marquess, a Philadelphia-based auditor of legal bills, reports that several companies approached him during past few months concerned that they were being selectively overcharged by attorneys who perceived them to be asleep at the switch.
He says audits by his company, Legalgard , turned up examples of law firms' passing costs challenged by one client on to another client.
"Cost-shifting is all over the place," Mr. Marquess maintains.
"I'm not saying that law firms have meetings and tell their people to shift costs.
I don't think anybody's that blatant," he adds.
"But there are subtle ways the message gets communicated."
He cites the example of a top partner who reminds fellow lawyers at a staff meeting that half the firm's top 20 clients have issued strict guidelines on legal bills.
"What's really being said is that the remaining 10 don't have a lot of controls, and costs could be shifted to them," Mr. Marquess says.
The adjustments occur not only on time sheets but also on expense forms and in decisions on how heavily to staff a case.
In a recent audit of legal bills to a Los Angeles health-care company that hadn't closely monitored its major outside law firm, Legalgard found three instances of individual lawyers billing more than 50 hours a day.
Its previous audit of the same attorneys for a company that had a reputation of being more vigilant turned up no such problems.
In audits for two companies in Florida, Legalgard determined that a midsized law firm charged one client 10 cents a page for photocopying -- after a higher rate had been challenged -- while charging a less confrontational client 50 cents a page.
In Sacramento, the auditor found that a midsized law firm handling dog-bite liability cases for several security companies assigned twice as many lawyers as usual to cases involving clients who typically didn't watch bills closely.
Among the most common, if fairly innocuous, cost-shifting techniques is taking a taxi ride home after working late on a variety of matters and then charging the most easy-going client for the whole ride, some lawyers who have done this say.
It's not easy for auditors, much less clients, to catch the cost shifters.
Few auditors or client companies are ever in a position to compare bills for similar work from the same firm.
The best that clients can do is "be tough, so at least you'll know that costs aren't being shifted to you," says John Toothman, chairman of The Devil's Advocate, an Alexandria, Va., litigation consulting firm.
Companies should be especially vigilant if they fit Mr. Toothman's profile of a "soaker client," one likely to be used to absorb the cost of discounts offered to others.
The classic candidate: a company that's handed a firm a big piece of litigation upon which the company's future depends.
Large matters are tougher for clients to track carefully.
Litigation tends to be less familiar to companies than transactional work, and lawyers can smell the fear of a desperate client, Mr. Toothman says.
To be sure, claims of cost-shifting may be overstated.
Jonathan Bellis, partner in charge of the law-office consulting group at Price Waterhouse, says legal-bill auditors may be tempted to raise clients' fears about cost-shifting for "self-serving" reasons.
But interviews with partners and associates at law firms across the country suggest that attorneys at all levels are aware of the phenomenon.
"We're told which clients have given us a billing cap and which haven't," says a young Los Angeles lawyer.
"And after a while, you sort of get a sense which clients you can bill more freely."
Alfred J.T. Byrne, a partner at the Washington law firm Patton, Boggs & Blow, says he hasn't seen lawyers actually handing off costs from one client to another.
But he says the rise of what he calls "ad hoc relationship negotiations" has certainly enabled larger and more aggressive consumers of legal service to obtain much more favorable terms from law firms than "one-shot, isolated, transitory clients."
Indeed, in recent years, many law firms have tacitly adopted multitier billing systems.
For example, certain firms now offer lower fees to clients of long standing who typically pay on time.
"There's a sort of a code," Mr. Toothman says.
Clients should ask for the "most favorable rate charged for services rendered to large, creditworthy clients" or the lowest rate "charged by such persons for similar work," he says.
Such terms are known informally as "most-favored nation" clauses, after international treaties between countries that commonly deal with each other.
Some major legal retainer agreements now routinely incorporate such clauses but, Mr. Toothman suggests, small companies or clients with only a limited amount of legal work shouldn't be afraid to request them.
