In half a decade as a hot institutional broker, Rafi Khan built an enviable reputation for picking stocks that subsequently soared in value.
Now the 43-year-old Pakistani native is the subject of lots of unwanted attention.
His associations with the powerful money managers and swindlers with whom he has rubbed elbows are coming under increased scrutiny by law-enforcement officials and others:
-- Federal investigators recently subpoenaed all of Mr. Khan's trading records from a stock brokerage firm that he partly owns and that also employs a Canadian stock swindler.
-- The Federal Bureau of Investigation has been asking about Mr. Khan's dealings with another convicted swindler whose family has a 40% stake in a small over-the-counter company in which Mr. Khan has been trading recently, says one former employee of Mr. Khan.
-- Some Canadian and U.S. regulators have begun informal inquiries involving some of the stocks Mr. Khan has backed and the funds that have purchased them.
These developments follow the request by a federal judge in New York that the Justice Department investigate whether Mr. Khan committed perjury in testimony he gave as part of a battle that he is waging for control of ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc.
For his part, Mr. Khan denies any wrongdoing and says he has never been charged with a crime.
All that investigators will get by looking through his trading records is a "headache," he says during a lengthy interview at his home here, which doubles as his office.
However, Mr. Khan does express bitterness and frustration at what he feels is the unfair treatment he is receiving at the hands of government officials, the news media and some of his longtime mutual-fund clients, who he says have shunned him in recent weeks.
Mr. Khan concedes that some of that wariness is understandable given the bad publicity he has been receiving.
Part of the coverage was sparked by the firing last month of prominent mutual-fund manager John Kaweske, who was dismissed by Denver-based Invesco Funds Group for allegedly violating the firm's employee stock-trading rules.
Mr. Kaweske has denied any wrongdoing.
Mr. Khan was put in the spotlight partly because he had worked closely with Mr. Kaweske.
The fund manager had purchased a number of the broker's favorite stocks, either for Invesco or his own personal stock portfolio.
However, Invesco has denied that Mr. Kaweske's dismissal was connected to his dealings with Mr. Khan.
The broker blames his current woes on what he calls a "despicable" campaign by ICN management that has included the filing of a lawsuit charging Mr. Khan with fraud, hiring private detectives to delve into his past and running full-page newspaper ads attacking his credibility.
ICN management says it is optimistic that it will win a shareholder vote, set for Tuesday.
Mr. Khan declines to predict the outcome.
Yet Mr. Khan's troubles also seem connected to some broader worries percolating through the securities business.
Regulators privately question whether high-powered stock promoters and brokers have developed too cozy a relationship with some fund managers.
They worry that some managers may be getting improper inducements to purchase certain stocks for their funds.
While no one has cited any specific evidence of wrongdoing by Mr. Khan, some regulators mention him as the kind of person whose dealings they want to examine more closely.
Mr. Khan certainly has had a career to attract attention.
A longtime insurance actuary, he became a stockbroker only about six years ago, landing a job at a regional firm in Los Angeles.
He soon began attracting institutional clients with his combination of astute picks and flamboyance.
His company analyses, done in what Mr. Khan calls his "National Enquirer" style, feature large, bold type, capital letters and provocative headlines -- such as his description of a favored Kentucky life-insurance company as "fingerlickin' good."
"Rafi is one of the most incisive and imaginative people in his trade," says Seth Glickenhaus, founder and president of Glickenhaus & Co., a New York money manager.
The current FBI inquiry into Mr. Khan is looking in part at his activities at the Beverly Hills, Calif., brokerage firm Reynolds Kendrick Stratton.
Last year, Mr. Khan went to work at Reynolds Kendrick and invested $500,000 as part of a new ownership group at the firm.
To help run the firm, the new ownership brought in Irving Kott, a convicted Canadian stock swindler with an international record of criminal and regulatory problems dating back to the 1970s.
Mr. Khan says he had nothing to do with that hiring and left the firm after he learned of Mr. Kott's past.
However, he retains his 7% ownership interest in the brokerage firm.
A Reynolds Kendrick spokesman says the U.S. attorney's office in New York has subpoenaed all of Mr. Khan's trading records at the firm.
As for Mr. Kott, he is still a "consultant" at the firm, the spokesman says.
Mr. Kott couldn't be reached to comment.
Kristina Kraverica, a 23-year-old former assistant to Mr. Khan, says she was recently contacted by FBI agents who inquired about the broker's dealings with Sherman Mazur, a Los Angeles real-estate syndicator who is serving a six-year federal prison sentence for fraud.
Before his incarceration, Mr. Mazur was a nearly full-time "consultant" to Gerant Industries Inc., a Beverly Hills firm that is 40%-owned by Mr. Mazur and his family.
In recent months, Mr. Khan has placed about 10% of Gerant's 130 million shares with some of his major institutional clients.
Mr. Khan acknowledges he also helped persuade his new employer, Phoenix-based Desert Mountain Securities, to become a market maker for Gerant.
Mr. Khan says he thought the stock of Gerant, which has interests in blood-plasma centers and real estate, had potential to increase substantially.
The stock closed yesterday in Nasdaq Stock Market trading at 6.25 cents a share, unchanged.
Mr. Khan says he met Mr. Mazur on a few occasions, mostly of a social nature, including a couple of racquetball games.
He says he knew of Mr. Mazur's legal troubles, but that didn't deter his interest in Gerant.
Mr. Khan says his dealings with Mr. Mazur were completely aboveboard.
Despite all of the recent diversions, Mr. Khan says he is trying to keep focused on Tuesday's showdown with ICN management.
He says he has spent $2 million of his own money in the fight, and gone "nearly broke" in the process.
Even if he loses the ICN fight, Mr. Khan vows he will be back fighting to regain his clients and his place in the securities business.
He has no doubt that he can.
Pointing to a stack of his own research reports on his desk, he proclaims: "You won't find talent like that anywhere else."
