Federal authorities here are conducting a criminal investigation related to $165 million of municipal bonds sold years ago by a nearby county authority.
The inquiry, involving bonds underwritten in the mid-1980s, has sparked the interest of some lawyers aware of the investigation because they assumed that the statute of limitations on any suspected violations had expired.
Lawyers familiar with the matter said authorities have advanced the theory that the statute of limitations runs not from when the bonds were sold, but from when they were redeemed.
Such a theory could leave a multitude of muni deals open to scrutiny now that federal authorities have decided to more actively enforce laws governing municipal bonds.
The bonds were underwritten in the mid-1980s by Matthews & Wright Group Inc., which later changed its name to Helmstar Group Inc.
The company settled federal fraud charges related to its municipal bond-underwriting activities and isn't the object of the probe.
The securities were sold in two separate offerings by Ocean, Highway and Port Authority of Nassau County, Fla. -- a $100 million issue in late 1985 and a $65 million issue in August of 1986.
Both sales came just before important tax-reform deadlines that affected the tax status of the bonds.
The Securities and Exchange Commission charged in a 1989 lawsuit that Matthews & Wright underwrote several muni deals before the deadlines in allegedly bogus closings that involved an impecunious offshore bank.
Among the bonds allegedly sold in this manner was the $65 million Nassau County authority issue.
Internal Revenue Service criminal investigators working on behalf of the Justice Department are making inquiries about the bond deals, and lawyers familiar with the matter said a federal grand jury has been convened here.
Federal investigators, who declined to comment on the matter, are known to be making inquiries about local parties involved in the bond transactions, including attorney Arthur Jacobs.
He was counsel for the authority when the bonds were sold and still serves in that capacity.
Tom Williams, the authority's chairman, referred questions about the bond issues to Mr. Jacobs.
Phone calls to Mr. Jacobs seeking comment weren't answered.
Mr. Williams said he knows nothing about any federal investigation involving the bonds.
