Irradiating beef may help save lives, but the meat industry is still waiting for the government's green light.
Agriculture Department scientists recently reported that small doses of irradiation could wipe out "nearly 100%" of the E. coli bacterial strain in beef.
These bacteria were blamed in three West Coast tainted-hamburger fatalities more than a year ago and in several subsequent cases, most involving children.
Irradiation has already been shown to sterilize meat and produce against practically all bacteria that cause spoilage.
While an aide says Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy is "close" to announcing his position on the issue, others suspect that politics is holding him back.
Within the Clinton administration there is concern that the public might link beef irradiation with the government radiation experiments of the 1950s.
Some proponents have even suggested getting rid of the name irradiation, calling the process "ionized pasteurization" instead.
Criticism of irradiation has come primarily from a small but vocal group called Food and Water Inc., which contends that, despite years of research, not enough is known about the stray molecules created during irradiation.
Critics also worry that the process may reduce nutrient levels.
Indeed, Mr. Espy's press secretary, Steve Kinsella, recently said that before Mr. Espy would recommend irradiation as part of stepped-up safety measures for beef, the process "would have to be proven it is safe and . . . acceptable by consumers."
The most common method of irradiating food is with brief bursts of gamma rays from the radioactive isotope cobalt-60.
This procedure, which takes place in a room with concrete walls, is used to treat produce and some poultry in Florida in the country's only commercial food-irradiation plant.
The method has long been used in the U.S. to sterilize medical devices and the food that accompanies astronauts into space, and has been used for years in Europe and the Middle East to prevent spoilage.
In fact, at least some of the shrimp imported into the U.S. has been irradiated in Europe.
A proposal from the meat industry urging Mr. Espy's support has been at the Agriculture Department for weeks, but he hasn't held a full department-level meeting to discuss it, people familiar with the matter say.
Mr. Espy declined to be interviewed.
Some proponents suspect that the decision on beef is hung up on philosophical disagreements within the department.
They note that Ellen Haas, now an assistant secretary in charge of food and consumer services, actively opposed irradiation while she was executive director of Public Voice for Food and Health Policy.
That consumer-advocacy group once suggested that irradiated foods be marked with a skull and crossbones.
A spokesman for Ms. Haas says she hasn't discussed the topic with Mr. Espy.
Mr. Espy passed up a chance to endorse irradiation last week when he attended a seminar on food safety in New York City, sponsored by the parents of a girl who had died of kidney failure after eating food poisoned by the bacteria known as E. coli 0157:H7.
In his remarks, Mr. Espy spoke about improving the current packing-plant inspection system but didn't mention irradiation.
Pressure for him to endorse is growing.
Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa) recently urged Mr. Espy to recommend irradiating beef, calling it "the most promising path we know to halt and, eventually, eliminate the proliferation of pathogens in our food supply."
Others in Congress also want action.
"Our position is, `Let's go,'" says an aide to Sen. Slade Gorton (R., Wash.).
The American Medical Association's Council on Scientific Affairs has recommended that irradiation be added to what it called the "armamentarium of techniques" to ensure food safety.
And in Maine, state epidemiologist Kathleen Gensheimer hopes that state's ban on irradiated food will be repealed soon.
"Food irradiation is an example of technology not being put to good use," she says.
Twenty-three cases of E. coli infection were reported in Maine in the second half of 1993.
While E. coli cases aren't routinely reported nationally, Denise Koo, an epidemiologist at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, believes the E. coli 0157:H7 strain "is increasing in incidence."
Carriers of the pathogen are sometimes difficult to pinpoint but, says Dr. Koo, "often health departments can trace it back to a beef source."
James Marsden, vice president of scientific and technical affairs at the American Meat Institute, a trade group whose membership includes beefpackers, says: "If the USDA is going to successfully address pathogens in meat and poultry, this is one technology they will have to strongly consider.
At the very minimum you need to give consumers a choice."
The government approved irradiating poultry in 1992, but so far no nationalbrand processor has sold irradiated poultry, in part because of worries about potential consumer backlash and the questions the process might raise about nonirradiated poultry.
Because irradiation is considered a food additive -- although it leaves no traces and is undetectable -- the FDA by law must approve the technique for beef, as it has for poultry.
But the FDA can't act until the USDA, which oversees the nation's meat supply, formally recommends that it do so.
Agriculture Department aides also suggest that Mr. Espy is seeking less volatile alternatives to irradiation.
"Our scientists have looked at technologies already used in the pharmaceuticals and cheese-manufacturing industries," as well as possible applications of chemical-warfare detection systems used in Desert Storm, one aide said.
While its leadership weighs the matter, USDA researchers are pressing forward on several other fronts, including a search for an E. coli vaccine.
Scientists at a government laboratory in Beltsville, Md., have inserted into pigs, sheep and mice a mouse gene that produces an antibody against E. coli.
-- What It Is: Short bursts of gamma rays from the radioactive isotopes cobalt-60 or cesium-137, or from electron beams.
-- What It Does: Removes almost all traces of E. coli in beef, salmonella in poultry, cholera in fish, trichinosis in pork and bacteria that spoil produce.
-- Proponents of Beef Irradiation: The National Food Processors Association, the American Medical Association, the World Health Organization and the American Meat Institute.
All say beef irradiation will help reduce deaths from E. coli.
-- Critics of Beef Irradiation: Food and Water, Inc.
They say nutrients are lost in the process, and not enough is known about the stray molecules that result from it.
