A Delaware state court judge delayed action on a request by Blockbuster Entertainment Inc. shareholders to bar the video rental giant from buying $1.25 billion of Viacom Inc. shares.
Vice Chancellor Carolyn Berger postponed until today any action on a motion for a temporary restraining order to block the cash infusion by Blockbuster into Viacom.
Viacom negotiated a deal originally valued at $8.4 billion to acquire Blockbuster for stock as a means of financing a higher offer for Paramount Communications Inc., which Viacom has since won the right to acquire after a brutal bidding war with QVC Inc.
As an interim step in Viacom's agreement to acquire the video rental company, Blockbuster agreed to acquire $1.25 billion of Viacom Class B shares.
Viacom is set to use that cash beginning March 11 to help pay for Paramount shares that it receives in a tender offer that ends today at midnight.
Blockbuster shareholders, however, have filed lawsuits to scuttle the entire Blockbuster-Viacom deal, arguing that it is unfair to holders.
Since the deal was announced, Viacom's shares have plunged, raising further questions about whether the acquisition of Blockbuster will be completed.
Said one lawyer for shareholders yesterday: "Viacom has to pay for the Paramount shares.
We don't want that $1.25 billion to go out of Blockbuster's coffers."
In other action, Viacom said that its earnings for the fourth quarter more than doubled to $26.3 million, or 11 cents a share, from $11.7 million, or 10 cents a share, a year earlier on fewer shares outstanding.
Revenue rose 3.7% to $530.4 million from $511.6 million.
For all of 1993, Viacom's profit soared to $171 million, or $1.31 a share, from $49 million, or 41 cents a share, a year earlier.
The latest results included a one-time loss of $8.9 million and a gain of $10.3 million reflecting an accounting change, while year-earlier profit included a one-time loss of $17.1 million.
Revenue climbed 7.5% to $2 billion from $1.86 billion.
In trading on the American Stock Exchange yesterday, Viacom Class B shares rose $1.375 to close at $28.375 a share.
The rise, analysts said, was fueled in part by a "buy-recommendation" by Furman Selz Inc., analysts said.
