Eastman Kodak Co. plans to overhaul its key imaging group to put more emphasis on electronic technology while also cutting staff in several corporate divisions.
The reorganization will separate Kodak's newer electronic technology -- such as Photo CD and digital filmless cameras -- from its core film and photographic-paper business.
The reorganization will be one of the first by Chief Executive George Fisher, who joined Kodak in December after leading Motorola Inc. to the forefront of wireless electronic technology.
Mr. Fisher has warned digital skeptics that he strongly supports expanding Kodak's electronic ventures, insisting that patience is needed for new innovations.
But he has been quick to add, as he did in a recent company newsletter, that "if this company is going to be healthy, it has to be healthy in the core . . . film business."
People close to the company also say Kodak will soon begin staff reductions in nonmanufacturing areas such as sales, marketing, human resources, finance and administration.
These jobs account for about a third of the Rochester, N.Y., company's total work force of 115,000.
Although overall cutback figures in each division are still being determined, "we're not talking 2% to 5%," says one person close to the company.
For example, staff reductions of as much as 30% are expected in some divisions, such as the 300-person communications and public-affairs division.
A significant portion of the cutbacks may occur outside the U.S.
A Kodak spokesman declined to comment specifically on staff cuts or the imaging overhaul.
But he said, "Each unit is currently looking at its own needs and at its structure.
Some units are getting a higher percentage cut than others, but nothing is mandated."
The cutbacks were originally set into motion by former CEO Kay Whitmore.
Mr. Whitmore announced companywide staff reductions of as much as 10,000 people in August 1993, but it wasn't clear where the bulk of cuts would be.
Mr. Fisher has said that some of these job cuts could be offset by hiring in key growth areas of the company, bringing the net reductions to about 8,000 or 9,000.
He has also said he hoped most job cuts would take place by the middle of 1994, with the last 1,000 or so occuring later through attrition.
Investors have pushed for a major shake-up at Kodak, which has restructured five times in the past decade yet failed to cut costs or substantially grow.
Earnings peaked in 1988, when Kodak's biggest photography competitor, Fuji Photo Film Co. of Tokyo, had only a small foothold in the U.S.
But now, Fuji and private-label film makers have become fierce competitors, and Kodak can no longer rely on double-digit growth in its film business.
Both the overhaul of imaging and the staff cuts are likely to be well-received by analysts and industry watchers.
Many had initially criticized Kodak's investment in digital technology, saying the company should focus resources on its profitable core business of film.
But the mood has changed with the arrival of Mr. Fisher, who doubled Motorola's sales to $16 billion from $8 billion in his five years as CEO, largely because of his technological foresight and patience with the development of cellular telephones and pagers.
By splitting the division, Kodak and investors will be able to pinpoint cash flow and cost problems, as well as profit potential.
"Fisher has the documented ability to make investments that will produce attractive returns in the long-run," says Michael Ellmann, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder & Co.
"If anything, I would regard this as an organizationally constructive move."
The new emphasis on digital and electronic technology is expected to force changes in top imaging management.
Kodak's imaging group leaders historically have had backgrounds in conventional products such as film, and some outsiders may be brought in to help lead the digital side, people close to the company say.
The reorganization is expected to establish a clear distinction between the businesses, improving accountability for profits and costs of each, said Jack Kelly, an analyst with Goldman Sachs.
"If I'm in Kodak, I'll be much more motivated to make electronics work if that's my only thing," he said.
The expected imaging reorganization would be welcomed by the photofinishing industry, which had been confused about who was in charge when it came to answering their questions about Kodak's emerging digital technology.
Rick Bachelder, owner of Pittsburgh-based Filmet Color Laboratories Inc., met with Mr. Fisher recently and said the CEO assured him that there would be a strategy unfolding to put more emphasis on Kodak's digital side, including Photo CD, a technology for storing photos digitally so they can be viewed or edited on television sets or computers.
"I have felt in the past that there was not a person in charge at Kodak who was driving the vision forward of this technology," Mr. Bachelder said.
"I now feel people there are empowered with a sense of anticipation and excitement."
The proposed changes even brought a nod of approval from Scott Brownstein, the digital whiz-kid who helped invent Kodak's Photo CD but joined media mogul Mortimer Zuckerman's Applied Graphics Technologies last year.
"It's not going to be easy," said Mr. Brownstein.
"But it could have tremendous impact."
