Washington, D.C. -- Shortly after the artillery pounding Sarajevo finally falls silent, a noisy busload of North Carolina postmasters ambles to the entrance of the Holocaust Museum -- a memorial to an earlier European slaughter.
"I really don't know what to expect," frets Bob Haring, Durham's postmaster.
"I do, that's what makes me nervous," says his grim-faced friend, Sherrill Taylor, who hails from Currituck.
Forty postmasters line up before the museum.
Another eight are so anxious that they won't get off the bus, and head off to some of Washington's cheerier sites instead.
But the majority join the sellout crowd that lines up outside the museum every day.
What accounts for the astonishing popularity of the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, a forbidding place commemorating an unspeakable horror committed far away?
Since it opened in April last year, about one million people have trooped through.
Advance tickets for weekends are sold out a month ahead.
Locally, only Redskins tickets are tougher to get.
Some of the appeal is easy enough to explain.
This is Washington's newest museum; it's a magnet for schools preaching tolerance; Holocaust books and movies have become a staple of popular culture.
"Schindler's List" is a multiple Oscar nominee.
Unsurprisingly, Jews make up a major part of the visiting throng (about 38% according to a museum survey taken last September), but surprisingly, perhaps, they are far from a majority.
The museum's reach is deeper, its grip firmer on a much more diverse public than anyone suspected.
The museum tells a frightful tale that many feel compelled to hear, and with the hearing, tell others.
The museum loosens tongues, dredges memories, unearths fears.
There isn't a Jew among the visitors from the North Carolina chapter of the National Association of Postmasters of the United States.
Few of the postmasters say they know much about the Holocaust or have given it much thought.
But when they planned their annual trip to the Capitol to lobby Congress, Sheila Harrell, New London's postmaster, made sure to include a Holocaust Museum tour during their visit.
One of the group's members had read a book by Nazi-hunter Simon Wiesenthal, grew intrigued with the era and pushed for the museum visit.
Mrs. Harrell's husband, Joe, also wanted to go badly.
World War II is personal for Joe: his father parachuted into Europe and later died of war injuries when Joe was just eight.
The rest of the group, close friends from some of the Tarheel state's tiniest hamlets, figured that if Mrs. Harrell thought it was important to go, they'd go too.
Anyway, they explain, rural postmasters are supposed to keep up with the latest events and spread the news back home.
They consider themselves purveyors of information, fonts of gossip for towns with names like Orrum, Cerro Gorea or Tuckasegee.
"We're like local bartenders; people tell us everything," says Norma O'Kelley of Cullowhee, the home of Western Carolina University and not much else.
Nevertheless, over dinner at a local steakhouse on the eve of the museum visit, many of them are clearly nervous about what they are going to see.
Mrs. Harrell says she "dreads" the tour.
Mr. Harrell figures the museum will be something like the movie "Apocalypse Now," with "the killing, the gore, the blood."
But as the postmasters learn, the museum is far more subtle, far less easy to dismiss than some cinematic chamber of horrors.
The museum's brilliance is its ability to create a sense of the ghetto's claustrophobia and impending doom, and to give a human face to the vast, impersonal massacre.
The postmasters quickly split up.
Some linger over displays of ghetto scenes; others hurry through.
Dominick Spadaro, president of the group, gets angry.
A wiry ex-Marine from a coastal town called Atlantic Beach, he stares at a video image of a young girl in the Warsaw Ghetto peering over a dead girl even younger.
As the crowd backs up by a display describing the "mobile killing squads" that hunted down Jews and Communists, he chatters nervously about bringing "wayward kids" through the museum.
Maybe that, he says, would shock them away from violence.
Mr. Spadaro said he had come expecting to see some celebration of America's role in the war, but instead learned of the U.S. decision against bombing the death camps.
"There's no way we did all we could," he says.
Now, with Bosnia, he asks: "Are we doing everything we can to help?
You can't just remember mistakes, you have to learn from them."
Mr. Haring, the Durham postmaster, says he was brought up short by a room filled with shoes stripped from prisoners arriving at Majdanek in Poland.
Dusty and stiff with age, they are "the last witnesses to those people," he shudders, echoing the words of a Yiddish poem inscribed on the wall.
He's had this feeling of loss and comprehension once before, he says, at the eternal flame at John F. Kennedy's grave.
Charles Huntley's epiphany comes before a display of flags commemorating the U.S. army units that liberated death camps.
There he finds the name of the camp freed by his infantry corps: Dora-Mittelbau.
For 50 years, the name had eluded him.
All he could remember was a tank bursting through a gate, and a gaunt prisoner smiling at him.
His outfit withdrew quickly afterwards.
The evening before, the quiet, white-haired man wanted only to talk of a postman's shrinking retirement pay.
Now the stories flow freely: How his Berlin-born sergeant shouted out in German for a German soldier to halt, and shot him quickly when he didn't.
How some friends got drunk and set out to "capture" a German town, and were killed quickly with the "blurp" of a machine gun.
"I saw a lot of things by the side of the road -- animals dead, people dead," says the retired, 68-year-old postmaster from Lenoir.
"This isn't a happy place," he says of the museum.
"It tells a story, and it's a sad story."
Back at the Quality Hotel on Capitol Hill, Mrs. Harrell and her husband are getting dressed for a dinner of NAPUC officers.
As usual, she's as bubbly as spring water.
But recalling the displays of handicapped children singled out for extermination, she dissolves into tears.
"What about Butch?" she cries out the name of her brother, who can't walk without arm-crutches.
"He would have been killed too."
Post-office customers in New London are about to hear an earful about the Holocaust Museum.
Mrs. Harrell says: "There's no way you can see that exhibit and not tell everyone about the horror you saw."
Mr. Davis is a reporter in the Journal's Washington bureau.
