The dollar stumbled yesterday as the yen drew strength from the third steepest rise in Tokyo stock market history, fueled by optimism over passage of Japan's long-stalled political-reform package during the weekend.
In addition, any hopes for a dollar recovery after Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve chairman, said interest rates will rise eventually were immediately put to rest when President Clinton termed low interest rates "critical" to the U.S. economic recovery.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7345 marks, down from 1.7425 marks late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 108.70 yen, down from 110 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.5060, up from $1.4945.
About midday Tuesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.25 yen and at 1.7340 marks.
The Nikkei index of 225 selected issues rocketed 7.8% to a three-month high of 20,229.12, after Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's prime minister, pushed through the compromise reform package on which he had staked his political career.
Passage of Mr. Hosokawa's anticorruption measures opened up the way for his coalition government to focus on economic-stimulus measures to revive Japan's flagging economy.
Indeed, bullishness over Japan's economy was further prodded by various statements by Japanese officials that an economic-stimulus package would be announced Thursday.
Such a package could strengthen the yen because market interest rates in Japan probably will climb if the government decides to borrow, said Angelo Evangelista, vice president, corporate foreign exchange, at the Bank of Boston.
However, it wasn't immediately clear whether an economic-stimulus package would, in fact, add muscle to the yen.
A stimulus package -- if combined with a tearing down of trade barriers against U.S. goods and services -- could also damp any U.S. pressure to keep the yen strong.
The yen has been extremely sensitive to comments by U.S. officials critical of Japan's huge trade surpluses and deploring a weak yen as a tool for stimulating the domestic economy.
Indeed, last February's calls by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen for a strong yen as a way of mitigating Japan's trade imbalance dug a path for the yen's historical highs against the dollar by August.
Meanwhile, Mr. Greenspan made clear, in testimony before Congress's Joint Economic Committee, that U.S. interest rates eventually would rise.
"The foundations of the economic expansion are looking increasingly well-entrenched," he said.
"Short-term interest rates are currently abnormally low in real terms.
At some point, absent an unexpected and prolonged weakening of economic activity, we will need to move them to a more neutral stance."
But traders noted that Mr. Greenspan failed to specify when rates would go higher or what it would take to trigger that rate increase.
What's more the Fed chief's commentary was quickly countered by Mr. Clinton, who immediately called for a continuation of low interest rates, saying there is "no evidence" that inflation is returning to the economy.
"We want the economy to grow in a very stable, solid way," Mr. Clinton said, adding: "Obviously, low interest rates are critical to that."
