CLINTON SCRAMBLES to offset the torrent of Whitewater activity.
The White House is stunned by reaction to the Whitewater subpoenas.
"How can the public not be paying attention when every news outlet is going crazy with this," says Democratic analyst Bob Beckel.
To try to divert attention, Clinton will talk about other issues, such as jobs this weekend in Detroit.
Clinton aides start meeting with Democrats on midterm election strategies.
Amid the turmoil, a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll shows that Americans approve of Clinton's handling of the economy by 47% to 43%, and of foreign policy by 47% to 39%.
But 47% now think the nation is on the wrong track, up from 42% in January.
And some Democrats fear a worsening as Whitewater foments.
After finding Rep. Leach's office closed, special counsel Robert Fiske's office asks The Wall Street Journal for a list of the Whitewater witnesses that House Banking Republicans plan to call.
INTEREST RATES cast a shadow over hopes for economic recovery.
Two-thirds of those surveyed in the Journal/NBC poll expect higher interest rates over the next year -- as do many economists.
The next move could come at a March 22 Fed meeting.
"The major worry is that the Fed may tighten too much," warns the DRI/McGraw Hill forecasting firm.
But unemployment worries decline, with 33% of Americans rating it the top economic issue, down from 43% last October.
Some 52% now think the economy will stay about the same over the next year after recent gains, though the 29% who think it will get better is down from 44% in January.
The public feels better about the economy, but "there is still an uneasiness," says Robert Teeter, who conducted the poll with Peter Hart.
TRADE TALKS with Japan head for a crucial showdown next week.
Despite progress in opening Japan's cellular-phone market, officials keep working on a list of Japanese goods that could face U.S. sanctions if an accord isn't reached.
Likely inclusions: fax machines and cellular gear.
Japanese business officials say that figures to be released next week will show an increased foreign share of Japan's semiconductor market.
In the poll, 49% of Americans blame Japan for the U.S. trade deficit with that country, but 35% blame the U.S.
By 58% to 32% they say Japan's policy is costing U.S. jobs.
By nearly 2 to 1, those surveyed say it is important to stand up to Japan even if it sparks a trade war.
But the public is equally divided on whether the U.S. or Japan would be hurt more by a trade war.
By 54% to 37% Americans now believe the U.S. is a stronger economic power than Japan, a stunning reversal from just three years ago.
GORE GEARS UP for more television and other appearances as Clinton's spokesman on Whitewater.
He also will expand his telecommunications advocacy by traveling to an international conference in Argentina.
In the new poll, positive views of Gore dip to 44% from 54% in November.
CHRISTOPHER VISITS China today amid worries by U.S. intelligence that arrests of dissidents there were driven by a hard-line faction that could end up forcing Clinton to curtail U.S.-China trade.
In the poll, two-thirds of Americans think the U.S. should tie trade to demands that China improve its human-rights policies.
SENATE RACE: Kentucky Sen. Ford emerges as a possible interim Senate Democratic leader when Mitchell leaves, with Arkansas's Pryor a sleeper candidate for the post.
In the poll, the public by 73% to 22% thinks gridlock continues even though Democrats control both Congress and the White House.
HEALTH-CARE HUDDLE: Democratic and GOP members of the Senate Finance Committee plan a two-day retreat to rural Virginia late next week to discuss whether to use the Clinton bill as the starting point for drafting health-care legislation.
Americans by 40% to 29% trust Democrats more than Republicans on health-care reform.
U.S. OFFICIALS FEAR that public backing for Bosnia peacekeeping is tenuous.
A majority of Americans, by 53% to 40%, favor using U.S. troops to keep the peace in Bosnia if an agreement is reached, the Journal/NBC poll finds.
Americans by 53% to 33% also approve of Clinton's handling of Bosnia.
But Pentagon officials and NATO allies worry that public and congressional support would crumble as soon as the U.S. suffered any deaths.
Officials count on Russia to help maintain order in the area.
In the poll, 61% of Americans say they see Russia overall as neither an ally nor an adversary.
But despite the recent spy flap, they favor continuing aid to Russia by a margin of 54% to 38%.
Americans by 48% to 21% have positive feelings about the United Nations, and by 40% to 14% toward NATO.
MINOR MEMOS: The public feels equally confident in the health ideas of Clinton and the American Medical Association, but favor Clinton's views 2 to 1 over those of health insurers. . . .
In the poll, negative views of Virginia GOP Senate candidate Oliver North exceed positive feelings by 38% to 30%.
