Gold-futures prices leaped higher, spurred by the heavy buying of commodity funds and strong performance of other commodity markets.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery settled at $383.60 an ounce, up $4.60 on the day, while the price of the March silver-futures contract rose 11.5 cents to $5.135 an ounce.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, April platinum was up $4.30 to $386 an ounce.
Yesterday's rally in precious-metals markets came after steep price drops throughout most of last week.
And in early trading yesterday, it appeared prices were headed lower again.
At one point, the April gold contract was down $1.50 at $377.50 an ounce.
Last week's drop, which saw the price of the April contract fall from about $390 an ounce to less than $380 an ounce, had pushed the market too low, said Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man .
"The market was definitely oversold," Mr. Demler said.
"It was due for a correction."
Providing a foundation of support for precious-metals prices were commodity funds, the managed pools of investors' money that wield so much influence in today's commodity markets, analysts said.
"It was a technical reversal," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"Many of the very heavy fund sellers from late last week reversed course."
The market derived additional strength from a rally in the Knight Ridder Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodity-futures contracts.
The index settled at 225.55, up 0.55 on the day.
Gold and the CRB index tend to move more or less in tandem-and opposite the performance of bond prices.
"The recent drops in gold prices are a counter-trend move -- that is, against the long-term upward trend," Mr. O'Neill said.
"The long-term fundamental picture is quite constructive for the metals."
One factor that may provide long-term support for precious-metals prices, analysts said, is the Japanese economic-stimulus package unveiled over the weekend, which provides for lower taxes and spending incentives that may enhance Japanese purchases of gold.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Wheat prices jumped on rumors that China is interested in buying an additional 18.4 million bushels of subsidized U.S. wheat.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the wheat contract for March delivery jumped 7.50 cents a bushel to settle at $3.7175 a bushel.
China bought about 30 million bushels of U.S. wheat in January.
China's continuing interest ignited speculation that a drought in one wheat-producing province is spreading.
The rally follows a big slump in wheat prices over the past few weeks.
Corn and soybean prices settled mixed.
ENERGY: Petroleum-futures prices drifted lower on little news.
Only heating oil for February delivery showed gains on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Continued cold weather helped to support prices of the February heating-oil contract, which rose one cent a gallon to settle at 53.7 cents.
But prices of heating oil for March or later delivery dropped.
Unleaded gasoline prices fell as traders sold the expiring February contract to roll positions into March futures.
Also, weather-restricted driving over much of the U.S. may have curbed gasoline demand.
The February contract was down 0.92 cent a gallon to 42.54 cents.
Crude oil for March delivery settled 15 cents lower at $15.19 a barrel.
