The Federal National Mortgage Association next Tuesday will announce a major new commitment to low- and moderate-income housing.
Under the plan, called "Impact 2000," this commitment would account for more than half of Fannie Mae's total business by the year 2000.
People familiar with the plan say it calls for Fannie Mae to plow $150 billion more into low- and moderate-income housing between now and the end of the decade than it would have under its previous business blueprint.
The program envisions Fannie Mae's commitment to low- and moderate-income housing totaling $1 trillion by the year 2000.
The plan doesn't entail wholesale product changes but rather reflects a marked switch in emphasis to reach out to segments of society currently underserved by the mortgage finance community.
It will feature an outreach program to help aspiring homebuyers, particularly minorities and immigrants.
The immigrant population is projected to increase by nine million persons by the end of the decade.
Fannie Mae plans a $5 billion pilot program to help nontraditional mortgage borrowers with more flexible credit standards.
It also will stress to lenders and underwriters the flexibility of underwriting standards.
Some lenders cite these standards as the reason they don't do more for low- and moderate-income families.
The mortgage-finance giant will continue to review the underwriting guidelines, placing top priority on the elimination of bias.
Fannie Mae is a shareholder-owned corporation chartered by Congress to provide liquidity for housing finance.
It buys mortgages and packages them into mortgage-backed securities, which it sells in financial markets.
The company intends to seek out people who may be intimidated by the housing finance system and help them become and remain homeowners.
It plans a $5 million three-year commitment to support homebuyer-assistance counseling, and will open at least 25 new "partnership offices" across the nation to work with local officials and community groups to promote homeownership in underserved areas.
Fannie Mae told the Department of Housing and Urban Development last week that it fell short of meeting an interim goal established by Congress for providing assistance to central city residents but met a goal for low- and moderate-income housing.
A 1992 law subjecting Fannie Mae and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. to a new system of financial regulation for safety and soundness also directed both companies, which are quite profitable, to focus more on affordable housing.
Freddie Mac also failed to meet its central cities goal, but met its low- and moderate-income goal.
