Corporate communications giants and media moguls are betting big money that their multimedia alliances, joint ventures and high-tech projects will steer them to big profits.
There's plenty of hype in the headlines, but they are putting big capital -- and big egos -- on the line.
The convergence of the cable, telephone and entertainment industries appears inevitable, even after the collapse last month of the planned merger between Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc.
What follows is a guide to some of the leading players, big and small, who will figure in the multimedia future.
More than any company, TCI, headed by John Malone, has led the cable industry in expanding channel capacity, offering more program choices and pushing the development of interactive services.
The Denver-based company is the nation's largest cable operator, with more than 10 million subscribers, so it's also the biggest customer to programmers, software companies and equipment suppliers.
Through its Liberty Media Corp. subsidiary, it owns interests in a menu of cable channels, including Turner Broadcasting System Inc.'s Cable News Network and TNT channels, the Family Channel, Court TV, and a chain of regional sports networks.
By year's end, TCI will begin installing the first generation of high-tech, digital-compression "smart boxes," or set-top converters, and the industry is expected to follow its lead.
And the company says it will continue with its plan to build "full-service" networks, offering such services as video-on-demand, interactive games and home shopping.
The announcement last fall of the TCI-Bell Atlantic agreement set off a slew of similar mergers and alliances.
TCI blamed the deal's demise on the Federal Communications Commission's latest round of cable rate cuts, which it called unwarranted.
The industry claims the new rules will crimp cash flow, but many analysts are bullish on cable stocks for the long term.
The deal's collapse eliminated some of the urgency to find partners, but executives say the forces propelling such links -- including the explosion of digital technology and the easing of regulations -- haven't changed.
With Mr. Malone now free to pursue new ventures, even with Bell Atlantic, TCI is widely expected to hook up with a range of partners, from big movie studios to tiny software developers.
"We want to spark the creative fires" and explore the features needed for new networks we're building, says Robert Thomson, a TCI senior vice president.
"We want to see a thousand flowers blooming."
After the breakup of its merger with TCI, Bell Atlantic is prowling for other deals that will accelerate its push to deliver interactive services.
"Even without TCI, we think we have a number of arrows left in our quiver," Chief Executive Raymond Smith told analysts recently.
The Philadelphia-based company now is looking for more-focused partnerships with cable operators.
Bell Atlantic is regarded on Wall Street as the most aggressive of the regional telephone companies in its drive to deliver multimedia services.
Even before it agreed to merge with TCI, Bell Atlantic had won a court ruling allowing it to send video programming over its local phone lines.
It remains the only one of the seven regional Bell companies that can legally do so, and it is already venturing into video services with a trial in northern Virginia.
Mr. Smith predicts video programming will generate "significant revenue" as early as next year.
The company is developing a software system called Stargazer, which will help subscribers navigate through hundreds of cable channels and functions.
Bell Atlantic also announced an early and aggressive plan to build a section of "information highway."
Starting a five-year, $15 billion effort, the company plans to wire 1.2 million homes for interactive services by the end of next year, and add an average of 1.5 million more homes annually thereafter.
The company has agreed to work with newspaper publisher Knight-Ridder Inc. to develop news, entertainment and advertising for delivery into the home.
With cash flow of $5 billion a year, Bell Atlantic has the wherewithal to make massive equipment, software and programming purchases.
But the collapse of the TCI deal raises the question of how much telephone companies, given their devotion to shareholder dividends, are willing to pay for cable properties.
Unlike phone companies, cable companies are measured more by cash flow than earnings.
Surrounded by the chief executives of media and telephone companies at a panel earlier this year, Walt Disney Co.
Chairman Michael Eisner said, "I feel like an English major in an organic-chemistry course."
Disney so far has been the wallflower at the multimedia ball, and sometimes even comes on like a party pooper.
"I don't get it," Mr. Eisner said at the panel.
He compared the much-discussed 500-channel universe to radio.
"I don't like radio," he said.
"It's too much, it's too confusing, it's not comfortable.
I can't remember more than four stations."
And he said categorically: "We are not investing in the information highway.
I'm not saying it is the correct path, I'm saying it is the path for us."
That's because no matter how the technology shakes out, Disney is certain to have a big part in the multimedia future.
The Burbank, Calif., company has the strongest identity in the business and an abundance of movies from its production arms, Walt Disney Pictures, Miramax Films, Hollywood Pictures and Touchstone Pictures, which are expected to produce about 60 new films this year.
Disney says its brand name and products -- feature films, animated movies and TV shows -- are in such demand that the company will be able to charge a fair price for its wares no matter what distribution system dominates in the future.
Nevertheless, many people believe -- and Mr. Eisner doesn't deny -- that Disney might ally with a telephone or cable company, if only to ensure that it isn't held hostage by monopolists who control the wires into people's homes.
One candidate analysts mention: American Telephone & Telegraph Co., which would feel comfortable with Disney's wholesome image.
Another is Ameritech Corp.
Meanwhile, Disney has been researching and developing high-tech attractions for its theme parks, an effort cloaked in secrecy.
And the company's computer-software unit has worked on developing software and video games using Disney's characters.
The unit provided hand-drawn animation for an "Aladdin" game, developed with Sega Enterprises Ltd. of Japan and Virgin Interactive Entertainment, a unit of Virgin Group Ltd. of Britain.
The game has been among Sega's biggest hits ever, selling more than one million units, and has been praised by critics, partly because it's one of few video games attracting young girls to the market.
Microsoft Corp. is placing a big bet -- about $100 million a year -- that it can build an interactive TV franchise that will match its dominant position in personal computers.
A team of more than 300 programmers and other technology wizards is tackling the biggest programming challenges for multimedia services: operating systems, to control a new generation of TV set-top converters; video-server software, to coordinate services such as interactive shopping and video conferencing; navigators, or program-guide software etched on chips and installed in TVs, VCRs and set-top boxes to help users find their way through myriad entertainment choices; and programming tools, including templates that would put the corner hardware store on an equal footing with Macy's in designing catchy ads and shopping services.
The Redmond, Wash., software giant trails competitors in most of these fields.
But it has the broadest capabilities to design a complete package of programs, and an advantage in sharing the new communications technologies with home and office PCs.
Microsoft's strategy assumes that businesses will use multimedia networks first, and that home computers and TV converters will swap multimedia information and programming later.
The company has embraced many partners.
One alliance, with Intel Corp. and General Instrument Corp., aims to build TV set-top converters with interactive features for cable subscribers.
Microsoft recently signed a deal with TCI to test its operating-system software in Seattle and Denver.
And the company has been talking with TCI, Time Warner Inc. and others about collaborating on software standards, causing consternation among competitors who fear a backroom deal will give an unfair advantage to second-rate software.
Nonsense, says Microsoft Chief Executive William Gates.
Telecommunications companies won't begin locking themselves into software for several years.
With so many billions of dollars in network improvements at stake, they will have extensively tested all the options by then, and it is impossible to say who will win, Mr. Gates says.
But he adds: "We are doing a broader set of things that are more integrated into PCs, and it's a lot more ambitious than anything else we are aware of."
Hardly a week passes without Time Warner announcing some new service for its Full Service Network in Orlando, Fla., an ambitious array of offerings that will go on-line to some 4,000 homes later this year.
Like many large cable operators, Time Warner has its feet in both the distribution networks and the content that will fill them.
The New York-based company is the nation's No. 2 cable operator, with 7.2 million subscribers.
It has vast holdings in programming, from Warner Bros. movies to the cable networks Home Box Office and Cinemax.
It is among the largest music companies, home to Eric Clapton, Madonna and other stars.
And it is the nation's largest magazine publisher, with titles from People, Fortune and Sports Illustrated to Southern Living and hip music magazine Vibe.
When Time Warner announced plans for its Full Service Network last year, Chairman and CEO Gerald Levin called it "the keystone of Time Warner's vision and strategy."
To build it, Time Warner has created alliances with leading computer-chip makers, software developers and video programmers.
Earlier this month, however, Time Warner said it was pushing back the project's launch, to the fourth quarter from April, because of snags at key suppliers.
The delay provided a reminder of the mammoth challenge facing Time Warner and other companies building networks as they try to pull together all the hardware and software needed to make the new services work.
Time Warner now plans to begin offering movies-on-demand, interactive games and home shopping in Orlando by year's end, followed by other services, such as news-on-demand, interactive encyclopedias and distance learning.
The company recently announced plans for a service called Automall, which will allow viewers to browse through car and truck selections and then ask a salesperson to drive the car out to the viewer's house for a test drive.
To help pay for interactive programming and upgrades in its cable systems, Time Warner will rely partly on a new partner: the regional phone company U S West Inc., which invested $2.5 billion in return for a 25.5% stake in the company's cable and entertainment divisions.
But one big worry for integrated companies such as Time Warner is that new services, particularly movies-on-demand, may raid the revenue of pay-TV services such as HBO, which is already losing subscribers.
And with total debt of $15 billion, Time Warner can ill afford to lose revenue in any of its businesses.
Viacom Inc. is the house that Sumner Redstone built.
The feisty 70-year-old chairman, who grew up with silent films and later ran a chain of movie theaters, has parlayed an attractive blend of brand-name assets into a programming powerhouse around the world.
Music videos on MTV now reach more than 250 million households worldwide.
Last month, Mr. Redstone won a protracted 1980s-style bidding war with QVC Inc. for Paramount Communications Inc.
But the prize came with a hefty price: $9.75 billion in cash and stock.
Viacom's merger with Paramount, and its planned acquisition of Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., would create an entertainment behemoth with combined sales of about $12 billion.
But Viacom must now deal with paring about $10 billion in debt, reviving Paramount Pictures, and creating synergies with Paramount's vast holdings, which include a publishing division and pro sports teams.
Like most cable companies these days, New York-based Viacom has big plans for its full-service test cable system, based in Castro Valley, Calif., and scheduled to start operating this fall.
With AT&T, its main partner in the venture, Viacom will offer such services as video-on-demand, interactive games and home shopping, as well as pocket phones.
The new system will also give users faster access to on-line computer services, such as Prodigy and America Online, through their cable link.
But the Castro Valley system will be more of a showcase for Viacom's programming holdings than for its technology.
The company is plotting interactive versions of MTV and VH-1, in which viewers select the music lineup, as well as interactive children's games on Nickelodeon.
Another possibility: Showtime-on-demand, in which viewers choose from any movie playing on Showtime.
Of course, MTV can't keep growing forever -- and it is facing increased competition.
The world's largest record companies, led by Time Warner and Sony, are planning their own music video channels world-wide.
Showtime continues to limp along in the shadow of Time Warner's HBO.
To prepare itself for the multimedia era, Viacom in 1992 created a "new media" unit, which produces interactive programming for CD-ROM as well as video-game formats.
Titles include Rocko's Modern Life, based on an animated show on Nickelodeon.
Those projects are the fruit of Viacom's purchase last year of ICOM Simulations Inc., a small Chicago-based producer of interactive games and programming.
The division is working on other Viacom titles it predicts will be big interactive sellers, including Beavis and Butthead.
Last year, during its fight for Paramount, Viacom found a partner in Nynex Corp., which invested $1.2 billion and could contribute telephone expertise should restrictions on cable-telephone cross-ownership be eased.
Viacom also agreed to acquire Blockbuster, though final approval is uncertain.
Blockbuster's video retail business faces many long-term questions, but for now the company offers annual cash flow of a half-billion dollars.
Silicon Graphics Inc. is defining the state of the art in computerized imagery.
The company, based in Mountain View, Calif., makes graphics workstations, big and powerful computers that can simulate a molecule on the screen and then spin it in any direction, or show wind flowing over an airplane wing.
Consumers caught a glimpse of the company's wizardry in "Terminator 2" and "Jurassic Park."
With those credentials, SGI has landed some high-profile jobs in multimedia.
For Time Warner's interactive-television trial in Orlando, SGI is providing microchips and designing hardware and software that will run on powerful set-top boxes, though it is one of the suppliers whose delays forced Time Warner to push back the start of the service.
SGI is also starting to supply big digital storehouses called video servers, and software that will provide two-way entertainment and video communications to 4,000 homes.
"We are really scrambling to do it," says Edward McCracken, SGI's chief executive.
"Orlando is driving our technology even more than a lot of the military applications we're involved in."
The computer maker is also bringing high-end graphics technology to video games with partner Nintendo, in arcade machines slated for introduction this year and in home game players in 1995.
But competitors question whether SGI can ever play to a mass audience, especially since the company's heritage is selling to engineers who didn't balk at $50,000 workstations (its machines now range from $4,995 to $1 million supercomputers).
To set a standard for interactive entertainment, the company is racing consumer-oriented companies such as Apple Computer Inc., Microsoft and 3DO.
Mr. McCracken says he isn't worried.
Though SGI's set-top prototypes in Orlando will cost more than $2,500 each, a price of $250 is within reach when mass rollouts begin in 1996, he says.
When asked to explain QVC's mission, Chairman Barry Diller likes to joke that he wants convenience above all: "buying underwear in your underwear."
A media mogul if ever there was one, Mr. Diller was distracted by the long battle for Paramount.
Though he lost that fight, he is still looking for acquisitions.
And he remains focused on QVC, based in West Chester, Pa., and how to enlarge a company that already churns out $1.2 billion in sales.
When Mr. Diller, who brought America "The Movie of the Week" at ABC and built the Fox Network from scratch, arrived at QVC in 1992, the company became a Wall Street favorite overnight.
But these days, everyone -- including Mr. Diller -- is waiting to see if home shopping can move into the interactive age and attract a broader audience.
"Much of this interactive era remains unknown," he says.
"Other than to say a high-capacity network will be built, the who, how and when is confusing at the moment."
So far, he has made some cosmetic changes to QVC's on-air look, and has hired an all-star team to revamp the network and its offspring.
Q2, a new shopping service aimed at more active and affluent viewers, is preparing for a May launch.
Persuading its target audience to give up the tactile experience of browsing through malls for shopping on the sofa will be an awesome task.
And close behind QVC are seasoned retailers, including R.H. Macy & Co. and Spiegel Inc., that also plan shopping channels.
Though Mr. Diller plans to begin introducing interactive services in 1995, he knows the road to push-button shopping will be slow.
"I think our job is to be much more in the evolutionary mode," he says.
"First, we have sophisticated backroom computers taking millions of calls.
The step from there is to more services, to taking the bias off home shopping, to marketing, to rationalizing the business.
That's a five-year program."
Chances are, your name, telephone number or bank-account number is stored in this company's software.
Based in Redwood Shores, Calif., Oracle Corp. serves huge international business customers.
McDonald's Corp. keeps track of inventories with Oracle software; AT&T runs its billing systems on Oracle software.
Now the company may store the movie you watch.
This year it will start delivering video servers, the giant computerized warehouses that will store and retrieve games, movies and text in digital form for the full-service networks being built by cable and telephone companies.
"It's a natural extension of what we were doing," says Terence J. Garnett, senior vice president of the new media division.
"We're just storing new types of data.
Instead of accounting data, we can handle a two-hour movie."
Oracle Chief Executive Lawrence Ellison is leading a group of company executives seeking to bridge the gap between Hollywood and Silicon Valley, explaining the finer points of digital storage to people who don't know a megabit from a kilobyte.
Bell Atlantic and U S West have chosen Oracle's video servers to deliver movies-on-demand and interactive shopping services over their phone-line networks.
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and Washington Post Co. have agreed to work with Oracle to develop electronic services, including video news-on-demand.
A viewer watching a news broadcast of a story on Haiti, for example, might use the TV remote control to retrieve related news footage, text and maps that would help explain the situation.
Video servers are crucial to providing television viewers with the myriad services that cable and telephone companies have promised.
And with billions of dollars in potential sales, some powerful competitors have joined in the chase, including AT&T, Hewlett-Packard Co., International Business Machines Corp. and Silicon Graphics.
He is the boy wonder of interactivity.
From consumer-electronics shows to cable conferences coast to coast, W.M. "Trip" Hawkins can be found on stage, joystick in hand, holding court about the future of video entertainment.
With boyish good looks and enthusiasm, Mr. Hawkins is the inspiration for the push -- and some say the hype -- in interactive games and services.
These days the 40-year-old Mr. Hawkins is working furiously to set an industry standard for CD-ROM-based multimedia players.
His company, 3DO Co. of Redwood City, Calif., is a start-up that licenses technology for the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer, which combines a CD-ROM player, computing capabilities, text, and sharper graphics and crisper sound than other game machines.
3DO has no profits, but it does have an impressive list of backers, including such giants as AT&T, Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. and Time Warner.
Matsushita's Panasonic unit is already selling its version of the multiplayer in stores, and AT&T will roll out its model this fall.
But the market is nascent, and big-league competitors, including Sony Corp. and Sega, plan to introduce their own multimedia players -- each incompatible with others -- next year.
No one is a front-runner yet.
Mr. Hawkins argues that 3DO has two key advantages: Its machines are already in stores, and are more advanced than competitors'.
"The whole ball game for us will unfold in 24 months," says Mr. Hawkins.
"The question is, can we build a marketplace before they get a chance to get going?
If we don't, it's a fragmented market."
It isn't clear whether consumers are ready for such a contraption, even after the price was cut last month to $500.
Diminished expectations have knocked 3DO's stock down to about $25 from a high of $47 in October.
Nonetheless, 20 titles for use with the 3DO machine-interactive games and educational and entertainment software, including John Madden Football -- are now available, and more are on the way.
"3DO is in the driver's seat," Mr. Hawkins says.
"It's our game to win or lose."
The other company Mr. Hawkins founded is helping to bridge the gap between Silicon Valley and Hollywood.
Electronic Arts Inc., San Mateo, Calif., is a leading producer of multimedia software and software for hand-held video games.
At the consumer electronics show this year, Electronic Arts introduced "Shock Wave: Invasion Earth 2019," its first interactive movie, a sci-fi thriller that plays on the 3DO machine.
It blends Hollywood film production with state-of-the-art computer graphics.
And the company last month agreed to acquire Broderbund Software Inc., a growing educational-software company, in a stock swap valued at $400 million.
Channel surfing won't be easy in an era of 500 channels.
Many companies have set out to build what will probably be the first interactive innovation widely used by viewers: software called navigators, on-screen guides to help sort through all the program choices.
An early favorite is StarSight Telecast Inc., a small publicly held company in Fremont, Calif., whose navigator software will start showing up in homes this year.
The software, loaded in chips as part of video equipment, will enable viewers to search programs by title, theme (sports, drama, comedy), or plain old channel surfing, and will let them record a program with a touch of a button.
Using a remote control, a viewer will be able to pull up a program grid similar to those published in newspapers, look through seven days of programming, and even pull up a description of the program now showing and the time remaining.
"This is real," says StarSight Chairman Michael Faber.
"Whether or not the superhighway comes, we're already there."
The small company, which went public in July and has yet to report a profit, has already drawn investments from leading cable operators, including Viacom, Tribune Co. and Cox Enterprises Inc.
More important, StarSight has agreements with big TV and VCR makers such as Zenith Electronics Corp., Samsung Electronics Co. and Philips Electronics NV to build the StarSight chip into this year's new models.
In addition, the largest makers of cable converters have agreed to include the StarSight chip in the boxes they sell to cable operators.
StarSight executives claim to have the strongest grip on the technology, with four patents covering many features.
But already it has sued and been countersued over the patents.
There's no guarantee how long the company can withstand such challenges.
And formidable competitors are lining up.
TCI and News Corp. have invested in a version of News Corp.'s venerable print guide, called TV Guide OnScreen.
United Video Satellite Group Inc., which owns the scrolling guide now available on many cable systems, is also developing a navigator, as are others.
In many ways, Brian Roberts embodies the new guard for the cable industry, whose aging pioneers are starting to cash out of a business built on better TV reception back in the 1950s.
At 34, he is president of Comcast Corp., a family-controlled communications company founded by his father, Ralph, in 1963.
Brian Roberts went door to door selling cable subscriptions in high school, worked at the company through college, and hasn't stopped yet.
Today he serves on executive committees at CableLabs, the industry research arm, and the National Cable Television Association, two critical decision-making bodies in the cable industry.
Comcast is considered a plum by both cable and telephone analysts because of its mix of assets.
The Philadelphia-based company has more than four million cable subscribers, equity stakes in QVC and TBS, a cellular-phone unit with a strong base in the populous Northeast corridor, and other alternative-access telephone partnerships.
"Telecommunications technology is moving so quickly, we can't afford to put all our eggs in one basket," Mr. Roberts says.
Comcast is one of the handful of major cable operators that have yet to ally with a major corporate partner.
Though he has vowed never to "sell the company outright" to the telephone companies interested in Comcast, Mr. Roberts says he would consider a "strategic partner that offers the right price."
Backed by an astute management team, Mr. Roberts has made some smart moves recently with cable programming and telephone operations that helped produce a healthy $625 million in cash flow for Comcast last year.
Comcast bought stock and options representing a 30% stake in Nextel Communications Inc., a wireless phone service.
Today Comcast has a paper profit of close to $1 billion on that investment.
In cable, the company is upgrading its U.S. systems.
Last year it doubled the number of households it serves with fiberoptic lines.
As smaller systems sell out, look for Comcast to buy some of them to consolidate its own markets.
In Britain, Comcast has been chosen to deliver phone service by 24% of homes in areas where it has laid wires.
Many U.S. cable companies are using the British market as a training ground of sorts in case Congress permits cable and telephone service to be offered by the same company.
Is Comcast a telephone company or a cable company?
Says Mr. Roberts: "The world is unlimited with applications."
A small, closely held software company named Microware Systems Corp. hopes to become a multimedia giant by designing the operating systems for the powerful new set-top converters that cable companies plan to deploy in coming years.
Microware, which has already designed the operating software for so-called compact disk-interactive multimedia players sold by Philips and Sony, wants to provide the "protocol," or computer language, for set-top boxes to "talk" to video servers, the storehouses of movies and data.
Though other companies, including Microsoft, have the same goal, tiny Microware already has scored big.
Bell Atlantic has placed orders with three suppliers for "millions" of TV set-top converters, to offer interactive services to 10 million subscribers by the year 2000.
And all three suppliers, including Philips and IBM, will use the Microware OS/9 operating system in their boxes.
"We're already shipping software to manufacturers, and that's where the rubber meets the road," says President Kenneth Kaplan, who oversees 200 employees from his company's headquarters in Des Moines.
The key element of Microware's product is its ability to handle "real-time" tasks simultaneously.
While a viewer watches a home-shopping program, for example, the Microware system could allow the viewer to make a "buy" decision, or choose which credit card to use, instantly and seamlessly.
"Our system can juggle the signals quite nicely," Mr. Kaplan says.
Sony spied the multimedia future five years ago when it paid $2 billion to acquire CBS Records.
A year later, it paid $3.4 billion for Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc.
Today, the Japanese giant is one of the world's largest entertainment purveyors, a $34 billion empire with offices or factories in 29 countries and more than $14 billion of assets in the U.S. alone.
While cable and phone companies slug it out to see who builds the pipeline, Sony says it is happy to be at both ends, supplying the content to be sent and the hardware to receive it.
The company is now trying to achieve synergy -- it is known around the company as the "S" word -- with its vast holdings.
Though not always on the cutting edge the way it once was, Sony's electronics division sells television sets, camcorders, multimedia CD-ROM players, computers, and CD players, while Sony Pictures Entertainment rakes in money from Columbia Pictures ("A Few Good Men," "Bram Stoker's Dracula"), Tri-Star Pictures ("Basic Instinct") and Sony Pictures Classics ("Howards End").
Its music business, too, has stars from Sade to the Spin Doctors.
But the much-ballyhooed synergy has been slow to benefit the company's bottom line.
Net income, which plunged 70% in the year ended last March 31, fell 40.6% in the first nine months of the latest fiscal year.
And sales, which grew at rates of more than 20% in the late 1980s, rose just 1.6% in fiscal 1993 and fell 7.4% in the latest nine months.
Sony's Hollywood operations have had their share of flops and management turnover.
The company also has had a hard time reining in studio costs, and its biggest attempt at synergy -- "Last Action Hero" -- was a bust when the movie failed and other projects connected with it were similarly disappointing.
To bring electronics and entertainment into harmony, Sony started a new electronic-publishing division in 1991 to make and distribute software.
Thus far, the unit has doubled its sales each year, and it had a profit in 1993 on sales of more than $150 million, the company says.
Last year, with the help of Silicon Graphics workstations, the division produced CD-ROM and video-game titles using footage and soundtracks from the Sony Pictures films "Bram Stoker's Dracula" and "Cliffhanger."
Sony also plans to roll out its own version of an interactive CD-ROM player by 1995 to play such titles, pitting the company against rivals like 3DO and Sega.
Olaf Olafsson, president of the division, says it will publish and distribute entertainment and informational software in any format that lends itself to interactivity.
"This is not theoretical synergy," he says.
"This makes sense."
General Instrument sells more equipment to the cable industry than any other company: more than $1 billion a year of converter boxes, amplifiers, transmitters, receivers, even the fiber-optic and coaxial cable.
Despite the recent FCC rate restrictions, which may slow cable companies' capital spending, "we see ourselves at the fulcrum of a major explosive growth cycle," says Hal Krisberg, a General Instrument vice president.
Cable operators are upgrading their networks, replacing coaxial wire with fiber-optic cable and swapping old converters for powerful new, computerlike "compuverters," the label General Instrument executives give to their little black boxes.
The company is linking with Intel and Microsoft to build new smart boxes, a direct challenge to a similar alliance of Kaleida Labs Inc., a joint venture of Apple and IBM; Motorola Inc.; and Scientific-Atlanta Inc., General Instrument's biggest competitor in supplying equipment to cable companies.
Despite the success of General Instrument's cable set-top converters, the electronics industry is still debating whether the brains of the television set should migrate to hardware that sits on top of it, or even to the video servers that will feed it.
TV makers want to eliminate the box.
Most are now working on smarter TV sets incorporating the software that enables viewers to use interactive guides and, ultimately, a range of high-tech services.
No matter where the payoff is in multimedia, AT&T should get its share.
It is investing billions of dollars in wireless services, computer chips and network software.
And even if these don't pan out, AT&T's long-distance network is likely to capture much of the traffic and revenue generated by the new services.
AT&T, based in New York, is involved in five of the biggest interactive multimedia consumer trials planned or under way in the U.S., including Time Warner's Orlando network and Viacom's Castro Valley test.
AT&T has similar arrangements with GTE Corp. and Pacific Telesis Group.
For Time Warner, AT&T is supplying an advanced switching system called ATM.
The new switch is designed to handle the huge amounts of video, voice and data traffic anticipated on the new networks.
For Viacom, Pacific Bell and GTE, AT&T is supplying a complete network using computer video servers, set-top boxes and ATM switches to pump movies and other entertainment to home subscribers.
AT&T is backing these trials with software designed to steer the multimedia traffic.
The software will also help power the TV set-top boxes and remote controls that subscribers will use to gain access to services such as shopping and interactive games.
In computer chips, AT&T has lined up backing for Hobbit, a new multimedia chip, from consumer-electronics giants such as NEC Corp., Matsushita and Toshiba.
Another chip, called VoiceSpan, allows users of multimedia machines to transmit high-quality sound and data through separate channels over one phone line.
Canon Inc. and Matsushita plan to use the chips in fax machines that will allow people to speak over the phone while also sending a fax.
AT&T and Sega will use it in an interactive game machine they are developing jointly.
In wireless products and services, AT&T owns EO Inc., which makes a small data communicator similar in concept to Apple's Newton.
And AT&T is an investor in General Magic Inc., a software consortium that has developed a product called Telescript, which will allow users of multimedia communicators and other devices to launch "electronic agents," powerful ways to filter and find information from external networks.
Apple, Matsushita, Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp., Philips and Sony also have invested in General Magic.
Mr. Robichaux is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
