"The early money was on Kerrigan," Art Manteris says, not speaking metaphorically.
"But all the late action has been on Harding to finish higher in the standings."
Mr. Manteris, the bookmaker for the Las Vegas Hilton Race and Sports SuperBook, is also posting odds on the four-man bobsled, ice hockey and downhill skiing.
He is one of the many people in Las Vegas who are making it possible for all Americans, men and women, young and old, to pursue their dream of cashing in on the Olympics.
There is a catch: To wager on the XVII Winter Games, you must be physically present in Nevada, the only state where this Olympic activity is legal.
In itself, that isn't altogether a bad thing.
The sports-betting operations here are like what you might get if you asked Frank Sinatra to design an airport waiting room: softly lit caverns with rows of comfortable chairs, twinkling information displays, free drinks, brass rails, waitresses in microskirts, cash machines, courteous attendants at computers behind service counters and giant television screens showing scores of sporting events all at once.
But getting to Las Vegas is for most Americans a considerable expense, and a bettor hoping to cover the plane fare with a big score on the giant slalom is likely to be disappointed.
The bookies here are happy to take bets of a few hundred dollars on the Games, but they keep the action small, figuring that anyone who arrived with a suitcase full of cash must know more about exotic sports than they do, or at least more about snow and ice.
"A couple of people have come in asking if we took bets on the Winter Games," says Jimmy Vaccaro, bookmaker for the Mirage.
"I went up to each of them and asked where they were from.
They both said Minnesota."
Among gamblers here, who mostly bet on horse racing, basketball, football and boxing, enthusiasm varies for the Winter Games.
"I would never bet the Olympics," says Patrick Smith, a visitor from Phoenix, looking slightly horrified.
"I don't think money should be bet on amateur sports."
On the other hand, the idea sounds pretty good to Bruce Jarrett, a man who makes his living betting on poker and sports.
"Gambling is like a cat-and-mouse game" between bettor and bookie, he says.
"It could be frog jumping or the stock market; if there's value in it, why not?"
Robert Greiner, who spends six months a year gambling in Las Vegas and the other six running a restaurant and motel in Sicamous, British Columbia, the Houseboat Capital of Canada, is interested in betting hockey.
"What's important is watching all the games.
We call it paying your dues," he says, keeping one eye on a television screen as a waitress places a fresh drink by his elbow.
"With all this change in the Soviet Union, the Russians and the Czechs might be a little weaker this time."
Hockey is, in fact, at the root of Olympic gambling.
"The Winter Olympics came out of the closet, so to speak, in 1980, with the hockey team," Mr. Vaccaro says.
"We booked it, and had a decent amount of action."
The idea was a natural, because gamblers already were accustomed to betting on games in the National Hockey League.
(Hockey tip from "Montana Melvin" Venetz, a gambler with a cane who says he once ran for Congress on a platform of socialized medicine: "Bet the goalie, just the way you bet the pitcher in baseball.")
Olympiads since 1980 have coincided with a period of spectacular growth in sports betting in Nevada.
Where once there was a handful of sports books, now there are 112; last year they took in a total of $72.6 million in pretax vigorish.
The fraction of that amount that is spent on the Olympics is so small that the Nevada Gaming Control Board doesn't even track it, but casino owners love a gimmick, so bookmakers have added more events.
The other major encouragement to Olympic gambling has been Michael "Roxy" Roxborough, who almost single-handedly modernized and computerized the business of setting odds and point spreads on sporting events.
From a modest office at the top of the Bank of America building here, Mr. Roxborough gathers intelligence on sporting events of all kinds, calculates odds on them and beams them out to bookmakers all over the state (about 80% of the Nevada sports books subscribe to his service).
Bookies may alter his odds according to their own hunches, but "Roxy's line" is usually the starting point.
This service is important for something like the Super Bowl, indispensable for exotic Nordic and Alpine sports.
This year, Mr. Roxborough is setting odds on hockey, downhill skiing, giant slalom, speed skating, figure skating and national medal totals (Norway and Germany are the favorites at 6-to-5).
Once again, the action probably won't amount to much.
But you never know.
"If it comes down to Tonya versus Nancy, we might write some serious business this year," Mr. Vaccaro says.
