Canadian corporate profits climbed solidly in the 1993 fourth quarter, and analysts see the trend picking up steam this year.
Jeffrey Rubin, chief economist of securities firm Wood Gundy Inc. in Toronto, sees "explosive growth" in Canadian profits over the next two years, fueled by higher output and firmer resource prices.
A Wall Street Journal survey of 112 early-reporting companies shows combined fourth-quarter profits of 924 million Canadian dollars (US$691 million), up 42% from a year earlier.
The jump in earnings was partly due to fewer write-downs taken in the latest quarter compared with the year before.
Seventy-five of the companies surveyed posted higher profits, quarter over quarter.
Mr. Rubin said Canadian corporate profits are poised to soar about 90% from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1995.
Canadian profits haven't rebounded as strongly as U.S. corporate earnings have from the depths of the recession of the early 1990s, and, at long last, "most of the asset write-downs are behind us," he said.
The economic picture will also fuel profit growth, Mr. Rubin added, predicting Canada's gross domestic product will rise about 4% this year from 1993.
"Profit margins domestically in the economy are improving, and they're improving because unit labor costs are falling, and they're falling because we're having very strong productivity growth."
Stronger economies abroad should help boost resource prices, and Mr. Rubin said the low value of the Canadian dollar against the U.S. dollar "hasn't fully been reflected in the earnings numbers yet."
Canadian exporters benefit from a weaker Canadian currency because their products are sold mostly in U.S. dollars.
Mr. Rubin said the stage is set for the Toronto Stock Exchange's 300-stock composite index to top 5000 by the end of next year, up from its current level of 4349.
Frank Mersch, a mutual-fund manager with Altamira Management Ltd. in Toronto, also expects corporate profits to swing higher this year, but he's more cautious about the stock market.
"Valuations are getting a little bit more stretched than we've seen for the last four years, but there are certain sectors that still show good momentum."
Because of the low Canadian dollar, Mr. Mersch likes "anything that exports," in the strengthening North American economy, including companies that export pulp and paper, steel and natural gas.
He calls those "regional commodities," and he steers clear of Canadian companies that export "global commodities," such as oil or metal, because he doesn't expect Japan and Germany to provide the economic stimulus needed to boost prices of those commodities.
Sixteen industrial companies in the survey posted combined profits of C$205.5 million in the fourth quarter, up from C$138 million a year before.
The steel sector, boosted by strong auto sales and firmer selling prices, continued its upswing in profits.
Integrated steel producer Stelco Inc. earned C$13 million in the fourth quarter, compared with a loss of C$4 million a year ealier.
Profit for Co-Steel Inc. jumped to C$7.4 million from C$2 million.
Results improved for five base-metal mining companies, showing a combined loss of C$1.4 million in the fourth quarter compared with a loss of C$149 million, which included several nonrecurring charges.
Still, metal inventories remain high and prices weak, and analysts say further improvement in results for Canadian mining concerns requires a solid upturn in world economies.
Profits for seven gold-mining concerns dropped to C$21.2 million in the fourth quarter from C$50.6 million a year earlier.
Results were skewed by a C$49 million nonrecurring charge taken by Lac Minerals Ltd., which posted a loss of C$58 million compared with a profit of C$5.7 million.
Weaker oil prices weighed on earnings for nine oil and gas companies, which showed combined profits of C$197.5 million in the fourth quarter, down from C$259 million a year before.
Companies with significant natural-gas output, such as Petro-Canada fared best in the group.
Petro-Canada's fourth-quarter earnings were C$36 million, up from C$27 million.
The forest-products sector showed mixed results.
Twelve forest-products companies showed a combined loss of C$203 million, including several large nonrecurring charges, compared with a loss of C$141.4 million a year before.
Nine consumer-products companies showed a combined profit of C$22 million in the fourth quarter, down from C$34.5 million a year before.
