The dollar drifted higher against the mark in light holiday trading, as the mark again fell victim to the anemic German economy and to political instability in Russia.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7553 marks, up from 1.7495 marks late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 111.06 yen, unchanged from Friday.
Sterling was trading at $1.4932, little changed from $1.4934.
About midday Tuesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 110.93 yen and at 1.7525 marks.
Traders noted early mark selling in favor of the dollar on the weekend resignation of first deputy prime minister Yegor Gaidar, the architect of Russia's economic reforms.
Mr. Gaidar said he couldn't continue to serve in his post because he no longer had the influence necessary to push through his program.
Political and economic instability in Russia tends to push the mark lower because of Germany's close economic ties and large investments there.
But, perhaps more significantly, traders said the mark has fallen prey to a marketwide perception that the dollar's rise against the mark is unstoppable -- as the U.S. economy continues to steamroll toward recovery, while the German economy has yet to hit bottom.
"There is a divergence in the direction of the two economies," said Andrew Busch, a senior trader at Harris Trust & Savings Bank in Chicago.
"And while there are no immediate changes seen in interest rates, there is a definite direction.
Eventually, interest rates will have to go down in Germany, while they go up in the U.S."
Mr. Busch said he believes the Bundesbank will continue to try to shore up the falling mark by holding its key interest rates steady at its policy-making meeting Thursday.
"But the market will definitely not reward them for that decision," Mr. Busch predicted.
"If they wait, and the dollar continues to go higher, they're in trouble because the market will really feed on the fact that the Bundesbank will have to cut later," he said.
Mark Schwartz, vice president of foreign exchange at Lehman Bros., agrees that the mark may continue to weaken even if the Bundesbank fails to cut its key interest rates Thursday.
"The interest rate cuts have become a nonissue," Mr. Schwartz said.
"The mark will continue to weaken whether they cut or not.
At this point traders are just out to trash the mark."
The dollar has climbed more than five pfennig from 1.6990 marks on Dec. 28, when its recent powerful rally began.
But Mr. Schwartz also sounded a word of caution, saying the dollar's strong gains against the mark could be vulnerable to a correction.
Shorting the German currency "has become too much like a one-way bet," he said.
"When it starts to get too easy to make money in this business, look out, that's when the market punishes you," Mr. Schwartz said.
He added that a cut in German interest rates has been so heavily discounted by the market that when any such rate cut arrives, it may even be seen as an excuse to sell dollars for marks and take profits.
