Tokyo stocks slid 1.1% Tuesday, as uncertainty about U.S. interest rates and escalating tension on the Korean peninsula kept many investors on the sidelines.
London shares climbed slightly, boosted by a rise in British government bonds and strength in stock-index futures.
In Frankfurt, prices rose moderately, despite concerns about U.S. rates.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.04, down 0.16, reflecting lower Asia/Pacific markets and higher American and European markets.
Precious metals stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 149.07, up 2.73, or 1.9%, with Battle Mountain Gold of the U.S. posting a 4.6% gain in its local currency.
Securities brokerage houses stocks trailed at 150.18, down 3.44, or 2.2%, with Daiwa Securities of Japan sliding 4.7% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which lost 122.71 points on Friday, fell 215.92 to 20253.53.
Japanese markets were closed Monday for a national holiday.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei index fell 146.12 points to close the morning session at 20107.41.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 360 million shares, compared with 480.61 million shares on Friday.
Declining issues outnumbered advancers 826-247.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which lost 1.29 points on Friday, skidded 19.23, or 1.2%, to 1628.01.
Investors were jittery about a possible increase in U.S. interest rates ahead of a meeting by the U.S. Federal Reserve's policy-making panel.
The Fed later raised the target for the federal-funds rate, or what banks charge each other for overnight loans, to 3 1/2% from 3 1/4%.
Market participants also nervously watched the situation on the nearby Korean peninsula after the U.S. said it would send Patriot missiles to South Korea as a defensive measure in response to North Korea's failure to allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities.
In addition, institutional investors continued to delay action until after Friday, the last day of trading for settlement in the fiscal year ending March 31.
The Nikkei began sliding early in the session, dropping as low as 20202.42, as equities caught the bearish spirit in index futures and bond prices.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index rose 3.5 points to 3201.5.
The FT 30-stock index fell half a point to 2527.7.
Volume was 678.3 million shares, compared with 506.3 million shares a day earlier.
Investors, who mostly stayed on the sidelines awaiting the decision on U.S. interest rates, gained confidence from the strength of June stock-index futures and a jump of nearly one point in British government bonds.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index gained 10.06 points to 2141.34, near its intraday low of 2140.76, after an early surge to 2155.31.
Firmness in bonds boosted stock prices, although bond traders' attitude of independence from U.S. economic changes didn't fully catch on with stock traders, who remained nervous about U.S. rates.
In Paris, shares slumped in light trading, sliding late in the day on jitters about U.S. interest rates.
In Amsterdam, equities fell, undermined by the weaker U.S. dollar, declines in foreign stock markets and worries that Dutch interest rates won't decline much further.
In Milan, stocks, including those traded electronically, rose 1.1%, as a few aggressive buyers lifted the market, helping it recover most of Monday's losses in the face of widespread selling.
In Madrid, prices rose slightly in thin, erratic trading amid investor worries about U.S. interest rates.
In Stockholm, shares eased in late trading after hovering above Monday's levels for most of the day; thin volume reflected investors' caution ahead of the decision on U.S. rates.
In Zurich, equities rose in moderate trading, bolstered by a bond-market rebound.
In Hong Kong, shares rebounded 4% as investors hunted for bargains after Monday's market plunge.
The buying prevailed despite expectations that U.S. interest rates would rise and that Hong Kong rates would increase on Friday.
The market, which initially fell sharply, recovered to halt a five-session losing streak, although the upswing didn't fully erase the 12% overall loss tallied in those sessions.
In Singapore, prices rose slightly, helped by bargain-hunting in a seesaw session.
In Kuala Lumpur, stocks climbed 1.4% in light trading, rebounding slightly from Monday's 5% tumble.
In Seoul, shares sank in light trading on worries, especially by foreign investors, about North Korea's nuclear-weapons program.
In Taipei, equities recovered from early losses in light trading; fears about U.S. interest rates gave way to strong demand for blue-chip electronic issues.
In Manila, shares slid 1.3% in light dealings on slumping blue chips.
In Wellington, stocks dived 2.1%, mainly because of a sell-off in shares of the national phone company.
In Bangkok, prices rose 2.7% in light trading, as investors regained confidence in the volatile market.
Meanwhile, in Mexico City, stocks soared 5.4% on news that Chiapas peace envoy Manuel Camacho Solis ruled out a run for the presidency this year, removing one of the concerns that has been convulsing the Mexican market.
Among corporate developments, in London, Glaxo Holdings sank 18 1/2 pence, or 2.7% to 662 1/2 pence.
The drug maker said a unit of rival Ciba-Geigy has filed an abbreviated new-drug application for a version of ranitidine hydrochloride, the active ingredient in Glaxo's flagship antiulcer drug, Zantac.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
