Turmoil in South Africa and world currency markets has quietly pushed the price of the other precious metal -- platinum -- to its highest level since last summer.
In the past five months, platinum for April delivery has climbed more than 13%, to $400.50 an ounce on Friday from $353 an ounce in September, and has supplanted gold as the leader of precious-metals markets.
Just last week, the price of the April platinum futures contract surged nearly 2%.
The strong performances of platinum and the related metal palladium, both of which are used by the automotive industry to make pollution-control devices, have highlighted broad-based rallies in the prices of metals with industrial uses, including copper and aluminum.
Palladium for March delivery is up nearly 12% since November, to $1.352 an ounce from $1.21.
And for various reasons, economists and analysts think platinum and palladium may continue to lead metals prices higher in coming weeks.
"Over the next month or two, I think we'll see continued strength," says Fred Demler, metals economist for ED&F Man.
"I think platinum has the potential to test the $420-to-$425-an-ounce range."
As for palladium, "it really took off at the beginning of February," says William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"There's very good demand for palladium from the international automotive industry, which should help to push prices higher for the next six months."
The main source of price support for platinum has been violence and upheaval associated with the impending elections in South Africa, in which black South Africans will be allowed to vote for the first time.
South Africa produces the bulk of the world's platinum, and many of its mines are in Bophuthatswana, a small South African homeland whose residents have talked of seceding from the newly democratized country.
"About $20 an ounce of the recent platinum price rise is directly the result of fears about South African production," says Jeremy Coombes, a London-based manager at metals refining and marketing firm Johnson Matthey PLC.
While many analysts are skeptical that the turmoil surrounding the election will actually disturb the flow of platinum out of South Africa, the platinum market is hypersensitive even to the threat of such supply disruptions.
"The price of platinum can rise very aggressively on speculation that supplies may be constrained," says Nina Lipton, market research director for Platinum Guild International, a trade group.
"For example, talk of sanctions against South Africa in 1985 and 1986 contributed to a major runup."
One way the political uncertainty may push prices higher is to restrain, to some extent, the market-moving trading habits of commodity funds, which are big managed pools of investors' money.
These funds tend to trade on the basis of their own mathematical projections rather than supply-and-demand fundamentals, but nevertheless grow cautious when supply shortages are possible, analysts say.
Uncertainty between now and the April 27 South African elections may keep these funds from pushing platinum prices down by aggressively selling futures contracts.
"At the moment, the funds are mainly on the long side," buying futures contracts in wagers that prices will continue to rise, Mr. Demler says.
Another factor supporting the platinum market has been the yen's steep rise against the U.S. dollar, Ms. Lipton says.
Platinum futures contracts are denominated in dollars, and thus have suddenly become extremely cheap for buyers in Japan, which include the country's automotive and jewelry industries and stock-market investors seeking a precious-metals hedge against stock-price declines.
And even before the favorable currency fluctuation, Japanese platinum imports were strong.
In 1993, Japanese imports totaled more than two million ounces, close to the record-setting 2.2 million-ounce Japanese imports of 1991.
While the Japanese economy continues to struggle and the market there for many luxury goods remains depressed, sales of platinum jewelry in Japan are booming, Mr. Coombes says.
Also providing support for both the platinum and palladium markets is the completion of a long-term agreement under which Japan will buy big quantities of both metals from Russia, the source of more than half the world's palladium production.
The coupling of Japanese palladium purchases with platinum purchases means that Russian platinum won't be dumped on world markets as it has been in recent years, Mr. O'Neill says.
Analysts caution that platinum's rally may stall in May if the South African elections don't lead to real supply shortages.
"If you look at platinum strictly from a supply-demand standpoint globally, there is no shortage," Mr. O'Neill says.
"We will have a surplus of production over consumption in 1994."
Another negative may be the increasingly lackluster performance of gold, which, after rallying late last year, has now become mired in a rigid trading range between $375 and $390 an ounce.
"Platinum fundamentals in the near term are more bullish than for gold and silver," Mr. Demler says.
"Gold is kind of an anchor on the platinum market at the moment."
