The nation's schools may hitch a cheap ride on the information superhighway.
Broad telecommunications legislation moving through Congress would require companies to provide inexpensive computer linkups to schools, nonprofit medical facilities, libraries and some other public buildings.
The idea is supported by people ranging from Vice President Al Gore to filmmaker George Lucas.
Rep. Edward Markey, chairman of the House telecommunications subcommittee, envisions connecting students' home computers to their schools and linking the schools to the Library of Congress, the New York Public Library and other distant databases.
The Massachusetts Democrat, a leading sponsor of the legislation, talks of charging students only a penny a minute to use such services.
The thought of cheap hookups -- and especially cut-rate or free monthly service -- unsettles most telephone and cable television companies.
A survey by Rep. Markey of 20 companies early this year turned up only three -- Bell Atlantic Corp., Tele-Communications Inc. and Cox Cable Communications -- that were willing to pay for high-capacity links to elementary and secondary schools in their territories.
The rest didn't say no, but they also didn't say yes.
BellSouth Corp. told Mr. Markey that requiring free links to schools would burden the Atlanta-based Bell company "with a competitive disadvantage."
In January, Vice President Gore shook up the communications industry by challenging it "to connect all of our classrooms, all of our libraries and all of our hospitals and clinics by the year 2000."
The next day, BellSouth amended its response to Mr. Markey's survey.
On reconsideration, it suggested continuing efforts to work with state and local officials "to determine technological solutions and business arrangements that are more customized to the individual needs of each of the schools."
Other companies also have changed their tune.
Giving away service "to schools or anyone else, while superficially attractive, is not in the long-term public interest," responded Ameritech, the Chicago-based Baby Bell, to Mr. Markey's survey.
In testimony earlier this month before Mr. Markey's panel, Richard Notebaert, the company's president, softened that stance.
Ameritech, he said, "has committed to connect elementary and secondary schools to this advanced network before the end of the decade."
Mr. Lucas, the movie maker, has been pushing for free information-highway connections for students through his George Lucas Educational Foundation.
"At some point, I hope we do the right thing," says Mr. Lucas.
"Obviously, this is a big issue, and personal and corporate greed have to be put aside a little bit to focus on what is best for our country."
While the industry is softening its stance on building the links between schools and computer networks, the issue of paying for monthly service is a different matter.
Even Bell Atlantic, TCI and Cox haven't promised to do that, though many companies suggest that schools are likely to get discounts.
Ronald Stowe, head of Pacific Telesis Group's Washington office, suggests that companies might work together to provide packages of equipment and services and train teachers and students how to use them.
"It is not enough just to offer free connections to every school," he says.
"Schools need hardware, software and training."
Meanwhile, the FCC's new chairman, Reed Hundt, is likely to put continued pressure on the companies.
Mr. Hundt, who taught seventh grade in an inner-city school in Philadelphia before enrolling in law school, recalls how painful it was to have only 35 textbooks for five classes of 35 each.
"If students could be connected to networks," he says, "it would let them escape the classroom, escape the confines of their neighborhoods."
