Some 81 Republican members of the House asked the Office of Government Ethics to investigate Hillary Rodham Clinton's holdings in an investment partnership that sold short several health-care stocks early last year.
Mrs. Clinton, wife of President Clinton, has been a limited partner since 1986 in ValuePartners I, a hedge fund managed by Smith Capital Management of Little Rock, Ark.
Among other investors in partnerships sponsored or managed by Smith Capital was James McDougal, former chairman of the failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan Association and former business partner of the Clintons in Whitewater Development Co., the Republicans' letter said.
A 1986 financial statement for Mr. McDougal and his wife, Susan, lists among their assets Whitewater Development as well as three separate interests in unspecified "Value Partnerships," totaling $142,060.
The statement was obtained by The Wall Street Journal.
Mrs. Clinton's investment, held at the same time she headed the presidential task force on health-care reform, "constitutes the appearance of impropriety and conflict of interest," said the letter signed by Louisiana Rep. Robert Livingston and 80 other representatives.
Mrs. Clinton's interest in the hedge fund was disclosed last May in filings with the ethics office.
At the time, a White House representative said that Mrs. Clinton "has no input, communication, review, oversight or control over the investments that the fund makes."
The representative couldn't say for certain that Mrs. Clinton was unaware that her money was invested in medical-company stocks.
Rep. Livingston and his co-signers cited Mr. McDougal and other, unidentified friends of Mrs. Clinton who were participants in Smith Capital investments as people who were in a position to inform Mrs. Clinton that ValuePartners I was selling short health-care stocks.
In addition, the letter said, Smith Capital issued at least six reports to investors in its partnerships in 1992 and the first six months of 1993, reporting its short sales of health-care and pharmaceutical stocks.
Hedge funds, such as ValuePartners I, are aggressive investment pools that can buy stocks with borrowed money and can sell stocks short -- that is, borrow shares and sell them at current prices in anticipation of replacing them at lower prices.
"At the time that Ms. Rodham Clinton's actions caused the drop in the prices of these stocks, her personal investment in ValuePartners I, of which she had repeated notice, was intentionally structured to profit from price declines in pharmaceutical company stocks," the letter said.
The fund, and other of the Clintons' holdings, were placed in a blind trust last July.
Rep. Livingston and his colleagues previously asked the Securities and Exchange Commission whether it was investigating the short sales of ValuePartners I. The commission, as is its policy, responded that it could neither confirm nor deny the existence of an investigation.
