Corporate farms face deep mistrust in the Midwest.
Some states have curbed corporate ownership of farmland since the Depression.
Iowa and Kansas won't let meatpackers raise their own livestock.
As chicken company Tyson Foods and others push into the hog business, "a lot of small farmers are afraid that Tyson will do to hog farming what Wal-Mart did to the small store on the square," says Chris Hurt, a Purdue University economist.
Iowa's anticorporate-farming laws didn't apply to Premium Standard Farms Inc. when its founders announced plans for a 4,800-hog complex in 1989.
But Iowa blocked it by denying construction permits, saying the site was too near a park.
So Premium Standard went to Missouri, and the town it chose, Princeton, is thriving.
The company's work force is expected to hit 1,500 soon.
Jobs in the barns pay from $13,000 to $45,000 a year.
Property values in Princeton, the seat of a county whose population shrank by one-fifth during the 1980s, are now rising 15% a year.
Churches that met twice a month are holding weekly services again.
Premium Standard keeps people happy by supplying fireworks on July 4 and cement to fix downtown sidewalks.
"We're glad we got what Iowa didn't want," says Jack Tucker, a local banker.
Now, Kansas is considering legalizing corporate hog farms.
In Oklahoma, which eased curbs in 1991, Seaboard Corp. of Shawnee Mission, Kan., is opening a packing plant and building a herd of 14,000 sows in cattle country.
Some Iowa officials dismiss Premium Standard as a flash in the pan.
"Those people aren't farmers.
They're only interested in making money on their money," scoffs Dale Cochran, the state agriculture secretary.
"I think it's possible that Princeton will become a ghost town."
Still, Midwestern hog farmers feel pressure to get bigger or get out.
Many, after the farm crisis a decade ago, dread borrowing hundreds of thousands of dollars to build a modern hog setup.
Those taking the plunge are mostly younger and more willing to face a different world.
Jon Caspers of Swaledale, Iowa, 39, expanded his breeding herd 33% and now sells 20,000 hogs a year.
"There's a lot of tradition involved with being a pig farmer," he says.
"But competing in the future means being bigger and having closer ties with a meatpacker."
