Biodegradable plastic, a field littered with failures, is beginning to live up to its name.
A few big companies are making materials that mimic many of the properties of synthetic plastics, yet will decompose in the environment.
Earlier versions merely broke down into tiny pieces.
Cargill Inc., the giant Minneapolis-based commodity processor, opened a small plant last month that makes plastic from corn.
A venture of the chemical company DuPont Co. and the international food concern ConAgra Inc. is trying to do the same with cheese whey.
The British bioscience company Zeneca Group PLC has harnessed micro-organisms that ingest corn sugar to make plastic.
But because of the technology that is evolving, the market is much smaller than that envisioned in the 1980s, when Wall Street thought consumer products from beverage cups to diapers would be made of biodegradable plastic.
Such products make up roughly 16 billion pounds of synthetic plastic that end up in landfills each year.
The new generation of natural plastics seems destined for niche markets.
The U.S. Navy is interested in biodegradable plastic tableware because its ships must discharge food-soiled garbage at sea when on extended cruises; the Navy has four years to comply with a United Nations treaty that bans the dumping of synthetic plastics into the ocean.
Many states require that beverage-container rings degrade because they are a hazard to wildlife.
Some ocean-fishing businesses are interested in biodegradable nets that would eventually disappear if they are snagged or lost.
The fast-food industry, under consumer pressure to cut its waste, is experimenting with compost.
And McDonald's Corp. is researching natural-plastic containers.
The market is expected to expand to hundreds of millions of pounds by the end of the decade, but growth will be slow.
Bioplastics must go into a microbe-rich environment such as a compost pile to break down, and the infrastructure for that is in its infancy.
Bioplastics also cost more than their synthetic counterparts -- though the gap is narrowing -- and some don't perform well with microwave ovens or heat.
And environmentalists are leery of claims of biodegradable plastic because of their experience four years ago with garbage bags hawked as degradable.
What they actually did was disintegrate into bits of synthetic plastic when an additive broke down.
Some of those bioplastics contained an additive made by Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.
The grain processor, which had acquired a corn starch technology overseas, got out of the business.
Mobil Corp.'s chemical unit stripped the degradability claim from its boxes of Hefty plastic garbage bags shortly before several states filed suit, accusing it of making false claims.
Mobil says a ferrous-oxide additive, which is still used, helps the bags fall apart under sunlight.
"Biodegradable plastic got a humongous black eye a few years ago," says Patrick R. Gruber, a chemist and the brains behind Cargill's natural-plastic business.
"And nobody really knows how big the market is yet.
But now it works."
Some leaders in bioplastic technology are agriculture-related companies, which are looking for new uses for grain to counter slumping exports.
The hottest bioplastic is polylactide-long used for surgical sutures because it dissolves.
It can be made from corn and formulated to have many of the physical properties of polystyrene and polyethylene, two of the most common disposable plastics.
Through a process called fermentation, some microorganisms convert sugar to lactic acidthe building block for polylactide.
A pound of medical-grade polylactide fetches hundreds of dollars.
Cargill's breakthrough was figuring out how to make enough of it to lower the cost to roughly $3 a pound.
Its test plant can make 10 million pounds a year of a polylactide called EcoPLA for companies experimenting with natural plastic.
Mr. Gruber figures he has to get EcoPLA's price down to around $1 a pound to compete with synthetic plastics such as polyethylene, which costs roughly 40 cents a pound.
If that happens, Cargill plans to build a plant in 1997 to produce 250 million pounds of EcoPLA a year.
Polylactide technology is also sparking the interest of firms in Japan and Europe, as well as ACX Technologies Inc., a Golden, Colo., spinoff of brewer Adolph Coors Co.
Another type of bioplastic is faltering.
Warner-Lambert Co. is stopping production of Novon -- whose uses included golf tees and packing peanuts -- and is trying to license other companies to make it.
Novon is made through a mechanical process using corn starch and some synthetic materials.
A Rockford, Ill., plant able to make 100 million pounds annually produced only a trickle because there was so little demand.
"Clearly, we felt the market was bigger," says Steven Mojo, director of Novon market development for the pharmaceutical maker.
"Our enthusiasm has been tempered."
The new bioplastics have a unique marketing problem.
As long as they cost significantly more to make, manufacturers must push natural plastics as so environmentally friendly that consumers are willing to pay a premium for them.
But biodegradability is a slippery concept.
Many consumers think it means they can simply toss the stuff in their garbage and it will break down at the landfill.
But even natural plastic won't degrade in dry, modern landfills.
Moisture, warmth and hungry micro-organisms are needed to reduce the material to carbon dioxide, water and humus.
"What we do isn't going to solve the landfill problem," says William D. Luzier, the U.S. business manager for Zeneca BioProducts.
The bioscience firm advises customers to advertise that its natural plastic Biopol, which costs $6 to $8 a pound, requires "a microbially active environment such as a home compost pile" in order to degrade.
That's enough for marketers to paint themselves green.
"Our customers are always looking for a marketing edge," says Andrew T. Berlin, president of Chicago-based Berlin Packaging Corp., which makes bottles and jars from Biopol.
"This way they can demonstrate their commitment to the environment."
But it isn't clear that consumers will pay much more for a product that, in order to justify its premium price, must go into a compost pile -- particularly when many don't have access to one.
Some early attempts to sell such products have flopped.
Minneapolis-based retailer Dayton Hudson Corp. tried to launch private-label body-care products called Goodnest.
Consumers were asked to pay $9 for 12 ounces of all-natural ingredients and a bottle made of Biopol.
The line was shelved after several months.
So far, environmentalists mostly are standing behind efforts to recycle plastic.
"Biodegradable has enormous marketability because it is a warm and fuzzy term," says Richard Denison, senior scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund.
"But it is really just a small niche."
