As academic dean of one of the member colleges in the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, I read with considerable interest the response of Dr. Donald Gerth, chair of the WASC's accrediting commission, to your Dec. 29 editorial "The Diversity Standard" ("Ethnic Diversity and Accreditation," Jan. 26).
Dr. Gerth asserts that your editorial "gets many things wrong."
For example, he denies that WASC's "accrediting document sets forth a new diversity standard."
Member institutions have subscribed to it since 1988, he claims.
Yet the 1992 report of an external review panel, commissioned by WASC to review its operations, questions the legitimacy of the diversity standard.
WASC, the report states, began asserting it with vigor before it had been established within the academic community through a "formal, collegial, and consultative process."
It adds, "many institutions did not realize the significance of these changes {in 1988} nor the emphasis that would subsequently be placed on diversity."
Again, Dr. Gerth asserts that the new "document clearly states that accreditation will not be denied any college that is thoughtfully considering the matter of diversity."
In fact, my college and others, following the lead of Middle States, have repeatedly requested that the document clearly state that diversity not be used to undermine the autonomy or alter the mission of any institution.
No such statement has appeared in any of the drafts.
Most interesting, however, is how Dr. Gerth defends the claim that diversity and educational quality are inextricably linked: since our society is ethnically diverse, "we say that" any education that "provided no familiarity with the ways and histories of the groups to which fellow students, citizens and co-workers" belong would "represent a serious gap in educational quality."
Dr. Gerth assures us that institutions need only thoughtfully consider diversity, presumably with the freedom to reject it.
Are we to conclude, then, that WASC will accredit such institutions, even though it thinks there is a "serious gap" in the education they offer?
Also, what exactly is Dr. Gerth's argument that diversity and quality are inextricably linked?
He seems to say nothing more than "we say" it.
Perhaps an argument can be made by supplying the premise that the only way to achieve civility in the populace is through studying diverse cultures.
Yet Dr. Gerth offers no support for this radical and controversial claim.
Dr. Gerth simply makes no allowance for a long-standing, respectable view of education that offers a means to the ends he desires, but avoids producing an "atmosphere blighted by censorship, speech codes, quota hiring and other symptoms of political correctness."
Perhaps another, if not better, way of unifying people is to look to what all share as human beings, to those virtues that are common to all peoples of all times.
Dr. Gerth may deny that there are such virtues, but then one wonders whose views really will "compromise America's future."
Kevin D. Kolbeck
Santa Paula, Calif.
