Crude and heating oil prices tumbled, driven lower on continued reports of unusually warm weather.
According to Howard Schmidt, meteorologist for Accu-Weather Inc. in State College, Pa., temperatures in the Northeast could top 60 degrees this weekend.
"Even at night, we expect temperatures near some major metropolitan areas to remain above freezing," which is 32 degrees Fahrenheit, Mr. Schmidt said.
Temperatures at this time of the year typically range between a low of 28 degrees and a high of 40 degrees.
The warm weather, which is already causing a thaw in the Northeast, is expected to last through early next week.
The spring-like warmth will be followed by a colder spell.
But temperatures in the Northeast, the world's largest heating-oil market, aren't expected to again drop to the sub-zero levels of recent weeks anytime soon.
Crude oil for March delivery fell by 13 cents a barrel to $13.93, the lowest level for that contract in almost two months.
Heating oil for March fell by 2.03 cents a gallon to 45.02 cents.
Heating oil futures prices have fallen heavily -- by almost 6 cents a gallon -- since last Friday's settlement.
Gasoline prices, however, rose slightly yesterday, as traders began to anticipate warmer weather and an increase in driving.
Crude oil prices in the U.S. had actually started the day higher, propped up by slightly bullish statistics released by the American Petroleum Institute late Tuesday.
The Institute reported that crude oil stocks last week fell by 4.3 million barrels to 331.3 million barrels.
Gasoline stocks also fell.
Traders had expected inventories for both of those commodities to grow.
However, distillate inventories, which include stocks of heating oil, didn't decline as sharply as expected.
Traders are now speculating that heating oil dealers might be sufficiently stocked up at this point.
With the weather issue dropping into the background, market participants again began to focus on how the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is going to deal with the oversupply of oil at the group's meeting in March.
Remarks by Venezuelan Oil Minister Erwin Arrieta have damped hopes by traders that OPEC might opt to cut its output.
When asked about the prospects of such a reduction, Mr. Arrieta reportedly said "to proceed to a cut alarms us a little."
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of wheat-futures contracts for delivery in July rose slightly amid growing concern about a dry spell in winter wheat states such as Texas and Oklahoma.
In trading at the Kansas City Board of Trade, the wheat contract for July delivery rose half a cent to settle at $3.4525 a bushel.
The wheat crop in the Southern Plains is dormant this time of year.
But traders are worried that the dry pattern might linger long enough to stunt the crop when it begins growing this spring.
Prices of corn and soybean futures contracts rose as concern eased about the prospects for a trade war with Japan, which is a major importer of U.S. farm commodities.
ORANGE JUICE: A final round of selling related to the demise of the 1994 frost season pushed orange-juice futures prices lower.
At New York's Cotton Exchange, orange juice for March delivery fell 3.25 cents to $1.065 a pound.
Each year, traders and speculators buy futures contracts in December and early January in anticipation of the possibility of a frost that could damage Florida's orange crop.
This buying helps to push prices higher during these periods.
Each year a frost does not occur, traders tend to sell off their futures contracts in February.
The recent warming trend throughout the country has all but ruled out the possibility of a crop-damaging frost this year, analysts said.
