The dollar snapped back from an early sell-off against the mark that was sparked by the Bundesbank's decision to leave key interest rates untouched.
After the dollar dropped to a new low for the week, it whipped back to recover its losses against the mark, leaving many investors somewhat bloodied by the abrupt moves.
Late in New York, the dollar was mixed against the other major currencies; it was quoted at 1.6890 marks, up from 1.6885 marks late Wednesday in New York, and at 105.85 yen, down from 106.07 yen a day earlier.
Sterling was trading at $1.4934, off from $1.4944.
About noon Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.85 yen and at 1.6945 marks.
Early on, traders were expecting, at the very least, a symbolic cut in the German central bank's ceiling Lombard rate, which would have provided some excuse to push the dollar higher.
Indeed, in Asian and European trading the dollar climbed steadily to its intraday high of 1.6943 marks on expectations that any German rate cut would propel the dollar above key resistance at 1.7000 marks, traders said.
But the surprise decision by the Bundesbank to leave key rates unchanged forced traders to switch positions, sending the dollar spiraling to its intraday low of 1.6760 marks.
"The market went long dollars into the announcement and then there was a big squeeze and the market turned bearish," said Paul McErlain, vice president at Societe Generale in New York.
But when the dollar failed to punch below key support at about 1.6750 marks, "the shorts were squeezed out by a few big players" and the dollar was pushed higher, Mr. McErlain added.
The Bundesbank "caught the market with its pants down a little bit," Mr. McErlain said, noting that many intraday players were hurt by the day's whipsaw movement.
Indeed, prior to the announcement, there were ample reasons to suspect the Bundesbank would be cutting rates."
I kind of thought they might," said Bill Bertha, chief dealer for Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
For one, the dollar remains in a strong technical downdraft, unable to climb above 1.7000 marks despite a spate of economic data showing the U.S. economic recovery is in full swing.
In addition, a cut in the Lombard rate would have been a symbolic gesture to Germany's economic partners, who have been pressing for a faster Bundesbank easing to help stimulate the world economy.
And traders also noted that yesterday represented the last obvious opportunity for a Bundesbank rate cut before the central bank's four-week Easter break.
When the policy-making council resumes its regular biweekly meetings April 14, the dollar may well have recovered from its recent slide, traders said.
And the Bundesbank is likely to be reluctant to sanction a rate cut if the mark is going through another period of weakness, they added.
One final factor, traders said, was that while many in the market had expected a token easing yesterday, sentiment was almost universally positioned against any dramatic action by the Bundesbank.
Perversely, that could have created an environment to do something dramatic for a central bank that apparently likes to move against market expectations.
"With the Bundesbank you always get into a situation where its double and triple reverse psychology," said Cyrus Whitney, chief trader at Commerzbank in New York.
But with the dollar's technical recovery from its lows, it found further support on comments by Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president, that despite yesterday's decision, the bank still sees room to ease money-market rates.
Meanwhile, the Bank of Canada was reported selling U.S. dollars aggressively late yesterday after technically driven trading took the Canadian dollar to a seven-year low.
The U.S. dollar was trading at 1.3680 Canadian dollars in late New York trading, up from 1.3640 Canadian dollars late Wednesday.
But the U.S. dollar continued higher later in Australasian dealings to break a key 1.3700 Canadian dollar resistance level.
"The Canadian economy itself is really stumbling to a halt," said Societe Generale's Mr. McErlain.
