Some scripters see Italy's post-Cold War election next weekend as equal in importance to the post-World War II 1948 vote.
Then, the Christian Democrats defeated the Communists to dominate Italian politics for the next 45 years.
But up until last month, the "momentous" label was being applied because of a belief that the former Communists, now flying a new pennant, would finally win power.
With the Christian Democrats and Socialists discredited by one of the most pervasive anti-corruption purges in any country's history, it seemed that the well-organized Democratic Party of the Left (PDS in Italian) was unstoppable.
Now, however, "momentous" has a new connotation.
A few weeks ago, the PDS was running against a smudge of parties of the right.
Today, it is facing a formidable, although rather strange, coalition.
At the center is a new political creation called Forza Italia (literally, "Go for it, Italy").
FI has fielded 267 candidates, all with one remarkable qualification: no previous involvement in Italian politics.
This assemblage of non-politicians wading into one of the world's most treacherous political jungles is remindful of the children's crusades.
But Forza Italia bears no resemblance otherwise.
Since its debut early last month it has folded the separatist Northern League of Umberto Bossi and the south's National Alliance of Gianfranco Fini into its coalition, creating a rightist "Freedom Alliance."
If opinion polls are any indication, Forza Italia's creator, Silvio Berlusconi, has at least an outside chance to become Italy's next prime minister.
What's going on here?
Well, quite a number of things at once, which is not unusual in Italy.
Mr. Berlusconi, a self-made business tycoon, obviously spotted a market niche that was in fact a gaping hole left by the demise of the Christian Democrats and Socialists.
The Northern League had strength in the north and the National Alliance in the south, but there was nothing left in the center, either politically or geographically, to stop the PDS machine.
So he moved into the vacuum, employing his marketing skills and his ownership of three TV stations, several newspapers and an advertising agency to build support.
He spotted something else as well, the fact that whatever confidence Italians ever had in their political class has evaporated.
That is less of a problem for the PDS than it was for the Christian Democrats and Socialists.
The Communists had only brief tastes of power sharing over 45 years, and hence are relatively, although not entirely, free of scandal.
But scandal is even less of a problem for Forza Italia, which wasn't even a party three months ago.
It was to emphasize this point that Mr. Berlusconi assembled his non-politicians.
He auditioned candidates in much the way he selects players for his championship AC Milan football club, picking people with demonstrable audience appeal.
Using the model of football fan clubs, he organized 12,000 local political clubs to back his candidates.
Mr. Berlusconi clearly is reading the mood of Italy.
He also may have discovered a public sentiment that now pervades the democratic world.
In country after country, there is a mood of skepticism toward the political class.
The denizens of the Washington Beltway are watching in dismay as the Clintons, Dan Rostenkowski et al. lose credibility by the hour.
The long grip on power of Japan's Liberal Democratic Party has finally been loosened and perhaps broken.
Helmut Kohl in Germany faces an uphill fight to win re-election in the fall.
If John Major is two-faced, as his many critics charge, it probably is because he spends so much time trying to ward off attacks from both the British left and right.
Some people find this phenomenon disquieting, a prelude to a lurch into an era of weak national leadership, or even anarchy, that might encourage the enemies of the democratic nations to make stronger efforts to appropriate their wealth and power.
Others take an opposite view, that it is a necessary cleansing process, an opening up of sludged engines that have run unattended for too long.
Most likely, however, neither anarchy nor purity will be the end result.
Rather, it is more likely a case of political systems going through a process of Shumpeterian creative destruction as new know-how gains ascendancy.
The evolution of Italy's PDS is instructive.
Only a few years ago, it was Western Europe's largest Communist Party, with a strong, although usually muted, allegiance toward Moscow.
It was the place where Italians went to register a strong, but mostly ineffectual, protest vote against the club of boodlers that passed for a parliament.
But after the collapse of the Soviet empire, the Italian Communists changed their party's name.
Their leader, Achille Ochetto, began to sound like a born-again Milton Friedman.
He promises to continue privatization of state industries and has been urging investors not to fear a PDS government.
In short, the PDS knows that communism, or even 1975-vintage socialism, no longer sells.
Mr. Ochetto, however, has had to pull into his coalition some less reassuring elements.
There are the Greens, with a decidedly anti-business coloration, and worst of all, Refondazione, a party of unreconstructed Communists.
Mr. Berlusconi has his coalition problems too.
The Northern League started life as the Lombard League with a campaign to split the prosperous Italian north away from the impoverished and corrupt south.
That played well for awhile in the north but has begun to lose steam.
The National Alliance has gained some popularity in the south but remains type-cast as a neo-fascist party despite Mr. Fini's protestations that he has no interest in resurrecting Mussolini.
Mr. Berlusconi, even though distrusted by many Italians as a glib financial buccaneer, seems better attuned to the times than most of his opponents.
He surrounded himself with first-rate economic advisers, for one thing.
He would take the government out of health care, which nearly all Italians agree is a mess.
He would reduce the top income tax bracket to 30% from 50% to win revenues from high earners who now avoid or evade taxes.
He would reduce the number of different taxes Italians pay to 20 from 200.
In foreign policy, he styles himself as a good friend of the U.S. and supporter of NATO.
Italians are not natural optimists where politics are concerned, even when there are fresh winds blowing.
But one thing is certain: Next weekend's Italian election is the end of one era and the beginning of another, whichever way it goes.
