A white-collar criminal can't avoid prison just because his incarceration would destroy his business and throw his employees out of work, a federal appeals court has ruled.
The ruling overturns an unusual decision by a Pittsburgh judge last year to put Elliott Sharapan on probation, rather than imprison him, for mail fraud and false corporate-tax filings.
U.S. District Judge Barron P. McCune had concluded that society would be better served if the company stayed afloat and some of its revenue was available to enhance the compensation available to victims of Mr. Sharapan's fraud.
The federal appeals court ruling denying Judge McCune such discretion is the latest to address an issue that has troubled federal judges for some time: Under what circumstances can they depart from federal sentencing guidelines and use their own judgment?
Established under the 1984 Sentencing Reform Act, the guidelines provide a range of prison sentences for some 2,000 crimes, taking into consideration such factors as the past record of the defendant and various extenuating circumstances.
The intent was to bring uniformity to prison sentences, but the guidelines have been controversial since their inception.
Many judges view them as legislative interference with their discretion and with the judicial process.
The concerns are similar to those that have been raised about minimum mandatory sentences, which require judges to impose prison sentences without parole for certain crimes no matter what the circumstances.
A related idea, automatic life sentences after three convictions for serious violent crimes, has received broad bipartisan support in Congress and from the Clinton administration.
In the Pittsburgh case, Judge McCune disregarded a guideline requirement that he sentence Mr. Sharapan to between 33 and 41 months in prison and order him to pay $40,799.50 in restitution.
President of Ralph's Discount City Inc., a health and beauty supply store in Pittsburgh, Mr. Sharapan faced a 30-count indictment stemming from a coupon-redemption scam that netted him $2.2 million.
He pleaded guilty to two counts of mail fraud and two counts of filing false corporate-tax returns.
In handing down a sentence, Judge McCune reasoned that Ralph's Discount, and its 30 employees, probably couldn't survive Mr. Sharapan's incarceration and that it made "more sense" for him to operate his business and pay back his victims, according to the appeals court opinion.
Judge McCune increased the recommended amount of restitution to $300,000, placed Mr. Sharapan under house arrest at night for two years and ordered him to "operate his business conscientiously."
In overturning the sentence, the Third U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia ruled that the decision violated a federal sentencing policy guideline specifically requiring judges to refrain from taking "vocational skills" into account when sentencing defendants.
The only exception, the appeals court ruled, might be when imprisonment would deprive society of something of "extraordinary value."
Ralph's Discount and its employees, the appeal court ruled, didn't meet that test.
"What the government was concerned about," said Assistant U.S. Attorney Bonnie R. Schlueter, who argued the case, "is that . . . a departure such as this would really defeat one of the purposes of the guidelines -- to ensure that white-collar criminals were given long sentences."
Mr. Sharapan's attorney in Pittsburgh, Charles F. Scarlata, said Judge McCune's sentence was appropriate under the circumstances.
The appeals court ordered that he be resentenced within the guidelines.
Mr. Sharapan has been free pending his appeal and resentencing.
An employer can be held responsible for acts of sexual harassment by high-level supervisory employees even if the company has taken steps to address the problem, a federal appeals court ruled.
The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New York also said that a plaintiff alleging that sex was demanded in return for job benefits need not demonstrate economic loss to make a successful claim.
The specific case involves a Columbia University student and employee who filed a sex-discrimination claim after being laid off in August 1990.
The woman claimed that she had been harassed by her supervisor, a high-level officer in the university's fund-raising office, who allegedly demanded sex in return for raises and other benefits.
The supervisor, who didn't deny having a sexual relationship with the woman but claimed that it was consensual, was forced to resign about the same time the woman was laid off.
Columbia successfully argued at the trial-court level that it shouldn't be held liable because it had dealt with the problem.
But in reversing the lower court and reinstating the action against the school, the appeals court said that an employer is liable for a "discriminatorily abusive" work environment created by a supervisor if the supervisor "uses his actual or apparent authority to further the harassment."
By contrast, if the alleged harasser is a co-worker or lower-level supervisor who doesn't use his authority to carry out the harassment, then the employer will only be liable if it did nothing or provided no avenue for complaint, the court said.
(Karibian v.
Columbia Univ. et al., No. 93-7188.)
Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
