First Interstate Bancorp, in a move that could help fend off bidders, said it will "significantly" boost its dividend, increase a share-buyback program and cut costs by restructuring and reducing its work force.
First Interstate, one of the nation's largest bank holding companies with $51.5 billion in assets, said it won't release details on its planned job cuts for two or three weeks.
Many of the cuts will be made through an early-retirement program, which will be offered to employees in coming weeks, said a spokesman for the Los Angeles company.
He said about 10% of the bank's 26,000 employees are currently eligible for early retirement.
"We're evaluating everything," he said, when asked where the cuts might take place.
Details of the cost-reduction program, including the amount of a charge for the early-retirement program, will be announced during the third quarter.
The bank said it plans to increase its revenue 1% faster than the rate of market growth in each of its major geographic markets in 13 Western states.
It expects to do this through the cross-selling of financial products, more consumer lending and acquisitions.
It is targeting banks that have returns on equity of at least 18% and potential to cut operating costs by 50%.
First Interstate's moves come three weeks after the bank spurned a merger offer from cross-state rival Wells Fargo & Co., saying it wanted to remain independent.
In a statement, First Interstate's chairman and chief executive, Edward M. Carson, said the strategy is part of a continuing plan begun in 1990.
"While we are pleased with the results to date, our management and board of directors are committed to generating even greater value over the next few years," he said.
One big First Interstate shareholder, investment firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., also holds a large stake in another bank, Fleet Financial Group Inc., which imposed similar changes in recent weeks.
First Interstate and KKR declined to comment on whether KKR played a role in First Interstate's news yesterday.
KKR holds 8.2% of First Interstate's common.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, First Interstate closed at $74.50, up $1.625, or 2.2%.
First Interstate's dividend boost will be announced on April 19, when its board of directors meet.
The current quarterly dividend is 50 cents a share.
Under a new share-repurchase plan, the bank will increase its previously announced share-repurchase plan to 8 million shares, or 9.7% of its common shares outstanding, from 1.5 million shares.
The buyback begins in June.
