As members of Congress return to work next week, they'll be hearing from some old friends: The gag is off for the many ex-lawmakers who turned to lobbying last year.
The group that departed after 1992 was the first to be subject to a one-year ban on lobbying their former colleagues -- a "cooling-off" period to squelch the images of politicians instantly cashing in on their not-so-old contacts, and of corporations buying access.
The one-year ban "is a very good thing, a very healthy thing," says former Rep. Thomas Downey, a New York Democrat who came to the House in the post-Watergate reform class of 1974 and who's now subject to the 1989 ethics law.
"It's good for the public to think there's not a revolving door."
But there is a revolving door, and long before the ban expired this month for the ex-members who served until 1993, the evidence was clear that its spinning between Congress and the lobbying ranks has hardly slowed, let alone stopped.
More than a quarter of the 435-member House left after 1992 because of retirements and defeats, a 44-year high.
And, according to checks of their whereabouts, about four out of 10 opened offices or joined major law firms and corporations to do lobbying and consulting.
Even during the cooling-off period, exmembers aren't barred from devising legislative strategy for their clients, many of whom have business before the committees they once sat on.
"My role has been more one of an adviser to corporate clients," says ex-Rep.
Ed Jenkins of Georgia, who worked with textile magnate Roger Milliken to oppose the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But with the deadline behind him, "I certainly intend to be more of an advocate" before Congress.
Nothing in the law ever prevented the ex-members from lobbying the executive branch.
So Mr. Downey, whose clients at Thomas Downey & Associates include Joseph E. Seagrams & Sons Inc., Time Warner Inc., Merck & Co. and Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., has been free to call on his close friend, Vice President Al Gore -- and says he did so to influence administration policy expanding the earned-income tax credit for the working poor.
Mr. Downey's one-time colleague at the House Ways and Means Committee, Beryl Anthony, could contact his fellow Arkansas Democrats in the White House for clients at Winston & Strawn -- as he did last year for drug makers seeking to soften the blow to a tax credit for their operations in Puerto Rico.
Moreover, the one-year gag on ex-lawmakers applies only to contacting members of Congress about a client's legislative issues; lawmakers-turned-lobbyists can continue to meet socially with their former colleagues in Congress, and have.
In the past year, Mr. Downey and others kept up their regular basketball games in the members-only-and ex-members-only-House gym.
Mr. Jenkins, another Ways and Means veteran who's now a partner with ace lobbyist John Winburn, could continue to play poker with his one-time colleagues.
Former Rep. Guy Vander Jagt, a Michigan Republican now at Baker & Hostetler's Washington office, still dined on Tuesdays with other House Republicans in the longtime "SOS" Club, breakfasted Wednesdays with another House GOP group along with cabinet or media types, and attended bipartisan prayer breakfasts on Thursdays at the Capitol.
And many ex-legislators regularly turned up in 1993 at lawmakers' fundraisers, and in the company of lawmakers at capital restaurants or out-of-town political retreats.
Just one former legislator is known to have run into trouble with the law.
This month, the Federal Bureau of Investigation acknowledged that it is investigating whether ex-Rep.
Robin Tallon, a South Carolina Democrat, violated the ban last March when he visited his successor, Democratic Rep. James Clyburn, with other lobbyists for the Tobacco Institute.
The meeting, attended by a reporter who then wrote about it, included a video and discussion against an antismoking measure in a committee on which Rep. Clyburn sits.
Mr. Tallon has denied breaking the law, a felony carrying a penalty of up to five years in prison and a $50,000 fine, saying he didn't lobby but only sat in on the discussion.
For most of the legislators turned lobbyists, the one-year ban proved a nuisance at best.
It's clear, though, that their contacts with their ex-colleagues in Congress are about to increase.
Mr. Vander Jagt, a former member of the powerful Ways and Means Committee who seeks a tax change on behalf of an association of football coaches, says, "I told them how to meet with congressmen, but I couldn't go with them."
Freed of the one-year gag, he says, "I certainly hope it will make a difference."
As for the corporations and trade associations that vied to hire the many lawmakers who departed after 1992, the yearlong ban was little if any deterrent.
Ex-legislators say recruiters didn't even ask about the restriction unless the former lawmakers brought it up.
Winston & Strawn lured two Democrats, Mr. Anthony and Dennis Eckart of Ohio, formerly on the influential House Energy and Commerce Committee.
Cassidy and Associates signed up Marty Russo of Illinois, and the Jefferson Group hired Democrat Jerry Huckaby of Louisiana and Republican Andy Ireland of Florida, who's since left to represent Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey.
Former congressional staffers also fall under lobbying restrictions, but of a more limited sort.
Michael Scrivner, formerly chief of staff to the top Republican at the Energy and Commerce panel, faced no restrictions at all: Under the law, he was barred only from lobbying his ex-boss, Republican Norman Lent of New York.
But Mr. Lent likewise left Congress -- to be Mr. Scrivner's lobbying partner.
Their clients include corporations with interests before Energy and Commerce, among them the Bell telephone companies, Pfizer Inc. and Mobil Corp.
Among ex-staffers, a top draw is Robert Leonard, former chief counsel to the Ways and Means panel, who's joined forces with two veteran lobbyists.
Until next month , the anniversary of his departure from the committee, he can't discuss clients' issues with Chairman Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, or with other committee members and staff, though he has continued to see them socially.
But Mr. Leonard can contact other members of Congress and their staff on business, and his legal work also takes him to the Internal Revenue Service and the Treasury, where he likewise has longtime contacts.
Mr. Leonard calls the one-year gag on lobbying Congress "an appropriate restriction."
But Sen. David Boren (D., Okla.) and Congress Watch, a Ralph Nader group that monitors the "revolving door" issue, want a five-year ban on ex-members lobbying Congress.
Mr. Downey says the bar perhaps ought to be lengthened to the two years of a full Congress.
But Mr. Lent, according to his partner, likes to joke that now that he's free of the restriction, Congress should make it 15 years -- "to limit the competition."
