The Television Event of the Year turned out to be a semiotic smorgasbord, equal parts coyness, crassness and commerce.
Nancy's picture made it to the screen first -- in a Campbell's Soup advertisement, doing violence to a hockey player.
The Olympic broadcasters themselves pretended bravely that they were covering just another Olympic figure-skating competition; the word "Gillooly" never passed their lips.
But in between the decorous CBS Olympic segments, CBS advertisements promoted the CBS late news with the message: "Face-off on the ice!
Nancy, Tonya, the judges, the drama, coming up at 11!"
Tonya skated to music from "Much Ado About Nothing."
Coverage of the actual ice skating continued to be rewarding television.
Scott Hamilton took care to explain the triple Lutz, demonstrating the move himself.
And the CBS crew did what they could to ensure that speed skater Bonnie Blair's Olympian achievement, a fifth gold medal, got the notice it deserved.
Still, Ms. Blair may have felt a bit the way Mikhail Gorbachev did when he agreed to scrap short-range nuclear weapons, just as Clarence Thomas's confirmation hearing was getting under way.
Perhaps the funniest picture CBS has aired during the Winter Games was one of a security guard at the Hamar ice rink scrutinizing Ms. Harding's identification card.
Haven't I seen you somewhere before?
At Markus's Place!
Greg Gumbel brought viewers the news that when Germany's Markus Wasmeier won his second gold medal of the Games his sponsor, a brewer, responded by awarding him a free supply of beer for life.
Can't a big, powerful network get its speed-skating announcer Dick Stockton to stop calling Ms. Blair "America's Sweetheart?"
Maybe Laurence "Cuddles" Tisch doesn't care.
Team CBS's Mike Emrick is as careless with words as Team USA has been with the puck.
The Finns, who beat the U.S. hockey team, achieved "victory without whimper," he declared.
He added: "Life is timing.
Hockey is life."
We thought life was a fountain.
The first night of the Tonya Harding-Nancy Kerrigan skate-off gave CBS the highest-rated night of any Olympic Games ever.
The Wednesday night coverage drew 48.5% of the nation's 94.2 million TV homes, an estimated 126.7 million people, according to A.C. Nielsen Co.
That makes it the fourth-most-watched television broadcast ever (No. 1 was the 1994 Super Bowl, which drew 134.8 million viewers).
ABC had just 8.7% of TV homes and NBC had 6.2%.
