CLINTON IS PROPOSING to slash spending for many federal programs.
The president's budget, to be released Monday, calls for deep cuts in scores of programs and the elimination of more than 100 others.
Clinton will seek reductions in next year's spending for public housing, Army Corps of Engineers construction projects, rural electrification loan subsidies, subsidies for transit systems and aid to help poor people pay their heating bills, officials said.
Clinton administration officials are calling attention to some of the cuts to demonstrate that the president made some difficult choices.
The U.S. and the U.N. may be forced to decide soon whether to impose sanctions on North Korea, Defense Secretary-designate Perry said.
Conceding Pyongyang may have a nuclear weapon, he said his biggest concern is stopping North Korea from any effort to develop what may be "dozens" of bombs.
The world must defend Bosnia against the "merciless savagery" of ethnic aggression, Prime Ministers Bhutto of Pakistan and Ciller of Turkey said during a visit to Sarajevo.
The two leaders asked for a "fair peace" to be reached as soon as possible and appealed to the U.N. chief to call for air strikes against Bosnian Serbs.
Russian extremist Zhirinovsky claimed that he had given the go-ahead for the use of a new secret weapon against Muslim military units in the former Yugoslavia.
The ultranationalist politician, who is touring the region, has yet to produce any evidence of the weapon's existence.
The Justice Department cleared Commerce Secretary Brown of allegations that he sought a bribe to help liberalize U.S.-Vietnam trade relations.
Though investigators concluded weeks ago there was no case against Brown, officials wanted to check every possible lead to avoid charges of a coverup.
Venezuela's new president declared that the nation would have to make sacrifices to overcome its dependence on oil, but added that a recently imposed value-added tax was an unjust burden that he would attempt to repeal.
Caldera, who also served as president from 1969 to 1974, was sworn in yesterday.
The recent Mexican uprising isn't likely to spread, the State Department's top Latin American official, Alexander Watson, said.
His assessment came at a congressional hearing on the Chiapas uprising, during which Rep. Torricelli said the administration has a responsibility to inform U.S. firms if further instability is expected.
Israel's Rabin said it would take a miracle to resolve remaining differences in next week's Israeli-PLO negotiations.
The PLO said more delays in implementing Palestinian autonomy would hurt the peace process.
Three Jewish settlers were wounded in a drive-by shooting in the West Bank.
Attorney General Reno plans to announce steps today to correct immigrationrelated problems, including increased enforcement against employers who knowingly hire undocumented workers.
Federal agents intend to target employers who have made it a practice to hire such workers.
Children's behavior isn't affected by sugar or artificial sweeteners, according to a new medical study.
The study, funded in part by the government, found that, even when intake levels were excessive, neither sugar nor aspartame influences children's behavior or thinking.
Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams ended a U.S. visit, pledging that he would make "concrete" decisions soon on his party's role in the Northern Ireland peace process.
Adams, whose party is the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, didn't offer any new policy initiatives during his visit.
The British government reportedly said it would present new proposals for a political settlement in Northern Ireland.
The proposals are said to involve ideas for reducing Britain's role in the province and mechanisms for enhancing cross-border cooperation with the Republic of Ireland.
A radical Islamic group told foreigners they should leave Egypt, warning of "extremely ferocious" actions.
The radicals reacted angrily to a police raid Tuesday in Cairo in which seven suspected Muslim extremists were killed.
