Heinz Schimmelbusch says he's ready to fight back.
If he does, the scrape could provide a revealing look into the infighting, egos and chain of events that shaped what is perhaps Germany's worst corporate disaster since World War II.
Mr. Schimmelbusch is the former chief executive officer of Metallgesellschaft AG, the German corporate giant that was brought to the brink of collapse by huge oil-futures trading losses by its American subsidiary last year.
On Dec. 17, Mr. Schimmelbusch was fired by the supervisory board, which was led by Deutsche Bank AG executive Ronaldo Schmitz.
Since then, he has found himself virtually unemployable, shunned by former colleagues and hounded by anonymous death threats.
He believes there is a move afoot to brand him criminally liable for the Metallgesellschaft disaster.
After recovering from a recent heart ailment and pondering whether to simply "fade away," Mr. Schimmelbusch says he is now determined to defend himself.
"Slowly I'm beginning to realize that, although I don't want to, it's being forced on me," Mr. Schimmelbusch says.
Indeed, the whole mess seems soon destined for court.
MG's supervisory board said Friday it is preparing to sue Mr. Schimmelbusch and his former finance director, Meinhard Forster, for damages related to their alleged involvement in risky oil dealings at Metallgesellschaft's U.S. subsidiary, MG Corp.
The announcement came along with a 15-page summary of an independent auditor's report detailing the sharp rise in oil-futures trading that caused $1.2 billion in losses between October 1992 and December 1993, putting 55,000 jobs at stake and requiring a 3.4 billion mark ($2 billion) bank rescue in January.
Essentially, the auditors say the U.S. subsidiary, in an effort to gain a foothold in the U.S. oil market, offered attractive fixed-rate contracts to customers, while hedging its sales obligations by buying futures contracts on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
For MG Corp., nominally a metals concern with oil-trading interests dating back only to 1991, the gambit misfired drastically.
Now, the German parent company contends that Mr. Schimmelbusch misled Metallgesellschaft's board as to MG Corp.'s exposure and losses in its futures trading.
Mr. Schimmelbusch denies any wrongdoing.
He says he had no knowledge of the rising risk in the oil-trading operations until receiving the "liquidity call" from MG Corp. after a Nov. 19 supervisory board meeting, in which he was still assuming that MG Corp. was on solid financial ground.
Whatever the case, the matter has grown nasty and promises to get nastier still.
Mr. Schimmelbusch is the object of a criminal investigation being led by the Frankfurt prosecutor's office in response to a shareholder's complaint after MG's stock price fell nearly 50% last year.
Authorities say the former Metallgesellschaft chief is suspected of breach of trust and of withholding information from the company's supervisory board.
Earlier this month, investigators seized files from Metallgesellschaft's offices and searched Mr. Schimmelbusch's Frankfurt home.
Mr. Schimmelbusch asserts that many of his problems stem from longstanding management disagreements with Mr. Schmitz of Deutsche Bank, disagreements he now characterizes as a personal feud.
If pushed into a corner, he cryptically promises a spirited defense of his actions, while shining a light on the role of his adversaries.
"It's all going to come out," he promises, pointing a finger in the air.
Indeed, some caught up in Metallgesellschaft's purge along with Mr. Schimmelbusch have already begun to return fire.
In the U.S., W. Arthur Benson, the former president of MG's U.S. oil trading unit, has filed a $1 billion law suit in Baltimore's U.S. District Court against Metallgesellschaft and Deutsche Bank seeking damages for alleged defamation and civil conspiracy.
Mr. Benson, who was fired in February, alleges that his efforts to stem the oil-trading losses were undermined by "byzantine maneuverings" to discredit Mr. Schimmelbusch.
Both concerns have denied those allegations.
Still, some observers believe that fallout from the MG debacle could be more damaging to Germany's corporate image than the company's near collapse was last winter.
Metallgesellschaft is part of an interlocking German system of cross holdings and board seats among industry and banks that asserts powerful influence on German businesses -- sometimes working to oust management when it has disagreements.
Detailed glimpses into that system are rare.
The audit report, published last Friday, provides some heretofore unreported details of the oil-trading loss that drove Metallgesellschaft to the brink of insolvency and forced Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank AG and a consortium of 120 bank creditors to throw together a massive rescue operation.
According to the audit, Mr. Schimmelbusch turned to Deutsche Bank for help Dec. 3, which Mr. Schmitz later claimed was the first time he or the supervisory board heard of real problems facing MG's oil-trading operation.
Mr. Schmitz said he had called Mr. Forster two days earlier asking about "rumors" in the oil markets that MG was in trouble.
According to Mr. Schmitz, Mr. Forster expressed "surprise."
On Dec. 6, MG announced "adjustments" to its previous credit lines with Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank to help cover exposure in oil markets.
But soon stock analysts were publicly speculating that Metallgesellschaft's losses could top $1 billion, and the scare was on, sending MG's stock price down 50% and roiling world oil and metals markets.
The auditor's report asserts that Mr. Forster knew of the worsening situation last summer.
Mr. Forster hasn't responded to the allegations and couldn't be reached to comment.
The report was less conclusive on what Mr. Schimmelbusch and other board members knew, or when they knew it.
The report alleged that Mr. Schimmelbusch and other MG management board members had access to documents last summer showing rising losses, unrealized earnings and growing net liabilities.
Mr. Schimmelbusch says he became concerned last September that the volumes of the unit's oil business were becoming too high.
"But there was no discussion of losses because there weren't any" as of last summer, he says.
Hans-Werner Nolting, an MG board member who survived the December management purge, joined Mr. Schimmelbusch in denying the audit's contention that MG Corp.'s management board was aware last summer that MG Corp. was headed for financial difficulty.
As of August, Mr. Nolting said, MG Corp.'s internal accounting showed a small profit and declining business volumes and funding requirements.
"The special audit's report on this time period is thus incomprehensible to me," Mr. Nolting said in a recent interview.
Mr. Schimmelbush, in interviews, also says that far from keeping the U.S. subsidiary's oil trading operations under wraps, MG Corp. officials briefed Mr. Schmitz on them at a July 23 meeting in New York.
(Mr. Schimmelbusch wasn't at that meeting.)
Mr. Schmitz couldn't be reached to comment for this article.
But Mr. Schmitz, who is familiar with oil trading from his earlier career at BASF AG, has previously said his MG Corp. briefings didn't touch on the growing risk.
According to Mr. Schimmelbusch, Mr. Schmitz was skeptical of MG's oil positions, opening a difference of opinion between the two executives.
Mr. Schmitz's caution resulted in a second audit of MG Corp.'s books for its fiscal year ended Sept. 30, 1993, by KPMG Peat Marwick, in addition to the regular audit by Arthur Anderson.
Mr. Schimmelbusch asserts that both audits confirmed that MG Corp. was not in financial danger and was actually showing a small profit, which he dutifully reported to the MG supervisory board at its meeting on Nov. 19.
