A panic developed among investors right after the slaying and could have sent the markets tumbling.
But Mexican authorities managed to maintain calm through a once-secret agreement with the U.S. Treasury and a complex mix of moral suasion and vague threats to investors who might have profited from a panic.
This is the story of that effort.
At 9:30 p.m. in Mexico City last Wednesday -- 2 1/2 hours after the assassination, Jose Angel Gurria, head of the powerful development bank Nacional Financiera, and several of Mexico's most senior financial officials were assembling at 2 Arturo Street, a colonial mansion converted into Finance Ministry offices.
Mr. Gurria and everyone else in the room knew Mr. Colosio was dead, even though the government hadn't yet acknowledged that to the world.
Knowing the panic that could be created when the news was let out, Mr. Gurria reflected that either Mexico was about to prove the strength of its financial team, or the markets would send Mexico into chaos.
"It was like Colosio's body was lying on the table" in front of the group, he says.
"We knew we had a job to do."
Mexican financial markets were already fragile.
Economic growth in 1993 registered a pathetic 0.4%.
The Chiapas peasant revolt, the kidnapping of a well-known executive and surprising rifts within the ruling party had all raised questions about social stability.
Stocks had tumbled in recent weeks, and the peso was down 8.1% against the dollar this year.
As calls poured into the Finance Ministry and Banco de Mexico, the central bank, it became clear that there could be a full-fledged run against the peso.
Speculators were looking for ways to sell the peso short, a bet on its decline.
Mexican banks, while friendlier to the government than foreign investors, would clearly dump pesos to protect themselves and make a profit, if they had to.
In addition, the Finance Ministry knew that Japanese banks and corporations had already been unloading huge positions in peso securities to raise cash and dress up year-end financial statements.
A currency crisis could spark further huge sales by the Japanese.
However, Hacienda, as the Finance Ministry is known, had a secret weapon.
Just before the North American Free Trade Agreement debate between Ross Perot and Vice President Al Gore, Hacienda's undersecretary of finance, Guillermo Ortiz, had quietly negotiated a $6 billion swap line with the U.S. Treasury.
The idea was to give the Mexican central bank more dollars to use to support the value of the peso if Nafta failed to win approval.
But the agreement -- which had remained secret because it was never formally signed -- was still around, and Mr. Ortiz hoped to invoke it now.
Announcing the agreement would give Mexican authorities a crucial psychological boost with investors by showing that anyone attacking the peso would have to take on both Mexico and the U.S.
But it might take a day to get all the approvals from the U.S. government.
Could the Mexican markets be shut down?
Mr. Ortiz wondered.
By 11 p.m., with international investors nervous, and European markets about to open, Mexican financial officials were in discussions about shutting trading in stocks and the currency for a day, to let things settle down.
But a full-scale argument broke out about the kind of signal the closings would show.
The meeting split up into working groups and took until 2 a.m. to decide that at least the currency markets and the banks should be closed.
Pedro Aspe, the finance minister, and Miguel Mancera, the central bank head, then left for President Carlos Salinas's offices.
With at least some decisions made, officials called Roberto Hernandez, the chief executive of Banamex-Accival, Mexico's largest bank, informing him of the bank and currency-market closure.
The Hacienda officials said the banks would certainly be free to trade Friday -- but they also warned that Hacienda would be watching closely for any speculative challenge.
At 3:30 a.m. in Boston, Robert Citrone, manager of Fidelity Investment Management's New Markets Income Fund, was back in the firm's warren-like offices.
A few hours earlier he had stepped off the train in Acton, Mass., greeting his wife and newborn son.
"I have bad news," his wife had said.
The garage flooded with snow-melt again, Mr. Citrone thought.
Then his wife told him Mr. Colosio had been shot.
At home through the evening, Mr. Citrone phoned central-bank contacts or anyone else who could give him a reading on the situation.
A Mexican central-bank official at one point convinced him that it had enough currency reserves to defend the peso.
That was true, but what if other investors panicked?
Brokers were already talking about a 300-point decline in Mexican stocks, and that would also mean the currency would be in trouble.
At 4 a.m., Finance Minister Aspe returned to Arturo Street with an answer from President Salinas: Thursday would be a day of mourning for Mr. Colosio.
Banks and currency markets would close.
Now it was time to bring out the secret weapon, the $6 billion swap agreement.
Mr. Ortiz, the undersecretary of finance, picked up the phone and dialed the home in Washington of Lawrence Summers, the undersecretary of international affairs for the Treasury.
Mr. Summers thought he could secure the swap line.
The hope was to close the Mexican stock exchange, too, but Bolsa authorities wanted to make sure that there wouldn't be any trading of Mexican shares in New York, either.
Mr. Summers said he would see if that could be done.
Later, Mr. Ortiz learned that Treasury had asked for a closure of Mexican stocks, but the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York Stock Exchange were resisting the idea.
It looked like the U.S. markets would open Mexican shares after only a short delay.
But trading of Mexican stocks in London was turning out to be disorderly, a sign of panic.
Shares in bellwether Telefonos de Mexico were down more than 5%.
The Arturo Street team turned to Carlos Mendoza, a young Stanford Business School graduate who runs Nacional Financiera's $1.5 billion Mexican stock fund.
Mr. Mendoza had won the respect of international traders late last year when he managed to sell $1 billion of Telmex shares into the markets without anyone's noticing.
Sleepless and worried, Mr. Mendoza called Mexican brokers in London, encouraging them to keep markets orderly.
To keep things under control, while still not committing much of Nacional Financiera's money, he gave the London traders an indication where he might buy or sell Telmex shares.
That hint tightened the spread, or difference between the buying and selling price.
Less than an hour before the New York opening, Telmex shares had recovered.
With the Arturo Street meetings finally over as the sun was coming up in Mexico City, the finance officials began trying to win back investor confidence by calling everyone they could think of around the world from traders to chief executives.
Judging by the calls, international investors were still scared.
But the Mexicans began winning them back, one at a time.
"The performance was magnificent," says a Trust Co. of the West portfolio manager.
"Almost every investment bank and every investor in the U.S. was on the phones from 8 to 9 in the morning and had it all laid out for them by the Mexicans."
By Thursday afternoon, the tide had turned.
Stories burst across the news wires announcing the "new" $6 billion swap agreeement, approved by President Clinton.
Also, in a rare example of quick agreement, President Salinas had managed to gather government, business and labor leaders to announce a re-signing of the country's basic economic pact.
Telmex shares finished just 5.6% lower on the Big Board, and they rebounded Friday once the Mexican Bolsa reopened.
Investor confidence had been restored.
"The whole world was grading our ability to manage the unexpected," Mr. Gurria says.
"Everybody at the Arturo Street meetings said, `We have to make this work because we have to make Mexico work.'
