A veteran of CS First Boston's investment banking operations in London, Michel de Carvalho, is to step down following changes that have shifted the balance of power within the firm to New York.
CS First Boston announced that Mr. de Carvalho, a managing director in charge of debt issues for major corporate clients, had decided to resign as of March 15 to pursue personal and family business interests.
CS First Boston is the investment banking unit of CS Holding AG, the Zurich-based holding company that also owns Credit Suisse.
Contacted by telephone, Mr. de Carvalho, 49 years old, linked his departure to organizational changes within the CSFB group, which until last year operated as a triumvirate of linked but independent investment-banking units in New York, London and Tokyo.
Last June, CSFB reorganized along product lines, with its main investment banking functions run from New York, a change that effectively downgraded the status of the London operation to that of a branch of New York.
Under the old system, commented Mr. de Carvalho, CSFB's London staff were "Europeans, with a chairman who was European.
We didn't work abroad in one of the branches; we worked at home, in head office."
Now, by contrast, he added, the group is effectively "headquartered in New York."
Though he had been offered posts in New York, he said, he decided against accepting them because he preferred to remain in Europe.
His decision to leave the firm follows the resignation two weeks ago in Zurich of Hans-Joerg Rudloff, former chairman of CS First Boston in London, from the board of CS Holding, which he joined a year ago.
The two moves weren't linked, but Mr. de Carvalho had worked closely with Mr. Rudloff until his departure from London last year.
Mr. de Carvalho joined CSFB from N.M. Rothschild & Sons Ltd. in 1979.
During the following 10 years, he was responsible for building up the group's investment banking business in France, Belgium and Luxembourg.
In 1989, at Mr. Rudloff's request, he moved to Paris to set up a CSFB subsidiary there.
He returned to London in 1992.
