Not all that long ago, Chester Gould, the author of the Dick Tracy comic strip, became something of a pariah in the world of American liberals because he always depicted captured criminals wailing, "I demand my Constitutional rights."
Dick Tracy's view of criminals as, well, criminals, was laughed and litigated out of the American system as hopelessly "conservative."
Instead we would seek more social justice to balance criminal justice.
But along the way, the scales tipped over.
We are writing these words just a few hours before a liberal President is to go before the nation in his State of the Union address and, according to news reports, call for: putting 100,000 police on the streets, putting three-time felons in prison forever and putting bad boys in boot camps.
It looks like we're all Dick Tracys now.
An awful lot of innocent Americans have had to be robbed, beaten, stabbed, raped, tortured and murdered to arrive at the point where a Bill Clinton could feel compelled to get tough on crime.
The good news is that the American system, most of the time, is able to bring off a mid-course correction before the train goes over the cliff.
Public fury over violent crime is of course causing the politicians to act.
But there does seem to be a school of liberal thought on crime which holds that if we enact gun-control laws like the Brady bill, we'll have pretty much decapitated the crime problem.
Dream on.
The most recent Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll suggests that the public is not that confused.
Most people recognize we have to do something about the people who pull the triggers, too.
Asked this month about putting higher fees on gun dealers (Treasury Secretary Bentsen's idea), 18% said it'd make a major difference.
Raising taxes on ammunition (Senator Moynihan) attracts 17%.
Now let's get serious about crime.
Toughen the penalties for juveniles: 73%.
Send them to boot camps: 62%.
Capital punishment for more crimes: 64%.
Life for three-time felons: 76%.
No doubt, people can have serious conversations about the implementation details behind this gale-force public outcry, but the direction is clear enough.
One important detail that occurs to us is federal judicial appointments.
We hope someone asks the President and the people who advise him on these appointments whether they will seek a federal judiciary or Supreme Court that agrees with Mr. Clinton's State of the Union views on criminal justice.
Our strong impression is that a lot of civilian liberals are on board for less social and more justice in this area, but that their relatives in the law schools and legal community still don't have a clue.
For them, an extra 100,000 police will simply cause an exponential increase in dismissals for "police error."
But a corner has been turned.
We'll see whether the political system is responsive enough to make that corner safe again.
