The first evidence of our ability to write comes from lower Mesopotamia in what is now southern Iraq: proto-cuneiform writing on clay tablets that have been dated from between 3,500 B.C. and 2,800 B.C.
But did these people around the city of Uruk write about epic battles and their brave, resourceful heroes and heroines?
Perhaps, but that is not what has survived.
What we have are their general ledgers, showing what it cost to brew their beer and bake their bread -- in materials and in labor.
Five thousand years hence will our descendants have only our stock and option quotations for learned scholars to guess at how we lived?
I hope not.
But "Archaic Bookkeeping" (University of Chicago Press, 169 pages, $34.95), by Hans J. Nissen, Peter Damerow and Robert K. Englund with Peter Larsen translating from the German, does offer some nice insights into life back then.
Bookkeepers used debits and credits much as we use them today.
The cost of the flour produced by a given mill was translated into "female laborer days."
Foremen were responsible down to the day for the work done by their crews.
If a foreman died while he was in a "deficit" position, his worldly goods could be confiscated by the state and the members of his household transferred into the royal labor force.
Apparently, working for the state was no picnic -- the tablets report regularly on escapes both successful and foiled.
Women are in the work force in record numbers and many are, or will become, mothers without dropping out of the labor market.
Anne Weisberg and Carol Buckler, both lawyer-mothers, address nearly every problem you might face in "Everything a Working Mother Needs to Know" (Doubleday, 235 pages, $14.95), starting with when a woman should announce her pregnancy.
They suggest waiting until the second trimester, because some subtle and not so subtle discrimination is still frequently brought to bear on pregnant employees.
Their book also details a pregnant woman's rights under federal law.
The Pregnancy Discrimination Act passed last year covers firms with as few as 15 employees.
But it does not provide the same guarantees as the earlier law, the Family and Medical Leave Act.
For example, the new law does not require employers to guarantee a pregnant worker's position while she is out on leave, nor does it require them to provide such leave or even pregnancy disability insurance.
It simply requires employers to guarantee job security to pregnant women if and to the same extent they guarantee job security to people returning from other disability leaves.
One appendix of the book provides a summary of state legislation on parental, family and medical leave.
Some state laws are stricter than existing federal laws.
Vermont, for example, requires employers with as few as 10 employees to provide them with up to 12 weeks of leave.
The authors also lay out child-care alternatives.
Many working women believe an au pair to be the ideal solution, but forget that such workers are provided only with annual work permits.
That means the family must begin the tedious search anew every year.
Another helpful appendix provides a list of resource phone numbers, including that of the International Nanny Association.
With the tax season upon us, lots of readers should be attracted to a book with the title "How to Pay Zero Taxes" (McGraw-Hill, 590 pages, $14.95), by Jeff Schnepper.
He argues, with some cause, that taxpayers with high incomes can afford highly paid professional tax consultants to reduce their taxes.
He says his book is for the rest of us, and has come up with more than 150 legal ways to minimize the big bite.
Most people know that if they sell their home at a profit, the gain on the sale can be sheltered from tax if reinvested in a new home within two years.
But what if you can't find a buyer for your old home yet have already purchased a new home.
He notes that an Internal Revenue Service ruling allows the sale of the old home to a corporation the taxpayer sets up.
In this scenario, the corporation then rents the home to an outside tenant.
The gain on the sale of the home to the corporation will not be taxed so long as the cost of the new home is equal to or greater than the old home's adjusted sales price.
Moreover, since the old home has been sold at its appreciated price it can now be depreciated at a much higher rate.
Both the income generated from the renting of the home, the higher depreciation and any expenses associated with maintaining the home will be passed through the corporation to the taxpayer.
Another little-known quirk is the government's special tax shelter for those who pay higher-education expenses.
This benefit can be obtained by purchasing certain U.S. savings bonds.
For years after 1989 a taxpayer can potentially exclude all or a portion of the interest that accrues on the bond if the bond is redeemed in a year when qualified education expenses must be paid.
In the case of a joint return, the benefit starts to be phased out if the taxpayer's modified adjusted gross income exceeds $68,250 in 1993.
(The number is indexed for inflation.)
Yes, this is making your head hurt, but you'll feel a lot better after April 15.
