Largo Entertainment, an independent production company that became a symbol of the one-time Japanese infatuation with the movie-industry, has lost its chief executive.
Movie producer Larry Gordon, Largo's chairman, said he was leaving the company to accept a production deal with MCA's Universal Pictures.
When Largo was formed nearly five years ago, Mr. Gordon had called it "My field of dreams."
But like a long succession of other highly publicized independent production companies in Hollywood, this one ended up being plowed under.
Largo, named for Mr. Gordon and also because of its musical meaning, "slow and stately," was announced amid a storm of hoopla.
As the first major manifestation of the Japanese love affair with Hollywood, JVC/Victor Co. of Japan, or JVC, kicked in $100 million to bankroll Mr. Gordon, then one of the industry's hottest producers.
Mr. Gordon, who had "48 Hours," "Die Hard" and "Field of Dreams" among his credits, was going to have total autonomy, the vaunted ability to say "yes" to movies.
Although he had once run a studio (Twentieth Century Fox) and was known as a consummate insider, Mr. Gordon was frustrated with studio bureaucracy.
He believed he had come up with a way to buck the system: Largo was constructed so that although it wouldn't distribute its own movies, it would do just about everything else, and retain ownership.
If a blockbuster happened, a windfall would result, and the company could go public or sell a handsome equity stake.
But several things happened to hobble the company, according to people close to the situation.
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., which owns 51% of JVC, paid more than $6 billion for MCA Inc.
Overnight, Largo became an afterthought, say some observers.
Just as the Japanese economy began to cool and Japanese enthusiasm about Hollywood began to wane, Credit Lyonnais and other banks were being ravaged by bad loans to independent producers.
Largo was able to attract a $75 million credit facility from a group of banks led by Chemical Bank, a unit of Chemical Banking Corp., but funds still were tight.
Meanwhile, Mr. Gordon was making movies that weren't taking off -- not as many as the five or six a year that had been projected, but selected middle-budget movies like "Judgment Night," "Point Break," "The Super" and "Unlawful Entry."
Largo's structure called for it to pay much of its own releasing costs, development costs, overseas sales force and overhead: even a string of modestly budgeted films that didn't work cost a lot.
What profits there were went to the studios who distributed the films.
Furthermore, Mr. Gordon was more interested, and more skilled at, putting together movie projects than in running a company and supervising a multitude of them, associates say.
The man who wanted to say "yes" just wasn't saying it often enough, say some individuals close to the situation.
None of the films took off, and Mr. Gordon began focusing on putting together two potential big-ticket "franchise" movies that he believed could transform the company.
They were "Waterworld," a futuristic adventure with Kevin Costner, and "Die Hard 3," with Bruce Willis.
The latter had a problem when its script -- terrorists on a ship -- was beaten to the screen by another movie, "Under Siege," and a new concept had to be found.
But the main problem was that the films would cost anywhere from $50 million to $80 million, and JVC wouldn't pay for them, associates say.
JVC officials weren't available for comment.
(Both movies now are being made elsewhere.)
As a result, last year Mr. Gordon told friends he was frustrated.
Universal, where he must bring his movie projects first, was a logical place for him to go: The studio has released several Largo movies including the coming "The Getaway" and "Timecop," and its chief, Thomas Pollock, is Mr. Gordon's former attorney.
Largo, which has 40 employees, will continue to exist, says Mr. Gordon.
"We still have assets and two movies to release," says Mr. Gordon.
"I don't consider it a failure."
