Next time you see a mutual fund with lousy performance, don't blame the person who manages it.
Check out the fund's annual expenses instead.
Steadman American Industry Fund, for instance, ranked as the worst-performing stock fund for the five years ended December 1993, losing 25% of shareholders' money in a period when the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index soared 97.1%.
But the fund's stock-picking was only partly responsible for the rotten results.
If you look at the performance of Steadman American Industry before the deduction of annual mutual-fund expenses, the fund actually gained 45.1%, according to Morningstar Inc., a Chicago fund-research firm.
Instead, the biggest reason for Steadman's poor performance has been the fund's outrageously high annual expenses.
Those expenses have claimed more than 12% of fund assets in each of the past four years, says fund researcher Lipper Analytical Services.
Investors are often only dimly aware of the impact of fund expenses.
These expenses are gradually deducted from a fund's share price throughout the year.
As a result, mutual-fund performance numbers, including the ones reported in the back of this newspaper, automatically reflect the impact of annual fund expenses.
(The performance numbers don't reflect loads or sales charges, however.)
Annual fund expenses are disclosed in a fund document known as the prospectus, expressed as a percent of fund assets.
On average, diversified U.S. stock funds levy expenses of 1.23%, or $1.23 for every $100 under management.
That means that the typical stock fund has to return at least 1.23% each year, just for shareholders to break even.
(Return means the change in the fund's share price plus dividends.)
Steadman Fund Group, which manages the American Industry fund, blames its high annual expenses on legal bills incurred in a lengthy battle with the Securities and Exchange Commission over allegations that the Washington, D.C. fund group mispriced its mutual funds; Steadman won the case on appeal in 1992.
It says expenses have started to come down.
But Max Katcher, Steadman's treasurer, concedes that -- even without the high expenses -- its fund performance has left something to be desired.
"We won't quarrel with that," Mr. Katcher says.
"Those are the facts."
High expenses used to be a big problem at American Heritage Fund, which once ranked as one of the fund industry's most notorious losers.
But market strategist Heiko Thieme took over the fund in 1990 and has since turned in strong gains, despite a rough first year and recent weak results.
That has bolstered the fund's five-year record, so that it now ranks as the 118th best-performing diversified U.S. stock fund over the past five years, with a total return of 122.4%.
But the fund's performance would have been even better if it wasn't for the fund's historically high annual expenses.
While the fund's annual expenses currently are running at less than 2%, they amounted to more than 13% of assets at the start of the five-year period.
If those expenses are backed out of American Heritage's results, Morningstar calculates that the fund would have returned 212.7% during the past five years, making it the industry's 19th best performer.
"If a fund has an expense ratio above 2.5%, I would view that as a warning signal," says Mr. Thieme.
"But just focusing on expenses is a mistake.
It's the return of the fund that should be decisive" when selecting a mutual fund.
While some funds are impaired by their high expenses, others count thriftiness as their chief virtue.
Vanguard Extended Market Portfolio, for instance, is an index fund that simply buys and holds the stocks in the Wilshire 4500, an index of smaller-company stocks.
Morningstar figures that the Vanguard fund ranks as the 262nd best fund over the past five years, out of a total of 603 diversified U.S. stock funds that were around for the entire period.
But the fund's better-than-average result has come about because its expenses -- currently 0.19% -- are so much lower than those of its competitors.
If you ignore expenses, the fund's ranking drops to a below-average 352nd.
For many mutual funds, expenses have meant the difference between beating and lagging behind the market over the past five years.
Before expenses, funds soared an average 108.1% since year-end 1988, compared with 97.1% for the S&P 500.
But once expenses are subtracted, the funds returned a market-lagging 95.3%.
"It shows how tough it is to beat the market," says John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a newsletter published by Morningstar.
"Expenses have clearly made a big difference."
Expenses can also take a big chunk out of short-term performance.
Morningstar figures that the average diversified U.S. stock fund returned 12.6% last year, compared with 10.1% for the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.
But if you back out expenses, fund returns jump to almost 14%.
Eliminating expenses doesn't do much for Vanguard Group, the country's second-largest fund complex, which prides itself on its rock-bottom expenses.
Removing expenses bolsters Vanguard's 1993 stockfund performance only slightly, to almost 13% from 12.6%.
But the effect on the Steadman funds is enormous.
There are four Steadman funds, three of which are classified as diversified U.S. stock funds by Morningstar.
These three funds returned an average of 7.6% last year.
But if you back out expenses, Steadman's average performance soars to 17.4%.
Eliminating expenses has an especially significant effect on the performance of Steadman American Industry, which returned 9.1% last year, making it the 633rd best-performing fund out of a total of 953 that were around for the 12-month period.
Ignore expenses and Steadman American Industry becomes the 88th best-performing fund, with a return of 23.9%.
In "On Looking Into the Abyss: Untimely Thoughts on Culture and Society" (Knopf, 224 pages, $24), the distinguished historian Gertrude Himmelfarb has given us a kind of fever chart of contemporary intellectual fashion.
The word "abyss" suggests that the diagnosis will not be encouraging.
Indeed, many of the phenomena that Ms. Himmelfarb discusses in these seven essays (all of which were written in the past three years) are the opposite of salubrious.
There are, first of all, such diverse intellectual maladies as deconstruction, the new historicism and nihilistic relativism: all the anemic bugbears that make the university such a cheerful place today.
Then there are various historical catastrophes: the pernicious amalgams of nationalism and fundamentalism, for example, which are proliferating anew.
Above all there is the Holocaust, the shadow of which in one way or another darkens all these essays, a grim reminder that very bad ideas can in fact have very bad consequences.
Yet Ms. Himmelfarb's reports from the abyss are more than gloomy bulletins.
Her essays are also "untimely," that is to say, "unfashionable."
Like Nietzsche's "Untimely Meditations," they challenge prevailing intellectual orthodoxy.
If many prominent critics today flirt with nihilism, Ms. Himmelfarb anatomizes it in order to attack it.
In her introduction, she writes that her book is "dedicated to the proposition that there are such things as truth and reality and that there is a connection between them, as there is also a connection between the aesthetic sensibility and the moral imagination, between culture and society."
The amazing thing about these sensible statements is that you have to look long and hard to find people to defend them, not only in the university but also in cultural life generally.
When it comes to the idea of truth, the prevailing wisdom is summed up by the influential philosopher Richard Rorty, who speaks with contempt of "metaphysical prigs," i.e., those who still believe that philosophy has something to do with "seeking the truth."
Presumably, Mr. Rorty's students are all thoroughly disabused of any such "priggishness."
Ms. Himmelfarb is impatient with this blase relativism.
Perhaps it is not given to us to possess truth with utter clarity.
But it does not follow, as the Rortarians insist, that we are completely cut off from the truth.
True, it is often difficult to make judgments about historical events.
Our knowledge is fragmentary, the events are dazzlingly complex.
But the fashionable historians who claim that condemning Hitler or Stalin is an act of "moral imperialism" and who pretend that there is no qualitative difference between democracy and totalitarianism are more than obtuse: They are culpable.
One of Ms. Himmelfarb's goals in these essays is to revitalize the idea of greatness -- historical greatness, literary greatness, even moral greatness.
Ms. Himmelfarb quotes Madame de Sevigne's famous remark that "No man is a hero to his valet."
Today, she suggests, we live with a valet's view of the world: Everything is cut down to size -- even below size.
"It can no longer be taken for granted that Milton deserves to be more "privileged" than Mickey Mouse, that high culture is higher . . . than popular culture, and that some events in history are more momentous than others."
Attacks on greatness say more about us than the things they would diminish.
As Hegel observed, if it happens that no man is a hero to his valet, this is not because the man is not a hero but because the valet is a valet.
As is often the case, many of our characteristic maladies are partly a function of our virtues.
Thus the suspicion of greatness is the other side -- the exaggeration or distortion -- of our laudable insistence on equality and democracy.
Must democracy entail mediocrity?
Or take the ideal of free speech, one of the bedrocks of a democratic society.
We want free speech; does that mean we must also accept the free circulation of pornography?
These are some of the conundrums that liberalism generates for itself in our society.
It makes for some strange situations.
As Ms. Himmelfarb observes, we live in a society where the ideal of free speech and the insistence on the separation of church and state lead to the "curious result that the photograph of a crucifix immersed in urine can be exhibited in a public school, but a crucifix not immersed in urine cannot be exhibited."
In her introduction, Ms. Himmelfarb notes that the critical inspiration for these essays was Lionel Trilling, the great literary critic and social commentator.
Not only her title but also many phrases, examples and arguments are drawn from Trilling's work.
It is above all Trilling's manner -- a manner charged with moral seriousness but unencumbered by pedantry or obscurantism -- that appeals to her.
Unlike many critics, then or now, Trilling was "able to resist the insidious ideological and political fashions of his time without the coarsening of mind that often comes with doing battle, and also without the timidity and equivocation that retreats from battle in an excess of fastidiousness."
Both are necessary: intellectual integrity as well as the courage to "do battle" for ideas.
And both are rare.
We must be grateful to Ms. Himmelfarb for reminding both are still possible.
