Its finances are in shambles, local subscribers are furious, board members are embarrassed, and the station management is on the defensive.
WQED, the first community-sponsored educational-television station in America, has suffered from public TV's modern ailments: dwindling corporate and government funding amid growing competition for viewers and sponsors from the cable networks.
But WQED's greatest problem has been insouciance, for its station executives -- accustomed to flush times -- missed the industry danger signs in some cases and ignored them in others.
They spent lavishly, and when their strong corporate funding dried up, they failed to scale back and live within their means.
As recently as last year, the station ran myriad telethons exhorting viewers to send in money while its chief executives collected handsome salary and benefit packages.
Meanwhile, WQED had racked up a $4.8 million deficit and had no prospects of significant new sponsorship.
Lloyd Kaiser, the station's chief executive who retired in June, says his 23-year regime at WQED isn't at fault: "The precarious position of public TV nationally speaks for itself."
These days, many viewers can tune in to cable networks like the Discovery Channel to see the kind of programming once exclusive to public television.
In addition, local companies -- that put up money to sponsor nationally produced public -- TV shows such as "MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour" on local PBS stations -- have found such plugs to be costly.
"It's a very expensive form of advertising," says Karl Smrekar, financial adviser for Allegheny Financial Group, which no longer sponsors the showing of "Wall Street Week" on WQED.
It cost about $13,000 a year to sponsor the Friday night show, and the firm now advertises on radio for about half that amount, Mr. Smrekar says.
Indeed, public stations across the country are finding business and viewer support isn't taking up the slack as big corporate underwriters and state and local governments re-allocate money they used to give to public TV.
As a result, "they all take turns" running deficits, says Steve Behrens, editor of Current, the public-broadcasting news journal.
Stations nationwide have been cutting back their staffs and their executive salaries as they grapple with the harsh new reality.
For example, KCET in Los Angeles had rounds of layoffs in 1991 and 1993, as did KQED in San Francisco and WNET in New York.
WNET reduced its chief executive's salary from $290,000 to about $246,000 in salary and allowances.
But in WQED's case, Thomas Allen, a former board member who retired about three years ago, says, "I'm not sure how much any board member -- even the officers -- was aware of the nuts and bolts of what was going on over there.
It was a big operation with a big board, and authority gets a little bit fragmented."
What was going on was this: WQED lost Gulf Oil, its principal corporate sponsor, and National Geographic, its main co-producer, and had no prospects to replace them.
Nevertheless, the station continued to give its top four executives handsome salaries and benefit packages, which in the fiscal year ended June 30, 1992, ranged from $205,000 to $325,995, the latest numbers available.
The packages included annual car allowances ranging from $15,000 to $22,000, and the executives were able to cash in insurance policies for amounts ranging from $34,000 to $68,191.
The policies were bought some years before, without board knowledge, says Elsie Hillman, WQED board chairwoman who is a Pittsburgh civic leader.
News of these pay and accounting anomalies began to surface in Pittsburgh, creating a public-relations storm in a community grown accustomed to steady televised appeals for donations to the home of "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood."
The board was embarrassed: "It wasn't that the wool was pulled over our eyes, but that I wasn't looking at the right things," says Mrs. Hillman.
Once-loyal WQED viewers felt betrayed, and some have cut donations.
"I put it in the context of people at the United Way and the blood bank using their position for personal gain when they're supposed to be doing God's work," laments Harry M. Corbett, a longtime WQED subscriber who no longer pledges $150 a year.
Pledges and donations gave WQED its start 40 years ago when 60,000 Pittsburghers contributed $2 each for community television.
WQED is among the handful of public-TV stations that produce programs shown nationwide for the Public Broadcasting Service, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting's programming arm.
The station not only launched legendary broadcaster Fred Rogers and his acclaimed children's series, but teamed up with National Geographic for 15 years of spectacular documentaries.
Twelve of WQED's National Geographic Specials are in the top 25 most-watched individual shows ever broadcast on PBS, and the station's 28 Emmy awards lifted it to the same constellation as better-known, bigger PBS stations in Boston and New York.
Current and former staffers credit the former top executives, Mr. Kaiser and Thomas Skinner, with both WQED's rise and fall.
The pair arrived in 1970 from public-TV station WITF in Hershey, Pa., and built WQED from a small station with $2 million in annual revenue to a $36 million operation with TV channels WQED and WQEX, a classical-music radio station and a monthly city magazine.
For 15 years, WQED rode high on sponsorship from Gulf Oil, which provided as much as $3 million annually for National Geographic documentaries on subjects ranging from sharks and grizzly bears to the lives of Baka pygmies in the rain forest of southeastern Cameroon.
National Geographic's executive producer, Dennis B. Kane, forged a fast bond with WQED's executive producer, Mr. Skinner.
Together, they traveled from Jerusalem to the Serengeti in Africa, scoping out potential sites and dining at fine restaurants, according to Mr. Kane.
Because Gulf bank-rolled the documentaries with money upfront, cash flow wasn't a problem back in Pittsburgh.
Each Christmas, there were poinsettias on all the secretaries' desks and fancy parties.
Managers gathered each year for a few days' working retreat at a nearby ski lodge, according to some of those who participated.
Things began to unravel in 1989 when National Geographic's Mr. Kane decided to strike out on his own to form ABC-Kane, a small division of Capital Cities, and National Geographic decided to produce its shows in-house.
Though WQED had two years' notice before its final production of the National Geographic Specials, it seemed oblivious to what others in public television saw: Big corporate outlays for national public-television productions were drying up across the country.
"We all had rosy-colored glasses on, thinking things would come along to replace National Geographic," acknowledges Mrs. Hillman, the WQED board chairwoman.
But nothing did.
People who worked at the station at that time say Mr. Skinner went into mourning after losing National Geographic, and his deputies say he had difficulty adjusting to more mundane programming prospects.
Mr. Skinner denies this, saying he plunged into working on "Infinite Voyage," a science program funded with about $3 million a year from Digital Equipment Co.
But in 1991 after four seasons, DEC announced it was giving the program a final year before pulling the plug.
WQED began experiencing difficulty raising money for new productions, and went ahead with productions that weren't fully funded.
"It was like writing a book not knowing the number of chapters, or whether there would be certain chapters on certain things," says Theodore Bogosian.
Mr. Bogosian, a former producer at WQED, worked on the program "Space Age," which fizzled after six episodes.
By the time Mr. Kaiser retired last June at age 65, the station was hanging by a thread.
Passed over for the top job, Mr. Skinner quit shortly thereafter.
Both men receive pensions of more than $100,000 a year.
Donald Korb, a retired Westinghouse Electric Corp. treasurer and the former head of WQED's finance committee, took over as acting chief executive officer and notes he initially spent 70 to 80 hours a week working just to "stabilize the situation."
He has slashed staff by 25%, cut top salaries and amended past accounting practices he acknowledges were "very shoddy."
Shocked by the fervor of public outcry against WQED, Mr. Korb also turned over the station's financial records to J. Alan Johnson, a former U.S. attorney, to investigate the station's past practices and dispel the "cloud that hangs over" its operations.
A final report is pending.
The station says its latest financial figures show WQED raised $5.2 million, or about 18%, of its revenue from subscribers in the year ended June 30, 1993.
About $17.9 million, or 63%, of its revenue stemmed largely from government sources, including PBS, the National Endowment for the Arts, and federal and state grants.
Another $1 million came from corporate underwriting, while the rest came from magazine ad sales and other sources.
With WQED's current deficit and projected revenue of $26 million for the next fiscal year, a turnaround isn't going to be easy, Mr. Korb concedes.
"We need a lot of skill and a little bit of luck" to survive, he says.
WQED still co-produces "Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?" a popular children's geography-game series with WGBH in Boston.
(Fred Rogers long ago set up an independent production company for Mister Rogers' Neighborhood, though he still rents WQED studio space.)
WQED produced just two programs broadcast nationally last year, quite a comedown from its past glory days.
WQED produced a program on breast cancer that was underwritten with $750,000 from Avon, and another on nurses was sponsored by a Pittsburgh area hospital.
It has produced several nostalgic and popular shows on Pittsburgh's history, both now and under Mr. Kaiser, though it has done little to reflect what is happening in the city today.
WQED is searching for a permanent chief executive, whom Mr. Korb says will be paid something less than $200,000.
"Some people are more willing to do God's work than others," says Mr. Korb, who is being paid $10,000 a month.
"I'd submit that if you were to pay, say $120,000, you're not going to find someone who would do that job, and if you did, they'd probably fail."
