The day of the Los Angeles earthquake, a company called Hi Tech Communications sent this promotional fax to reporters: "Earth shattering, 9.9 on the Richter Story Scale, Incredible Computer Technology at Work."
Reporters recently sent this message back to the publicist who created that rhetorical bauble: tasteless.
The fax was singled out for an award in "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" publicists contest, sponsored by the San Francisco chapter of the Public Relations Society of America.
At a meeting, the society announced victors for the good categories, which included being helpful, being persistent without being annoying and holding the wackiest press conference.
The winner of the last: Sun Microsystems, for using jugglers tossing bowling pins to show how network operating software works.
But more dear to the hearts, or at least spleens, of the journalist-judges were the demerits for bad flackery.
Apple Computer was the big winner with five dubious distinctions, including regularly distributing press kits the size of phone books and for a category called "The Lie that Wouldn't Die," insisting that former chief executive John Sculley wasn't fired.
Apple's new chief executive, Michael Spindler, also won the Empty Suit Award for being the spokesperson with the least to say.
He impressed the judges by holding a news conference after a major reorganization and refusing to discuss the company's finances, strategies or problems.
Pacific Telesis got two awards, one for putting out an earnings release with a $1 billion discrepancy and the other for an 11-page, single-spaced earnings handout that never provided total revenue.
Wild 107 FM radio also won two awards for the most poorly timed, dumbest or most tasteless publicity stunt.
One was for having a deejay block traffic on San Francisco's Bay Bridge for two hours during morning rush hour while he got a haircut; the other was for paying John Wayne Bobbitt $2,500 to be a deejay for a day.
The most unpleasant contest to judge was probably the BaffleGab Award for technogarble or confusing prose.
The winner: "3Com Corporation, the world leader in Ethernet adapters, today announced a new member of the Etherlink III Parallel Tasking family of adapters: the Etherlink III PCMCIA adapter for notebook PCs."
And the next sentence was even worse.
