International Business Machines Corp. and Motorola Inc., apparently responding to competitive moves by rival Intel Corp., announced plans to roll out an even more souped-up version of their new PowerPC computer chip.
IBM, of Armonk, N.Y., and Motorola, of Schaumburg, Ill., which developed PowerPC with Cupertino, Calif.-based Apple Computer Inc., said they will be producing a 100-megahertz version of the recently launched PowerPC 601 chip for volume shipment in the fourth quarter.
IBM and Motorola said the new chip, which runs about 25% faster than the fastest 80-megahertz PowerPC 601, will be shipped in limited quantities in the second quarter, mostly for testing purposes.
Analysts said yesterday's announcement came earlier than they had expected, and seemed to be motivated by Intel's accelerated launch of 90-megahertz and 100-megahertz versions of its fastest Pentium chip in early March.
Those chips, called the P54C, are already being shipped to personal-computer makers such as AST Research Inc. and Hewlett-Packard Co.
The P54C slightly exceeds overall performance of the PowerPC chips currently included on a new line of Apple Macintoshes launched March 14.
IBM is to come out with its PowerPC-based personal computers later in the year.
The 100-megahertz PowerPC chip is expected by analysts to regain a slight performance edge.
Both Intel and the PowerPC troika plan successive generations of their competing chips that will leapfrog one another in performance, with PowerPC expected by analysts to take a lead eventually.
"It's important for them PowerPC to stay on top of the hill here," said Michael Slater, publisher of the Microprocessor Report in Sebastopol, Calif.
Officials at Santa Clara, Calif.-based Intel said they weren't overly concerned with the latest PowerPC chip, noting that it won't ship in volume until late in the year.
Intel, whose chips dominate some 85% of the PC market, maintains an overwhelming advantage in the number of software programs designed to run only on Intel-based machines through Microsoft Corp.'s DOS and Windows operating systems.
