The California Insurance Department is pressing for regulation that, for the first time, would show prospective investment returns to buyers of life insurance.
The department took its proposal to state administrative agency, the Office of Administrative Law, for approval.
If the agency approves the plan, other states are likely to follow.
Consumer advocates say the regulation would take some of the mystery out of life insurance.
But they worry that insurance companies will lobby to get the proposal killed.
"If there is any industry influence, this might not get through," said John Montgomery, chief actuary for the California Insurance Department.
"The companies feel this won't help their competitive position."
It could take several months for the law office to make up its mind on the department's plan.
The proposal would strike at the heart of how cash-value insurance is sold.
Cash-value insurance, such as whole or universal life, comes with an investment feature as well as a death benefit.
Currently, life-insurance agents typically show prospective customers charts that illustrate how much cash value their policy builds up over time.
But the charts don't explicitly reveal a rate of return.
Instead, they show the dollar amount and make no allowances for the cost for buying the death benefit.
With its proposal, California is saying that if a company wants to show a policy's growth, it must also show the potential return on the investment component.
Specifically, companies would have to disclose the average annual rate of return earned on a policy after its fifth, 10th and 15th years.
For most policies, the returns are small after the fifth year but competitive with rival investments by the 15th year.
The department's action comes at a time when the organization representing state insurance regulators, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, is considering rules to prohibit the use of any investment projections in life-insurance sales.
Although the California proposal is less severe than that, it has nevertheless irritated insurance companies.
"This has very little benefit," said Walt Miller, senior vice president and chief actuary for Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
"The California department is just trying to ram this down everyone's throat."
He said the proposal tells the consumer nothing new and that it has several technical flaws.
He added that the proposal would be costly to implement, particularly for small life-insurance companies.
But consumer advocates say the companies' unspoken objection is that, by showing investment returns, policyholders would realize that their policies earn very little in the early years.
That's because agent commissions and administrative costs eat up the premiums.
James Hunt, an actuary with the National Insurance Consumer Organization, believes the California proposal would help discourage consumers from trading in old policies for new ones -- an event known as replacement.
When replacement is encouraged by unscrupulous agents -- who stand to benefit from sales commissions on the replacement policy -- it is called churning.
Churning was at the center of a recent Pennsylvania investigation into sales practices of Metropolitan Life Insurance Co.
Earlier this month, that company settled the allegations by paying a $1.5 million fine to the state and by making amends to policyholders.
Because of the expenses, replacement rarely makes sense in the early years."
This approach would help the replacement mess," Mr. Hunt said.
"The policyholders would see low return on the new policy, and returns on existing policies are excellent."
The California proposal uses what is called the Yield Comparison Index.
The index shows how much the policy earns, on an annual basis, over time after subtracting the costs of the death benefit.
For instance, suppose a consumer bought a term-life insurance policy, which offers no investment feature and is less expensive than cash-value insurance, and invested the difference.
The return earned on the difference would be the rate of return that insurers in California would have to disclose.
