Fears that a U.S.-Japanese trade war will stoke inflation sent the bond market into another tailspin.
Stocks and the dollar were mixed.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average slipped 7.32 points to 3824.42 and Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index lost 1.80 to 463.01.
But the Nasdaq Composite Index rose 1.11 to 784.58.
All eyes were fixed on the bond market.
For the second time this week, bond prices slumped.
The yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond shot up to 6.83% from 6.77% Wednesday.
Analysts said news of robust retail sales last month depressed prices in the morning but the losses widened in the afternoon amid reports that President Clinton had decided to renew a tough trade provision, a move that was certain to ratchet up tensions with Tokyo.
"It's clear that the market fears outright trade disputes," says John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon Brothers.
Also spooking the market was more good news on the economic front.
Car makers reported that sales of autos and light trucks continued at a strong pace last month, defying expectations of slackening demand and slower sales because of bad weather.
In the perverse world of bond trading, signs of economic strength are worrisome in that they suggest that inflation may be in the offing.
While some analysts argued that investors were nervous that a trade war with Japan would reduce competition in the U.S. and increase inflationary pressures, Mr. Lipsky said uncertainty about the implications of a trade dispute was enough to upset bond traders.
"You just don't know what's going to happen but the chances are that it's not good," he said.
As long as today's unemployment report supports the picture of a sturdy economy, he believes the Federal Reserve will "act fairly quickly" to raise short-term interest rates again.
Meanwhile, some economists feel that even if today's jobs report is weak, it will do little to restore confidence in the bond market.
Before an aura of calm can return to the bond market, "we have to get this hedge-fund selling out of the way and get a sense that economic activity is slowing for reasons other than the weather," says Stephen Slifer, chief financial market economist at Lehman Brothers.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 0.28 to 117.23.
Stock prices were mixed.
Volume totaled 291.8 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 950 issues rose and 1,190 fell.
Bond prices fell.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue dropped more than 3/4 point, or over $7.50 for each $1,000 face amount.
The dollar was mixed.
In late New York trading, the currency was quoted at 1.7105 marks and 103.95 yen compared with 1.7040 marks and 104.10 yen Wednesday.
