The North Atlantic Treaty Organization ordered Bosnia's Serbs to end their shelling of Sarajevo and to withdraw all heavy weapons or face air strikes.
Similar threats have been issued and ignored in the past.
But President Clinton, who lobbied the plan hard with his NATO allies, insisted that this time would be different.
"We hope that Bosnian Serb actions will make air strikes unnecessary," Mr. Clinton said.
"But no one should doubt NATO's resolve.
NATO is now set to act."
Even then, U.S. officials cautioned that air strikes could have a limited effect on ending the suffering and bloodshed in Bosnia.
"No one expects this to end the conflict or even lift the siege of Sarajevo," said a top U.S. official.
Officials said they were hoping that yesterday's ultimatum would deter further Serbian attacks and pave the way for new peace negotiations.
The plan, hammered out in a 13-hour meeting of NATO ambassadors in Brussels, gives the Serbs 10 days to either withdraw their artillery, mortars and tanks 12 miles beyond the center of Sarajevo or place those weapons under United Nations control.
Any shelling before that could face immediate retaliation.
U.S. officials said that air strikes could be launched against artillery emplacements, antiaircraft weapons as well as their support equipment.
Bosnia's Serbs have at least 100 heavy weapons encircling Sarajevo.
Bosnia's Muslims, who have a small fraction of that, won't be required to withdraw or turn over their weapons, but the no-shoot order will apply to them as well.
Even before the NATO ultimatum was issued, Bosnia's Serbs told the United Nations commander in Sarajevo that they would withdraw their weapons from around the besieged capital.
Faced with similar threats in the past, the Serbs have made similar promises but failed to follow through.
Whether they will honor their commitment this time is far from certain.
In addition, Bosnia's Muslim-led government and the Bosnian Serb forces agreed to yet another cease-fire around Sarajevo yesterday.
Although all previous cease-fires have been broken, the U.N. commander in Bosnia, Gen. Michael Rose, welcomed the latest agreement as "a very small start on a very large problem."
While Mr. Clinton acknowledged that American pilots who will be part of a multinational force could face some risk from Serb artillery, he emphasized that there wouldn't be any American ground troops involved in the operation.
Portraying the Bosnian war as a European problem, the president seemed to play down a possible role for American peacekeepers in the future.
"We have said that the American forces could only be used, if at all, in the implementation of a peace agreement," he said.
Outraged by last weekend's killing of 68 people in a Sarajevo market, congressional leaders strongly endorsed the idea of Nato air strikes.
At the same time, Congress and the American public remain adamantly opposed to the idea of sending U.S. peacekeepers to Bosnia.
But having decided once again to take a more active role in Bosnia, Mr. Clinton may find it hard to back away from his earlier commitment to provide up to half of the peacekeepers needed to enforce a peace agreement.
"This is a quagmire," said Indiana Sen. Dan Coats, a conservative Republican member on the Armed Services Committee.
"I think we're forgetting the lessons of Somalia.
There are a lot of unanswered questions."
Peace talks are scheduled to resume in Geneva today among Bosnia's Serbs, Muslims and Croats.
President Clinton said the U.S. would now try to help broker a peace settlement, hinting at the possibility of shuttle diplomacy by U.S. officials.
As a first step, he said, the U.S. would try to determine the Bosnian Muslims' "legitimate bedrock requirements" as well as offering them a "clear and honest" assessment of the costs of continued fighting.
Mr. Clinton said that "it was not exactly true" that the U.S. would now try to pressure the Muslims into accepting a peace settlement.
U.S. diplomatic challenges won't end there.
The administration had to do some serious arm-twisting to persuade the Canadians, the Greeks, and to a lesser extent, the British, to go along with the plan.
Canada and Britain have large peacekeeping contingents in Bosnia, and if their troops are targeted for retaliation, they may blame the U.S. for forcing the plan on them.
The Europeans already are bitter at the U.S. refusal to send ground troops to help in Bosnia.
President Clinton's most immediate problem will be trying to calm Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Spurred on by his nationalist opponents, Mr. Yeltsin, according to his aides, has been telephoning world leaders urging NATO not to attack the Serbs, Russia's traditional allies.
Mr. Clinton said last evening he was trying to get in touch with the Russian leader.
And he expressed hope that once Mr. Yeltsin understood that "anyone who violates the safe zone" could be punished "he will, if not agree with our action, at least understand it more."
