McDonnell Douglas Corp., beating out archrival Lockheed Corp. for a hotly contested fighter-jet order, will sell 20 of its F-15 jets to Israel for $2 billion.
The sale, the largest on the international horizon for U.S. arms-makers, dealt a harsh blow to Lockheed, which had campaigned intensely to sell 42 new variants of its F-16 fighter to Israel, at slightly lower total cost.
Military and industry officials said the deal also includes options for Israel to buy five more F-15 jets from McDonnell Douglas.
Deliveries, some of which could be scheduled as early as 1996, are expected to run through 1999.
Gen. Herzl Bodinger, head of the Israeli Air Force, said that among the reasons Israel chose the two-engine F-15 was that it can fly without refueling to countries like Iran, Iraq, and Libya with large weapon loads, even during extreme weather conditions.
At McDonnell Douglas headquarters in St. Louis, managers were ecstatic that their plane, marketed through a relatively quiet campaign, had prevailed after surviving a challenge from Lockheed that delayed the sale for months.
After personal intervention by Lockheed Chairman Daniel Tellep, Israel had agreed to consider a yet-to-be-built F-16ES, or "enhanced-strategic" variant.
Such a model of the single-engine F-16 could fly far enough to reach potential targets, and would have made the Lockheed jet more competitive with the F-15 for Israeli needs -- though it also stood to make the plane more expensive.
In the end, Lockheed pulled out all the stops, running large advertisements in Israeli newspapers and offering final production of the jets in Israel.
Lockheed also made no secret of the supplier contracts it would withdraw from Israel if the F-16ES lost.
Lockheed said it did nothing improper in studying how it would end those contracts.
Lockheed, the Calabasas, Calif., aerospace company that bought its F-16 fighter business from General Dynamics Corp. last year, already has had to drastically slow production because of order cancellations by the U.S. Air Force and Pakistan.
Both McDonnell Douglas and Lockheed had conceded that the competition was especially important because of the shrinking number of large sale prospects emerging at a time of falling world-wide defense spending.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, McDonnell Douglas shares rose $2.625 a share, or 2.4%, to close at $111.50, while Lockheed stock closed unchanged at $63.75 a share.
At Lockheed's fighter division in Fort Worth, Texas, disappointed officials released a statement saying they "don't understand the decision criteria," since they apparently weren't "based on price or performance."
The competition, which has raged for more than a year, began as a contest between the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 attack jet and a different F-16 variant.
But Lockheed later found itself scrambling to compete against the F-15, the premier fighter of the U.S. Air Force.
Robert Trice, a McDonnell Douglas vice president, said that "people who are serious" as buyers favor F-15s for overall performance.
One factor in the sale looks to have had little to do with performance comparisons, however.
By ordering the F-15, Israel is helping preserve an order for 72 of the F-15s by Saudi Arabia.
The Saudis, under financial pressure, are negotiating to restructure arms deliveries from five major U.S. defense contractors.
It now appears the Israeli sale will permit a needed slowdown in some Saudi deliveries of F-15s several years from now.
Joel Johnson, vice president, international, with the Aerospace Industries Association trade group, said that "without the Saudi buy, there isn't an F-15 line for the Israelis to buy from, and without the Israeli decision, it's hard to figure out the Saudi delivery schedule."
Amy Dockser Marcus and Thomas E. Ricks contributed to this article.
