In the midst of a political crisis over the Indian uprising in the state of Chiapas, Mexico received more bad news on the economic front over the weekend.
The government released numbers showing that the economy grew a scant 0.2% in the fourth quarter, below economists' expectations of a 0.5% increase.
For the entire year, the economy grew just 0.4% -- the worst economic performance since President Carlos Salinas and his team of technocrats took office more than five years ago.
As recently as October, the government had been predicting 1.1% growth for the year.
The Salinas administration started the year planning on an increase of 2.5% to 3%, following a 2.6% rise in 1992.
Many economists say relief should come this year, with a 3% growth rate.
They tie their optimism to increased social spending that should stem from the uprising in Chiapas and to a general economic stimulus plan that includes a minimum-wage increase.
Some analysts, however, expect a tardy turnaround that won't materialize until the second half.
"So far, there has really been no signal of the economy taking off," says Jorge Suarez-Velez, a managing director at Afin International Securities in New York.
"The government has tried to reduce interest rates," to prime the economy, Mr. Suarez-Velez said.
But he also said that banks will try not to cut their rates too fast, because the slow economy is adding to their nonperforming loans.
Particularly hard-hit in 1993 were the auto and oil industries, top money-earners in this developing country of 85 million people.
The auto industry contracted nearly 15%, according to an auto trade group.
Oil revenues, likewise, slid in the fourth quarter, along with world oil prices.
The economic problems -- especially in the state-owned oil sector, which provides financing for about a quarter of Mexico's budget -- could cause real trouble because they could cut into tax revenue.
Any decline could endanger progress the government has made in balancing its budget and reassuring foreign investors about Mexico's economic climate.
A particular worry is how the government will finance Chiapas-inspired social spending.
The government has already said it will sell off its remaining stakes in Mexican banks this year, fetching some $2.5 billion, but there is speculation that the government may even need to begin selling pieces of Petroleos Mexicanos, the mammoth oil monopoly.
Already, small turnkey contracts have been given out to drillers and, in recent months, several land rigs have been sold in what some optimists believe is a slow-motion privatization.
Economists, assuming that the government will have to run a budget deficit this year, hope it can be kept to less than 1% of the gross domestic product.
Luis Donaldo Colosio, the presidential candidate of the heretofore unbeatable ruling party, won't make any promises.
In a recent interview, he said, "I have rejected emphatically populism," an approach that produced deficit spending.
"I also believe in trade as a very important instrument in elevating the living conditions of people."
But, the candidate added, budget "surpluses shouldn't become an obsession."
Nearly every week since the New Year's Day uprising, President Salinas has announced another spending program.
More and more civic groups, including farmers from the Mexican interior and the border state of Chihuahua, are fastening their free-market frustrations to the land-reform issues of the Indian uprising in Mexico's southernmost state.
Thus, government spending on agriculture is expected to nearly double this year.
Investors are still optimistic.
Despite a Chiapas-induced slide early in the year and a series of setbacks in recent days, Mexican stock prices are still up nearly 4% this year.
The major reason for the sanguine spirit is that interest rates are slipping.
For the first time in 15 years, rates on Mexican treasury bills are below 10%.
The government development bank has also lowered the cost of borrowing money by two percentage points in a broad effort to ease problems among small and medium-sized businesses that are forced to compete because of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But it remains to be seen whether lowered interest rates will be enough to get the economy going again and keep Mexico on track.
The running Nafta/Chiapas joke here is that, "On Jan. 1, Mexico thought it'd wake up in the First World but found itself instead in Central America."
