Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp., having beaten out their big European competitor for yesterday's $6 billion airliner order from Saudi Arabia, may still face a hard round of competition over the mix of aircraft to be delivered.
Details about the long-awaited order were scarce at a White House news conference, during which President Clinton called the purchase by the state-owned airline, Saudia, "a gold-medal win for America's businesses and workers."
Saudia expects to replace all of its about 50 planes with jetliners from the two U.S. manufacturers, thus excluding Europe's Airbus Industrie consortium from its new fleet.
Despite the president's contention that the order for U.S. manufacturers reflects a national strategy that encourages industry to "create good, high-paying jobs in America," the companies sought to soften any suggestion that producing planes for the Saudis will expand their work forces.
In the past few years of sharp downturns in global new-plane orders from airlines, both Boeing and McDonnell Douglas have been reducing employment significantly.
At the news conference, Boeing Chairman Frank Shrontz said the Saudi order is "certainly going to help stabilize the employment levels at McDonnell Douglas and Boeing at what is a very critical time for both of us."
People familiar with the arrangements have said the order's final size is expected to be between 60 and 66 aircraft, with about 60% of the total value going to Seattle-based Boeing and the remainder to St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas.
Discussions have involved about 25 MD-90 aircraft and a substantial number of MD-11 widebody jets from McDonnell Douglas, with Boeing providing at least 10 of its 747 jumbo jets and a combination of twin-engine planes, including its new 777 or established 767 and 757 models.
Suggestions that Boeing and McDonnell Douglas will still have to fight each other for orders, however, came in the announcement by Prince Bandar bin Sultan, Saudi Arabia's U.S. ambassador.
The prince said the two companies had been invited to a March 20 session in his country to negotiate prices, financing and delivery schedules.
Boeing's smaller 737 jetliners compete head-on with the MD-90s, for example.
The environment between the two companies remains highly competitive, and the Saudi order is likely to be the largest that any of the world's aircraft producers will receive until at least late 1995.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Boeing shares jumped $2.125 to $46.50, and McDonnell Douglas shares rose $1.875 to $118.875.
In the Airbus camp, the Saudi decision left some disappointed managers assessing the odds that Airbus might still sneak in to win orders for their own twin-engine planes, especially if the Boeing and McDonnell Douglas competition for smaller planes turns bitter.
At the news conference, President Clinton compared U.S. efforts helping the American aerospace companies win the Saudi business to his administration's work on behalf of the North American Free Trade Agreement and other international trade pacts.
Commerce Secretary Ron Brown estimated that the Saudi order, to be financed by the U.S. Export-Import Bank, might result in 100,000 Americans' being hired or retained by aerospace companies.
He said he was reasoning that each billion-dollar increase in exports equates to about 20,000 jobs for Americans.
Boeing's Mr. Shrontz, while mentioning only the order's impact on work-force stabilization, thanked President Clinton "for helping to communicate to our customers the importance of this transaction, and our hope that the decision would be made on the basis of product merit."
McDonnell Douglas Chairman John McDonnell said the Saudi order "reflects what we can accomplish as a nation if we pull together as a team with the support of an energetic administration to achieve three critical objectives: sales for American companies, exports of U.S. products to our friends around the world, and jobs for Americans."
For McDonnell Douglas, especially, orders are needed to help bolster its sagging jetliner production facilities in Long Beach, Calif., where only three to four planes are expected to be delivered in the current quarter.
