President Clinton took direct aim at Japan by renewing a tough trade provision known as Super 301, but the measure threatens -- rather than launches -- a trade war.
The provision is considered the most powerful weapon in the U.S. arsenal against its trading partners, and the Clinton administration is using it as part of an orchestrated plan to signal its seriousness over shrinking the $59.3 billion U.S. trade deficit with Japan.
But the way the law is written, it could take almost a year before any trade sanctions are imposed.
The U.S. didn't leave any doubt that Japan is the target of this action.
Mr. Clinton telephoned Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa before a public announcement in the afternoon, in a conversation that Mr. Clinton termed a "friendly, forthright" discussion.
U.S. officials said other world leaders weren't notified.
Japan denounced the U.S. move as a violation of international trade rules.
"The government of Japan cannot keep silent its concerns over this move," said chief government spokesman Masayoshi Takemura.
Nevertheless, Mr. Takemura said Japan would opt for a "restrained response" while pushing ahead with voluntary measures designed to open the Japanese market.
Japan expects to announce those measures later this month.
Before the announcement, Prime Minister Hosokawa had urged the U.S. to "act with good sense."
Nevertheless, other Japanese officials said the U.S. move could prompt increasing bilateral tension and raise anti-U.S. sentiment in Japan, leading to a wider trade war.
"Such a unilateral approach to solving trade disputes will invite retaliatory moves and result in a shrinkage of world trade," Hideaki Kumano, the top bureaucrat at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, said Tuesday.
In the U.S., fears that a U.S.-Japanese trade war will stoke inflation sent the bond market into another tailspin.
The dollar fell slightly against the yen, and grain prices sank amid speculation that the trade tensions might disrupt Japanese purchases of U.S. crops.
Yesterday's executive order renews Super 301 for two years, reviving a trade measure that was part of the 1988 Trade Act but which expired in 1990.
The trade measure was initially introduced to spur the Bush administration to employ tough action against trading partners.
The renewal is partly more rhetoric than action, because nothing significant will happen under Super 301 until at least September, and even then the action won't involve trade retaliation.
Under the trade measure, the U.S. will assemble a preliminary list of trading practices that it considers to be unfair to U.S. goods.
U.S. officials will identify those practices using findings from the National Trade Estimates Report, an annual report to be released at the end of this month.
The administration would have until Sept. 30 to pinpoint a final list, and officials said they will make their announcement on the deadline day.
Within 21 days of submitting a report to Congress, the U.S. would initiate an investigation of those practices under Section 301 of the 1988 Trade Act.
If the alleged practices aren't rectified during negotiations and dispute-resolution proceedings, the U.S. could impose punitive tariffs in an amount equal to the estimated value of lost sales by U.S. companies.
The talks probably would take months.
Although yesterday's actions were aimed at Japan, officials took pains not to appear to be protectionist or anti-Japan.
An internal two-page outline, entitled "Talking Points on Super 301 Executive Order," said that if asked whether the action is directed at Japan, officials should respond: "This Executive Order is not directed at any country. . . ."
Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman carried a list of questions and answers related to the executive order.
The first question was: "Doesn't the announcement of Super 301 escalate the trade war with . . .
The prepared answer: "No one is interested in starting a trade war with Japan."
When U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor announced the decision to a throng of reporters and television crews in an amphitheater half a block from the White House, he echoed that point.
In Tokyo, though, Japanese officials said they found ironic U.S. attempts to play down the significance of the move.
"On the right hand you're saying there won't be a trade war, while on the left, you're actually putting your finger on the trigger," said one official.
Super 301 hasn't ever produced devastating consequences.
In 1989, when the trade measure was initiated, the U.S. identified unfair trading practices in Japan, India and Brazil.
The U.S. settled with Japan over opening its market to foreign satellites, supercomputers and wood products before any sanctions went into place.
It reached agreement with Brazil, too, on trade issues before issuing any punitive measures.
The U.S. never resolved its problem with India, and sanctions were never imposed.
Still, yesterday's renewal didn't go over well in Brussels, where the European Commission strongly criticized the renewal.
"We've never hidden our distaste for Super 301 and other similar unilateral trade measures," a commission spokesman said.
"They go against the flow of modern trade policy and they tend to make markets clam up rather than prying them open."
Apart from trying to pressure Japan, the Clinton administration has also been under its own pressure from Congress to get tough.
By renewing Super 301, the administration appeases U.S. lawmakers who have been seeking to legislate tough action.
A slew of lawmakers quickly responded to Mr. Kantor's announcement with statements of support.
Sen. Max Baucus (D., Mont.), who recently introduced legislation to renew Super 301, said President Clinton made "a bold and historic statement."
There are tougher decisions, by far, ahead for the U.S.
In mid-March, figures are supposed to be released showing foreign semiconductor makers' share of the Japanese market in the fourth quarter of 1993.
The U.S. says the share is supposed to hit 20%, as part of a bilateral semiconductor agreement.
Japan denies that it has to meet such a target.
By the end of March, the administration is expected to release a review of government procurement of supercomputers.
By April 30, the U.S. is expected to name government procurement practices that it considers to be unfair against U.S. goods, and it could set up a schedule for retaliation.
The administration could initiate trade retaliatory action against Japan under Section 301, the basis for Super 301.
But Super 301 is considered powerful because it sets a time frame for the administration to identify trading practices as problems.
The U.S. already has threatened Japan with sanctions because of a dispute over Motorola Inc.'s access to Japan's cellular-telephone market.
That case, which is separate from the Super 301 matter, so far represents the main U.S. attempt to pressure Japan into accepting specific goals for opening up its markets in several sectors.
Officials familiar with the talks said Japan and the U.S. government are making steady, albeit slow, progress in the case.
On auto trade, Japan's largest car maker moved to head off sanctions by offering a compromise.
Shoichiro Toyoda, chairman of Toyota Motor Corp., said the company would be willing to set targets for purchases of U.S. auto parts, as long as it wouldn't face the threat of sanctions if those targets weren't met.
It isn't clear, however, whether a non-binding target would satisfy Washington.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher leaves today on an Asian trip that includes a stop in Tokyo.
Winston Lord, the department's assistant secretary for East Asian affairs, said Mr. Christopher would be emphasizing "that we have got to open up the Japanese market and we've got to get at these global imbalances."
But Mr. Lord said the secretary of state isn't "going as a negotiator because there's nothing to negotiate about at this point."
Michael Williams in Tokyo contributed to this article.
