President Clinton will propose in his fiscal 1995 budget shifting resources in the Department of Housing and Urban Development toward caring for the homeless and away from public-housing programs.
The idea apparently is to target more money to the neediest.
Moreover, administration officials believe that homeless people need more counseling and social services, in addition to emergency shelter.
Although the details won't be unveiled until Feb. 7, public-housing advocates already are protesting expected cuts in their programs.
Some 1,200 housing organizations signed a letter to the White House last week, asserting that housing bore the brunt of budget cuts through the 1980s and shouldn't be hit again.
Administration officials say Mr. Clinton's $25 billion HUD budget will seek to increase annual federal spending on homelessness to more than $1.2 billion from about $800 million now.
Both Mr. Clinton and HUD Secretary Henry Cisneros have emphasized their commitment to reducing homelessness as the top goal at HUD.
Officials acknowledged HUD's priorities will shift, but they wouldn't confirm how severely public-housing funds would be trimmed.
Public-housing officials and lobbyists say they expect steep cuts from the current $4.6 billion budget for building and modernizing public housing.
At least one lobbyist predicted that Congress would reinstate any spending the administration proposes to cut from public housing.
"We will turn, as we have for 14 years, to members of Congress, who have done their best to fund public housing adequately," said Gordon Cavanaugh, who represents the Council for Large Public Housing Authorities.
The squeeze at HUD reflects overall budget limits resulting from last summer's agreement to cap domestic spending.
For every spending increase President Clinton proposes, a similar cut must be found.
Both Mr. Cisneros and President Clinton have publicly touted their commitment to reduce homelessness.
In December, standing alongside homeless advocates at the White House, the two men announced $400 million in grants for homeless programs, using unspent funds from previous years.
HUD also launched a program last year providing $20 million in counseling, shelter and other aid for the homeless in Washington.
Mr. Cisneros said the government's efforts in the district would be a model for other cities.
Thomas L. Kenyon, president of the National Alliance to End Homelessness, applauded the shift of funds to help the homeless.
"It feels so good for someone to call this a priority," he said.
