Virtuality Group PLC, the arcade-machine company he founded in 1987, is creating "a whole new medium of communication," says the 33-year-old managing director.
In the not-too-distant future, he says, people miles apart will play tennis, golf and perhaps Virtuality Boxing together on global information highways.
If Dr. Waldern -- he has a Ph.D. in computer science -- has his way, Virtuality will be in the center of this communications and entertainment revolution.
The company is already the world's biggest seller of "virtual reality" arcade games, which use sophisticated computer power with video-image headsets and joysticks to bring video games to a new level of interactivity.
Virtuality went public on the London Stock Exchange last October in an offering that raised just under #9.5 million.
From an initial price of 170 pence ($2.50), the shares more than doubled to 350 pence in three months.
Motorola Inc. has a 3.8% stake, International Business Machines Corp. a 2.3% stake.
Apax Partners & Co.
Ventures Ltd., a big British venture-capital firm, owns 50.9% through two partnerships.
Dr. Waldern, having sold equity to finance the start-up, owns about 8%.
He isn't exactly the William Gates of Britain, but Virtuality's emergence is a rare example of promising innovation in a landscape dominated by basic industry.
A year after its founding, Virtuality, then called W Industries, won the British Technology Group's "best new business" award.
In January, Tim Sainsbury, the British minister of industry, was interested enough in the company to spend 20 minutes chatting with Dr. Waldern at the Amusement Trades Exhibition International arcade-game show, where Virtuality unveiled its second-generation game machines.
(The minister declined to play.)
Virtuality hopes to avoid the mistakes of other British electronics companies by adopting an international view.
"To be in the high-tech market, you have to be international," Dr. Waldern says.
"The U.K. is like a little state."
The company's biggest market will probably be the U.S. Virtuality opened a sales office in St. Louis last May, and 40% of its sales in last year's first half came from the U.S.
About 14% came from Britain, 26% from continental Europe and 20% from the Far East and other countries.
Though companies like Virtuality aren't common here, Dr. Waldern argues that Britain is a good base for the imaginative, intricate software demanded by virtual reality.
There are an "exceptional" number of people with computer-science degrees, he says, many of them creative enough to master special effects demanded by Hollywood.
In truth, however, the virtual part of these games is still only a crude approximation of reality.
Virtuality's main achievements in its second generation were to reduce the cost while increasing performance, lighten the headset to less than 1 1/2 pounds from more than six pounds, and reduce the 1 1/2-foot cube of electronics running the machines to four personal-computer boards mounted with custom chips.
Four machines now cost an arcade owner #17,950 ($26,000), one-third the 1992 price.
A player looks into the game through displays right before his eyes in the visorlike headset.
He can see 360 degrees by turning his head.
A joystick shoots invaders and controls the speed at which a player moves.
But the graphics are cartoonlike, two-dimensional figures.
Virtual reality is still a long way from the "Star Trek" virtual vacation machine into which Trekkies stepped to escape the pressures of cold, hard space travel.
Still, Dr. Waldern says, Virtuality has sold 450 machines world-wide, compared with 25 sold by its nearest competitor.
The goal is to have a big installed base so the company can sell add-on software.
"The machines are reprogrammable," Dr. Waldern says.
Sega Enterprises Ltd. of Japan and an undersea "experience" for Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s planned Universal Studios theme park in Japan.
And Dr. Waldern says he is talking with telephone and cable-TV companies about how to develop the company's technology and distribute it.
That could help him achieve his eventual goal of selling Virtuality game software for home use.
That's how Nintendo Co. grew so big, he notes.
"Arcades lead the consumer by two years," he says.
It's an ambitious plan, but Virtuality has a good track record.
Dr. Waldern founded the company with three other computer engineers after earning his doctorate in 1985 by building an interactive workstation to design cars.
No one would give him money to start a company, so he borrowed #10,000 from his family for the first prototype.
Figuring that arcade games represented both the best and most demanding market, he took a year to write a business plan, and then raised #750,000 by selling equity in the company in 1989.
Once Virtuality began selling machines, it had positive cash flow in four months, he says.
In 1992, the company had its first pretax profit, of #217,000, on revenue of #5.25 million.
Because of the costs of developing and introducing the second generation, Virtuality expects to post a 1993 loss of as much as #400,000.
"But we did the second generation on time and on budget," Dr. Waldern says.
Two to three years from now, Virtuality will have its third-generation machines.
One day, Dr. Waldern says, virtual-reality technology will move from the world of entertainment to be used in designing cars and houses and in determining how to operate on patients.
But first, there's money to be made in video games.
"You can't get to your dream" immediately, he says.
"You've got to earn it."
Ms. Guyon is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's London bureau.
