Americans continue to love a good fright, and few fears cut closer to home than those touching on milk for the kids.
Some people worry about cow's milk in general, but what's really got people unnerved is bovine somatotropin (bST), the "growth hormone" now approved for use.
The scare got started with Jeremy Rifkin, who goblinizes nearly every outgrowth of agricultural science since Johnny Appleseed.
It has had great resonance among the overpopulated ranks of dairy farmers, who naturally see in greater supplies only a loss of income.
But some people who normally wouldn't enlist with the terror troops to fight a genetically enhanced tomato or irradiation that could take the worry out of meat and fish nevertheless cringe at the milk.
They worry that added antibiotics said to be associated with using bST will contaminate baby's bottle.
Though the hormone is present naturally in cows, injection of a supplement is serious and expensive business, and only the larger and more sophisticated operations are likely to want to do it.
Commercial versions of the product carry warning labels.
It's not surprising, then, that major grocery chains have sought to identify their dairy wares as bST-free.
Now comes the Food and Drug Administration, which feels obliged to play label cop again.
To its credit, the agency has certified the hormone in the face of Luddite pressure.
You can't use your milk cartons to kill a straw man, the FDA warns.
The agency says swearing off a substance implies that the shunned stuff is bad for you, and this stuff isn't.
We would rather fight this battle on some ground other than stifling commercial speech.
Instead, let's encourage the truth.
If the supermarkets are too timid to wage an educational campaign, what about our scientists, public and private?
The FDA and the Federal Trade Commission disseminate material warning of quackery in the promotion of hokey remedies; why not a similar drive against fraudulent "consumerism"?
Perhaps former Surgeon General Koop could interrupt his sales tour for the Clinton medical plan to say a few choice words.
The New York-based American Council on Science and Health as usual is speaking out.
Its draft monograph by Terry Etherton, Penn State professor of animal nutrition and physiology, finds "there is no evidence whatsoever that bST increases the incidence of illness in dairy cows" and thus milk drinkers' exposure to antibiotics.
Likewise, there's no heightened risk of allergic reactions.
As we have highlighted many times on this page, Americans, for all their common sense, are susceptible to food scares.
But they somehow manage to indulge themselves in known killers such as smoking, suntans and obesity.
Incidentally, a sister hormone, pST, promises to yield leaner pork and in so doing save human lives.
Expect a fight.
Eventually, most nonsense gets discounted in the U.S.
But we have a somewhat fanciful proposal for helping this process along.
Across the country, the same dairy farmers who are teaming with the ridiculous Mr. Rifkin have long succeeded in placing legal price floors on their milk.
This presents the opportunity for a market test.
Since the bovine somatotropin promises to boost productivity by at least 10% and lower cost, let's allow its purveyors to sell their milk below minimum.
The bST-free side can make any claim it wants, and America's thirsty families can choose.
With the help of some truth-telling by scientists, this should permit technology to triumph and, in the process, hasten the end of anticompetitiveness in the dairy case.
Mothers and children will rest easier.
