BAARLE-NASSAU, Netherlands, and BAARLE-HERTOG, Belgium -- In the Doornbos household on Nieuwstraat here, even the smallest domestic task is an international event.
When May Doornbos and her husband retire to their bedroom, she sleeps in Belgium, he in Holland.
To visit the bathroom or her oldest child's room, she must cross the frontier.
The border splits her living room down the middle.
The kitchen, at least, is solidly Dutch.
So is Mrs. Doornbos, who figures she immigrates "hundreds of times" a day.
Now that's Borderless Europe.
Only it has been like this for centuries in Baarle-Hertog and Baarle-Nassau: one village containing two nations.
By an accident of history, Belgian Baarle-Hertog is a collection of 21 enclaves -- some only a few meters wide -- stranded five miles into the Netherlands and dispersed through the Dutch town of Baarle-Nassau.
Each Baarle has its own church, school, police force and mayor.
The 8,000 residents of both towns -- 6,000 in the Dutch section, 2,000 in the Belgian -- have lived in peace for years, sharing roads, sewers, a common tongue (Dutch) and boundaries that split blocks, often houses, in two.
But now, as the rest of Europe comes together, the Baarles are being driven apart.
The Dutch province of Noord Brabant wants to merge Baarle-Nassau with other Dutch villages, prompting Belgian fears of Dutch domination over Baarle-Hertog -- and a nationalist uproar not heard in these parts since the Belgian uprising against Holland 150 years ago.
The Dutch of Baarle-Nassau fear the merger with other towns will mean losing tax dodges, Sunday shopping privileges and other perks that come with having a foreign country in their town.
The Dutch provincial government says it has no choice; it is following an order from the national government to combine small villages to make local government more efficient.
"I don't expect there will be another solution," says Gus Esmeer, a Dutch province official.
The furor has sounded a call to arms, of sorts, in Belgium.
The provincial government in Antwerp sent a delegation to lodge a complaint with the Dutch province; it plans another meeting and, if still unsuccessful, will call on the government in Brussels to appeal the decision to the Dutch national government in The Hague.
"It will be a fiasco," warns Baarle-Hertog Mayor Alfons Cornelissen, who crosses the border four times on his way to town hall.
"The national feeling is coming up again, and the risk is it will become fanatic."
A committee of Dutch and Belgian Baarle residents wrote 1,300 letters of protest to Noord Brabant and sent a busload of angry citizens to the capital.
The group, backed by 97% support in a local newspaper poll, issued a 28-page "Plea for an Independent Baarle-Nassau" and a poster warning that those who mess with the "Siamese twins from Baarle" will be attacked by lions.
"It's an emotional issue," says BaarleNassau Mayor Jan P.M.M. Hendrikx, who also objects to his province's plan.
"The situation has been this way for 1,000 years.
Now they're changing it, and we don't want that."
A farming village founded in 992, Baarle was split in feudal times when the Duke of Brabant gave some pieces of his land to the Counts of Nassau, but kept the inhabited parts.
Borders between the Duke's land, now part of Belgium, and the Counts' land, now in Holland, were formalized in 1648 by the Treaty of Westphalia and confirmed in 1843 when the border between Belgium and Holland was drawn.
The two nations have tried often and without success to draw a clean border in the area.
Meanwhile, residents must depend on color-coded street address plaques to tell a house's nationality.
Each home has Dutch water and gas, Belgian cable TV, and electricity and telephone service are determined by the location of a home's front door.
The two towns are haggling over how much sewage each should process from their shared pipes, and arguments over trash-bagging practices has led to garbage trucks from both countries leap-frogging down the same streets.
The two fire departments in Baarle also have struck sparks.
When fire broke out in a Belgian home that straddles a border on Maria Verhoeven Straat, Dutch authorities got the call to put out the blaze.
An angry Belgian force arrived, shouting: "That was our fire!"
Jack Haagen, the Dutch force's commander, says the Belgians were just envious.
But for the most part, Baarle residents like the arrangement and the many legal and tax loopholes they have discovered.
Because of its link to a Belgian town, Baarle-Nassau is the only village in Holland where Sunday shopping is legal.
The Dutch come from up to 100 kilometers away to shop in Baarle's 200 stores.
Many Dutch defect to the Belgian side of town for lower income and property taxes.
To avoid taxes on interest income, the Dutch and Belgians both keep their money in the other nation's banks.
When Baarle-Hertog residents wanted to see a movie that was banned in Belgium because of nudity, they showed it in the main hall of the Baarle social center, which straddles the border.
The two towns share youth clubs, a tourist office and library, and they have a phone link so that cross-town calls don't require international dialing.
Stores fly both flags and accept both currencies.
Both Belgians and Dutch in Baarle fear the Dutch province's consolidation plan will undermine their cooperation by forcing Baarle-Nassau to join other Dutch towns that don't care about the enclaves.
They also fear consolidation will force Baarle-Nassau to give up its Sunday shopping rights and other benefits of being a two-nation town.
"All the activities will fall apart," says Fons van Tilburg, a Dutch accountant leading the protest campaign.
Until then, though, Baarle residents are still finding ways to exploit their frontier.
De Swart Autoschade, a car-repair shop that sits on the border, faced legal action from Baarle-Nassau because of a Dutch ban on smokestacks near homes.
So de Swart added a two-foot extension to its chimney -- enough to make it angle into Belgian air space.
The exhaust is no longer under Dutch jurisdiction.
"It's nonsense," says mechanic Jan Kooremans, "but it's the law."
