Oksana Gritschuk and Evgeny Platov skated to a rock beat and led a Russian 1-2 finish in the ice-dancing competition, foiling Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean's effort to reclaim Olympic gold after 10 years.
Ms. Gritschuk and Mr. Platov beat out compatriots Maia Usova and Aleksandr Zhulin for the gold medal.
Ms. Torvill and Mr. Christopher had to settle for the bronze.
Dancing to 1950s rock-and-roll, including "Rock Around the Clock," Ms. Gritschuk and Mr. Platov didn't thrill the audience as much as Ms. Torvill and Mr. Dean's trick-filled ballroom dancing number.
But the judges didn't agree and five of them put the Russians first.
Only the British judge put Ms. Torvill and Mr. Dean in first place.
Pernilla Wiberg gave Sweden its first medal of the Lillehammer Winter Games in the women's combined.
Ms. Wiberg moved from fifth after Sunday's downhill portion of the combined into first after the morning slalom run, then withstood Vreni Schneider of Switzerland in the second slalom run.
Ms. Wiberg's total time of 3 minutes, 5.16 seconds was just 0.13 ahead of Ms. Schneider, The bronze went to Alenka Dovzan of Slovenia in 3:06.64.
Katja Seizinger of Germany, the Olympic downhill gold medalist and first after Sunday's combined downhill, straddled a blue slalom gate about halfway down and was disqualified.
Picabo Street of the U.S. struggled down the slalom runs, finishing 10th.
Lyubov Egorova equaled the career Winter Olympic gold-medal record, taking Russia from one second behind to a 30.1-second victory in the women's 20-kilometer cross-country ski relay.
It was her third gold of the Lillehammer Games and sixth overall.
Ms. Egorova won three golds in Albertville and has won a gold or silver medal in all nine Olympic events she has entered.
Russia won the relay in 57 minutes, 12.5 seconds.
Norway took the silver in 57:42.6.
Italy won the bronze.
Austria's Emese Hunyady won the women's 1,500 meters as Gunda Niemann of Germany had problems again.
Ms. Hunyady won in 2 minutes, 2.19 seconds, giving Austria its first speed-skating gold ever, and Russian Svetlana Fedotikina, skating late in the program, slipped into second in 2:02.69.
Ms. Niemann, who had been favored to win three gold medals in these Games, settled for a bronze medal.
She fell in the 3,000 last week, in which Ms. Hunyady was the silver medalist.
American Bonnie Blair skated the best 1,500 of her career, but missed the bronze by 0.03 second.
Ms. Blair has four career Olympic golds, but the 1,500 has not been a strong race for her.
The U.S. earned a medal-round berth by beating Italy 7-1.
The U.S. will play Finland tomorrow.
Slovakia beat France 6-2 to send it into a quarterfinal meeting with Russia.
Canada, which beat Sweden 3-2, will play the Czech Republic.
Sweden will play Germany.
Unheralded skiers from Belarus and Australia led qualifying for the freestyle aerial competition.
Alexei Parfenkov of Belarus made two clean though conservative jumps and accumulated 228.49 points in the men's competition.
Canadians Philippe LaRoche and Lloyd Langlois followed with 222.65 and 221.61.
In the women's competition, Kirstie Marshall of Australia landed both of her jumps well to accumulate 166.12 points.
She was followed by Norway's Hilde Synnove Lid with 158.70.
