William Perry, unanimously confirmed by the Senate last week to succeed Les Aspin as secretary of defense, goes back to Capitol Hill this week to testify in support of the president's defense program and budget.
One might think that these hearings will be uneventful.
After all, the $50 billion defense budget gap that Mr. Aspin discovered late last year has evidently all but evaporated.
Mr. Perry brings the benefits of his impressive experience to the job.
And he takes over from Mr. Aspin after having been assured in the president's State of the Union address that he will get the resources he needs to do the job.
Problem solved, right?
We are still left with three hard questions.
Is the defense strategy the right one to protect American interests?
Will the president's defense budget be enough to pay for it?
And will Mr. Clinton really fight for approval of his budget, or will he acquiesce in congressional defense budget cuts to help pay for his domestic programs and deficit reduction?
The hearings this week are the place to start looking for answers.
The $50 billion budget gap somehow shrank to about $30 billion following negotiations between the Pentagon and Office of Management and Budget.
The gap was reduced by an additional $10 billion when Mr. Clinton agreed to add that amount to the Pentagon's five-year spending plan.
Mr. Perry has said he will somehow be able to make up the remaining difference.
After all, we are only talking about finding an additional $4 billion savings in each of the next five years.
Or are we?
The debate is about more than that.
It is about America's place in the post-Cold War world.
Trouble spots and conflicts around the world -- including North Korea, Russia and the Persian Gulf -- remind us that the end of the Cold War didn't spell the end of threats to American interests.
The question is whether we have the right defense strategy to defend our interests.
It also is a debate about how we reconcile the competing demands of American foreign-policy leadership, domestic initiatives and deficit reduction -- what we are prepared to pay for and what we will have to shortchange.
The Bottom-Up Review yielded a defense strategy that provides the Clinton administration's answers.
It closely resembles the post-Cold War strategy formulated by the Bush administration -- ensuring the ability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous conflicts in the Persian Gulf and on the Korean peninsula.
The Bottom-Up Review resulted in a force structure that is a somewhat smaller version of the Bush administration's "base force."
But it promised to do nearly as much as its predecessor while spending about $100 billion less over five years.
To achieve this, Messrs. Aspin and Perry cut just about everything there was to cut (and perhaps more) while preserving the force they said was necessary to execute the strategy they proposed.
Any additional savings would have to come out of force structure -- undermining the strategy -- or out of readiness, resulting in a "hollow force."
Since the Bush defense spending plan itself may have been seriously underfunded, the Clinton plan to do nearly as much with fewer resources struck many observers as unrealistic.
And that was before the $50 billion gap.
Mr. Perry thus will be presenting a defense strategy that is designed to support active American engagement in the world; a defense program that is close to the margin of being able to execute the strategy; and a defense budget that probably can't pay for the program.
He also confronts a domestic political environment in which there is little support for maintaining current levels of defense spending.
But one obvious response -- to scale back our defense strategy because we cannot or will not pay for it -- would have profound consequences for American interests.
It would sacrifice the unique leadership role we play in the post-Cold War world and thus the opportunity to shape an international order that might avoid the kinds of conflicts that have wracked the 20th century.
It would also require us to rely more on friends and allies to help defend U.S. interests we no longer can protect ourselves -- at precisely the time when our weakened leadership increases the risks that friends and allies will be unwilling to shoulder this burden.
But even worse than a decision to scale back our defense strategy would be to pretend that the problem does not exist -- that there is no mismatch between strategy and resources.
Maintaining that illusion will result in hollow forces that are not ready to fight, whose inadequacies may tempt would-be aggressors.
Over the past year, Mr. Perry has struggled with these challenges as deputy secretary of defense.
No one is in a better position to convince Congress and the American people that the Bottom-Up Review correctly identified the strategy and forces needed to defend U.S. interests.
Likewise, no one is better qualified to explain how much defense spending such a strategy requires.
But only the president can successfully fight to win congressional approval of his own defense budget.
One can only hope that the president, with Mr. Perry, will reassure the American public -- and our allies -- that the U.S. remains committed to a strategy, a defense program and a budget that will protect our interests and allow us to play our unique role in the post-Cold War world.
Mr. Kanter, an associate at the Forum for International Policy in Washington, served as special assistant to the president for defense policy and arms control from 1989 to 1991.
