The government of Brazil plans a huge sell-off of state-owned properties this year, an official said.
But analysts, citing the nation's uncertain economic outlook and the slowness of previous privatization drives, expressed doubts whether that goal could be achieved.
Isac Roffe Zaguri, an official with Brazil's development bank, which is handling the transactions, said the government plans to sell 65 out of 137 remaining state-owned companies.
He estimated their value at nearly $4 billion.
Of that, he said, the government would use about half to pay down government debt and reap the other $2 billion in cash.
In contrast, over the past three years, the government sold $6.6 billion worth of state properties, but used almost all of the proceeds to reduce debt.
Perhaps the most important sale in 1994 will involve the auction of Rio de Janeiro's Light, a power distributor.
Mr. Zaguri said some foreign companies have expressed interest in acquiring stakes in Light.
The official added that he expected foreign investment to account for between 20% and 25% of this year's purchases of state-owned properties, up sharply from last year.
Unlike Mexico, foreign investors can purchase 100% of the voting stock of Brazilian companies.
Mr. Zaguri noted that the government is forbidden by the constitution to sell Brazil's giant telecommunications and oil companies.
But, he said, "We have a feeling that Congress will break the telecommunications monopoly."
The Brazilian legislature has the power to revise the constitution, but political analysts caution that altering it to permit the privatization of the big energy and telecommunications concerns would be a highly controversial step.
Some of the 1993 privatizations made their new owners wealthy.
For example, since last August, the dollar value of the buyers' stock in Usinas Siderurgicas de Minas Gerais, a steel company, nearly tripled, and the value of their stakes in C.S. Tubaral increased nearly sixfold.
This year's sales could be difficult.
Brazil is about to plunge its economy into a new stabilization plan to reduce inflation, which is running at 40% a month.
The outcome is highly uncertain, analysts say.
A presidential election late this year only adds to the uncertainty.
Nevertheless, Mr. Zaguri declared, "We are going to privatize industrial companies and electrical companies; and telecommunications if it is allowed by the constitution."
If Brazil should meet its goals, it will approach the dollar volume achieved by Argentina's privatization program of $12.1 billion.
But it will still lag far behind the record of $21.2 billion set by Mexico.
