By New Power Macs?
OVER THE PAST decade, Apple's Macintosh computers have generated high customer satisfaction and near-fanatical owner loyalty, yet failed to dominate the computer market.
Last year, Apple sold about 15% of all PCs in the U.S., while sales of dozens of other brands built to the competing IBM-compatible standard totaled nearly 85%.
Critics have long attributed this paradox to three flaws in the Macintosh: a high price, relatively slow computing speed and an inability to run programs designed for IBM-compatibles equipped with Microsoft's DOS and Windows software.
Now Apple has introduced a line of aggressively priced, impressively speedy Macs that tries to correct all these deficiencies.
It's called the Power Macintosh and is based on a very fast, new central processor chip -- the brain of a computer -- called the PowerPC.
It's so powerful it can run three kinds of software: older Macintosh programs written for prior Mac models, new Macintosh programs written for the PowerPC and even IBM-compatible software, if you buy a special Macintosh program that emulates an IBM-compatible PC and runs DOS and Windows.
After several weeks of testing a midrange Power Macintosh, I believe it is a beautifully designed PC that squarely addresses the Mac's longstanding weaknesses.
But I don't think everybody should rush out and buy one right away.
This week, I'll explain why.
Next week I'll tackle the issue of running IBM-compatible programs on the new Macintoshes.
The Power Macintosh gives Apple, for the first time in memory, clear price/performance leadership over IBM-compatible machines -- the most bang for the buck.
Independent lab tests show the PowerPC chip to be at least as fast as the fastest chip used in IBM-compatibles, Intel's Pentium, and much faster at some tasks.
In my unscientific tests, the Power Mac ripped through traditionally ponderous jobs like altering complex graphics.
It was positively amazing at much more mundane feats -- like changing a hundred instances of a word in a 20-page text document almost instantaneously.
THE MACHINES ARE at least twice as fast as the fastest previous Macs and retain all the built-in features and elegant design that have long made Macs easier to use, configure and expand than other PCs.
The base Power Mac model, called the 6100/60, is officially priced at just $1,819 with eight megabytes of memory and a 160 megabyte hard disk, and was selling this week at one New York discount store for $1,599.
With monitor and keyboard, it could be had for around $2,000 -- way below the typical IBM-compatible with a Pentium chip.
Even after adding a larger hard disk and a CD-ROM drive, or more memory and the program that lets the machine run IBM-compatible software, the price of this base model is still below $3,000 -- hundreds less than a Pentium system.
The brawniest of the three models, the 8100/80, with vast memory and a huge hard disk, can run to nearly $6,000 at discount.
But just buying a computer with a fast processor chip doesn't get you anything unless it actually runs the software you use much faster or permits added features in software that are of practical benefit.
And that's the catch in the Power Macintosh.
The machine's high speeds and increased power can only be achieved when running software that has been revised or created to take advantage of the PowerPC chip.
And there are only a handful of such "native" programs available now.
The Power Macs do a great job of running older Macintosh programs that weren't designed for the PowerPC -- a tough technical feat -- but these programs only run about as fast on Power Macs as they do on standard Macs.
And the Power Macs run many DOS and Windows programs acceptably, but more slowly than the fastest IBM-compatibles.
APPLE SAYS 60 native Power Macintosh versions of popular programs will be available within a month or so, but many of these are high-end graphics, desktop publishing or design programs, which benefit immensely from the machines' great speed.
So if you use a computer for this kind of work, buying a Power Mac soon makes good sense.
A few more general business programs, notably the WordPerfect word processor and the ClarisWorks integrated program, will be available quickly.
But bear in mind that if you mainly just write on your computer, the higher speeds of PowerPC and Pentium chips may not make a dramatic difference.
You can only type and read so fast.
The two leading Macintosh business programs, Microsoft's Word for writing and its Excel spreadsheet, won't be available in native Power Mac versions till late summer.
Apple says hundreds more native Power Mac programs are coming, but many won't be here until 1995, when even cheaper Power Macintosh models will be out.
Many of the thousands of other Mac programs, including very popular packages like Intuit's Quicken personal-finance package, aren't scheduled to be revised for PowerPC.
They'll run on a Power Mac, but no faster than they do now.
If you're in the market for a new midrange computer anyway, the Power Macintosh is an impressive value that's well worth considering.
But if you're tempted to replace or upgrade your machine early because you lust after the PowerPC's speed, make sure the new Macs can drastically improve the specific tasks for which you really use your computer.
That's the acid test for both PowerPC and Pentium computers, not speed ratings on a lab report.
