Norman Augustine's words have often caught the ear of the defense industry.
Even as Martin Marietta Corp. vice president, he captured attention both inside and outside his circle of aerospace executives with his 1983 book, "Augustine's Laws."
Among its aphorisms about the business, his "Law of the Core Dump" noted that if all the contract proposals conforming to Pentagon paperwork standards "were piled on top of each other at the bottom of the Grand Canyon, it would probably be a good idea."
And now that he is Martin Marietta's chairman, his ambitious actions in expanding the company during a critical post-Cold War consolidation are creating support for the notion that he has assumed the mantle of industry leader.
Among the largest industry mergers of late are two that he engineered: Martin Marietta's $3 billion purchase last year of the huge aerospace division of General Electric Co. and its agreement yesterday to buy old-line defense contractor Grumman Corp. for about $1.9 billion.
"He focuses on the issues that need to be talked about, whether they be foreign ownership of U.S. companies, the success of American defense technology, or the health of the U.S. industrial base," says Bernard Schwartz, who as chairman of fast-growing Loral Corp. has become a major industry figure himself.
"He's certainly one of the best in our industry; that's widely felt," adds Lockheed Corp.
Chairman Daniel Tellep.
"His strategy is crystal clear, and I think he's executing it well."
With the GE acquisition, Mr. Tellep says, "he strengthened his position in space and electronics."
And Grumman, while not offering "quite the same strengthening as with GE," also offers Martin Marietta "many attractive parts."
Since taking his first aerospace job with what was then Douglas Aircraft Co. in 1958, Mr. Augustine has brought an extremely varied set of interests to the industry.
Syndicated columnist Kenneth Adelman, for example, said that when he had lunch with the 58-year-old executive recently, "We spent the first hour talking about oddities of nature, starting with polar bears and when they mate."
Mr. Adelman, who co-wrote the 1990 book "The Defense Revolution" with Mr. Augustine and more recently wrote an article on defense conversion with him for Foreign Affairs magazine, notes that Mr. Augustine is a "photographic hunter who loves hiking and nature."
Among the hobbies Martin Marietta lists for its chief are dog-sledding in the Arctic and exploring volcanos in the Antarctic.
A Colorado native, Mr. Augustine has a home in Estes Park, along with one closer to Martin Marietta's Bethesda, Md., headquarters.
Mr. Adelman credits his collaborator with being keenly observant in his industry, as well.
"He saw the approaching downturn right at the high point of the Reagan defense buildup in 1986, in that the Frisbee was going to come down at some point," Mr. Adelman says.
Mr. Augustine's perspective benefits from two stints on the government side of defense, as assistant director of defense research and engineering at the Defense Department from 1965 to 1970, as assistant Army secretary and later undersecretary in the mid-1970s.
When he left the Pentagon in 1977 to join Martin Marietta, it was a company that then-Chairman Thomas G. Pownall had already transformed into a high-technology defense specialist, rather than the multi-industry company that had once had major cement, chemical and aluminum operations.
But unlike such other leading defense executives as General Dynamics Corp.
Chairman William A. Anders, a former astronaut who identified his company's future in selling off many of the core arms-making businesses as a way of converting company assets into cash for investors, Mr. Augustine found his corporate adventure in pulling together the operations of other contractors.
Many in the industry credit Mr. Augustine with being tough in streamlining the combined businesses.
His passion for reducing the tiers of management, mentioned in several of the "Augustine's Laws," led to a move last fall to close 10 U.S. plants and slash 2,000 from the work force to reflect the GE acquisition.
He warned at the time that more defense-budget cuts or a problem with his company's competitiveness could lead to more cuts this year.
And in his latest hard-line stance, Mr. Augustine said last month that his company would drop its planned $208.5 million acquisition of the space-launch business of General Dynamics unless the government agreed to share with Martin Marietta some of the savings the U.S. records because of his corporate purchase.
The Pentagon hasn't yet responded to Martin Marietta's petition.
But, said Lockheed's Mr. Tellep, "I think I'd give Norm credit for making the point so forcefully."
He added, "If the government adopts that as some sort of policy, I would hope it would be applied to all defense transactions."
