Faced with stiffening competition for U.S. real-estate assets, U.S. "vulture" investment funds are shopping in Europe.
But finding deals hasn't been easy.
The funds, accustomed to buying property and delinquent loans for as little as 40% or 50% of original book value, have found most European owners unwilling to sell at fire-sale prices.
So they are searching for other ways to capitalize on the turnaround of European markets.
Among the firms currently seeking European property are George Soros's British Land Quantum Property Partnership; Leon Black's Apollo Real Estate Investments; Colony Capital Inc.; Goldman, Sachs & Co.; and Morgan Stanley & Co.
The funds began looking in Europe because prices on U.S. real-estate portfolios have risen enough that profit margins on American deals "are getting eaten away," explained Richard Mully, head of European real estate for Bankers Trust New York Corp.
The funds see more opportunity in the London, Paris and Madrid markets, he said.
European office buildings have fallen in value by about one-third since peaking in early 1991, according to an index compiled by Jones Lang Wootton, a London-based real-estate company.
But the market appears to be bottoming out, the firm said.
The last round of North American investment in the European property markets has given U.S. investors plenty of reason to be cautious.
Chicago-based JMB Realty Corp. had a loss of more than $400 million on its 1989 purchase of Randsworth Acquisition Ltd., a British land company that was forced into receivership in 1992.
And Canary Wharf, Olympia & York Developments Ltd.'s celebrated foray into the London office market, drove the developer into bankruptcy court.
"Some of the smartest North American investors have gone to Europe and come back with their tails between their legs," noted Wendy Luscombe, who follows the British market for Aldrich, Eastman & Waltch, a Boston-based real-estate company.
"I think that's probably unnerved a lot of potential investors."
Today's bottom-fishers, having developed a system for valuing properties based on current cash flows, are confident that they won't overpay the way past investors did in Europe.
They are finding, however, that it isn't possible to do deals like they've done in the U.S., where they've been snapping up portfolios at steep discounts, then turning a quick profit by selling them or restructuring them one by one.
"These markets in Europe have been defined by strong relationships for years," explained Thomas Barrack Jr., president and chief executive officer of Colony.
"It's naive of us to think we can go in and be shrewder on an expedited basis.
You have to be willing to be in there for some time.
I don't think there are going to be any quick profits to be made in Europe."
In November, Credit Suisse of Zurich solicited bids on a portfolio of loans in London, and Bankers Trust and Goldman Sachs are among the potential buyers negotiating with the bank, according to one person involved in the talks.
But few buyers expect many of these American-style portfolio sales, because European governments haven't been pressuring banks and insurance companies, as U.S. regulators did, to shed real-estate assets.
When Los Angeles-based Colony began calling British banks in search of assets, recalled Mr. Barrack, it found that the government "didn't create the kind of punitive regulatory requirements that forced banks to dump assets at reduced prices.
The chairmen of the banks don't even want to talk to us."
Although the severe slump in the Paris property market has caught the attention of investors, little has actually been offered for sale at steep discounts.
"The French government has been supporting banks to allow them to hang on to real estate until the cycle turns," said Jack Anderson, who heads Ernst & Young's Paris office.
Lenders "certainly want to clear their balance sheets when they can get something.
But I don't think there will be any bankruptcy sales, like there were in the U.S."
Mr. Anderson said the largest discounts that he has seen are 20% to 30% off original book value, substantially smaller than the markdowns that investors have enjoyed in the U.S. Another problem with the French market, said Mr. Barrack, is that the tax structure makes it difficult for investors to resell assets for a quick profit.
Because much of Europe's commercial property is owned by public companies, some investors have decided to play the market by buying into those companies.
In February, the real-estate investment fund set up by financier George Soros and British Land Co. acquired a 29.9% stake in Stanhope Properties, a troubled British developer, giving the fund a major stake in Broadgate, one of London's most successful new-office developments.
Several U.S. investors, including Mr. Soros and Colony, also teamed up with European partners to bid on Ciga SpA, an Italian luxury-hotel chain with 35 hotels and more than 5,500 rooms throughout Europe.
ITT Corp.'s Sheraton hotel chain was top bidder at about $530 million.
Despite the obstacles, though, European real-estate experts expect the pace of U.S. investment to pick up.
"Everyone in the market believes its going to happen in the next six months," says Mr. Mully.
