Whittle Communications L.P., the pioneer of advertiser-sponsored books, said it expects to close its Whittle Books unit due to lack of advertiser-support for its next lineup.
The unit is expected to shut down after its last three books are published in May.
William S. Rukeyser, chairman and chief executive of Whittle Books, said in an interview that the unit would fold because it lacked signed advertising contracts for the company's year beginning in July.
"There is no assurance that new contracts will come in, so we have to do this," Mr. Rukeyser said.
A veteran editor at Time Inc. before joining Whittle in 1988, Mr. Rukeyser said he would probably leave the company in the coming months.
For Executives, Physicians Currently, Whittle publishes Chief Executive Press, a series of books for top executives that carries ads for Cessna Aircraft Co.
Another series, Grand Rounds Press, consists of books for physicians, sponsored by various pharmaceutical companies.
Each book typically contained 18 pages of ads.
The books created controversy when introduced in 1989 by Whittle, a Knoxville, Tenn., media company.
Alarmed that the practice of ad-stuffed books would become widespread, publishing purists scorned Whittle's books, which were sent free to a targeted readership.
This is the second recent shuttering of a Whittle property.
This month, the company closed its Special Report Network, an unprofitable unit that put television programming in physicians' waiting rooms.
While Whittle's books were derided by some in the publishing world, their subjects were weighty and their authors considered first-rate.
Some of the titles of the 34 books published included "A Short History of Financial Euphoria" by John Kenneth Galbraith and "Nuclear Renewal" by Richard Rhodes.
Some even turned into bestsellers.
Penguin USA, a unit of British publisher Pearson PLC, is in the midst of a deal to publish for bookstores -- though without ads -- work issued by Whittle.
Al Silverman, publisher and editor in chief of Viking Press, the hardcover publisher of Penguin, recently published "The Logic of Health Care Reform" by Pulitzer prize winner Paul Starr, which first appeared as a Whittle book in late 1992.
"A lot of people felt Whittle Books were a sort of distortion of book publishing in general," said Mr. Silverman.
He added, however, that the books always used top authors and were well-edited by Mr. Rukeyser's staff.
