In a speech in Houston this week, President Clinton said he wants to spend more money on local police, more on prisons, more to develop commercial applications for military technology, more to train laid-off workers, more for apprenticeships, more for the homeless, more for Head Start.
Mr. Clinton clearly hasn't lost his appetite for spending more.
But the hard numbers in the new federal budget show how much trouble he is having.
The spending restraints built into the 1990 and 1993 deficit-reduction laws, despite their flaws, are shackling him.
And the combined bipartisan political power of congressional deficit fighters, antispending conservatives and proponents of balancing the budget prevent him from cheating too much or trying to change the law.
"Most people think the budget is a mystery," Mr. Clinton said in Houston this week.
The president proposes to spend $1.5 trillion in the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30, 1995.
About half will go for various government benefits, from Social Security and Medicare to bureaucrats' pensions, more on that later.
Another 15% will go for interest.
The remaining 35%, the part of the budget that gets the most attention, will go for annually appropriated spending on everything from paper clips for the Pentagon to astronauts' salaries.
This discretionary spending, as it's known, has stopped climbing -- because President Bush and Congress set caps on it back in 1990 and Mr. Clinton agreed to continue them last year.
The caps, for the most part, have held better than many in Washington expected.
The end of the Cold War, of course, allowed both Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton to divert money from the defense budget to domestic programs.
But Mr. Clinton, his critics notwithstanding, hasn't managed to capture nearly as much of this peace dividend as Richard Nixon and Jimmy Carter did.
For every dollar that defense was cut as the Vietnam War wound down in the 1970s, domestic discretionary spending rose by 68 cents, after adjusting for inflation.
For every dollar that defense is being cut in the 1990s, domestic spending is projected to climb by 23 cents -- and nearly all of that increase occurred on Mr. Bush's watch.
Over the next five years, Mr. Clinton proposes to increase what's known as budget authority (the money that goes into agency checkbooks) for domestic programs by $33 billion or 15%.
But outlays (the checks that agencies write from budget authority granted in the past) would rise by $22.5 billion or 8.7%.
There's nothing sinister about the discrepancy: Nearly all of it reflects the way the government accounts for housing subsidies.
A slew of contracts with landlords and housing authorities expires in fiscal 1996.
When the government renews them for five or 15 years, depending on the type, it boosts budget authority in that one year.
The outlays are spread out over years.
Mr. Clinton is proposing to increase the number of subsidized units by about 2% over five years, but most of the increase reflects the accounting rule.
Adjusted for inflation, Mr. Clinton's budget looks even tougher.
Over the next five years -- provided the caps hold -- outlays for defense are to fall a steep 21% and outlays for domestic programs by 6%.
Some budget analysts are even beginning to wonder if this is asking too much, both on the defense and domestic side.
"Look at all of the political and territorial disputes," says University of Maryland budget scholar Allen Schick.
"It's hard to believe that something really bad won't happen" -- and with it a decision to spend more on defense.
And then there's Mr. Clinton's ambitious plan to increase what he likes to call "investments."
"He wants to shift resources toward the investments -- education, physical capital, R&D -- and that's all in the discretionary category," says economist Barry Bosworth of the Brookings Institution.
"Yet that is where he agreed to the cap on spending.
I kind of wonder if he will live with that for his full term."
Mr. Clinton, of course, tried to evade the spending caps last year with his economic-stimulus package, but Congress refused.
There is some seepage this year.
Despite the efforts of some Republicans, Congress is treating the California earthquake as an emergency, which means it doesn't have to cut somewhere else to make room for earthquake aid under the caps.
The Senate yesterday approved $10.1 billion in spending for quake aid, peacekeeping costs and other "emergency" spending and voted to offset only $3.4 billion of that by rescinding past appropriations.
For next year, Mr. Clinton projects that outlays for domestic and defense discretionary spending will come in just under the cap and actually fall by $7.7 billion (without making an adjustment for inflation).
That hasn't happened since 1969.
Domestic outlays are to rise by $2.8 billion, defense and foreign aid to fall by $10.5 billion.
"Domestic discretionary spending is going up.
Defense they are cutting in a manner inconsistent with a world-wide force," complains Rep. Christopher Cox (R., Calif.).
Other Republicans charge that Mr. Clinton cheated around the edges, partly by proposing $1.4 billion in higher fees for national parks, bankruptcy filings, meat inspections and the like.
What if the spending exceeds the cap?
Well, it probably will in 1995.
Because it's the result of a formally declared emergency -- the earthquake -- there's no problem under the budget rules.
If it happens for any other reason, then the law triggers automatic spending cuts to make sure the caps work.
But the big problem isn't discretionary spending.
"Focusing on this sector of the federal budget, while important, will distract from the larger 50% of the budget that goes for entitlement programs," the Republican staff of the Senate Budget Committee says in its analysis of the Clinton budget.
"And it is in this sector that the administration lacks courage."
Over the next five years, even assuming that Mr. Clinton's health plan passes and works as he predicts, spending on federal budget programs will climb by $325 billion, or 29% -- to $1.1 trillion in fiscal 1999, a 29% increase.
Outlays for Medicare alone are projected to rise by $74 billion, or 53%.
"What happened in the '70s," says Stanford University economist John Cogan, a Reagan administration budget official, "was that we restrained discretionary appropriations pretty well but we ballooned entitlements -- food stamps, Supplemental Security Income, Medicaid, Medicare."
"In the 1990s," he says, "we see restraint on the discretionary side of the budget because of the caps, but we also see what appear to be proposals for new entitlements -- and that's in health care," where Mr. Clinton is proposing to guarantee a generous health-insurance package to every American family even if the government has to pay for it.
