Despite a lackluster regional economy, Bank of Boston Corp. is making an aggressive push into an area many banks are still reluctant to tread: new business lending.
The bank, which only recently recovered from the severe slump in New England real estate, increased its overall loan portfolio 13% in 1993, to $28.78 billion.
That far outpaces the domestic loan growth of other U.S. banks, which averaged a 1.8% rise in the year ended June 30.
Moreover, while other banks focus on expanding their consumer lending, Bank of Boston's new customers are primarily small-business owners, not a traditional area of strength for the bank.
New England's second-largest bank says it is betting on a continued pickup in the economy.
If the strategy works, the bank will have created a new and profitable business for itself, as some smaller borrowers grow into larger customers.
But with New England's economy still lagging behind the rest of the country, analysts say the strategy carries substantial risk.
As one sign of the sluggishness, employment in the region has plunged 10% to 5.9 million jobs from its peak in February 1989, while U.S. employment is up 0.87% from a peak in June 1990.
If the already-weak regional recovery stalls, Bank of Boston could lose whatever chance it has to regain its standing as New England's largest bank.
Fleet Financial Group Inc., of Providence, R.I., earned that distinction with its Bank of New England takeover in 1991.
"For the first time in umpteen years, there will be some sustained economic pickup from 1994 to 1996," says Charles K. Gifford, Bank of Boston's president.
"I believe the market has turned around."
As one sign of renewed confidence, Mr. Gifford says that many businesses have stopped paying off their debt and are no longer afraid to take on added borrowing.
Analysts say Bank of Boston is increasing market share by offering attractive interest rates and flexible lending terms that competitors aren't matching.
"Most of the banks in the Northeast are having difficulty generating the loan growth that Bank of Boston is generating," says Gerard S. Cassidy, an analyst at Hancock Institutional Equity Services.
"They Bank of Boston must be offering something that is inducing people to leave their existing relationships."
But "as an outsider looking in, one would have to say that buying market share in this environment could backfire," says Mr. Cassidy.
"Depending on how they structured the loans, it could come back to bite them."
Federal Reserve Governor John LaWare warned New England banks against the dangers of too-rapid expansion in a speech to corporate executives in Boston recently.
"Pressure on earnings will be material if banks fix rates too low on long-term assets," Mr. LaWare said.
Bank of Boston denies cutting interest rates or making risky loans.
"There is tremendous competition for middle-market corporate loans," says Mr. Gifford.
"We have to be careful our management doesn't let competition outweigh judgment on loans.
The obvious danger is you'll make bad loans and you'll do it too cheaply.
I'm convinced we're doing neither . . .
This institution and its shareholders felt such pain in 1989 from credit-quality concerns that we're not about to go in the soup again."
Like many New England banks, Bank of Boston was hit hard by bad real-estate loans beginning in 1989, resulting in regulatory constraints and a loss of appetite for lending.
After two years spent on the mend, the company was the first major New England bank to declare itself out of the woods.
Its strategy since has been to pursue acquisitions and new borrowers.
Last year, it acquired Multibank Financial Corp., of Dedham, Mass., and Society for Savings Bancorp, of Hartford, Conn.
Other regional banks are also making acquisitions, but their tack on generating internal growth hasn't depended as much on loans.
Shawmut National Corp., of Hartford, Conn., had $15.38 billion in loans as of Dec. 31, up 3% from the year-ago period.
Much of Bank of Boston's gain in loans has come in commercial lending.
If interest rates rise as the economy quickens, commercial lending at lower rates could be riskier, especially if deposit costs rise.
As of Dec. 31, 1993, Bank of Boston had $11.99 billion in commercial and industrial loans, compared with $10.33 billion a year ago.
The commercial-loan portfolio was bolstered by the bank's commitment, announced 18 months ago, to lend $6 billion.
To date, the bank has committed about $5 billion to 1,200 New England commercial and industrial customers.
Of the $5 billion, loans outstanding are about $3 billion.
"In the past, we've been criticized for having loan growth driven by huge loans," says Mr. Gifford.
Bank of Boston is counting on small-business customers to generate income from other bank products such as checking and savings accounts.
"The profit has to do with the fact that small-business customers are typically loyal.
They generally do more with their bank than borrowing," says John Kahwaty, a spokesman for Bank of Boston.
Denise Rhone and Carrie Jones approached Bank of Boston last March after five other banks rejected their request for a $50,000 loan for their business, Sparkle Cleaning Associates, of Natick, Mass.
"Being a commercial cleaning firm, we had no real collateral that banks were interested in," says Ms. Rhone.
Bank of Boston's loan enabled the company to buy carpet-shampoo machines, trucks and a computer.
Sparkle Cleaning now has larger corporate contracts and has seen revenue jump to about $1 million in 1993.
Its staff has grown to 65 from 25.
Outside of New England, Bank of Boston's commercial portfolio has continued its growth in specialized industry lending, to media, transportation and environmental services companies.
The bank also has seen growth in its international lending in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay, which together made up 20% of its loan business in 1993.
The acquisitions of Multibank Financial and Society for Savings Bancorp contributed an additional $3.3 billion to 1993's total loans outstanding, the bank said.
Mr. Gifford said internal loan growth, combined with the recent acquisitions, caused the 1993 domestic loan portfolio to grow more than 25% from 1992.
International loans were also up about 25%, he said.
