Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. appears to be developing a backup plan just in case its merger with Viacom Inc. falls through.
Blockbuster will ask shareholders to approve a proposal that could allow the company to almost triple the amount of stock it can issue.
The move, according to some industry observers, calls into question the future of the music and video retailer's planned merger with Viacom.
A company being acquired for stock, observers said, wouldn't have any need for additional shares, unless it believed the merger might be significantly delayed or not completed.
An individual close to Viacom said the provisions in the Blockbuster proxy material dealing with authorization of new shares of stock are "routine" and that Viacom was aware of the plan.
Any speculation that the stock plan threatens the Viacom merger agreement with Blockbuster, this person said, is "a misreading of the proxy material".
A spokeswoman for Viacom said the company plans to proceed with the Blockbuster merger, as planned.
Blockbuster, based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., is seeking to raise the number of its authorized shares to 800 million from 300 million currently, according to a preliminary proxy statement filed this week with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The company said it could use any additional stock to make acquisitions, among other purposes.
The additional shares also could be used to fend off takeovers, other than by Viacom, the company said in the proxy statement.
Shareholders will vote on the proposal at Blockbuster's annual meeting in Fort Lauderdale May 24.
"I don't know why you would put that in the proxy statement if you expected the Viacom deal to go through," said Craig Bibb, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst who follows Blockbuster.
"That seems to indicate they have a backup plan for life without Viacom."
Thomas W. Hawkins, senior vice president and general counsel for Blockbuster, said: "We're approaching the company's business from two avenues."
One, he said, "is assuming that the merger with Viacom is approved."
The second, he added, involves "taking care of the company's business in the event the merger doesn't go through."
Some Blockbuster shareholders characterized the proposal for additional shares as a "housekeeping" move, which would allow the company to conduct business as usual.
"They'd be derelict if they didn't, especially when Blockbuster uses their stock as currency to do deals," said Larry Haverty, a money manager with State Street Research in Boston, which is a large Blockbuster shareholder.
The stock proposal follows recent comments by Blockbuster's chairman and chief executive officer, H. Wayne Huizenga, that he and other shareholders aren't happy with the current terms of the transaction, which values Blockbuster stock at $22.75 a share.
Blockbuster was trading in the $31-a-share range before the merger proposal was announced in January.
Yesterday, it closed at $25.875, down 25 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Mr. Huizenga said at an investment conference in New York last week that the combination in its current form would be unlikely to win board approval, according to people who attended the meeting.
Without that nod from directors, at least two-thirds of Blockbuster's shareholders must vote for the proposal, Mr. Huizenga said at that conference.
He added that shareholders overwhelmingly want Blockbuster to renegotiate or abandon the deal with Viacom.
One person familiar with Viacom's plans said he "can't imagine" why the company's chairman, Sumner Redstone, would renegotiate the deal "based on short-term price fluctuations."
The person said he believes both Blockbuster's and Viacom's stock will rebound once proxy materials relating to the plan are mailed and the SEC allows the companies to sell investors on the merits of the deal.
