Take the glitz and decorum away from boxing and wrestling, and you have the hottest new sport to arrive on cable and pay-per-view television: fights between ordinary guys.
Billed as "the ultimate barroom brawl," a series of regional matches known as Toughman contests will air Thursday on cable's Prime network to about 40 million people nationwide.
The bouts pit men with no professional boxing experience -- and little skill -- against one another in the ring.
Sixteen regional winners will duke it out at the Toughman World Championship at Las Vegas's MGM Grand Hotel in May, and the pay-per-view telecast is expected to draw the event's biggest audience yet for Showtime Event Television Pay Per View, a unit of Viacom Inc.
"The last thing I'm going to tell anyone is that this is good boxing," says Art Dore, a former boxing promoter who started the fights in Bay City, Mich., in 1979.
"But it's real.
This is what people want to see."
The Toughman contest attracts all sorts of contenders, from doctors to barroom bullies.
Leo "The Lion" Richardson, a Syracuse bartender, lists "lifting weights and riding Harley Davidsons" as his hobbies.
Kevin "Country Boy" Heldenbrandt, a Missouri Department of Corrections engineer who is deaf, is able to fight but can't hear the bell, so the referee throws a towel in his face at the end of each round.
Last year, an ex-con from Monroe, La., Randy "Penitentiary" Brooks, fought Tony "Super Trooper" Wall, a California state trooper.
The ex-con, who had served time for manslaughter, won.
After the amateur slugfest in Las Vegas became a surprise hit on pay-per-view last year at $12.95 a pop, SET Pay Per View decided to air this year's regional fights, in part to create demand for the pay-per-view event in May.
For a fraction of the cost of big-name prize-fights, SET Pay Per View hopes to reap big profits from Toughman.
The pay-per-view industry badly needs programming to boost revenue in the "events" category, which for 1993 is estimated to be $25 million below its 1991 high of $240 million, according to Paul Kagan Associates Inc. (Because boxing revenue drives the events category, growth ended after Mike Tyson was convicted of rape and sentenced to prison in 1992.)
So, with the promise of near-limitless channel capacity looming, pay-per-view event distributors are testing almost everything: wrestling, rock concerts, opera, college SAT study courses -- even amateur fisticuffs.
During the regional matches on cable, SET Pay Per View hopes to build appeal by promoting local heroes such as Eric "Butterbean" Esch, 26, who emerged as a crowd pleaser in Las Vegas last year.
Mr. Esch, a bald, 300-pound Alabama construction worker who is partial to denim trunks, entered his first Toughman contest on a friend's dare.
"I like to fight," Mr. Esch says.
"I don't do drugs, but this is my kind of high -- I get excited, the crowd is screaming, and last year there were Butterbean signs everywhere."
He vows to "go for knockouts" this year.
The contests have been selling out local arenas in places ranging from Dayton, Ohio, and Asheville, N.C., to Detroit.
Contestants, after meeting minimum age and weight standards -- 18 years and 175 pounds -- and passing a physical, need only show up to compete.
Fans relish the nononsense, take-all-comers format: The loser leaves the ring, while the winner fights as many as four challengers in a single night.
Rules are few.
Slugging is the favored technique, because there are only three rounds of 60 seconds each, compared with pro boxing's 10 three-minute rounds.
Holding, tripping and other dirty tricks are frowned upon but sometimes overlooked by the judges who score the bouts.
Still, the matches aren't as brutal as might be expected.
Toughman contestants wear groin protectors, head gear and bulky 16-ounce gloves.
(Heavyweight boxers use 10-ounce gloves.)
No one has been seriously injured in a Toughman bout, though the contest's numerous imitators may not be able to make that claim.
Last year, the referee was forced to stop a fight during the championship in Las Vegas.
Manuel "Grandaddy" Rodriguez, a 42-year-old Michigan auto worker, wasn't hurt, but the referee halted action long enough to pull up the fighter's drooping trunks.
Mr. Dore serves as master of ceremonies, ring announcer and color commentator during the matches.
Eschewing the passive role of pro-boxing announcers, Mr. Dore regularly screams at the fighters.
A recent tirade: "Never take a step back!
Toughmen go straight forward!
Only 10 seconds left!
Get him get him get him get him. . . .
Fight on!"
The talent is cheap, too.
Instead of the $20 million purse that might be reserved for a professional fighter on pay-per-view, the Toughman champ receives $50,000, and losers go home empty-handed.
Further, SET Pay Per View will pay a relative pittance to market Toughman: $600,000, compared with the $3 million typically spent on heavyweight championships.
Prime, a chain of regional sports networks, will air 30-second SET spots during regional contests for May's pay-per-view event.
SET has signed veteran Madison Square Garden boxing announcer Bruce Beck to call the championship fight.
TV personality and 1981-82 Toughman champ "Mr. T" will be a celebrity announcer and corner manager.
There are no favorites yet, and it's uncertain whether last year's champ, Scott "The Hammer" Biskner, 24 years old, a machinist from Bay City, will compete.
A newlywed, he says his priorities are shifting.
But don't count him out: "I'm still thinking about it," he says.
SET predicts it will pull in some 200,000 pay-per-view orders for the Las Vegas event.
Its projected gross will be about $3 million-small compared with the $20 million to $50 million a first-rank heavyweight contest can draw, but attractive enough for SET to buy 10 years' rights to Toughman.
Mr. Dore, for one, is certain viewers will jump at the chance to pay $14.95 to see no-name amateurs fight.
"Some people like to watch golf," he says.
"Some people like to fish.
And some like to watch fights.
They're gonna go bonkers."
