In the wake of the federal government's push to make cities and towns tell investors more about themselves, several municipalities are scrambling to get their bonds listed for public trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Two muni-bond issuers yesterday said they decided to list their bonds on the Big Board.
California moved in this direction less than two weeks ago.
Such actions could be good for investors, who often find wide discrepancies in prices quoted for muni bonds.
Connecticut sold $25 million of tax-exempt bonds yesterday that will be listed on the Big Board.
Tomorrow, the New York State Urban Development Corp. will sell $33 million of bonds that will also be listed on the exchange.
Neither issuer has listed its bonds before.
On March 3, California announced that it would become the first issuer in over a decade to have its tax-exempt bonds listed on the Big Board.
State Treasurer Kathleen Brown said at the time that "with this listing, California is taking the lead in demonstrating how the nation's state and local issuers can provide greater public price disclosure in the secondary market."
The moves by Connecticut and the New York State Urban Development Corp. follow on the heels of the Securities and Exchange Commission asking for comments about the need for better secondary market disclosure in the municipal bond market.
The listings mean it will be easier for investors, especially individuals, to track the value of their bond holdings.
It will also probably narrow the gap between the bid and ask prices of these listed municipal bonds, thus cutting into the profits of municipal bond market makers.
Meanwhile, the price of the benchmark U.S. Treasury bond jumped more than 7/8 point, or more then $8.75 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 92 2/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, dropped to 6.87% from 6.95% on Monday.
Investors were cheered by news of lower inflation, according to the producer price index, which was released by the government yesterday morning.
Other issuers may soon follow the examples set by California and Connecticut.
One of them is New York City, one of the nation's largest issuers of municipal debt.
"We've thought about it and we're continuing to think about it," said Michael W. Geffrard, first deputy comptroller.
According to public finance officials at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., a subsidiary of Dean Witter, Discover & Co., several other issuers are also considering listing their bonds.
Dean Witter was the sole underwriter of the $25 million Connecticut offering of general obligation bonds, which was one part of a larger offering.
The company will be a co-manager in tomorrow's scheduled offering from the Urban Development Corp.
The New York Stock Exchange has an automated on-line trading system that allows brokers and dealer to access the market for bonds listed on the exchange.
If a bond is actively traded, the last trade of the day will be disseminated by the stock exchange through a variety of news services, including this newspaper.
The Big Board already has more than 1,500 corporate bond issues listed with a face value of about $290 billion.
One of "the advantages is that you have a price quote in the paper every day . . . which individual investors would be able to see," said Mr. Geffrard, the New York City official.
"In a market like this, the spreads are awful," said Ken Woods, president of Asset Preservation Advisors Inc. of Atlanta, a money manager with over $400 million in assets under management.
When an individual investor buys less than $100,000 of municipal bonds at once, the spread between the bid and ask price is at least two points in many highly rated and easily traded municipal bonds, said Mr. Woods.
That means that for every $1,000 of bonds that an investor buys, he or she shells out $20 that goes into the pocket of whomever sold it.
Often the spreads are much wider and many investors don't even realize it because they do not have easy access to current prices, as many brokers do.
Unlike many stocks, most municipal bonds are not listed on a central exchange where investors can check for the prices of the latest transaction in a particular municipal bond.
"Some of these broker-dealers are not real fair with individuals when they buy and sell bonds," said Mr. Woods, "because they know they're not in competition.
They buy the bonds where they want to buy them."
For the record, officials in Connecticut and at the Urban Development Corp. were not willing to draw a direct connection between their decisions to list the bonds and the recent scrutiny of the municipal bond market.
But officials at the Big Board hinted that there was a connection.
John Foynes, the exchange's vice president of fixed income markets, agreed that it would "probably be correct to assume that pressures to increase disclosure has a place to play in this."
For his part, Benson R. Cohn, Connecticut's treasurer for debt management, says the listing may have actually saved the state some money.
He says the decision to list may have helped the state get a yield 0.05 percentage point lower than it would have without listing the bonds.
The state sold $25 million of general obligation term bonds that mature in 2012 at a yield of 5.65% at par, in addition to a separate offering of $205 million of general obligation bonds that weren't listed.
If the bonds that are listed trade two or three days a week, Mr. Cohn says the state would probably list more of its offerings.
Because listing a bond makes it more liquid, or easier to buy and sell, he reasons that future listings could save the state even more money in financing costs.
There is a limit to how many municipal bonds can be listed, Big Board officials noted.
Most municipalities sell so-called serial bonds, which come in small amounts and varying maturities.
For it to make sense to list a bond, cities and states would have to sell more so-called term bonds, which have one set maturity and are usually sold in very large amounts, or enlarge the size of one of the maturities of their serial bond offerings.
New government figures provided some reasurrance to the bond market that inflation hasn't spiraled out of control, and in response, prices of U.S. Treasury securities posted big gains.
Helping the market head higher was the Federal Reserve's announcement that it was buying Treasury securities as part of a technical operation.
But even with those factors aiding the market, traders said it was still a struggle.
"The market is very cognizant of the fact that the Fed remains in a tightening mode," said Michelle Laughlin, Sanwa Securities economist.
"That makes it difficult for the market to build up a head of steam when it does turn positive."
The 30-year bond rose more than 7/8 point while the 10-year note rose nearly 5/8 point to 95 26/32 to yield 6.44%, down from 6.52%.
The rally was sparked by a government report on February producer prices.
Although the overall 0.5% gain in the PPI was on the high side, traders found some good news in a smaller-than-forecast 0.1% gain in the PPI excluding food and energy.
The data eased worries about the present inflation picture, but didn't soothe concerns about the future.
"Inflation is still not a problem, but there continues to be signs that it may be a problem later," said Steve Wood, director of financial markets research at BA Securities Inc.
But the rally on the PPI data wasn't easy.
At one stage, the market erased most of its gains on data suggesting the manufacturing sector was healthier than expected in February.
The Fed reported industrial production increased 0.4% last month, above most forecasts.
"You've got a lot of strength in the manufacturing sector," said Sanwa's Ms. Laughlin.
"And the strength in the number will keep the Fed on track to tighten again."
After the initial move higher stalled out on the production data, the market found its second wind when the Fed announced at midday it was buying coupon securities.
Known as a "pass," the Fed arranges such transactions in order to meet seasonal shortfalls of reserves in the banking system.
Analysts note that while the operation had no monetary policy sigificance, it essentially amounted to a big buyer entering the market.
But the coupon pass actually proved to be a bit of a let-down to some.
Traders who had marked prices higher in anticipation of selling securities to the Fed were disappointed by the amount of securities that the Fed bought, along with the types of maturities and the prices at which the Fed did the transactions.
Traders estimated that Tuesday's pass totaled in the neighborhood of $3 billion.
When the Fed last arranged a coupon pass back in November, the Fed took about $4.7 billion worth of Treasury securities off of dealers hands.
Disappointment over what was viewed as an unaggressive pass caused prices to fall once more from their highs.
Then at midafternoon, the market erased even more of its gains in response to data suggesting consumers came out in droves once the harsh winter weather stopped.
The Johnson Redbook Service, an affiliate of Lynch, Jones & Ryan Inc., reported chain and department store sales rose 5.8% in the first two weeks of March.
By late in the day, the market was able to recover to the upper end of its trading range, but traders described the push higher as a struggle.
The market's attention now turns to today's consumer price index report.
Economists are calling for a 0.3% rise in the overall CPI, with a 0.2% gain excluding food and energy.
Israel took center stage in an otherwise quiet corporate bond market, selling nearly $2 billion principal amount of debt guaranteed by the U.S. through the Agency for International Development.
The offering was aggressively priced, and the yield spread widened slightly in secondary trading, one syndicate official said.
One investor noted that the Israeli debt offers more yield than a comparable U.S. Treasury security, along with high credit quality.
The Israeli offering, rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc., includes $121.5 million of five-year notes priced to yield 6.02% and $117 million of 10-year notes yielding 6.7%.
Also, $226 million of 20-year notes priced to yield 6.955% and $333.1 million of 24-year notes yielding 7.18%.
Israel also offered $1.16 billion principal amount of zero-coupon debt maturing between 2012 and 2024 at yields of 11.44% to 25.23%.
An additional $960 million of debt was priced during the session, including two offerings from Merrill Lynch & Co. totaling $300 million, Sun Co.'s $100 million of 10-year debt, and GTE California Inc.'s $250 million of debt.
GTE California is a subsidiary of GTE Corp.
Trading in the investment-grade market was light with prices following Treasury issues higher.
In the junk-bond market, trading was light with prices generally unchanged.
Mortgage securities managed to close higher, but optimism appears to remain low.
The market continues to underperform government securities, and traders say that if anything there was less selling yesterday instead of more buying as in recent days.
Primary market activity centered on an increase in Federal National Mortgage Association's Remic series 1994-40 to $981 million from $900 million.
The strips sector was busier.
Seven co-managers offered a $1.1 billion Fannie Mae Strips Trust 260, while two co-managers announced a $2.33 billion Strips Trust 259.
There was speculation the strips from these deals will eventually show up as collateral for future real estate mortgage investment conduits.
Anita Raghavan and Thomas D. Lauricella contributed to this article.
ISRAEL SOLD $1.16 billion of zero-coupon notes in 24 parts, as part of a larger bond offering, with yields between 7.38% and 7.62%.
Wednesday's Credit Markets and New Securities Issues columns incorrectly said the notes yielded between 11.44% and 25.23%.
