The prevailing antagonism toward the dollar, which has fallen 5% against the mark since Feb. 4, defies reason and fundamentals, market players said late last week as they kept selling.
Maybe not.
True, the dollar has lost ground as the federal funds target rate rose and the rate on the Bundesbank's securities repurchase agreements -- the Bundesbank's main instrument for influencing the money market -- fell.
The federal funds rate is the rate at which commercial banks charge each other for overnight loans.
But the dollar may not get as much mileage from interest-rate convergence as some market players had thought.
If that's so, the dollar's unpopularity doesn't look so unreasonable because dealers will continue to sell on impatience that the dollar isn't rising further, faster.
Late Friday in New York, the dollar traded at 1.6643 marks, little changed from Thursday and down from 1.6960 marks at the end of the previous week.
Against the yen, the dollar traded Friday at 104.80, compared with 104.55 Thursday and 106.10 a week earlier.
About noon Monday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 104.75 yen and at 1.6663 marks.
Convergence in U.S. and German interest rates boosts the dollar by making dollar-denominated assets more attractive compared with mark-denominated assets.
Currency-market participants have been betting on that trend for more than a year, and most analysts still expect the dollar to rise over the next few weeks.
By contrast, anxiety about the assassination of a Mexican presidential candidate, concern over the impact of the Whitewater affair on the effectiveness of the Clinton presidency, bond-market turmoil, and dollar liquidation by hedge funds -- all blamed for the dollar sell-off -- are transitory, they say.
But long-term economic fundamentals should center the dollar at 1.71 marks to 1.72 marks over the 1993-1995 period, according to David Rolley, senior financial economist at DRI/McGraw Hill Inc.
The DRI model factors in relative rates of economic growth and inflation in the two countries, current account as a share of gross domestic product, and differentials in short-term and long-term interest rates.
"If you throw it into the econometric pot and stir, you get 1.71 or 1.72" marks, Mr. Rolley says.
That doesn't mean the dollar will be capped there.
"Could we see 1.75?" he asks.
Could we visit 1.80?
We could.
But they're not the center of the market."
Currency players may have overstated the likely impact of rate convergence by recalling the 1980s, says Lisa Finstrom, senior currency analyst at Smith Barney Shearson.
But the gradual tightening in progress today is a far cry from sharp tightening imposed a decade ago to fight high inflation during a time of an expansive fiscal policy, she says.
"The upward pressure on rates won't be as dollar-supportive as in prior times," she says.
Meanwhile, German rates are falling more slowly than market players had expected.
"In forecasting a dramatic move in favor of the dollar the market was really anticipating a more rapid decline in rates," she says.
"Expectations were ahead of the game."
Falling German rates will help the dollar, Ms. Finstrom says, but she predicts that it has seen its highs for the year at 1.7680 marks.
For this week, the dollar remains vulnerable, analysts say.
"Technically, the dollar remains weak in a major sense," says Earl Johnson, foreign exchange adviser at Harris Trust & Savings Bank in Chicago.
Mr. Johnson expects the dollar to rise to 1.75 to 1.80 marks eventually.
But he doesn't expect dealers to start buying until the Bundesbank reduces interest rates.
That would signal that the central bank is picking up the pace of monetary easing, analysts say.
But it won't happen until April 14 at the earliest, when the policymaking Central Bank Council next meets.
A strong U.S. jobs data could help later in the week, he says.
