The assassination of presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio has pushed Mexico into its worst political crisis in years.
If not handled skillfully by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, it holds the potential to undermine the remarkable economic progress Mr. Salinas has made in his five-plus years in office.
The threat arises because Mexico doesn't have enough savings to finance the president's ambitious economic plans, and needs to attract huge amounts of foreign investment.
But foreigners only put money in countries where they are confident about the future, so if President Salinas can't restore confidence quickly -- well, investors have lots of other emerging markets where they can send their funds.
So far, the betting is that Mr. Salinas will manage this crisis as skillfully as he handled the economic problems he inherited in 1988 and the rebellion in the southern state of Chiapas on Jan. 1.
Investors and others want assurances that whoever becomes the new presidential candidate of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, will support the Salinas free-market economic policies as wholeheartedly as Mr. Colosio did.
Given the importance of dispelling uncertainty, some were speculating that a candidate for the August election might be named swiftly.
Yet according to one well-informed source, the PRI, in deference to the memory of Mr. Colosio, may not name a new candidate until after Easter, April 3.
Mexican officials called financial organizations and traders throughout the day yesterday, warning them against trying to profit by starting a run against the peso.
The officials noted that Mexico has unusually high foreign-currency reserves of $30 billion and is prepared to use them to buy pesos, supporting the currency's value.
In Washington, Clinton administration officials prepared to help Mexico brace for a possible run on the peso when the markets reopen, after being closed yesterday as part of a day of mourning.
The U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board said late yesterday that they were establishing a temporary $6 billion swap facility with Mexico, essentially giving Mexico a line of credit that allows it to borrow dollars to buy pesos.
"This agreement demonstrates continued strong support for Mexico's economic policies," Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan said in a joint statement.
The U.S. has provided short-term financial support to Mexico several times in the past, in 1976, in 1982-83, in 1986 and, most recently, in 1988.
"I think things will settle down," President Clinton told reporters.
"And I think fundamentally they are in sound shape.
We'll have to wait and see what happens tomorrow."
Mr. Bentsen said he was in touch with Mexican government officials Wednesday night and throughout the day yesterday.
"We continue to have every confidence Mexico is on the right economic path," the secretary said.
"The fundamental reforms it has undertaken in recent years have laid a very strong foundation for stable, noninflationary economic growth."
Confidence in Mexican stocks traded in foreign markets held up surprisingly well.
Telefonos de Mexico, the bellwether issue that makes up almost a third of the Mexican stock market's value, dropped $3.625 to $60.125 in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mexican "Brady bonds" -- commercial bank loans to the government repackaged into bonds -- fell just over two points, or $20 for each $1,000 face amount.
But Mexican markets have seen great volatility this year, and that will probably continue at least until a new PRI candidate is named.
The Mexican stock market, for instance, was up more than 10% earlier in the year, then quickly fell to the point where it was down 10% on the year.
It spiked up Tuesday and Wednesday on the news that former Mexico City Mayor Manuel Camacho Solis wouldn't launch a maverick presidential bid.
Even after a candidate is named, the ruling party may find itself in the kind of fix it hasn't been in during almost seven decades in power -- and investors hope that the ruling party will win because it represents continuity.
The reason is that the PRI, once brimming with presidential possibilities, suddenly finds itself with a paucity.
The obvious choice would be Mr. Camacho, the runner-up to Mr. Colosio as the original selection.
But Mr. Camacho got a horribly rough reception by the crowd when he arrived for Mr. Colosio's wake, because many Mexicans suspect -- without foundation -- that Mr. Camacho, who stood to benefit, must have somehow been involved in the assassination.
Yesterday, outside PRI headquarters, where Mr. Colosio's casket was taken before his body was cremated, a woman whose eyes were glassy from tears spotted a television camera and yelled into it, "Camacho arranged it!
Camacho arranged it!"
Others shouted, "Colosio, yes!
Camacho, no!"
So Mr. Camacho called an emotional, impromptu press conference after the wake and declared that he isn't interested in the PRI candidacy.
The other name mentioned most often as a possible candidate is Ernesto Zedillo, the Colosio campaign manager.
But the 42-year-old is inexperienced as a politician and has been caught up in a couple of well-publicized problems.
PRI Chairman Fernando Ortiz Arana has also emerged as a dark horse, but he is little-known and was thought by many to be in danger of losing his job until recent months.
Numerous other possible candidates, such as Finance Minister Pedro Aspe, are, at least currently, excluded from consideration.
A constitutional provision states that candidates can't occupy any of a large number of senior government positions for 180 days before the presidential elections -- which come on Aug. 21, in less than 150 days.
A government spokesman strongly denied that any discussion of a possible successor has even taken place, or that there has been any talk about postponing the elections and having President Salinas stay in office until things calm down.
People in contact with government ministries had said that such talks were going on as part of contingency planning Wednesday night.
Uncertainty also continued yesterday about the motives of the main suspect held in the assassination.
The assumption is that he had some political motives, but it wasn't clear whether he might have been part of some organized political movement or was just trying to find a way to protest the poverty in which he lived.
The suspect, Mario Aburto Martinez, 23 years old, reportedly shouted "I saved Mexico!" after shooting Mr. Colosio with a .38-caliber handgun from a distance that may have been as little as a foot.
The slaying took place in a desperately poor neighborhood right in front of a two-story brick meeting house built by the Solidarity antipoverty program that Mr. Colosio ran until becoming the candidate.
Solidarity was designed to mollify the poor while the government tried to straighten out its macroeconomic problems.
Mexico's attorney general, Diego Valadez, who flew to Tijuana to coordinate the investigation, announced only that Mr. Aburto had confessed to shooting Mr. Colosio -- a confession that Mr. Valadez said was made willingly in front of two witnesses, including the head of a law school.
The attorney general said that two other men were in custody, but he said they might just be witnesses.
He didn't identify them and, asked about a motive, said cryptically that he wouldn't engage in "adventuresome politics."
Mr. Aburto was a $100-a-week worker in a factory assembling audio cassettes in Tijuana.
Marco Antonio Oviedo, the manager of the factory, said that Mr. Aburto read a lot but "seemed to be totally normal."
He and others said Mr. Aburto was a hard worker who was trying to get ahead even though he had only been in his job for five weeks.
Mr. Oviedo said that Mr. Aburto completed his shift Wednesday three hours before allegedly killing Mr. Colosio.
Neighbors said Mr. Aburto was also trying to fix up his home, which sits right near a huge Colosio billboard.
The home has an outhouse in back and sits in a neighborhood with unpaved streets where the only electricity is tapped illegally off utility lines.
The neighborhood is full of transients who gather there before trying to jump across the border into the U.S.
Neighbors described Mr. Aburto as a loner; one, Miguel Jimenez, said, "He's sick in the head."
The handgun that killed Mr. Colosio reportedly was initially purchased in California years ago, but authorities didn't know how it had made its way to Mexico or whether its U.S. origins would become an issue in Mexico.
With so much still unknown, Mexicans yesterday nursed their grief, vented their anger and quietly acknowledged their fears.
In Tijuana, a makeshift altar of white candles and icons of Mexico's patron saint, Our Lady of Guadalupe, went up quickly outside the hospital right after Mr. Colosio died Wednesday night.
Rafael Carmona, 22 years old, worried that the assassination "will have such an impact on Mexico, politically, socially, in every sense.
There are no words to describe this."
Martin Fernando Garcia, 18, shook his head, saying, "In Mexico, we don't kill each other.
We don't do this kind of thing."
People in Tijuana complained bitterly that security around Mr. Colosio wasn't tighter as he campaigned.
"There wasn't one policeman," said Lupita Montoya, who was close to Mr. Colosio when he was shot.
"At the moment it happened, no one was here from the government.
No one was here."
In fact, there were many more security forces available to Mr. Colosio than normal, including two truckloads of police and forces from the presidential bodyguards, the Estado Mayor.
(A government spokesman said the bodyguards were offered to all the presidential candidates.)
But in the wee hours of Thursday morning, Colosio aides gathered in a Tijuana hotel room for some soul-searching discussions and blamed themselves for not forcing him to use the police more, for not curtailing his habit of plunging into crowds, where he seemed to draw energy by shaking as many hands as possible.
"We were hardly using" security, one aide said.
"He wasn't security-conscious.
He didn't activate his security."
"We all need a drink," he added, as he sipped brandy.
"I'm in pain.
I haven't cried since my mother died."
In Mexico City, an emotional crowd of thousands gathered outside the headquarters of the ruling party, where Mr. Colosio's body had been brought, and crushed their way into the auditorium to file past his plain steel casket and pay their respects before his body was cremated.
An old woman wailed uncontrollably as a younger woman helped her past the casket.
In the front row, a grief-stricken woman had a seizure that went unnoticed in the bedlam before someone finally got an ambulance to take her away.
Not only did President Salinas call for calm, but even the normal critics of his administration stayed quiet.
The opposition presidential candidates suspended their campaigns.
The normally voluble Zapatista rebels in Chiapas stayed quiet.
Radio stations editorialized that, while investors needed to do what was right for themselves, they should also remember their responsibilities to society.
Until things settle down, analysts and corporate executives said, foreign money will sit on the sidelines.
"Foreign investors are concerned," said Roberto Batres, managing director in Mexico for Arthur D. Little, the consulting firm.
"They'll wait to see what the reaction of Mexican leadership is, to see how quickly, how decisively and how wisely they move.
A lot depends on what happens in the next few days."
Whether coincidentally or not, Mexico yesterday announced it had joined the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a Paris-based thinktank that includes the world's richest nations.
There is a lot of confidence in President Salinas, but there are the beginnings of doubts, too.
While Mr. Salinas was expected to somehow avoid the traditional jinx during the last year of a presidency, since Jan. 1 he has had to confront the Chiapas uprising, which killed at least 145 people and was the first significant guerrilla activity in Mexico in two decades.
The problem developed into a broad political issue as the poor and politically dispossessed throughout the country used the bargaining table in Chiapas as a way to get their issues noticed, in a country whose closed political system rarely allows people to push government to act on their problems.
Mr. Salinas had to drastically step up social spending and institute a broad series of electoral reforms.
Then, a week and a half ago, kidnappers seized one of Mexico's most prominent businessmen, Alfredo Harp Helu, the billionaire president of Grupo Financiero Banamex-Accival.
Again, that wasn't supposed to happen.
No one of his prominence had been seized in more than 20 years.
The resulting publicity unsettled the business community and exposed the fact that Mexico had quietly become one of the most dangerous spots in Latin America for potential kidnapping victims.
Then, Mr. Colosio was shot dead.
This was the first time a political figure of his magnitude had been assassinated since Alvaro Obregon was shot in 1928 shortly after being elected president.
Mexico doesn't have a history of assassinations, and there is no evidence thus far that this will start a wave.
But in the crazy world of 1994 Mexican politics, no one seems to want to declare that this is the end of the violence.
Given that the authorities didn't immediately provide an explanation for the assassination and that it may be a while before a new PRI presidential candidate is named, some financial executives said it was probably a good idea for the markets to be closed yesterday.
"The Mexican authorities have done the right thing by declaring a holiday in the local market," said Jorge Jasson, senior vice president of international capital markets at Chase Manhattan Corp.
"It is very prudent and adequate to give everybody the opportunity to digest these painful events."
Assuming nothing more happens, financial experts hope Mexico will be able to pick up where it left off.
"The only issue people worry about is social inequality.
Will that translate into destabilization?" wondered Nora Lustig, an economist working at the Brookings Institution.
"But we see signs from all the major forces in the country that they are willing to solve things peacefully. . . .
I think the foreign money will continue to flow in."
One sign of that came from Detroit yesterday, where major auto makers said their business plans involving Mexico would be unaffected by the developments there.
Exports of U.S. vehicles to Mexico are already surging because of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
In the first two months of 1994, the Big Three auto makers shipped 5,811 cars, minivans and trucks from the U.S. and Canada to Mexico, more than a fivefold increase from a year ago.
By the end of this year, Detroit expects to export 55,000 to 60,000 vehicles to Mexico -- after shipping only about 9,500 last year.
Auto executives said their growing investment in Mexico is unlikely to change in the wake of Mr. Colosio's slaying.
While expressing sorrow over the killing, John T. Eby, Ford Motor Co.'s executive director of corporate strategy, said, "There's been put in place in Mexico a process and a shared vision of where they want to go that is not dependent on any single individual."
David Wessel in Washington and Neal Templin in Detroit contributed to this article.
