The Mexican government will put four companies on the auction block this year in the last leg of some $24 billion in privatizations since 1987.
The companies -- odds and ends of the privatization effort -- are expected to fetch a total of about $260 million.
After that, "we're closing," says Jorge Silberstein, an official in the government's Office of Privatization here.
Up for sale will be Ocean Garden, a seafood trading company that failed to attract high bids when the government tried to sell it last fall; three paper mills; a newspaper chain with five publications, which also recently failed to attract a price acceptable to the government; and a system of warehouses sitting on land all around Mexico worth "lots and lots of money," according to Mr. Silberstein.
Mr. Silberstein says there is strong interest in Ocean Garden today from international investors, and he expects interest from some big U.S. paper companies to be among the bidders for the paper mills.
Rules for these two auctions will be out in about three weeks.
The government's land holdings may be sold in pieces.
And the newspapers?
"We haven't figured out what to do," he says.
More intriguing than these sales is the question about what the government will do with state-owned oil giant Petroleos Mexicanos, the power company and the railroads.
These properties are considered strategic assets by the government and protected from sale by the Mexican constitution, Mr. Silberstein points out.
Then he adds, smiling: "But so were the banks," until Mexico changed the law and sold them for $12 billion in 1992.
"Right now, Pemex isn't going to be sold," Mr. Silberstein says.
But he notes that the oil company is also looking at joint ventures and sales of some assets.
Also, there are rumors in Mexican financial circles that the government is seeking a high-profile leader for Pemex, perhaps Pedro Aspe, the current finance minister and a former presidential candidate.
Mexican banking executives think Mr. Aspe, or someone of his stature, will prepare Pemex for a sale at some point during the next presidential term.
The Mexican government will also push forward the privatization of its ports and airports this year.
Currently, the government is attempting to set up port authorities so the airports and ports can run as independent businesses.
The railroads and the power companies are also taking small steps toward privatization by considering joint ventures with private companies.
For investors in Mexican stocks, the big question is what the government will do with its $2.2 billion position in bank shares left over from the privatizations.
The largest stake is a 20.38%, $1.8 billion holding in Bancomer, Mexico's second-largest bank.
The Bancomer stake consists of Series L shares that aren't publicly traded.
But investment bankers say Bancomer will list shares on the New York Stock Exchange this summer, right around the time when bank earnings -- and bank stocks -- should be on the rebound here.
The government also holds a 6.17%, $220 million stake in Grupo Financiero Serfin, which trades on the New York Stock Exchange, and a 21.04% stake in Banco Internacional.
"The whole idea is for us to not have any shares," Mr. Silberstein says.
But sales of big blocks of stock such as these are delicate because they can pressure share prices.
Investors criticized the Mexican government for its second public offering of Telefonos de Mexico because the stock price fell.
Mr. Silberstein brushes aside the complaints.
"There are bulls, bears, and pigs," he says.
The government has "to take profits somewhere."
He adds that the government has no immediate plans for its 34% stake in Mexicana Airlines, noting that the stock price is too low.
