Branko Svaljek weaves his way through linoleum corridors lined with tired workers and muddy footprints to the nerve center of this nuclear-power plant.
There he opens a door to another world: the whiff of new carpet and varnish, the hum of computers trading data with their U.S. counterparts, the jangle of telephones wired to a satellite on the roof.
"Now all we have to do is start working," jokes Mr. Svaljek, Westinghouse Electric Corp.'s site manager at Temelin, a plant under construction near a village of the same name.
From this small suite of offices, the Pittsburgh-based electrical-equipment maker soon will embark on an attempt to rescue nuclear power in Central and Eastern Europe.
In many eyes, Soviet-era nuclear power is the leading environmental threat in the region.
Plants in Russia, Bulgaria and Ukraine -- site of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster -- continue to flunk safety tests.
A reactor near St. Petersburg was shut down recently after its cooling system malfunctioned.
Yet such plants are often crucial power sources, and replacing them would cost billions of dollars that most countries in the region just don't have.
Even Chernobyl remains open, with its Block 4 reactor -- the one that exploded -- now said to be leaking radioactive dust.
The next-best solution to replacing the 50-plus suspect reactors in the region seems to be improving them, mainly by adding Western safety components, which nuclear-power concerns such as Westinghouse, Germany's Siemens AG, Swedish-Swiss ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd. and France's Framatome SA are eager to do.
Westinghouse's $400 million-plus Temelin contract is the most lucrative and high-profile deal in the region to date.
About $317 million of the funding is expected to come via commercial loans guaranteed by the U.S. Export-Import Bank to the Czech utility CEZ, Temelin's owner.
This summer, Westinghouse will install one of its instrument and control systems at the plant's two Soviet-designed, 1,000-megawatt reactors.
Later, Westinghouse will supply the plant with nuclear fuel.
"Not completing Temelin would be bad for all of us," says Thierry Muller, director of Framatome's Prague office.
Success, many in the industry say, will help quash protests of antinuclear activists who compare Temelin's pressurized-water (VVER) reactors to the graphite-moderated (RBMK) reactors of Chernobyl.
Meanwhile, Temelin could inspire Western banks and governments to back similar projects farther East.
For Westinghouse, Temelin marks a long-awaited breakthrough in the Czech Republic.
One of the first big U.S. companies to land here after 1989, Westinghouse lost two major deals before beating Siemens, ABB and Framatome for the Temelin contract last year.
More recently, it has clinched $5 million in contracts at two Czech lignite-fired power plants, formed a joint venture with a power-plant equipment maker and is pursuing another.
The company also hopes to replace Russia as fuel supplier for three other nuclear plants in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, a prize valued at around $140 million over six years.
But this is only the beginning.
Across Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, 41 VVER reactors and 15 Chernobyl-vintage RBMK reactors still operate despite alarming safety problems.
Dozens more high-polluting coal plants await overhaul.
If Westinghouse proves its mettle in Temelin, it could be a frontrunner for billions of dollars in contracts to make these plants safer and more efficient in years to come.
"Who else will have the references?" asks Josef Vita, head of licensing in the nuclear division of CEZ, the Czech utility.
"If Temelin is successful, it will be Westinghouse's bridge to the East.
That bridge may take a while to build.
The Czech Republic remains one of the few former Soviet-bloc countries with large stores of hard currency and the only one with a decent credit rating.
Moreover, its politicians seem eager to address the problem.
Westinghouse is making a point of working with small local partners and steering clear of big joint ventures.
But this hasn't kept it out of the headlines.
Environmentalists and politicians in neighboring Austria describe the Temelin plant as a Chernobyl-in-waiting.
Some Austrian politicians have even offered to help finance Temelin's conversion to a natural-gas plant.
As Westinghouse officials explain it, the only thing really Russian about Temelin is its design.
But even the pressurizedwater concept -- now common world-wide -- evolved during the 1950s when Westinghouse and Soviet scientists concurrently developed it for submarine propulsion.
Westinghouse will wire Temelin with a typical Western instrument and control system complete with a parallel "man-machine interface" device, which simulates images of valves, pumps and other key reactor components in a room all its own.
This feature was developed in the 1980s after the Three Mile Island disaster in Pennsylvania and is required by law at all U.S. reactors.
Still, opponents of Temelin say they are concerned that the Czechs never conducted an environmental impact report such as the U.S. requires.
The Czechs don't deny that; instead, they cite a series of safety reviews by local and international experts and above all, the green light from the Export-Import Bank that is expected to come soon.
Ex-Im officials say they've consulted the International Atomic Energy Agency, the National Security Council and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission on the plant's safety, as well as sent their own representatives to the site.
Its supporters also portray the plant as a critical solution to a more immediate threat looming over Central Europe.
About 250 kilometers north of Temelin lies the wasteland of North Bohemia, where a series of power plants fired by lignite, or brown coal, destroy forests and make local children wheeze like chain smokers.
Mr. Riha of CEZ admits the sulphur has created a "moon effect" with "catastrophic consequences" for North Bohemia, a region of about 1.2 million people, and the eastern German border region.
By 1996, the Czech government will require all these CEZ-owned plants to meet Western-type emission standards.
Enter Westinghouse, again.
The company has clinched deals valued at about $5 million to install pollution-control systems at two of about 12 lignite plants due for improvements.
The company expects to win related contracts as they are offered.
Outside the Czech Republic, Westinghouse has bid to help overhaul four early VVER reactors in Hungary and will supply a low-level radioactive-waste disposal system at a similar plant in Bulgaria.
The company also has opened offices in Moscow and Kiev.
Compared with the needs of most Russian nuclear plants, the Temelin modifications seem almost elementary.
About 35 older-model reactors operating around Eastern Europe and the former Soviet republics need everything from new containment vessels to extensive redesign.
Western experts have long considered many of these plants too unpredictable to remain in use.
The problem is, a city like St. Petersburg draws nearly half its power from one of the troubled plants.
"It's a mistake to think these countries have much of a choice" other than to keep the reactors running, says Jonathan Heller, secretary general of Foratom, a Brussels-based European atomic energy forum.
Estimates of the cost for repairs range from $9 billion (Foratom's estimate) to $24 billion (the World Bank's figure).
Add political turmoil to the mix, and it's no wonder, as Mr. Toth admits, "the opportunities in other Eastern countries aren't nearly as easy to define."
Mr. Muller predicts that about $3 billion of the regional repair bill will go directly to Western companies for new equipment.
Others put the figure even higher.
Not bad, considering the slowdown in nuclear power construction elsewhere.
Back in Prague, Westinghouse's Mr. Toth has learned to watch the news as closely as he reads requests for bids.
When he heard recently that the U.S. may pay Ukraine at least $155 million to help dismantle its store of nuclear weapons, his first thought was: hard currency.
"Maybe some of that money could be applied to fixing their plants," says Mr. Toth.
"You never know."
