Kathleen McGinty, director of the White House office on environmental policy, declined to describe the executive order fully.
At a meeting with reporters, she said the administration is targeting all uses of federal funds, not just direct spending by the federal government.
One person close to the administration's deliberations said the order will be purposely vague about the extent to which private companies will be covered.
He said the order is more likely to cover private companies that perform certain government functions -- companies that are contracted to clean up nuclear weapons plants, for instance -- rather than companies such as paper suppliers, which do business with the government.
Companies that are covered would be required to demonstrate that their activities aren't doing disproportionate environmental harm in minority communities.
The order is the Clinton administration's most visible effort so far to address the issue of "environmental justice" -- that is, the concern that pollution is a civil-rights problem as well as an environmental one.
Studies have found that certain types of pollution, particularly hazardous waste, tend to be concentrated in minority and low-income neighborhoods, raising the question of whether enforcement of environmental laws in such neighborhoods is more lax.
The immediate effect of the order probably will be to impose new recordkeeping requirements.
Ms. McGinty said there is a need to measure not just the impact of individual pollutants on populations exposed to environmental hazards, but also "total and cumulative impacts" of all pollutants that affect individual areas.
Separately, Ms. McGinty said that Environmental Protection Agency chief Carol Browner was "speaking for Bill Clinton and the rest of this administration" earlier this week when Ms. Browner endorsed legislation that largely would ban smoking in most nonresidential buildings.
The bill, introduced by Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), would ban smoking in any nonresidential building regularly entered by 10 or more persons at least one day a week -- except in specially designated smoking areas that have direct exhaust outlets to the outside.
