In a terrorist attack likely to further set back the dwindling prospects for peace in Northern Ireland, five mortar shells were fired yesterday at Heathrow Airport, apparently by the Irish Republican Army.
No one was injured, as the homemade mortar shells failed to explode, but the attack caused major disruptions at the world's busiest airport.
Although no one immediately claimed responsibility for the attack, police said telephone callers who issued warnings about the attack used recognized IRA "code words."
The attack comes at a time when the British and Irish governments are pushing a joint peace initiative that offers a place at the negotiating table to Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, if the IRA agrees to a cease-fire.
Until now, Sinn Fein has declined to accept or reject the offer, instead calling for what amounts to further concessions.
But the latest attack is certain to be interpreted as a sign to any moderates inside Sinn Fein and to the British government that the IRA doesn't plan to give up its terrorist campaign to get the British to leave Ulster.
Indeed, the attack came as Parliament was in the midst of a debate over whether to renew Britain's Prevention of Terrorism Act, which permits the government to detain suspected terrorists for as much as seven days without seeking a court ruling.
The MPs then voted to renew the law.
"If ever there was a sign that the IRA have no intention of discussing peace, then this was the sign," said Terry Dicks, a Conservative MP.
"I want some tough response from the government.
We should stop pussyfooting about with these people," he said.
The British and Irish governments have said that they intend to try to proceed with the peace process with or without Sinn Fein and the IRA, but skeptics have said that any settlement without them will be extremely difficult.
The mortar shells were launched about 6 p.m. yesterday from a car in a hotel parking lot about a quarter mile from Heathrow.
Two landed on a runway, but no aircraft were hit.
The incident shows that the IRA is still capable of staging spectacular, attention-getting attacks in London.
The group fired mortar shells at No. 10 Downing St., the prime minister's residence, in February 1991, with one exploding about 40 feet away.
Additionally, both last year and in 1992, the IRA exploded massive bombs in London's financial district, with the most recent blast killing one person, injuring 45 others and causing as much as #1 billion ($1.49 billion) in damages.
The government has since beefed up security in the area.
