Pilgrim Group is taking the unusual step of refunding $205,000 to one of its mutual funds, at the urging of the fund's directors.
Included in the money reimbursed to the Pilgrim Corporate Utilities Fund was a consultant's fee that shouldn't have been billed to the fund.
"The directors requested the reimbursement after their investigation, and we acquiesced," said Theodore Cohen, general counsel of Pilgrim Group, a closely held Los Angeles fund company that manages $2.7 billion.
Shortly after Pilgrim agreed to the reimbursement, two independent directors resigned from the board of the Pilgrim Corporate Utilities Fund.
The actions come at a time of increasing scrutiny of mutual-fund directors nationwide.
Just last week, Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt told a mutual-fund industry conference in Arizona that mutual-fund directors ought to be asking tough questions about the funds they oversee.
At Pilgrim, the issue surfaced among directors last July.
Shortly after he resigned, Pilgrim's former president, Robert Grunburg, sent a set of correspondence to fund directors, charging that Pilgrim Corporate Utilities Fund had picked up part of the tab for a consultant when the bill instead should have been paid out of Pilgrim Group's corporate coffers.
The Pilgrim utilities fund has shrunk to $7 million in assets, and ranks among the mutual-fund industry's worst performers over the past 10 years.
Pilgrim's Mr. Cohen said the $205,000, which was first disclosed in the fund's annual report, included $30,000 to correct an accounting error and $105,000 to refund a portion of the consultant's fee.
The remaining $70,000 represented part of the cost of investigating the matter.
"The numbers speak for themselves," Mr. Cohen said.
"I don't think this was a major discrepancy.
This was a consulting arrangement that lasted for five years."
Mr. Cohen said the SEC, which regulates mutual funds, looked at the consulting-fee arrangement during a recent routine examination.
"The SEC did not take any action that suggested they thought it was improper," Mr. Cohen said.
Pilgrim said in a statement that independent director Benjamin Klein resigned because of "the demands of his growing business."
The other independent director, Eliot Karasick, resigned for "health reasons," the statement said.
Mr. Karasick wouldn't discuss in detail the reasons for his resignation.
"I am not going to put myself in the position of casting stones," he said.
"I felt I could no longer be as productive as I wanted to be for the shareholders."
Mr. Klein, a University of California at Los Angeles economics professor who also runs an economic-research firm, didn't return phone calls.
Pilgrim hired the consultant, Alan C. Snyder, to help the firm with its marketing and distribution.
Mr. Snyder has since moved on to become chief executive officer of Aurora National Life Assurance Co., a successor corporation to failed Executive Life Insurance Co.
Mr. Snyder declined to comment.
The $205,000 refund to Pilgrim Corporate Utilities is the latest in a string of controversial actions involving Pilgrim Group, which is headed by Palomba Weingarten.
Pilgrim's marketing tactics have drawn fire from both competitors and mutual-fund analysts.
Last year, for instance, fund researcher Morningstar Inc. published a scathing article about a Pilgrim advertisement, prompting Pilgrim to sue the firm for libel.
Earlier this month, a California state appeals court threw out Pilgrim's suit.
Pilgrim Corporate Utilities will likely soon disappear.
Pilgrim Group recently sent a letter to shareholders saying the fund's directors had voted to merge the fund into the Lepercq-Istel Fund, a New York-based growth-and-income mutual fund.
The merger has to be approved by the Pilgrim fund's shareholders.
Pilgrim Corporate Utilities Fund sustained a loss of 18.7% in the decade through February, making it the fund industry's fifth worst performing fund, according to Morningstar.
Results at Lepercq-Istel Fund, with $16 million in assets, have been better than that, but still not great.
Last year, the fund beat the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index for the first time in 13 years.
For the 10 years ended February, it returned 127.1%, compared with an average 235% for all growth-and-income funds and 321.8% for the S&P 500.
"History is history," said Andrew Hanson, co-president of the fund.
"The only thing that matters is the future."
Mr. Hanson said he and a colleague took over management of the fund in December.
He said the proposal to merge the two funds came from the Lepercq fund's outside counsel, who also is the lawyer for the Pilgrim fund.
"The board of directors of their fund felt that the investment objective of our fund will meet the needs of their shareholders," Mr. Hanson said.
