The Baseball Network is expected to announce a series of sponsorship deals over the next month that will take it nearly half way to its 1994 target of $180 million in TV ad sales.
The network, a joint venture of major league baseball, NBC and ABC, was created last year in lieu of baseball getting a guaranteed network rights fee.
Instead, the network sells TV spots for its games and retains the lion's share of the ad revenue.
The concept has had many skeptics on Madison Avenue.
They note this entity can't operate like a conventional TV network: packaging up spots on baseball with other programming.
All it has to sell, by definition, is baseball.
In addition, the new network has aggressively priced ads for its prize attraction, the World Series: at over $300,000 per 30-second spot, versus the $200,000 range of CBS in 1993.
But after a long fallow period, The Baseball Network is starting to close deals: with Texaco Inc. and Russell Corp. recently, and, imminently, Gatorade.
Before spring training ends, according to people familiar with its operations, the network should book at least $80 million of sales, on terms that are within 6 percent of its asking price.
(Network games don't actually begin until the July 12 All-Star Game.)
"I can't confirm any numbers," said network chief Ken Schanzer, "but the response to this package in the marketplace, in our minds, has been extraordinary."
That definition of success still represents a deep cut in the sport's network TV revenue.
If the network does gross its targeted $180 million, baseball would realize about $140 million.
(The net figure comes after ad-agency commissions and the cuts going to General Electric Co.'s NBC and Capital Cities/ABC Inc.'s ABC.)
That's nearly 50 percent less than what CBS paid in the last season of its disastrous four-year $1.06 billion baseball contract.
But Mr. Schanzer, a former NBC Sports executive, argues that The Baseball Network is working, both in its ability to command top dollar in advertising and its utility as a "one-stop shopping" point for advertisers.
The network was empowered by baseball's owners not only to sell TV ads, but more broadly, market the game.
The common denominator of its deals, so far, is packaging up TV time and other forms of sponsorship.
Russell combined its TV buy with continuing as baseball's official uniform provider, while newcomer Texaco was hooked by the chance to sponsor All-Star balloting.
Ballots to choose players will be available only at ballparks and Texaco stations, and voting coincides with the start of the peak summer driving season.
"This was a program that would not just make people think of Texaco but would pull them in our stations to do something," says Tom Matthews, president of Texaco Refining and Marketing Inc.
Gatorade, an incumbent sponsor, was "prepared to walk away from baseball, whose audience was skewing high in age," according to its sports-marketing vice president, Bill Schmidt.
But the network now is poised to keep this Quaker Oats Co. unit in the fold by combining a big TV buy with a big, visible presence of Gatorade coolers in dugouts.
"They did a heck of a job of packing and winning our confidence," said Mr. Schmidt.
Baseball does, however, have a tougher demographic sell than the likes of the National Basketball Association, which has a younger audience.
But the network is stressing that 50 percent of fans who attend big-league games are 18 to 34 years old, and it's planning to take a page out of the NBA's book by stepping up the promotion of individual players.
Sources say it's negotiating for a sponsorship package with Nike Inc., the footwear maker that's a master in the image-making of players, including hoopsters Michael Jordan and Charles Barkley.
