KERR GROUP Inc., of Los Angeles, expects its net income to be boosted by about 50 cents a share per year through 1996 because of cost reductions from the company's relocation of its home-canning lid-manufacturing operations from Chicago to a new facility in Jackson, Tenn.
In Thursday's Small Stock Focus column, it was incorrectly reported that the 50-cent-ashare boost would be on a pretax basis.
(See: "Small Stock Focus: Traders Send Index to Yet Another High In Market Driven by Earnings Reports" -- WSJ Jan. 20, 1994)
KETCHUM ADVERTISING's San Francisco office resigned in November from DHL Corp.'s advertising account.
Thursday's Advertising column incorrectly stated that Ketchum had been fired from the business.
(See: "Marketing & Media -- Advertising: More and More Billboards Arise Pointing to Information Highway" -- WSJ Jan. 20, 1994)
THE ALLIANCE AIRPORT in Fort Worth, Texas, is under the direction of the Fort Worth City Council.
A headline in the Dec. 17 editions incorrectly stated that the airport was owned by Ross Perot.
The article was about Federal Express Corp.'s selection of Alliance Airport as its Southwestern hub, a move that could boost the fortunes of a project linked to the family of Mr. Perot.
(See: "Federal Express Picks Hub At Perot-Owned Airport" -- WSJ Dec. 17, 1993)
A REPORT by the U.S. paper industry said that the world trading agreement negotiated under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade generally meets the industry's objectives, but that the industry still has some reservations.
An article Monday incorrectly reported that the paper industry opposes the accord.
(See: "GATT Pact's Private-Sector Reviews Mixed -- U.S. Businesses Endorse Accord, Wish for More; Labor Criticizes Deal" -- WSJ Jan. 24, 1994)
MOODY'S INVESTORS SERVICE Inc. placed the credit ratings of Consolidated Edison Co. of New York under review for possible downgrades in part over concerns about "the company's ability to improve debt-protection measures."
In Friday's Credit Ratings column, it was incorrectly stated that Moody's was concerned about the company's ability to make its interest payments on debt.
(See: "Credit Ratings" -- WSJ Jan. 20, 1994)
