The Senate voted unanimously last week to get unrecovered drug addicts and alcoholics off the federal disability program.
The temptation now may be to move on to other pressing matters.
That would be a mistake: Let's stick around the disability honey pot and see who else shows up.
Already, Rep. J.J. Pickle has been holding hearings on press reports of (legal) immigrants being coached to fake craziness to get on the rolls of the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program.
Mr. Pickle is surely on to something.
About 10% of the six million SSI recipients (up from 4.5 million in 1988) are noncitizens.
But it isn't just immigrants.
The fuzzy world of mental disorder is the strongest engine driving the speedy growth of disability payments, as Carolyn Weaver at the American Enterprise Institute has written on this page and elsewhere.
Disability is a case history of the impulse to do good running far beyond anyone's effective control.
The federal government took the lead in relief for what used to be called the "aged, blind and disabled" with the christening of SSI in the early 1970s.
After a stable decade, court decisions and congressional actions forced the Social Security Administration to invite new applications, including children.
(Congress mandates that millions of dollars a year be spent on "outreach.")
SSI can yield up to $446 a month, retroactive to the date of application (it can take awhile to establish that one cannot work for at least 12 months, even though the screening is evidently loose).
The amount doesn't seem like much, and to those who were the originally intended beneficiaries, it surely isn't.
But as Charles Murray noted 10 years ago in "Losing Ground," it is curious that with all the advancements in treating disabilities, so few seem to leave the program once on it.
Social Security officials believe that one reason SSI has grown so much lately is that state and local governments, caught in a welfare crunch, have referred their general-assistance recipients to the feds.
However, most states supplement SSI for at least some categories of beneficiary.
California, the nation's welfare bread basket, does so for everyone, typically at $157 a month.
Sometimes, SSI is itself a supplement to an older benefit, the Disability Insurance (DI) part of Social Security itself.
This program, also growing rapidly, now aids 3.7 million retirees with an average of $626 a month.
(With 1.5 million dependents also covered, total family benefits can reach $2,000 a month).
Those who earned little income during their working life get less, but can use SSI to bolster their benefit.
That can amount to 100% replacement for their previous after-tax income.
In that event, why go back to work?
Social Security DI is itself in sorry shape.
Its "trust fund" will be exhausted next year.
As Richard Ippolito, a federal retirement analyst, observed in a draft paper last fall, the program "creates an incentive to quit the work force too early.
Unlike those who work until age 65, workers who qualify for disability retirement receive their unreduced Social Security annuities at much earlier ages.
And they get a free medical policy (Medicare) after two years on the program."
This early entrance into Social Security was created for workers whose hard physical labor actually wore their bodies down prior to the standard retirement age.
As those kinds of jobs have diminished, you'd expect the call on DI to decline as well, but not so.
A third are under 55.
Like SSI, eligibility for the disability program is determined by the states, though federal taxpayers are on the hook.
And as Mr. Ippolito observes, "an extensive appeals system . . . often ends up overturning those denied by lenient state employees in the first place."
For every 1,000 people working between the ages of 60 and 64, nearly 300 are now deemed "incapable of gainful employment."
Back in the early '80s, the Reagan Administration tried to prune the disability rolls.
This effort was thwarted by the welfare Iron Triangle (Congress, social-service advocates and the pliant press), which raised a firestorm.
Both SSI and DI are what is known in Washington as entitlements, not subject to budget discipline under the rules as they apply.
Obviously, something will have to be done with these programs if the almighty deficit is not to swell again from their effects.
SSI could fall within welfare reform, though most of the attention there has been directed at the larger AFDC problem.
Meantime, unless Social Security is really reformed, the current DI payroll tax of 1.2% would have to be doubled or tripled to carry its load, says Mr. Ippolito.
These two programs are examples of why the financial burden of the U.S. welfare state has grown to extend far beyond the stereotypical underclass.
More than 10% of this nation's people are on food stamps and nearly half of its babies are born on Medicaid.
The New York Post recently found 1 in 7 New Yorkers to be on the dole in some fashion, and in Los Angeles County the number may be 1 in 5.
If millions who could be working are allowed to claim disabilities and join in the idleness, how can the show go on?
