Hoping to drum up greater private investment in his beleaguered country, Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk unfurled a package of liberalized foreign-investment policies and economic reforms in meetings with U.S. executives over the weekend.
Last Friday, Mr. Kravchuk met with President Clinton and received a pledge of $700 million in aid for free-market reforms and disarmament.
But Mr. Kravchuk came to the U.S. also to woo U.S. companies, which he says Ukraine desperately needs for its transition to a capitalist economy.
"Ukraine has truly colossal potential in natural resources, human and scientific capital," Mr. Kravchuk said in an interview.
"But we haven't been able to make use of those resources in the economic crisis we're in.
We need funding and expertise to go ahead with reform."
Ukraine faces a perplexing situation: It needs foreign investment to climb out of its economic quagmire, but the country's economic and political instability keeps U.S. investors out.
When the Soviet Union crumbled in 1991, many believed Ukraine, with its industrial base and rich soil, would be among the first new countries to gain prosperity.
But political gridlock between Mr. Kravchuk and a resistant Parliament has stymied economic reform, leading to 70% monthly inflation and negligible privatization of state enterprises.
Mr. Kravchuk said recent laws should give foreign investors new reason to enter Ukraine.
Perhaps finally bowing to economic realities, Parliament passed the foreign-investment law in January, which offers investors in 10 key industries -- such as military conversion and agriculture -- benefits such as full repatriation of profits and five-year tax holidays.
It also adopted a privatization program, likely to be based on a voucher system like Russia's, and anti-inflation measures calling for tighter credit to state enterprises and price controls on essentials such as bread and milk.
While the new laws may look fine on paper, implementing them promises to be an uphill battle for Mr. Kravchuk.
Parliamentary elections scheduled for March 27 could roll in an even more recalcitrant legislature.
And privatizing the nation's largest enterprises, many of them woefully inefficient, could bring widespread layoffs and social unrest.
Talking of the dilapidated coal-mining industry that employs 600,000 miners, Mr. Kravchuk said, "If we were to deal with that industry in a `shock therapy' way, we would have an explosion on our hands."
