As one of the first female gangster rappers to climb the charts, the 24-year-old Ms. Laws is becoming as well known for her persona as for her music.
She boasts of a personal arsenal of automatic weapons and of hanging with street gangs.
She drinks malt liquor from 40-ounce bottles, curses incessantly, and muses aloud about killing someone -- anyone.
She certainly doesn't resemble the little girl who Lillie and Joe Laws raised in a middle-class neighborhood of Detroit.
The youngest of three daughters, Lichelle attended private school from first grade through high school.
For 15 years, she was a student of ballet, modern dance and the piano.
She attended church, and went to college.
She majored in business and became a fraternity "sweetheart."
How did this girl-next-door become a menace-to-society rapper?
"I come from a good home, but I've seen both sides," she says.
"I've slept on a bench and hustled in the ghetto, too."
Ms. Laws now works in a genre -- gangster rap -- in which projecting a tough image is as important as her sound.
"The sad truth is the harder the rapper's image, the more music they sell," says David Dickerson, a Silver Spring, Md., rap-music producer.
It wasn't until Ms. Laws acquired "the flavor" -- entertainment industry jargon describing the style found among youth from America's mean streets -- that she was able to land a recording contract.
"I tried the straight-up nice girl" approach, she says, and it "didn't work."
So she now raps songs such as, "A Blind Date With Boss," in which she acts out the seduction and murder of her date, a macho misogynist.
When Ms. Laws was growing up, her parents would take their three daughters out to dinners, movies and plays.
Her father, a retired auto worker, recalls driving through the city's depressed areas and telling his girls: "This is why I want you to go to school, so you don't have to live like this."
At St. Mary of Redford School, where Ms. Laws attended grades one through 12, she was known as a quiet student.
One of her counselors, Sister Loretta Schroeder, recalls her as "a very pretty girl, and a little on the shy side."
But following the lead of her more outgoing, older sister, Karyl, Lichelle eventually broke from her shell and became a cheerleader and member of the homecoming queen's court.
After finishing high school in 1987, Ms. Laws enrolled at Oakland University in Rochester, Mich.
Around this time, she began admiring the female rap groups that were just becoming popular.
She started writing material of her own and trying it out on fellow students.
"She would stand outside the dorm and rap," recalls classmate Keith Arnold.
"It was obvious that she had a passion for it."
Eventually, Ms. Laws and classmate Irene Moore formed a group and performed at campus functions.
Like other female rappers then, the act was free of profanity and violent lyrics.
"We were wearing little cute matching outfits on stage," Ms. Laws recalls.
In the middle of her junior year, Ms. Laws decided to drop out to concentrate on a career as a rapper.
She worked days in computer-data entry and performed in Detroit rap clubs at night.
By early 1990, Ms. Laws and Ms. Moore had moved to Los Angeles in hopes of getting discovered.
They soon learned that the industry was more fascinated with a group of hardcore "gangsta" rappers -- like Ice-T and NWA -- than with their softer style.
Producers, who turned them down, "were telling us that we didn't curse enough," says Ms. Laws.
The women decided to start using profanity in their raps.
With little money, Ms. Laws says, they stayed first in roach-infested hotels, and, when their money ran out, on benches or at peoples' homes.
Jeff Forston, a rapper and producer, says he put them up for a few days.
The women were "living real foul," he recalls.
Ms. Laws began "dressing down," donning baggy pants, big work shirts, and skull caps -- duds favored by gangster rappers.
In promoting her career as a gangster rapper, Ms. Laws has made much of her experiences of living in the streets.
She says she sold drugs and hung with the notorious street gang the Bloods.
She also says she spent some time in jail.
She didn't; and the stories about her life on the streets can't be verified.
Her mother also insists that she sent her daughter money: "Lichelle could have stayed at the Embassy Suites with all of the money we were sending her," she says.
In any case, her music began to reflect the desperation of street life.
She began writing explicitly violent and sexual rap lyrics.
Then, a year after arriving in Los Angeles, Ms. Laws and Ms. Moore walked into the offices of two producers, Tracy Kendrick and Courtney Branch.
"They insisted that someone listen to them rap or they wouldn't leave," recalls Mr. Kendrick.
He and Mr. Branch listened, and immediately began working with them, helping them polish their material and giving them a place to live.
"Everyone else out here had been turning them down," says Mr. Branch.
"I heard Lichelle rap and I said this is the greatest rapper on earth."
About six months later, with her new material, dressed-down image, and the guidance of Messrs. Branch and Kendrick, Ms. Laws signed with Def Jam West Records, a unit of Sony Corp.'s Sony Music Entertainment Inc.
Now, gross sales from Ms. Laws's first album, "Born Gangstaz, "have reached $733,000 since its release last spring, according to Def Jam.
She has just released a video, and is working on a second album and other projects.
On the cover of "Born Gangstaz," Ms. Laws and Ms. Moore strike various poses clutching automatic weapons.
But Ms. Moore appears on the recording only as a guest.
Ms. Moore is now completing her own album for Def Jam, and the two women no longer perform together.
For Ms. Laws's parents, accepting their daughter's new-found fame hasn't been easy.
"At first, we were completely disgusted with her," says her mother.
When students at the junior-high school where she taught "would come up to me and say, `I hear Boss is your daughter,' I'd say, `No, I don't know a thing about her.'"
Mrs. Laws retired from teaching last June.
Members of her church talk about her daughter, too.
"Not too many of our adult friends agree with what she's doing," says Mrs. Laws.
Ms. Laws makes no apologies for her music.
(A line from one song: "They wonder why they label me insane, because I loaded the clip and took the nine to the copper's brain.")
Even among those who appreciate gangster rap, there are critics who say that Ms. Laws still isn't the real thing.
One popular publicist says that after meeting her recently he realized, "She's not really a gangster, she's as sweet as pie."
But "when she raps," he adds, "she's very convincing."
Ms. Laws answers such criticism this way: "I'm both a gangster and a smart business person.
I know what I'm doing, and I know how to make it in this business."
