In an extraordinary effort to boost Rep. Dan Rostenkowski's precarious re-election prospects, President Clinton braved the cold and snow here to declare that the administration's top legislative priorities were bound up in the lawmaker's fate.
Mr. Clinton was amplifying what the Illinois Democrat has been telling his constituents: that he is an important national leader who should be returned to Washington despite his recent brushes with the law.
The president made clear that Mr. Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, was pivotal to his two biggest initiatives this year, overhauling the health-care and welfare systems.
Without him, Mr. Clinton said, "We would not be able to do the things that we have to do to meet our obligations to the future in this coming year in health care, welfare reform and many other areas."
In other circumstances such glowing words would constitute an endorsement, and in every practical sense they were.
But Mr. Clinton didn't actually use the word "endorsement," and didn't directly refer to the March 15 primary at which Mr. Rostenkowski's seat is being sought by other Democrats.
For one thing, it is rare for a president to intervene in a party primary contest.
For another, Mr. Rostenkowski is under investigation by Mr. Clinton's own Justice Department for possible misuse of his congressional and campaign funds.
That chancy combination largely explains why Mr. Rostenkowski said he didn't anticipate getting the president's endorsement, and why the president ignored a shouted question on the subject.
But the voters in the Fifth Congressional District couldn't help but get the point.
Messrs. Clinton and Rostenkowski were near-constant companions during the president's visit here.
Along with Chicago Mayor Richard Daley, a strong Rostenkowski ally, the congressman met the president at the airport, traveled with him in his limousine and participated side by side with him in two public events.
The president and the chairman couldn't stop saying nice things about each other all day.
"Leadership" was what they both credited each other for having most.
"If you want me to get things done, you have to say to the members of Congress, `Act,'" Mr. Clinton said.
"The one person you don't have to say it to is Dan Rostenkowski.
It's in his bones."
"I think," Mr. Rostenkowski concluded at the end of one event, "that this has been most rewarding."
