Broadcasters are gaining support for legislation that would let them use part of their spectrum for new services, including pay-per-view TV fare or data transmissions.
The broadcasters' proposal could be attached to a bill aimed at dismantling legal and regulatory barriers that have kept the telephone and cable television industries from competing head-to-head.
The House telecommunications subcommittee is scheduled to begin voting on its bill today, and broadcasters have been working hard at lining up votes.
If they can't count on enough supporters, they will probably put off the provision until the bill reaches the full Energy and Commerce Committee.
"We may choose to introduce it in full committee," said Jim May, executive vice president in charge of government relations for the National Association of Broadcasters.
Broadcasters appear confident that their provision will win in the committee and, according to senior congressional staff members, haven't been willing to compromise much.
A Senate telecommunications bill would let broadcasters use a portion of their spectrum for "program-related" services -- perhaps transmitting sports scores or other statistics during sporting events or additional information from advertisers.
But the version broadcasters hope to see introduced in the House goes well beyond services related to typical TV fare.
In the past few weeks, the broadcasters' association has been trying to persuade members of the House Energy and Commerce Committee to let TV and radio-station owners reap the benefits of new technologies.
Broadcasters envision using new digital-compression technologies to split their signals into six or more separate channels, some of which could deliver pay-per-view movies, sports or other entertainment via relatively inexpensive set-top boxes.
New channels also could provide data services for business customers.
Broadcasters view the new technologies, which are expected to be available within five years or so, as a new lane on the "information superhighway" that will let them compete against cable and telephone companies for some advanced telecommunications services.
Revenue raised from new services, some argue, could help foot the huge bills for converting to high-definition television; others see it as an alternative to HDTV.
Either way, broadcasters need Congress to free them from existing regulations that limit how they can use their assigned airwaves.
In addition to the airwaves used for their existing stations, the Federal Communications Commission decided two years ago to give TV stations additional spectrum to use temporarily as they shifted to HDTV.
The new technologies would let broadcasters test whether consumers want HDTV or would prefer other services.
Although the broadcasters' plan calls for paying the government for use of the spectrum based on what it would likely go for at a public auction, opponents view it as a spectrum grab.
"What's the value of something if you're the only person who can buy it?" asks Andrew Schwartzman, head of the Media Access Project, a public-interest law firm.
"They want to compete on the superhighway, but they don't want anybody to compete against them for the spectrum."
He believes spectrum that is freed up by new technology should be subject to FCC auctions so that minorities and others who want stations would get a chance to get them.
