At a Virginia retreat last Friday, Chairman Reed Hundt of the Federal Communications Commission gathered a number of the agency's top managers around him to assess the fallout from the collapse of the merger between Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc.
The capital was still ringing with denunciations of the FCC and its new chairman over the cable-television-rate rollback vote that the two companies blamed for killing their deal.
But Mr. Hundt's message to his troops was anything but contrite.
"Our mission was to protect the public against unreasonable prices while promoting business," he said.
"We did that."
For Mr. Hundt, suddenly the most visible and controversial FCC chairman since Newton Minow (who called TV a "vast wasteland" in the 1960s), the firestorm over the Bell Atlantic-TCI merger collapse offers clues to how he will handle a host of contentious issues, primarily the result of the telecommunications legislation that is on a fast track in Congress.
The legislation, which cleared a House subcommittee yesterday, would in large part leave it up to the FCC and the Justice Department to manage the transition of telephone and cable companies from monopolies to competitive industries.
All indications are that the companies will find Mr. Hundt a tough and skeptical force, even in the face of arguments that development of the so-called information superhighway -- a pet project of Mr. Hundt's close friend, Vice President Al Gore -- is at stake.
As the Bell Atlantic-TCI episode shows, Mr. Hundt isn't one to be dazzled by untested claims of benefits waiting just around the corner, and is willing on occasion to absorb fierce political attacks to defend his vision of how new communications services can be brought to market without burdening consumers.
Nor is he much inclined to ease up on regulation until he concludes that competition in the telecommunications arena is firmly rooted.
"The '90s will be a transitional period for the cable and telephone industries," he says in an interview.
In the cable-rate decision, he insists, "our goal was to make this a model of how to go through this transition.
We understand the industry and don't want to hurt it.
But we don't want cable companies to use their current consumers to invest in tomorrow's services."
To critics in Congress and the telecommunications industry, though, Mr. Hundt's words have a hollow ring.
After the demise of the Bell Atlantic-TCI deal, Senate Republican Leader Robert Dole of Kansas took the floor to blast the 1992 cable TV rate-reregulation bill as a "fiasco" that exposed "the government tinkering with something that it clearly didn't understand," and predicted that Mr. Hundt's regulatory policies would stifle the spread of new telecommunications services: "The administration says it supports the establishment of an information superhighway, but seems eager to throw up roadblocks in the way of its development."
Particularly bitter are the cable-TV companies, who saw their stock values sink and their dreams of cashing out to the phone companies dim in the wake of the FCC vote to order an average 7% rollback in rates to subscribers.
Stephen Effros, president of the Cable Telecommunications Association, says that Mr. Hundt's push for the rollback was little more than an effort to grab headlines with what amounts to a puny benefit, "cutting the fee for MTV."
In effect, Mr. Effros charges, the FCC is micromanaging the cable industry, "a symptom not only of reinventing government but also of reinventing business economics."
Mr. Effros's "reinventing government" reference amounts to a little-disguised slap at the man many in the industry see as the force behind the 45-year-old Mr. Hundt, Vice President Gore.
The two men have known each other since boyhood, when they were classmates and friends at Washington's tony St. Alban's School.
Mr. Hundt went on to Yale and its law school, and ultimately became a litigator at the Washington law firm of Latham & Watkins, where one of his partners was former Reagan-era FCC Chairman Mark Fowler.
For the past decade, he also advised Mr. Gore on economic issues, and was a senior adviser to the Clinton campaign and transition team.
Mr. Gore, of course, has made the embrace of the "information superhighway" one of the hallmarks of his vice presidency.
But despite the collapse of the Bell Atlantic-TCI merger, a megadeal that was supposed to jump-start the telecommunications revolution, both he and Mr. Hundt insist there is no embarrassment about how it turned out.
"As everyone knows very well, they were on the rocks and looking for a reason to call it off," Mr. Gore told reporters after the deal collapsed.
And Mr. Hundt, while acknowledging that rate regulation "is never painless," says the FCC vote will take excessive profits out of cable-TV rates until competition makes regulation unnecessary.
At the same time, he says, it will spur cable companies to invest for the future in new and unregulated services.
"The public is our No. 1 customer," says Blair Levin, Mr. Hundt's top aide.
"Industry clearly is a customer too, but it is a different relationship than with, say, Federal Express.
We're not seeking 100% happiness."
