In computer software, too much progress can be a bad thing.
Novell Inc. is finding this out the hard way.
As the dominant supplier of networking software for personal computers, Novell in recent years has earned a loyal following and sterling profits.
It has invested heavily in new products and repelled repeated attacks by rivals.
In recent months, Novell even has absorbed, seemingly without punishment, the release by archrival Microsoft Corp. of a ballyhooed networking program.
"I feel good about what we're doing," says Raymond Noorda, chief executive officer of the Provo, Utah, company.
Yet while well-positioned to defend its networking franchise, Novell's growth has slowed dramatically -- and for an unusual reason.
Most high-tech companies worry that new products will take too much away too quickly from established products, triggering a painful transition from one "generation" to another.
Novell faces the opposite problem.
Its customers are stubbornly sticking to older versions of its flagship Netware line because the newest version, Netware 4, upsets routines and requires too much re-education.
"It's a complete and total paradigm shift.
And that's the problem," says Ronald Neely, president of the Mid-Missouri Netware users group.
Everyone agrees that Netware 4, released a year ago, contains an important advance.
Past versions of the program only support a few hundred people on a network, forcing large organizations to maintain many clusters of networks.
To enter each cluster, a person needs a separate password and log-on; it isn't uncommon for a person to log on to a half-dozen different networks in the course of a day.
Netware 4 creates a single directory system across these clusters, eliminating the need for more than one password and log-on.
This advance will make it possible, for instance, for employees of Commonwealth Edison Co., a large Novell customer, to communicate more quickly with one another in the event of an emergency at one of the utility's nuclear-power plants.
Nevertheless, Commonwealth resisted adopting the new Netware for months and only recently began making the switch.
"Novell could've made it smoother," says Christopher Dumas, the utility's network coordinator.
One obstacle that initially stopped Mr. Dumas in his tracks: The new program meant that he had to issue nearly everyone at the company new passwords.
Novell plans to release an updated Netware 4 this summer that will make the shift easier.
Mr. Noorda, meanwhile, thinks customer acceptance for the program is growing.
The switchover to a more advanced form of Netware, however, isn't Novell's only headache.
The company is struggling to make good on its acquisition last June of Unix Systems Laboratories Inc. from American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
The purchase instantly made Novell the leading supplier of Unix, a computer operating system popular among scientists and engineers.
(An operating system controls the basic functions of a computer, such as opening and closing files and managing the flow of data between the machine's various hardware pieces.)
But so far Novell has failed to exploit its Unix asset, for which it paid nearly $600 million in combined new stock and writeoffs.
David Card, an analyst at International Data Corp., calls the purchase "a bad investment."
The sticking point is making Netware mesh with Unix.
Novell says it plans to close the gap gradually between these two distinctly different approaches to software.
Meanwhile, the company is telling customers to rely on Netware for sharing printers, files and mail.
Unix, it says, is best suited for controlling so-called server computers, which feed information and services to databases and other programs used by individuals.
This distinction between Netware and Unix strikes many as arbitrary and reflects Novell's unwillingness to embrace Unix out of a fear that it will undercut its traditional products.
"Novell is treating Unix as a side bet," says Jamie Lewis, president of the Burton Group, a consultancy in Salt Lake City.
Novell's handling of Unix "is the company's biggest weakness right now," he adds.
"It reflects a confused strategy about operating systems."
This confusion may hamper the progress of Unix, which for years has fought an uphill battle against operating systems offered by Microsoft or by computer makers themselves.
When he bought Unix, Mr. Noorda promised to "unify" its various strains, thus making it a stronger competitor with Microsoft's Windows and Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh.
But Novell's effort to sell "source licenses" for Unix, which would give buyers the power to reshape the software in any way they saw fit, might make Unix even more fragmented, some say.
Novell defends its stewardship of Unix, arguing that its relationship to Netware reflects the differing ways in which the programs are used.
"There are two jobs file networks and applications servers, and there always will be," says Michael DeFazio, who runs Novell's Unix business.
Critics, however, say Novell must make it possible to at least do these two jobs on the same computer, which currently isn't possible.
Mr. DeFazio concedes the point and insists Novell will accomplish this by 1995.
For his part, Mr. Noorda seems unruffled by the difficulties in taming Unix or managing the shift between Netware's generations.
One of the handful of managers responsible during the 1980s for turning PC software into a large, global industry, Mr. Noorda, now 69 years old and ailing, is searching for a successor.
In recent years, his reluctance to surrender the reins has contributed to the departure of several senior managers at the company.
Meanwhile, Mr. Noorda's past attempts at merging with another software giant -- talks with Lotus Development Corp. and Microsoft fell apart in the early 1990s -- still may give the impression that the company is in search of a suitor.
But Mr. Noorda makes it plain that Novell has what it takes to remain independent -- and survive his departure.
"We're pretty confident we're going to continue to do well," he says.
NOVELL Inc. acquired Unix Systems Laboratories Inc. for $346 million in Novell stock.
Last Monday's Corporate Focus article said Novell's cost was nearly $600 million in combined new stock and writeoffs.
