Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell, locked in a feud with his former law firm, abruptly resigned, adding to the chaos in a Clinton administration beset with Whitewater troubles.
The resignation, which surprised even senior Justice Department officials, leaves the leadership of the department reeling from the second top-level resignation in recent weeks.
In January, Philip Heymann quit as deputy attorney general, citing bad "chemistry" with Attorney General Janet Reno.
An administration official said Mr. Hubbell's decision was influenced by the knowledge that his former partners at the Rose Law Firm, Little Rock, Ark., would meet last night to vote on whether to refer the dispute to the Arkansas Bar Association.
The escalating feud involves Mr. Hubbell's expenses and billing practices at the firm and his representation of a company owned by his brother-in-law.
In his resignation letter to President Clinton, Mr. Hubbell said, "Unfortunately, because of public speculation about me and my former law firm, I will have to spend a significant amount of my personal time on an internal matter with my former partners."
The publicity diminishes his effectiveness, he said, and "distracts from your agenda."
In a letter to Mr. Hubbell, Mr. Clinton said: "I know your accomplishments in office will outlast any interest in the private matters that have arisen from your prior law practice."
The president later told reporters in Boston that Mr. Hubbell "did the right thing" in resigning, but added that he found it "hard to believe" that his longtime friend had done anything wrong.
While Mr. Hubbell's resignation stemmed from the dispute with his law firm, his announcement drew attention yesterday to Whitewater.
Mr. Hubbell's name has been linked to the Whitewater controversy, which has engulfed the administration and led to the recent resignation of White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum.
White House aides said U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor, a friend of Mr. Hubbell, talked with Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty on Sunday to alert him that Mr. Hubbell was seriously considering resigning.
Mr. Hubbell felt that he needed time to deal with the Rose conflict.
Mr. McLarty informed the president, but Mr. Clinton didn't talk with Mr. Hubbell.
Yesterday morning, Mr. Kantor called Mr. McLarty to tell him that Mr. Hubbell would indeed resign.
Rose has asked Mr. Hubbell to turn over backup documentation for his expense reports, in an effort to discover if he billed personal charges to the firm or its clients.
Mr. Hubbell wrote himself checks on a firm bank account without sufficient documentation, a person at Rose has said.
Rose partners are also unhappy about Mr. Hubbell's unsuccessful representation of P.O.M. Inc., owned by his brother-in-law, Seth "Skeeter" Ward.
The firm has had to absorb about $500,000 in litigation costs that P.O.M. said it couldn't pay, according to a person at the firm.
And because Mr. Hubbell agreed to take the case on a contingency-fee basis, the firm was forced to swallow roughly another $500,000 in unbilled time.
Rose's managing partner, Ronald Clark, didn't return phone calls yesterday, but previously said the firm hadn't concluded anything as a result of its review.
A person at the firm yesterday said, "We do not contemplate Mr. Hubbell's return to the firm."
Mr. Hubbell has also come under fire for his representation of the Resolution Trust Corp. after it took over Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, which was owned by James McDougal.
Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton were partners with Mr. McDougal and his ex-wife Susan in Whitewater Development Co.
Mr. Hubbell and the Rose Law Firm represented the RTC in a suit against Madison's auditor.
There have been allegations that Mr. Hubbell and the firm failed to reveal to the RTC that the firm had represented Madison, and that Mr. Hubbell's father-in-law had been involved in tangled litigation with the thrift.
In addition, RTC auditors are in Little Rock reviewing the firm's bills to make sure that all charges have been documented.
A subdued Ms. Reno highly praised Mr. Hubbell at a news conference called to announce his resignation, which he didn't attend.
"There are no words capable of fully conveying to you my deep respect and admiration for Webb Hubbell or how sad this event makes me," she said.
"He has been a tireless crusader for doing justice, for doing the right thing."
She added, "I don't believe he did a thing wrong."
She credited him with opening up the department's information policy, increasing the staffs of the civil rights and antitrust divisions, and pushing "major issues in immigration and environmental enforcement and equality for the disabled."
Mr. Hubbell's role has long been the target of speculation.
A close friend of Mr. Clinton and former law partner of Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Hubbell was assigned to the department from the first days of the administration, well before Ms. Reno took office in March last year.
Several critics speculated that he ran the department before Ms. Reno took office and has since been the real power, because of his ties to the White House.
But Mr. Hubbell, Mr. Heymann and other department officials have insisted Ms. Reno is the real boss.
Separately, a lawyer for Susan McDougal said she no longer had any Whitewater or Madison records in her possession.
Bobby McDaniel, the lawyer, said at a news conference in Little Rock yesterday that Ms. McDougal had one of her brothers deliver a box of Whitewater documents to the guard house at the Arkansas governor's mansion in 1991 at the request of then-Gov.
She also turned over five full boxes of documents to the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in the late 1980s, Mr. McDaniel said.
He said the Clintons had never returned her documents and that she had no copies.
