The government's savings-and-loan cleanup agency suggested that the Rose Law Firm, where Hillary Rodham Clinton and several administration officials were partners, may have improperly failed to disclose its dealings with a failed Arkansas thrift.
The Resolution Trust Corp.'s contractor-oversight office listed several instances when the firm didn't disclose its past connections with Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan to the RTC and to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
The FDIC took over Madison in early 1989, and the RTC inherited the failed thrift when that agency was formed in August 1989.
The FDIC and the RTC hired Rose to handle Madison-related affairs after the thrift failed.
The RTC report was dated Feb. 8 and made public after Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York, the ranking Republican on the Senate Banking Committee, commented on it during a hearing on the RTC's performance.
In a separate report last week, the FDIC said it hadn't found evidence that the Rose firm violated conflict-of-interest rules that were in force at the time.
Testifying at the committee hearing yesterday, acting FDIC Chairman Andrew Hove said the agency's rules at the time covered only actual conflicts.
"If we had dealt with the appearance of conflict, it is likely that the conclusion would have been different," he said.
RTC disclosure rules, as well as the current FDIC ones, are tougher than the old FDIC rules.
The contractor office said the report was being given to the RTC's general counsel for any "appropriate" action.
The matter probably will be handled by an RTC-FDIC legal-conflicts committee.
That panel decides whether law firms that deal with either agency should be barred from further RTC or FDIC work for violating the agencies' rules.
Sen. D'Amato and other GOP senators on the Banking panel seized on yesterday's hearing as an opportunity to raise questions about the involvement of President and Mrs. Clinton, other administration officials and the Rose firm in the swirling controversy over Madison and Whitewater Development Corp., a real-estate company the Clintons invested in.
Mr. D'Amato said the RTC did a better job on the Rose Law Firm issue than the FDIC did in its report.
Sen. Lauch Faircloth (R., N.C.), said the FDIC report sought to exonerate the Rose firm from serious conflicts involving Mrs. Clinton and Webster Hubbell, who was a Rose partner heading an FDIC case against Frost & Co., Madison's former accounting firm.
Mr. Hubbell currently is the Justice Department's third-ranking official.
Sen. Faircloth called the FDIC report "an eight-page plea of insanity," and Sen. D'Amato termed it "eight pages of sophomoric, legalistic mumbo jumbo" that don't "hold water."
The RTC report said that Rose didn't disclose that it previously had represented Madison before the Arkansas Securities Department in the S&L's attempt to gain approval for issuing stock and acting as a broker.
The report also said that Rose didn't disclose that it had used a Frost audit of Madison's condition to support the stock-authorization request before the securities agency.
Rose filed a lawsuit on behalf of the agencies against Frost for a "defective" audit that failed to detect that Madison was insolvent, the RTC said.
Rose also didn't report that Seth Ward and Seth Ward II, Mr. Hubbell's father-in-law and brother-in-law, respectively, had filed suits against Madison, the RTC said.
It said the FDIC later learned of the matter, but an FDIC attorney decided there wasn't a conflict.
Sen. D'Amato wasn't fully satisfied with even the RTC report.
He successfully pressed the FDIC's Mr. Hove and Roger Altman, the deputy Treasury secretary and acting RTC chief executive, to agree to have the two regulatory agencies' inspectors general review how the agencies handled the Rose Law Firm issue.
Mr. Altman, a longtime friend of the Clintons, responded to a barrage of GOP questions about how he told the RTC to handle the Madison case and any contacts he has had with the White House on the matter.
He said repeatedly that his instructions were to follow "exactly identical procedures" to those used in any enforcement case.
Mr. Altman said he initiated the only meeting with White House officials early this month.
He said he asked for the meeting with White House counsel Bernard W. Nussbaum and others after getting queries from members of Congress on how the RTC would handle the case.
He said he thought the White House officials should be told that the statute of limitations on suing individuals involved in the Madison failure was to run out on Feb. 28, and that the RTC would either seek to extend the deadline or would file any lawsuits by that date.
Congress has extended the statute for Madison and many other thrifts until the end of 1995.
