Silicon Graphics Inc.'s founding chairman, James H. Clark, resigned from the company and its board late yesterday, saying he wants to start his own interactive TV software company.
The move follows more than a year of speculation among insiders about a recent rift between Mr. Clark, 49 years old, and the chief executive he hand-picked in 1984, Edward R. McCracken, who remains at his post and will continue to oversee day-today operations.
Mr. Clark, who set up Silicon Graphics' highly touted, multimedia joint-ventures with Time Warner Inc. and Nintendo, was said to be pushing the Mountain View, Calif., company to expand its graphic-chip technology into the low-priced video-game market.
Meanwhile, Mr. McCracken was thought to place a higher priority on the existing business of selling fancy workstations to engineers.
Inside the company, the outspoken Mr. Clark frequently criticized Mr. McCracken for not aggressively pursuing new markets.
In an interview, Mr. Clark said he understood why an already fast-growing company would be reluctant to jump into new markets.
He also pooh-poohed rumors about his personal rift with Mr. McCracken as "greatly exaggerated."
He added, "Anytime you've got a chairman-founder and a CEO with any kind of responsibility, there's going to be that kind of speculation."
Silicon Graphics will name a successor when its board meets next Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday.
The company announced Mr. Clark's departure after the close yesterday, two days after Mr. Clark alerted fellow board members in an evening meeting.
In after-market trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Silicon Graphics shares slipped, to $24, down 75 cents, or 3%.
Salomon Brothers analyst Jeff Canin speculated that investors overreacted, erroneously thinking that Mr. Clark, traditionally the spokesman for the company, was also responsible for day-to-day operations.
While analysts had expected Mr. Clark to step down as chairman, they were surprised that he took the further step of relinquishing his seat on the board.
Mr. Clark said he decided to do that so he could concentrate on his new venture.
He had mulled quitting for at least six months, but decided to act after extended media coverage of what he calls the "information super hype-way."
"I keep thinking the one thing that isn't seriously being addressed here is applications software," which allows consumers to use their televisions to shop, gather on-line news or to get videos on demand, among other things.
"I want to grab that opportunity."
He went to great lengths to say he would not compete with Silicon Graphics, as Steve Jobs did when he left Apple Computer Inc. to form Next Inc.
"I'm not going to do that.
I love this company.
It's like I've built a huge fortress here.
What am I going to do?
Step outside and turn a cannon on it?"
