Dallas attorney W. Charles Bundren was raised a Southern Baptist and currently attends an evangelical church that interprets the bible literally.
Which makes him the Rutherford Institute's kind of guy.
Since 1982, Mr. Bundren has assisted on more than 100 cases involving clients of the institute, a legal organization specializing in religious cases.
His most notable clients have been antiabortion protestors who, he says, were "sued by a wealthy doctor who made his money from abortion" after they repeatedly picketed his home.
"If these people don't get representation," he says, "they're going to get rolled over by the sheer weight of the pleadings."
But Windle Turley, the Dallas lawyer for the doctor, says Mr. Bundren and the Rutherford Institute are supporting religious terrorism.
"They continue to say they're exercising their First Amendment rights, but it's hogwash," he says.
The continuing struggle for America's soul has taken a decidedly litigious turn in recent years.
Angered by the rout of prayer from schools, the advance of rights for gay people and the legalization of abortion, conservative Christians who once disdained legal remedies as too worldly have decided to fight from the bar as well as the pulpit.
In doing so, they argue, they are protecting the rights of religious people and creating a level playing field for religious ideas.
But critics contend that the real goal is to impose their religious and moral beliefs on the rest of America.
"They want to break down the walls of separation between church and state," says the Rev. Robert Drinan, a Jesuit priest and former Democratic congressman who now teaches at Georgetown University Law Center.
This controversy has grown along with the number of Christian-oriented legal-aid groups.
The National Legal Foundation, Virginia Beach, Va., drafted Colorado's controversial state amendment opposing gay rights in 1992.
The American Family Association Law Center, Tupelo, Miss., has sought to ban spiritually incorrect textbooks.
Last year, the Western Center for Law and Religious Freedom, Fair Oaks, Calif., drafted a policy supporting the teaching of creationism for a California school district whose board is dominated by conservative Christians.
The American Center for Law and Justice, Virginia Beach, Va., founded in 1990 by televangelist Pat Robertson and frequently featured on his 700 Club TV show, has already represented clients in nine cases before the Supreme Court and boasts, in a news release, of legal "SWAT teams" ready to descend on schools that deny students the right to pray at high school graduations.
But Rutherford, with about 230 current cases, is the most active Christian legal group these days, representing clients that have included Jerry Falwell's Liberty University and members of the militant antiabortion group Operation Rescue.
Rutherford went before the U.S. Supreme Court recently on behalf of an antiabortion activist who was accused of conspiring to undermine the operation of a chain of abortion clinics.
Among other things, the activist foraged through storage drums behind a pathology lab in search of aborted fetuses.
(The high court ruled against the activist and her co-defendants, but Rutherford filed a petition for rehearing.)
Founded by attorney John W. Whitehead, a onetime agnostic who experienced a sudden religious conversion in 1974 after reading a book on biblical prophecy, the institute offers its services free of charge to all who come to it -- an estimated 2,000 a month -- with problems related to religious freedom.
Starting in 1982 with $200 of his own money and the family address book, Mr. Whitehead and his group now operate out of a small brick building in Charlottesville, Va.
An annual budget of $8 million from donors funds a network of six U.S. and three overseas offices manned by 10 paid staff attorneys.
The bulk of the legal work, however, is done by a nationwide network of more than 500 legal volunteers, mostly conservative Christian men who share a belief that modern society has grown increasingly hostile to religious people.
Randal Shaheen, a 33-year-old evangelical Presbyterian and special counsel at the Arnold & Porter law firm in Washington, recently represented parents in Falmouth, Mass., who opposed a public school's efforts to supply condoms to their children.
"That side of the spectrum tends to be underrepresented by large law firms," he says.
As for Mr. Bundren, he says he abandoned a partnership at a large Dallas firm in part because of his work with the institute.
"I was taking philosophical positions that people flat out didn't like," he says.
"Now I don't have to worry about some partner walking into my office and chewing me out."
Mr. Bundren started representing Rutherford clients in about 1982, he says, as he saw people with traditional religious views being harassed.
He says the biggest cases he has handled involved supporting the constitutionality of Texas' sodomy laws in 1983 and, more recently, the defense of antiabortion activists.
Although most of Rutherford's cases revolve around such bread-and-butter Christian issues, Mr. Whitehead rejects characterizations of the institute as a fundamentalist group.
He cites its representation of Hare Krishnas seeking a vegetarian alternative at a school cafeteria and Orthodox Jews in Airmont, N.Y., whose home synagogues were banned by zoning restrictions.
And while the group doesn't always win, it usually has an impact.
Rutherford's case involving a biology teacher in the Capistrano Unified School District, who wanted to teach creationism instead of evolution, was dismissed by a federal judge.
But with an appeal pending, the school district estimates that it will spend $100,000 defending itself.
"This is one of the scariest phenomena I've seen in my 30 years of education," says James Fleming, superintendent of the district.
Opposing lawyers complain that Rutherford attorneys, fueled by religious fervor, continue to litigate cases most other attorneys would have dropped.
"Once it's apparent they have no basis, they will appeal nonetheless," says Marsha Wenk, the ACLU legal director in Newark.
Mr. Whitehead concedes that some of his attorneys are "pretty zealous."
While Mr. Whitehead insists that the tax-exempt group is "apolitical," it certainly skates close to the edge on political issues.
Why did it send petitions signed by 74,000 people to the White House and the Joint Chiefs of Staff last year, urging them to go slow on the politically sensitive issue of gays in the military?
Rutherford doesn't have an opinion on the issue, Mr. Whitehead says, but was aiding military officers worried that serving alongside gays might compromise their religious beliefs.
The institute also filed a brief on behalf of about 30 state legislators in the Texas Supreme Court opposing a proposed repeal of the state's sodomy laws.
The court eventually threw out a lower court ruling that the law was unconstitutional.
Despite the criticism, Mr. Whitehead is pushing ahead with growth plans that include a public-relations campaign featuring a monthly magazine and a three-minute daily spot on 942 radio stations; he plans to double the number of regional offices in the next few years and expand overseas.
With the Clinton administration supporting gays in the military and renewed federal funding for abortion clinics, he expects demand for the group's services to grow.
"That's going to get people really concerned," he says.
"We'll be busier."
