Bond prices soared after the Federal Reserve said it will raise short-term interest rates for the second time in seven weeks.
Stock prices were mixed, and the dollar was steady.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond jumped nearly 1 1/4 points, or nearly $12.50 for each $1,000 face amount, with the yield falling to 6.85% from 6.95% Monday.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average slipped 2.30 points to 3862.55.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index edged up 0.26 to 468.80, and the Nasdaq Composite Index fell 0.96 to 796.34.
The bond market rally erupted after the Fed made an unusual announcement during yesterday's meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.
The announcement said the Fed had decided "to increase slightly the degree of pressure on reserve positions."
The move was "expected to be associated with a small increase in short-term money market interest rates."
Bond traders interpreted the announcement as a decision to raise the federal-funds rate, at which banks make overnight loans to each other, to 3.5% from 3.25%.
The Fed wouldn't confirm this yesterday, which is customary.
The size of the Fed's move will be clear today during the traditional 11:30 a.m. EST intervention period when the New York Fed's Open Market Desk moves into the market.
The Fed last moved to raise the funds rate on Feb. 4 in order to make a preemptive strike against inflationary pressures.
But the rate increase, the first in five years, sparked widespread worries in the world's financial markets that the Fed had done too little too late to head off inflationary pressures.
By late last week the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond had dropped more than seven points, or more than $70 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
Yesterday's rate boost soothed investors' fears but it wasn't expected to end the nervousness that has plagued the bond market since the Fed move on Feb. 4.
Yesterday's rally was a "sigh of relief," said John Canavan, an analyst at Stone & McCarthy Research Associates of Princeton, N.J.
"As far as whether or not it's going to be enough to get the market moving higher, I'm not so sure," he added.
"The bear market psychology still exists despite the move today and it's going to take some time to turn that around."
Peter Hirsch, managing director and head of government trading at Salomon Brothers Inc., said "this is just the second step on a relatively long road" of interest rate boosts, "and the market may not be perceiving the length of this road."
Mr. Hirsch said he doesn't think long-term interest rates are likely to return to the level of last October, when the 30-year Treasury bond yield hit 5.79%.
He said such a level isn't likely unless the economy sinks back into recession.
The stock market mostly took the Fed news in stride.
Analysts said the muted reaction was understandable because a rate rise had been so widely anticipated.
"This is not much of a news event -- it was widely signaled and largely discounted," said Abby J. Cohen, market strategist at Goldman Sachs.
Joseph Battipaglia, chief investment strategist at Gruntal, said the mild response signaled that the stock market has regained its footing after stumbling in the wake of the Feb. 4 rate increase.
"What we're seeing today is that investors have accepted the fact we're in an era of Fed tightening," he said.
But the new era of higher interest rates isn't a threat to the strength of the stock market, Mr. Battipaglia contended.
He predicted that the industrial average will make another run toward the 4000 level in April thanks to gains in corporate earnings.
"Earnings-driven momentum is replacing the interest-rate benefits the stock market has been living off for so long," Mr. Battipaglia said.
Economically sensitive stocks led the market, a further sign of investors' confidence in the economic expansion, analysts said.
Tobacco stocks were among the day's worst performers after a House health subcommittee voted to raise federal cigarette taxes by $1.25 a pack, much higher than many analysts had expected.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 0.16 to 115.04.
Stock prices were mixed.
Volume totaled 282.2 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 1,189 issues rose and 925 fell.
Bond prices rose.
The Treasury's 10-year issue gained nearly a point, or almost $10 for each $1,000 face amount, to yield 6.42%.
The dollar was steady.
In late New York trading the currency was quoted at 1.6885 marks and 106.05 yen compared with 1.6895 marks and 106.00 yen Monday.
