The Baby Bells have seen the threat and promise in the coming wireless wars, and they both look a lot like David Nevins of Baltimore.
Mr. Nevins, a Baltimore public-relations executive who bears an uncanny resemblance to Miles Silverberg on the TV show "Murphy Brown," would seem to be a model customer.
He talks almost constantly on his car phone while driving from one appointment to another, using stalled time in traffic jams to return calls and catch up on other business.
Part of his nightly ritual is cleaning out the crumpled pink message slips that accumulate on the floor throughout the day.
A cellular devotee for nearly a decade, Mr. Nevins says he wouldn't even think of boarding a train or heading onto the golf course without his portable in hand.
"I can't be out of contact with my office for four or five hours," Mr. Nevins explains during a phone interview from -- where else? -- his car.
"If I didn't have to worry about cost, I'd use it far more frequently than I do now."
For the local phone company, there's just one catch: It isn't cashing in on Mr. Nevins's cellular habit.
A rival is.
The local company is Bell Atlantic Corp. of Philadelphia, which has a virtual monopoly on the old-fashioned, wired phone network that serves the mid-Atlantic region.
But Mr. Nevins buys his cellular services from Cellular One, which is owned by a rival Baby Bell -- Southwestern Bell Corp. of San Antonio.
Little wonder, then, that the seven regional Bell companies look at the wireless revolution with a mixture of dread and excitement.
Spun off from the old AT&T empire a decade ago, the Baby Bells are some of the most wired-up companies in the world, deriving more than 90% of their profits from wired telephone service.
Any breakthroughs in the untethered and unfettered future of wireless technology would seem to threaten them most.
The Baby Bells, after all, don't get paid when customers simply sidestep their wired networks.
"At some point it will get more cost-efficient for customers" to use wireless services, says Robert Barada, vice president of corporate strategy for Pacific Telesis Group, the San Francisco-based Baby Bell that serves California and Nevada.
"Clearly, that's when wireless will start to eat into the wire-line market."
So the Baby Bells face a Hobson's choice: They can sit idly by and let the wireless future, someday, render their networks all but obsolete; or they can dive into the wireless fray -- and perhaps help accelerate the arrival of that same scenario.
And that's where the promise of wireless comes in for the Baby Bells: For the most part, they are choosing the latter route, offering cellular-phone service, investing in foreign cellular markets, and starting up wireless data services.
They also are taking on a new kind of wire-based partner -- cable-TV companies -- in the hope of keeping their land lines humming with all manner of new interactive services.
They must chase the wireless future with no small amount of urgency.
Until now, customers have had their choice of just two companies for cellular-phone service in any given market, typically the hometown Baby Bell and a competitor.
About half of the nation's 14 million wireless customers currently buy cellular services from the cellular businesses owned by their local Bell companies.
This spring, federal regulators will begin doling out thousands of licenses -- up to seven in each market -- for access to the parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that will house the next generation of cellular technology: personal communications services.
To hear proponents tell it, PCS will be a lot cheaper and more customer-friendly than today's cellular service -- and have a lot more features.
Though the Baby Bells are among dozens of companies planning to bid for PCS licenses, regulators will exclude them from bidding for some prime licenses because of their already-sizable presence in cellular phone service.
The Bells plan to retrofit and upgrade their existing networks to be able to match the enhanced services of PCS competitors.
PCS offers another threat, as well.
Traditional cellular service often ends up routing a call onto the wireline of a Baby Bell, and hence offers at least a little revenue to the phone company.
PCS networks may one day let one "pocket communicator" zap a call directly to another, without ever having to jump onto a Baby Bell's line.
That would avoid the payment of any access fees to the phone company.
The PCS threat is "the big one," says analyst Marion Boucher of Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette in New York.
"It's the form of communication that could make the existing land-locked network obsolete."
Even regular cellular service poses a threat to the Baby Bells, letting long-distance calls bypass their local networks.
At risk is the $20 billion in annual fees the seven regional Bells currently receive from long-distance providers for routing calls to their local customers.
That represents a hefty 25% of the Baby Bells' annual revenues.
Cellular systems -- in particular, those owned by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. through its planned $12.6 billion acquisition of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. -- could let a long-distance provider avoid paying such "access fees."
"Every time somebody makes a long-distance call without using the Bells, they lose," says Jeffrey Miller, a partner at Andersen Consulting Inc. in New York.
Pacific Telesis was so worried about the wireless future that it decided last year to take the unusual step of spinning off its cellular operations into a separate company.
That new cellular unit will be able to compete more aggressively, unshackled from regulatory restrictions.
The spinoff is expected to be completed this spring.
Other Bells have taken less drastic steps.
Southwestern Bell started girding for the wireless war early, snapping up cellular properties in 1987, and paying what seemed like a ridiculously high price -- $50 per potential subscriber -- in the Washington, D.C., Baltimore and Chicago markets.
"Wall Street laughed at them at the time," recalls Steven R. Yanis, a telecommunications analyst with Kidder, Peabody & Co. in New York.
Wall Street isn't laughing anymore.
Today, those same properties would cost more than $300 per potential subscriber if they were for sale -- which they aren't -- and Southwestern Bell is at the top of the cellular heap among the Bells.
Part of the company's winning strategy is to price services lower than its competitors.
Customers have responded by flocking to the company in record numbers.
The Baby Bell added an eye-popping 200,000 cellular subscribers in the fourth quarter alone.
That gave Southwestern Bell a year-end subscriber base of more than two million cellular customers, the largest among the Bells.
The company also boasts the highest penetration rate among the Bells, 5.7% of potential subscribers, compared with the Baby Bell average of 3.8%.
The cellular unit is also unbelievably efficient.
Revenue per employee, a benchmark of worker productivity, is almost double the cellular-industry average, at $405,000.
Similarly, the number of subscribers per employee is 600 at Southwestern Bell; the industry average is half that.
"Southwestern Bell is clearly the best operator," Mr. Yanis says.
Pacific Telesis was another early believer in cellular.
Today, it has more than one million subscribers.
The planned spinoff will free up the wireline telephone company to go after the choicest PCS licenses this spring.
It will also put the Baby Bell in the unusual position of competing against its former sibling for wireless customers.
PacTel's domestic operations are bolstered by a strong international presence, including a lucrative venture in Germany that continues to exceed Wall Street's expectations.
Atlanta-based BellSouth Corp. also gets kudos for its cellular operations, which claim over 1.5 million customers.
More than half of the company's potential subscribers are located overseas.
The Baby Bell's cellular operations are particularly strong in Latin America, where the basic land-line infrastructure is so bad that many people use cellular as their primary form of communications.
BellSouth also has a nationwide paging system and a major stake in a wireless data service.
Outside its home territory, Bell Atlantic got into the cellular game fairly late, announcing its arrival in 1992 with the purchase of Metro Mobile CTS Inc., one of the largest non-Bell, independent cellular companies in the nation.
The acquisition extended Bell Atlantic's cellular reach into the backyards of its former siblings in the Northeast, Southeast and Southwest.
Bell Atlantic today claims about one million subscribers.
The cellular unit continues to aggressively roll out new services, a hallmark of Southwestern Bell, as well.
Both companies offer a one-person, one-number service that allows customers to get "follow-me" calling from the office to the car and home.
Ameritech Corp., Chicago, U S West Inc., Denver, and Nynex Corp., White Plains, N.Y., are considered the least aggressive cellular performers among the Bells.
The companies have done little to build on their cellular franchises over the years, perhaps leaving them the worst prepared for the coming showdown with new wireless competitors.
Ameritech has 860,000 subscribers, followed by U S West with 601,000 subscribers.
Dead last, with 575,000 subscribers, is Nynex, which has been significantly upgrading its network and introducing a raft of new services in an effort to lure new customers.
Marketing plans, strategic alliances and overseas investments matter little, of course, to customers like Mr. Nevins of Baltimore.
Like any consumer, his primary concern is getting the best deal in town, from whoever happens to be offering it.
"I'm going to go with whatever company offers the best service, followed by the best price," Mr. Nevins says.
"It doesn't matter to me if that happens to be Bell Atlantic, or somebody else."
Ms. Cauley is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
The Baby Bells serve about half of the nation's 14 million cellular customers.
Some have a stronger base than others from which to meet the rising competition in wireless services.*
