Mexico closed its banks and securities markets for a day in the wake of the Wednesday night assassination of the country's leading presidential candidate, but prices of Mexican stocks and bonds fell sharply in trading in London, New York and Chicago.
After tumbling in early London trading following news of the death of Luis Donaldo Colosio, Mexican securities recovered to what money managers said were respectable levels considering the seriousness of the country's political situation.
"You have mixed signals from Mexico," said Paul Wargnier, a portfolio manager at Trust Co. of the West in Los Angeles.
"But this event hasn't changed our outlook for Mexico, which is one of continued success from the economic measures the government has enacted and accelerated economic activity which we believe results in stock-market appreciation."
The trading activity in markets outside of Mexico demonstrated the growing global scope of financial markets.
A decade ago investors holding Mexican securities would have been stuck with their positions in the midst of a similar crisis.
"Governments always think closing markets is a good idea, because they think crashes in currencies and markets lead to civil unrest," said Richard Watkins, chief executive officer of Latinvest Securities Ltd. in London.
"Rarely is there a government that is willing to say, `let the markets decide.'"
Nonetheless, he added that the assassination of "a very talented guy who was likely to be the next president was so sad and traumatic to Mexicans that having a day off and closing the financial system isn't such a bad thing."
Among big Mexican stocks that trade in the form of American depositary receipts, which represent a set number of underlying shares, telephone company Telefonos de Mexico SA (Telmex) fell 3 5/8, or 5.7%, to 60 1/8 and Grupo Televisa SA, a television and film production company, fell 2 3/8, or 4%, to 56 3/8.
Mexico Fund Inc., a closed-end mutual fund, fell 1 3/8, or 4.3%, to 30 5/8, and Mexico Equity & Income Fund was down 1, or 4.6%, at 20 3/4.
"The ADR market in Mexican stocks hasn't been cause for great concern," said Mr. Watkins.
Traders "marked the prices down but it wasn't a great blood bath."
But that wasn't the case with more speculative Mexican investments, such as Telmex options that trade on the Chicago Board Options Exchange, where the price of the "April 65" Telmex call options contract plunged about 50%.
Record Set The estimated 100,000 contracts that changed hands were more than twice this year's daily average of about 45,000 contracts and set a record for Telmex options for a single day's trading.
"We do a lot of business in the Telmex options, but not like this," says Henry Nothnagel, senior vice president for derivative products at Kemper Securities.
"The assassination adds to the political uncertainty in Mexico, which causes people to turn to options both as protection for their stock holdings and to speculate."
Meanwhile, dollar-denominated Mexican Pars bonds, one of the "Brady bonds" that are widely held by U.S. and other foreign investors, fell to 70 from 72 1/4 Wednesday.
Michael Marshall, a director at Salomon Brothers Inc. in New York, said that at one point, they traded as low as 67.
The sell-off also spread to Argentine, Venezuelan and Brazilian Brady bonds.
"Even before Wednesday's assassination, developing country debt had been selling off," said Victor Miller, a money manager at Global Advisors, a fixed-income unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America in Newark, N.J.
"Today was just another lousy day for emerging market debt."
By contrast, Mexico's currency, the peso, hardly moved at all.
One reason was because banks in Mexico were closed, and the peso isn't widely traded internationally.
Traders also said Mexican officials have made it broadly known that they have reserves in excess of the money supply and are prepared to defend the peso within its prescribed trading band against the dollar.
Initially, Mexican stock and bond prices were marked sharply down in London trading with some stocks being priced 10% to 15% below their Wednesday closing prices.
But by the time trading began in New York, sentiments had calmed, partly because of Securities and Exchange Commission actions to delay trading in Telmex's ADRs, Mexico's biggest stock and one heavily owned by U.S. and other non-Mexican investors, and partly because of remarks by President Clinton.
At the SEC's request, trading in Telmex ADRs on the Nasdaq Stock Market was suspended for roughly 30 minutes "to give investors the opportunity to find out the facts in the hope that we would avoid any undue movement," in Mexican securities, said Mr. Clinton.
The president also said that Mexican institutions were "fundamentally strong" and that he had spoken with Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen "to make sure that if there was serious trading in Mexican currency, we could try to help stabilize that."
"There is a question mark associated with the peso," said Jaime de Pinies, Madrid-based director of research at Santander Investment, the investment bank of Grupo Santander that has a large operation in Mexico.
"But given that the U.S. Treasury will back the peso, I rule out any major change in Mexican exchange-rate policy."
In fact, the U.S. Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve jointly established a $6 billion swap facility with the Mexican government to support the peso when currency markets reopen today.
Tracy Gordon, a spokeswoman for Fidelity Investments in Boston, said the big U.S. mutual-fund company had "not seen much in the way of redemptions."
Mr. Wargnier of Trust Co. of the West in Los Angeles, said that in yesterday's hectic environment, "I've been a little more aggressive purchasing securities that I've wanted, and I've slowed down selling shares that I've intended to sell."
Money managers noted that with the increasing globalization of securities markets and the growing investment in one country's securities by residents in other countries, it is harder for a nation to closet its markets -- unless it wants to do without foreign investment entirely.
"In a modern global environment, it's impossible for a country to shut down its securities markets," said Robert Pennells, head of equities at Lehman Global Asset Management Ltd., London.
"We can trade Hong Kong stocks in London and New York stocks in London before they open."
But he said share prices quoted outside of a stock's home are often "at distressed levels because the traders are assuming a large risk in maintaining a home market away from the security."
Faced with the option of holding onto Mexican stocks or dumping them at up to 15% below where they traded a day earlier, he says: "We've decided to take a wait-and-see attitude and not get caught up in the hysteria of the moment."
By the end of last year, foreigners owned $21.9 billion, or roughly 40%, of all Mexican treasury securities and other government obligations.
Robert Meyer, a portfolio manager at Morgan Stanley Asset Management in New York, estimated that foreigners generally account for at least half of the trading in Mexican shares.
"Closing Mexican markets doesn't stop the trading," said John Purcell, director of emerging markets research at Salomon Brothers Inc. in New York.
"Virtually all trading in Mexican Brady bonds is done outside Mexico in major financial centers like New York, London and Tokyo."
Of course, some Mexican stocks and bonds don't trade outside the country.
Although investors were able to buy and sell shares in companies like Telmex and Grupo Televisa, with Mexico's stock market closed "you're stuck if you own a stock that isn't traded in ADR form," said a trader at a big New York investment bank.
Yesterday, investors also found some of the biggest Mexican stocks they owned -- such as Cemex SA, Grupo Financiero Bancomer SA and Grupo Carso SA -- were relatively illiquid and could only be unloaded at a significant loss.
Though these companies have issued ADRs in the U.S., the receipts are unlisted and must trade either over-the-counter or only between large qualified institutional investors.
Traders said that yesterday the spread between what dealers were willing to buy and sell ADRs in cement giant Cemex was atan extremely wide $3 to $4.
On Wednesday, Cemex closed at 49 3/8 to 49 7/8.
At one point, the bid offer spread for Grupo Bancomer was between $31 and $34; the day before a bank holding company's ADRs closed at $33 1/2 to $34.
With such wide spreads, "there was relatively little business," said one trader.
That's because brokers who usually make a market in these stocks often use the local Mexican market to lay off their trades or arbitrage between the ADRs and the underlying shares that trade in Mexico City.
But with Mexican markets closed, "they won't stick their neck out, and they won't do anything in size," said the trader.
