In a major shift in strategy, Philip Morris Cos. sued the city of San Francisco to try to overturn one of the nation's toughest antismoking ordinances.
With the suit, Philip Morris's first legal challenge to a city smoking ordinance, the company is stepping up its fight against a new generation of smoking restrictions at the local level.
The San Francisco ordinance, which went into effect yesterday, bans smoking in offices and calls for a ban on smoking in restaurants by Jan. 1, 1995.
Philip Morris asked a state court to declare the ordinance invalid and unenforceable on the ground that it is pre-empted by state safety regulations.
In the past 12 months, dozens of cities around the country have passed extremely tough antismoking laws, bolstered by last year's Environmental Protection Agency report that found second-hand cigarette smoke causes cancer.
"Local ordinances are by far the most important successes in tobacco control," says Mark Pertschuk, co-director of Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights in Berkeley, Calif.
"At the state and federal level, the tobacco industry is remarkably powerful, and you do not see the kind of successes we see at the local level."
Steve Parrish, Philip Morris's general counsel, said the company will "seriously consider" challenging other restrictive city ordinances around the country.
"There have been a lot of them coming up, especially since the EPA report came out last year," said Mr. Parrish.
"We think they are a potential problem."
Philip Morris joined with a group of local businesses to file the suit.
As part of its fight against tough smoking restrictions on the local level, Philip Morris has been aggressively lobbying at state capitals to pass laws that pre-empt restrictive municipal ordinances.
Antismoking activists in North Carolina are fuming at a tobacco industry-supported law that regulates smoking in public places but contains no actual restrictions on smoking.
"It's worse than bad," said Adam Goldstein, an assistant professor of family medicine at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
The law, which was passed last year, contains a provision that prevents cities from enacting more restrictive laws governing smoking in public places.
"It will stymie a lot of the action that would have occurred as a result of the EPA report," said Dr. Goldstein, who notes that North Carolina cities rushed to pass tough local laws before the bill became law.
Dr. Goldstein said the tobacco industry actively supported the law.
"It was their bill," he said.
The issue is somewhat different in the California case.
Philip Morris, which joined with local bar and hotel owners to fight the ordinance, argues that the city is pre-empted from passing the law because state workplace safety rules are responsible for regulating the safety of workers.
Philip Morris notes that in a similar lawsuit in 1992, a California judge threw out a San Francisco ordinance regulating the use of video display terminals in private businesses.
But in recent years cities have begun to assert more authority in determining what is safe for their residents.
"There are many arguments for allowing this type of thing to be decided locally," said Gerald Frug, a professor of law at the Harvard Law School.
"It could be decided either way."
He added that the question of pre-emption is "becoming more of an issue because cities have become more concerned" about protecting workers.
But Jeffrey Tanenbaum, a San Francisco attorney representing Philip Morris, asserted that San Francisco has exceeded its authority.
"If every local government took it upon itself to issue varying workplace regulations," he said, "it would be impossible to do business in this nation."
California, in particular, has become increasingly inhospitable to smokers, which is presumably another reason for Philip Morris's strong show of force.
Last year, the Los Angeles City Council passed a law banning smoking in the city's 7,000 restaurants.
The ban, which has already taken effect, is being challenged in court by local businesses.
Antismoking activists say the challenge is funded by the tobacco industry.
In San Francisco, Philip Morris acknowledges it approached businesses about joining forces on the lawsuit.
California is also one of the only states in the country to buy advertisements on popular television shows to run antitobacco ads.
The program is financed by the state cigarette tax.
"California has set a precedent that is going to sweep across the U.S.," says Angela Alioto, president of San Francisco's board of supervisors and the author of the city's antismoking law.
