Alarmed by the recent resignation of several key reformers from the Russian government, President Clinton's top adviser on Russia warned that any backsliding by Moscow could lead to hyperinflation and political chaos.
The warning of Strobe Talbott was a dramatic departure from his usually upbeat assessments about Russia's future and his own earlier suggestion that Russia needed "less shock and more therapy."
That comment, made after the strong showing of Russian fascists and Communists in last month's parliamentary elections, was criticized bitterly by Russian reformers who claimed that it undermined their efforts to make politically painful, but necessary, reforms.
After touting Russia as its No. 1 foreign-policy success, the Clinton administration now is finding its policy captive to overseas developments that it never could have expected to control.
Testifying before a skeptical Senate Foreign Operations Subcommittee, Mr. Talbott said that Russia's "leaders must realize that slowing the pace of reform will not ease the social pain of economic transition.
In fact, quite the contrary.
Gradual reform is a prescription for hyperinflation and economic collapse."'
While insisting that American bilateral assistance shouldn't be linked to Russia's future macroeconomic performance, Mr. Talbott said the U.S. would only support increased multilateral lending to Russia -- including funds to ease the social burden for ordinary Russians -- if Moscow exercised "fiscal and monetary responsibility."
At the same time, it isn't clear how much of an effect the warning will have on Moscow's decision making.
Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin said recently that his government was abandoning "market romanticism" and would now concentrate on boosting production in oldstyle Communist heavy industries -- a course U.S. officials fear will lead to larger budget deficits and raging inflation.
However, Mr. Chernomyrdin also has invited an International Monetary Fund team to Moscow this week to help formulate a new Russian budget -- a clear bid to free up $1.5 billion in promised funds.
The Clinton administration is holding out the promise of increased multilateral lending as an incentive for continued reform.
But many Russians are skeptical that the lenders will ever do enough to justify the pain of continued change.
Mr. Talbott and Brian Atwood, head of the Agency for International Development, spent a good part of the hearing defending the Clinton administration's overall policy toward Russia, particularly the management of the $2.5 billion foreign-aid program for the former Soviet republics.
Subcommittee Chairman Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.) suggested that the Clinton administration was getting too close to President Boris Yeltsin and neglecting other important reformers.
And several senators raised concerns that the U.S. was allowing Russia to dictate U.S. foreign policy, particularly on the question of whether to bring Eastern Europe into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Speaking after the hearing, Mr. Atwood expressed concern that the subcommittee's detailed questioning could slow down future disbursement of aid.
"We can get them the detail they ask for, but it will slow down the process considerably," he said.
