Peter Walter, the narrator of the German writer Uwe Timm's novel "Headhunter" (New Directions, 402 pages, $22.95), is a classic success story.
As the novel opens, Walter -- who has scaled the sales ladder all the way from door-to-door magazine peddler through life-insurance agent and business-stationery vendor to international commodities broker -- has been arrested and tried for siphoning off funds.
With his business partner, Dembrowski, he's skipped off to sunny Spain on the day of his verdict.
There, while Dembrowski plays tennis, frolics with his young mistress and tries not to think too much about the wife and children he left back in Hamburg, Walter researches a book on Easter Island.
Though he's never visited it, the island has long fascinated Walter, not only because of those famous stone statues but because of the sudden social collapse that caused some statues to be left half-finished.
What brought on that collapse?
Walter hypothesizes that an "immense collective boredom" led first to statue-making and then to chaos and cannibalism.
For Mr. Timm, plainly, the creation of those mammoth, mystifying figures is a metaphor for the 1980s fortune-building of Boesky and Milken and other would-be Masters of the Universe -- and thus a warning about the excesses of capitalism.
"Headhunter," like Tom Wolfe's "Bonfire of the Vanities," is a meditation on the anthropological meaning of '80s financial wheeler-dealering; like Don DeLillo's "White Noise," it's a reflection on the mystery of life, language and computerized banking systems.
It's also rife with images of cannibalism.
Modern life, for Mr. Timm, is an endless series of variations on dog-eat-dog.
Walter recalls that during World War II, his grandmother put bread on her family's table by making grenades in a munitions factory.
His uncle, a writer, is also a cannibal of sorts, "digging with his questions into Grandmother's memories" as he asks about that wartime job, hoping to feed professionally on her life.
Not too far beneath Mr. Timm's preoccupation with contemporary brutality lies a vivid sense of the horror of World War II.
Yet that war is remembered not for its death camps (the only Nazi is a Latvian SS man who was disarmed by Walter's great-grandmother), but for Allied bombing of German residential neighborhoods.
Likewise, Mr. Timm implicitly ascribes the aspects of German finance that he finds offensive not to individuals, but to the influence of the financial establishment of another country (America).
Walter recalls a foul-mouthed colleague who had brought a "taste for rich fecal language back with him from New York where he'd worked in one of the most respected brokerage firms."
The very title of Mr. Timm's novel is an anti-U.S. dig: it refers to Walter's friend Rob, a job-placement specialist from America, who makes "the serious mistake of putting headhunter into German and introducing himself as Kopfjager."
In Germany, the term "inevitably suggests small, black Indian heads dried in the sand, with their overlong hair and lashes."
To sensitive Germans, even the language of American business is a savage proposition.
Sure enough, unlike German managers, Rob (whose name is a pun: he does rob) fires employees coldbloodedly, with no regard for longstanding personal relationships.
"Modern American management," he explains coolly.
It is safe to say that some American readers will find Mr. Timm's world picture more than a bit skewed.
Yet Mr. Timm's views on American vs. German manners and morals shouldn't blind readers to this novel's virtues, among them its insights into the erotics of commerce ("I'm convinced," Walter says, "that sexuality always underlies trading"), the psychology of salesmanship, and what Walter calls "the esthetics of money."
In Brazil, to which he flees after the authorities catch up to him in Spain, Walter reflects on the soiled, taped-together Brazilian currency.
He observes: "You can feel the stability of a currency -- at any rate, I can.
The pleasure of handling the money.
It's not by chance that in Switzerland . . . you get the impression that you're always getting freshly printed money for change."
Every time one begins to feel exasperated by Mr. Timm's tendency to play down German failings and blame the U.S., one reads something fresh, quirky, unexpected and illuminating -- for instance, a convincing analysis of what makes high heels attractive.
Moreover, for all we've read in recent years about why communism collapsed, a long speech by Dembrowski comparing the psychology of East German economic planners to that of West German stockbrokers proves gripping and perceptive.
One shocking aspect of this novel is the sloppiness of Peter Tegel's translation.
Errors of grammar, spelling and punctuation abound, along with awkward Germanisms.
Mr. Tegel's grasp of American usage is amazingly slippery: He uses the words car and truck interchangeably, speaks of "taking legal proceedings," and so on.
For all its shortcomings, "Headhunter" deserved to be rendered into English more meticulously.
