House Democrats, trying to craft an alternative health plan, are coming face-to-face with the question of how much they can spend to placate business interests and win support for the goal of universal health coverage.
A draft bill before the House Ways and Means health subcommittee would significantly cut the level of benefits and business subsidies proposed by the Clinton administration.
But there is strong pressure to restore funds to help small companies finance health insurance they would be required to help buy for their workers.
"I have to help small business, no doubt about it," said Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski.
But given the hostile stance the small-business lobby -- particularly National Federation of Independent Business -- has taken toward the overall health-reform effort, subcommittee Chairman Fortney "Pete" Stark (D., Calif.) is reluctant to commit himself yet.
"The day the NFIB signs up for something, I might consider it," Mr. Stark said.
Without such a commitment, he joked, making concessions now would be "like feeding dog biscuits to a pit bull."
The practical politics is best seen in the case of Rep. Sander Levin, a Michigan Democrat.
In other circumstances, he might be described as a liberal, but he finds himself to the right of Mr. Stark on health-care reform.
He is one of several swing votes on the subcommittee pushing for concessions to small business.
But his Detroit-area district also reflects the heavy presence of the auto industry, which has a stake in health-care subsidies for early retirees.
The Stark plan would be less generous than the administration's on both counts.
Modifying it to buy peace with these interests would add billions to its cost and force the subcommittee or full Ways and Means panel to consider offsetting savings or additional taxes.
To keep his plan from widening the deficit, Mr. Stark already has included a possible 0.8% payroll tax on employers.
But even this provision, described as temporary, is viewed with irritation by the committee leadership.
Meanwhile, if Democrats restore funds to blunt business oposition, they will face criticism from labor and the left that the plan doesn't go far enough in such areas as mental health and preventive care.
The NFIB and other business organizations currently are polling their membership again regarding health-care reform.
However critical of the administration's proposal, business interests privately concede that unless the stalemate in Congress is broken soon, they, too, stand to lose.
"The worst of all scenarios for the health-insurance industry is no action at all," said Willis Gradison, a former Republican congressman and now president of the Health Insurance Association of America.
His trade group has spent millions of dollars on advertisements against the Clinton plan.
While Mr. Stark's vision of a government run, Medicare-like program to cover millions of uninsured households is too liberal for many in Congress, the discussions in his subcommittee this week have forced lawmakers and competing private interests to face up to the trade-offs that will be involved in crafting any compromise.
Rep. William Thomas (R., Calif.), who succeeded Mr. Gradison on the Stark panel, likened the search for compromise to three-dimensional chess.
"I don't know yet if the area of immediate discussion is going to be the one that works," he said.
The NFIB has opposed any plan that would require employers to help pay for their workers' insurance, as both the Clinton and Stark plans would.
It was unsparing in its remarks.
"Pete Stark has been very clear in his tremendous dislike for small business owners; he's said they have no social conscience," said Jack Faris, the organization's president.
"He's wrong, and we're sorry he feels that way."
The public meetings of the panel this week have coincided with separate private sessions in which Democrats and Republicans have sought to find some middle ground.
"We are moving toward a convergence," said House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.), who still is struggling to find a working majority in his panel.
In remarks that opened the Stark panel's deliberations this week, Rep. John Lewis, a hero of the civil-rights movement, fell back on familiar passages from Frederick Douglass that he had learned as a boy while practicing oratory before the chickens on a southern farm.
"Those who profess to favor freedom and yet deprecate agitation are men who want crops without plowing up the ground," Mr. Lewis said.
"They want rain without thunder and lightning."
Jeanne Saddler contributed to this article.
