Miguel Tavao is a 52-year-old chauffeur who works four days a week for a wealthy family in Rio.
He used to take the bus to work because he could never save enough to buy a car of his own, and financing terms were prohibitive.
Two years ago, he had his eye on a Volkswagen Gol that retailed for $9,917.
Last October, in time for his wedding anniversary, he went back to the dealer.
"I couldn't believe it.
The price had come down to $7,198," says Mr. Tavao.
"She was mine."
In Sao Paulo, stockbroker Raul Ribeiro just purchased a Fiat, but he plans to leave it at the dealership as a hedge against inflation.
"I already have two cars, but I did well this year, and I think it's a good place to park my money.
With inflation creeping up, you don't know what might happen."
In a hemisphere dominated by rapid economic reform, Brazil is still ostracized as the odd man out among Latin America's golden boys.
Insatiable inflation still feeds voraciously on the unbalanced budget, and badly needed constitutional reform is postponed as a new corruption scandal envelops key legislators.
But last year, while politicians were bickering, jockeying and finger-pointing, the gross domestic product grew 4% behind their backs.
Industrial production was up 9.3%.
And Mr. Ribeiro and Mr. Tavao bought new cars.
In fact, the performance of the auto and auto-parts sector, which accounts for 10% of GDP, is given credit for a good one-third of this growth.
Vehicle production surged 43% in one year.
Record car sales brought the industry from the doldrums to its greatest performance since 1957.
This increase was spurred mainly by the sale of popular, low-end cars, which became more affordable as their prices dropped more than 30% on average from the previous year.
A principal reason for the price cut and the subsequent revival of the car industry was the government's decision to significantly reduce Brazil's exorbitant automotive tax rates.
A labyrinth of taxes from manufacturer to dealer qualifies Brazil as the world's most highly taxed automotive industry.
For years, these taxes were passed on to the consumer in higher costs.
By the early 1990s, Brazilian cars were selling for 30% more than cars in the U.S. -- and companies found that only luxury cars were worth producing.
Sales plummeted, once-powerful auto makers were brought to their knees, and unhappy unions threatened new rounds of strikes.
In March 1992, on the brink of disaster, all the relevant parties called for a crisis convention.
In a negotiation process that Detroit executives would find dizzying, 28 brawling, self-serving factions of the unions, the automotive industry and various government ministries hammered out an agreement.
Over 50 clauses were agreed to, but the key measure was a 6% cut in tax rates, followed by further cuts last February.
In exchange for the tax cuts, auto makers agreed to cut prices.
They also agreed to invest heavily in the sector, to preserve employment, and to increase real wages by 20% over three years.
The union promised to increase productivity and to refrain from striking.
The ink hadn't dried when criticism of the accord poured in from all parts of the ideological spectrum.
The tax break was the main lightning rod for controversy and dissension.
The nationalist left accused the pact of favoring car companies -- all of which are foreign multinationals with supposedly deep pockets -- giving them preferential treatment over other more needy sectors.
Brazilian tax authorities made dire predictions that tax receipts would fall dramatically with the lower rates and increase the deficit.
Free-marketeers argued that the accord involved too much government intervention and that companies should be left to find their own way.
Now, a year down the road, the preliminary results from the accord show beneficiaries across the board -- not the least of whom are the oft-forgotten Brazilian consumers.
The 10% to 45% price reductions on popular cars helped boost unit sales 30% to 1.05 million vehicles last year.
Productivity has risen to 28 cars from 19 cars an hour.
Salaries have increased 34% in two years, and auto makers have added 8,000 new employees, twice as many as expected.
The companies, which had agreed to invest $1 billion, already have invested one-third more.
"We invested in new technology and management systems for the first time in years," says Celso Vargas, president of Freios Vargas, an auto-parts company.
From a policy standpoint, the most important result is to be found in the effect of the tax cuts: While combined tax rates on the sector have fallen to 33% this year from 43% in 1991, state and federal tax revenues from the industry have increased 17% since March 1992.
Thus, the fear of lost revenues has proved unjustified, and further tax reductions would likely yield even more dramatic results.
(Even at the current level, Brazilian automotive taxes are still the highest and most complex in the world.)
While tax reduction played a large role in reviving the auto industry, another important stimulus to increased efficiency and lower prices was the huge influx of imports that resulted from a new trade policy.
Import tariffs on cars began to drop to 35% (where they stand today) from super-protectionist levels of 80%.
"The Japanese imports certainly motivated us to step up our investments in order to launch new products at the low and mid end of the market," says Miguel Jorge, vice president of corporate affairs at Autolatina (the joint venture between Ford and Volkswagen).
"However, the overall conditions were also conducive to investment."
It was precisely the combination of tax break and market opening that provided the healthy balance of carrot and stick that revived the auto industry.
As for the government, "It intends to gradually pull out of the accord and to let market forces take over . . . while continuing to bring down import barriers," according to Antonio Maciel Neto, former vice minister of industry.
Uncertainty clouds the economic landscape for 1994 as election-year politics start to kick in.
There is not even assurance that the automotive accord will remain in effect; several state governments have launched an attack to reinstate the higher taxes and will not yet acknowledge that they have actually gained revenue from lower rates.
Nevertheless, the success of the auto makers' initiative during the most troubled period in recent Brazilian economic history stands out as a prototype for other business sectors, and has been an effective tourniquet, rather than a Band-Aid, for Brazil's economic wounds.
Ms. Sierra is director of program development for the Council of the Americas.
