During his visit here last week, U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen urged China to move swiftly to damp this nation's smoldering inflation-and for good reason.
The greatest risk to China's passage from state-run to market economy is inflation.
It could stall reform measures or send the red-hot economy into a tailspin -- with potentially dire consequences for China's internal stability and for U.S. investors here.
Both the World Bank and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development have warned recently that explosive money-supply growth and easy credit in China threaten to ignite inflation.
In some cities, consumer prices already are 20% or more above levels of a year ago.
In part because of such concerns, the U.S. wants to help China find new ways to manage its complex economy.
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan is planning a trip to Beijing, and Secretary Bentsen has offered to send Internal Revenue Service advisers to help China better collect taxes.
Mr. Bentsen also promised to make stable Chinese growth a focus of regular bilateral talks.
It is no surprise that China's economy is getting attention.
After racing along at an average growth rate of 9.5% a year for the past decade, China's reform-driven economy is by some measures the world's third largest.
Last year, by China's reckoning, some $20 billion was invested in the country by outside interests.
The Asian giant also is a big borrower: It has about $73 billion in foreign debt and this year plans to solicit another $1 billion in New York.
In 1993, the country also sucked in goods valued at $104 billion -- everything from satellites and supercomputers to automobiles and machine tools.
Its exports, such as raw materials, textiles and consumer electronics, were valued at $92 billion.
Inflation could throw a wrench into this humming economic engine.
Higher prices make it initially more expensive for outsiders to source goods in China and chronically costlier for consumers here to buy foreign products.
That eventually could lead to a devaluation of the Chinese yuan or erode China's hard-currency holdings and limit imports, especially big-ticket infrastructure items necessary for development.
"Inflation is probably the key concern in China," says Ned Hall, a vice president of AES China Generating Co., a U.S. venture that plans to invest as much as $2 billion building a 2,100-megawatt power plant in central China.
So concerned is AES about the prospect of a devaluation that it wants a guarantee from its Chinese partners that they will bear all currency risk.
To rein in the economy, Zhu Rongji, China's vice premier and central bank chief, has tried to clamp down on lending and ban frivolous investments.
He is attempting to restructure China's financial systems to marshal and allocate funds more efficiently, without resorting to the inflationary path of printing more money.
Complex, hard-to-collect taxes have been replaced with a simplified, value-added tax of about 17%.
What had been an awkward, inefficient foreign-exchange rate has been unified into a single, market-driven rate.
And state banks are being transformed into commercial ones.
At the same time, the government is trying to cut its role in industry and make more enterprises responsible for themselves.
It also aims to lift price controls in sensitive areas like oil, coal and transport.
The measures may result in greater unemployment just as basic commodities are getting pricier.
For that reason, Beijing has also already indicated it will subsidize some industries to soften the transition.
"The problem is, the government wants high growth and not high inflation," says a Beijing economist.
For example, just a few months into an austerity program Mr. Zhu launched last year to, among other things, fight inflation, other officials, including Deng Xiaoping, indicated they favored faster growth over caution.
"If there are some problems, let there be some problems -- he's very clear about this," says Fan Gang, an economist, referring to Mr. Deng.
And problems do abound.
When the unified currency policy -- which essentially devalued the official yuan rate for foreigners -- was announced last month, small stores that crowd Beijing's dusty alleys jacked up prices.
Consumers responded by hoarding everything from corn to appliances.
Grain prices in December rocketed by a third, helping to lift inflation in China's major cities to an ominous 23.9%.
Alarmed, the central government has reimposed price controls on 27 key commodities and now warns against profiteering.
To get the message out, Chinese President Jiang Zemin and other officials have made personal spot checks at markets in Beijing.
But they may have to take stronger measures: Private forecasters have warned that, if the economy stays on its current track, the inflation rate this year will rise.
