In recent years there has been a crescendo of discussion about the need to regulate the activities of financial institutions in the burgeoning market for over-the-counter derivatives of all types.
Central bankers in the U.S. and around the world, among others, have persistently suggested they may need a stronger regulatory role.
Despite some legitimate supervisory issues, the public-policy debate too often sounds like a case of regulation in search of a problem rather than the other way around.
The greatest threat from derivatives is not to the financial system as a whole, but rather to the earnings of particular companies, notably companies using derivatives.
Yes, these markets are complex, but the competing firms are already subject to market disciplines that are far stronger than bureaucratic do's and don'ts.
The proliferation of triple-A-rated derivative subsidiaries is a sign of the healthy functioning of these market disciplines.
More important than regulators, the people who should be looking most closely at derivatives activities are the senior executives and directors (especially members of audit committees) of any company with significant levels of participation in derivatives.
This is the crucial group for preventing unnecessary losses through the failure of companies to follow sensible management practices in addressing both risk-taking and risk-controls.
The recent disaster at the German giant Metallgesellschaft highlights the need for caution among senior managers of user firms.
A subsidiary's losses in oil futures and forwards of nearly $1 billion, on top of poor operating results generally, drove the parent company to the brink of a bankruptcy that could have cost 58,000 employees their jobs.
Without a costly rescue from its lenders and shareholders, Metallgesellschaft's poor control of its financial market risks would have destroyed this major corporation.
Metallgesellschaft apparently put its survival at issue by offering customers fixed-price delivery contracts of oil for periods as long as 10 years, something that would have smacked of financial imprudence even if the company had been "long" by an equivalent amount of oil reserves in the ground -- which it was not.
The company then sought to hedge the risk of higher oil prices by purchasing a series of short-term delivery contracts in oil futures and forward markets, and by constantly rolling expiring purchase contracts over into new short-term positions.
When traders in the market learned that the company had locked itself into massive short-term positions that had to roll over at predictable times to maintain hedging coverage, they positioned themselves to profit handsomely at Metallgesellschaft's expense.
Indeed, published reports suggest that the company may have lost as much as $30 million every time it rolled expiring positions into longer-dated positions, though theoretically this should have resulted in at least a slight profit.
Metallgesellschaft is not the only company in recent years to have awakened to find a huge loss stemming from ill-conceived or poorly controlled derivatives activities.
In 1992, Royal Dutch/Shell discovered that its 50%-owned Japanese affiliate, Showa Shell, had lost 82% of its entire shareholders' equity through speculation by a senior manager in the foreign-currency market.
Showa Shell had an annual dollar-denominated expense for raw material imports that it sought to hedge in currency futures markets by "locking in" a fixed rate of exchange.
Though this is a standard and quite prudent practice for a corporate treasurer's office, what was not standard was the decision to purchase more than $6 billion for future delivery, though the obligation of the company from actual trade flows was likely to be no more than $1 billion.
Thus, its "hedging" activity in the currency market involved speculating on five dollars for every dollar hedged.
Unfortunately, Showa Shell placed its bet on the wrong side of the market when it agreed to pay about 145 yen for every dollar.
When the value of the dollar fell by almost one-third against the yen, the company had "locked in" a hefty loss on each dollar it bought, and it was obligated to buy six times as many dollars as it needed.
This decision was reportedly made by a corporate official thought to be too senior to have his judgment questioned, and neither the company nor its parent had adequate controls in place to detect or control the problem.
Another example: At ABN-AMRO, a large European bank, one of its key foreign-currency traders inserted false expected volatilities for option positions into the bank's financial reporting system.
This created the appearance of profits when in fact the bank's positions were generating growing losses because the bank did not require someone independent of the trading desk to validate the key pricing variables.
The bank had lost $60 million before it discovered that its supposedly profitable positions were losers in the real world.
Losses in these markets can strike an individual company with hurricane force.
Within any company active in the markets, managers or traders can turn valuable tools for risk management into potent tools for risk creation.
What is needed are strong internal controls, not one-size-fits-all regulation.
Designing such controls is something that must be done in a manner highly specific to each company's organization, culture and objectives.
Even so, a few general principles apply.
In looking at a firm's policies and practices, every director or chief executive of a company with a significant derivatives position would do well to ask the following questions:
1. Do we know who is betting our company's future?
(If the answer is yes, "on what?" and "how often?" also may usefully be asked.)
2. Do we know what our positions are, right now?
Many companies use weekly or even monthly financial reports, yet positions in most financial markets can change radically in a matter of hours.
3. Do we know what our risks are, and what variables will affect profit and loss in each operational area?
It should be axiomatic that you can't control risk, much less manage it, if you don't know exactly where it is created within the organization.
Management should have a rigorous and comprehensive "risk map" to evaluate both the types and degrees of risk the company incurs.
4. Do we know how our positions were valued?
The Group of 30 and others have said that financial institutions should mark their derivatives to market at least daily.
However, this is easier said than done because many OTC derivatives markets are illiquid.
The "value" of positions in such illiquid markets often can be determined only by mathematical models, since there are not any reported trading market prices on equivalent transactions.
Even assuming a firm's model is correct, the computation of "value" that results is only as good as the assumptions about yield curves, volatilities and other inputs that are fed into the model.
Put differently, companies will be accruing profits today that in the real world will be realized only over many years.
5. Just exactly how, where, for how long and against what are we hedged?
"Don't worry, we are hedging the risk" should not be considered an acceptable answer to the question of how a company is making offsetting provisions for the specific risks it incurs.
All hedges are not created equal, and it is important to understand exactly what interest-rate risk, volatility risk, etc. is being hedged, and how the hedge is being implemented.
Even within a particular type of risk, such as interest-rate risk, it may not be possible to hedge more than a portion of the yield curve, and the durations of risks and available hedges may not match.
6. How much does our compensation system encourage perverse behavior?
Awarding bonuses solely on the basis of "accrued" profits without regard to the amount of the firm's capital put at risk, or how long the company will be at risk before profit is actually realized, may encourage undue risk-taking.
7. How effective are our controls?
When companies lose large sums through unauthorized trading or speculation, it often occurs due to the actions of senior personnel.
Junior personnel in a treasurer's office may not feel comfortable calling the CEO if their own boss takes abnormally large or risky positions.
Therefore, written risk limits, automated exception reporting, strong internal auditing and other steps are vital to make sure that risk-control policies are always followed.
8. Who is responsible for making sure we know what we're doing?
Both the CEO and the members of the board share direct responsibility for overseeing the company's internal financial controls.
Where large exposures are being incurred in derivatives, the board (or at least the audit committee) should look hard at all the issues discussed above.
Members of the board may not know how to create or trade derivatives, but they should know how to ask the right questions and to demand the right answers.
Used with care, derivatives are terrific products that can enhance profitability and reduce volatility.
Used in a wild or uncontrolled manner, they can be a one-way ticket to financial disaster.
The board and senior managers shouldn't wait for regulators to make sure their company is following a well-controlled and prudent path.
Mr. Breeden, former chairman of the SEC, is chairman of the Financial Services Group of Coopers & Lybrand.
