Platinum futures prices fell on the prospect of platinum sales by Russia and continuing fallout from remarks made Tuesday by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, analysts said.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, platinum for April delivery was down $5.90 to $391.20 an ounce.
Meanwhile, at New York's Commodity Exchange, the April gold futures contract fell 30 cents to $378.90 an ounce.
Reports that Russia's budget gap is much larger than expected and Russian central bank chief Viktor Gerashchenko's statement that Russia may be "compelled" to sell gold to close it, was interpreted yesterday as an indication that Russia may also sell platinum.
In recent years, heavy sales of platinum by Russia have exerted strong downward pressure on prices.
The report spawned selling of platinum futures contracts by investors large and small, including commodity funds, the managed pools of investor money that trade when prices fall through levels regarded as significant.
"These technical factors took over as we dropped below $395 an ounce in the active April platinum contract," said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
The price of gold also fell early yesterday, largely on continuing worries about statements Tuesday by Mr. Greenspan that gold is a good indicator of inflation and that the Fed will continue to raise interest rates when it perceives inflation as a threat.
"I don't think his comments should be viewed as indicating any effort by the Fed or other central banks to keep the price of gold down," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"I think he was just pointing out a device used by the Fed to monitor inflation."
Yesterday afternoon, gold's price rallied, after falling as low as $375.70 an ounce earlier in the session.
Mr. O'Neill nevertheless thinks prices may continue to erode in the near future.
"The dearth of Asian demand recently has been a major reason why gold has been unable to sustain its rally," he said.
"The short-term picture looks sloppy.
Prices could taper off a bit."
COPPER: Copper futures prices fell on speculation that recently strong physical demand for copper may have peaked.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, copper for April delivery was down .30 cent to 86.20 a pound.
On Tuesday, the price of the near-term March futures contract fell below that of farther-term contracts, which is an indication of diminishing demand for copper in the near term.
Talk of raising interest rates by Mr. Greenspan has also made the copper market jittery, analysts said.
ENERGY: April crude oil futures gained just 2 cents a barrel in a ho-hum trading session on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Traders were apparently holding back to see what the weekly report from the American Petroleum Institute might hold.
That report was delayed until late yesterday from the usual Tuesday release because of the Presidents Day holiday.
After the lackluster trading day, April crude settled at $14.41 a barrel.
There was little news affecting fundamentals to lend any direction to trading.
Heating oil finished higher on weather-related trading.
Gasoline futures were weak.
