Cellular and wireless data networks still have plenty of rapid growth ahead of them.
But telecommunications companies are already betting billions of dollars on the next generation of wireless technology: personal communications services and satellite networks.
The new technologies, expected to become available in 1996 or beyond, should compete with the Ardis and RAM Mobile networks in transmitting data, and with digital forms of cellular phones in sending both voice and data reliably.
But before they can get to that point, their backers must meet several big challenges, including funding and building multibillion-dollar systems and overcoming competition from existing networks, especially cellular companies.
Moreover, because the potential payoff looks so alluring, so many companies want in that a shakeout appears inevitable.
This spring, the Federal Communications Commission will auction frequencies for personal communications services, or PCS, to the regional Bell phone companies, long-distance carriers and a host of other telecommunications companies.
Analysts say the bidding could yield $10 billion.
And the FCC is expected to auction licenses later in the year for satellite-based phone services, which are mainly being sought by a dozen large companies.
Here's a look at the two technologies' workings and prospects:
PCS developers are, in effect, reinventing cellular.
The technology is expected to bounce signals between transmission "microcells," similar to the cells used by conventional cellular operators, only smaller and more closely spaced -- in some cases just a few hundred feet apart.
The technology's proponents say this will enable PCS phones to be smaller and less expensive than cellular phones, since they won't have to be as powerful: pocket phones that can be used anywhere.
Another difference: PCS systems will operate at higher frequencies, where the spectrum isn't so crowded.
The FCC awarded the technology a wider slice of frequencies than cellular.
More spectrum should allow providers to offer a wider range of services, eventually including video and multimedia.
PCS also will be all digital from the outset, designed for sending data (including faxes) as well as voice.
That will make it suitable for use with personal digital assistants, or PDAs, the small organizers/communicators that have begun appearing on the market.
But the cellular industry, and some analysts, argue that by the time PCS becomes widely available in three to five years, the differences between the two technologies will narrow considerably.
Cellular companies now use analog equipment, but they are starting to install digital gear for both voice and data transmission.
That will increase their systems' reliability and capacity.
And continued shrinking of size and cost could enable cellular phones to rival PCS phones.
These trends will mean "there's absolutely nothing that can be done on PCS that can't be done on digital cellular," says John Stupka, chairman and chief executive of Southwestern Bell Mobile Systems, the cellular unit of Southwestern Bell Corp.
"PCS is just more cellular."
Even so, Southwestern Bell and many other companies that provide cellular service don't want to be locked out of the new technology: They plan to bid for PCS licenses.
And companies that missed out on cellular are preparing for the PCS auction.
MCI Communications Corp. has told analysts it may spend more than $2 billion on licenses.
But MCI and other big PCS proponents, which had asked the FCC to auction several "national" PCS licenses providing a wide reach, suffered a setback when the agency decided to award licenses regionally.
That means MCI must take time and money to stitch together a consortium of regional license holders.
After companies win licenses, they must clear several other hurdles.
One is cost.
MCI estimates that its plan to deploy a PCS system reaching 90% of the U.S. population -- involving the construction of thousands of "microcells" and the installation of switching equipment -- will cost a total of $10 billion over 10 years.
Perhaps the highest hurdle for PCS operators will be taking on the cellular industry, which has a 10-year head start and more than 13 million subscribers.
"By the time PCS comes out, cellular will have three to four more years to develop and will be everywhere -- in the car, in the building, in homes," says Southwestern Bell's Mr. Stupka.
Some cellular companies are already stepping up their marketing to attract more subscribers before PCS becomes available.
Southwestern Bell, for instance, recently dropped its "roaming" charge of $3 for each call a customer makes outside its service area.
PCS operators also face competition from companies that provide specialized mobile radio service, or SMR.
The service was long used for clunky two-way communications in such areas as taxi dispatching.
But an easing of federal rules will allow Nextel Communications Inc., CenCall Communications Inc., Dial Page Inc. and others to offer voice and data services on their SMR frequencies through their own versions of wireless phones.
And then there will be the crowding -- and fragmentation -- within the PCS market itself.
The FCC will sell as many as seven PCS slots in each city.
But Barry Goodstadt, a consultant at Arthur D. Little in Cambridge, Mass., says most cities will be able to support only two service providers in addition to the two incumbent cellular companies.
The result, analysts say: Many PCS companies will be forced out of business before the industry settles down.
While PCS operators prepare for their terrestrial tussle, other wireless contenders plan to conquer the skies.
Communications Satellite Corp., Motorola Inc., TRW Inc. and several other companies are preparing to provide wireless phone, data and fax service by bouncing signals off orbiting satellites.
Their systems will link phones, computers and pagers almost anywhere on Earth.
But unlike cellular and PCS services, which will be pitched increasingly as replacements for conventional phones, the sky phones will be targeted to niche markets, mainly globe-trotting executives.
Some skeptics argue that satellite phones will have trouble attracting customers because they will be much more costly than cellular service while offering only slightly broader reach.
The sky phones' backers, however, argue that because of varying technological standards, a customer won't be able to use his cellular phone in Paris as well as New York.
So, they say, satellite phones will be used by international business travelers whose companies are willing to pay for "anywhere, anytime" phone service.
Satellite phones will also be marketed for use by residents and travelers in rural areas that lack cellular service, and in developing countries where phone service of any kind is limited.
As with PCS, the cost of infrastructure will be enormous.
"You have to spend years building the system" without getting a dollar of revenue, says Ron Mario, president of Comsat Mobile Communications.
"You have to stick your money into firecrackers, launch them, and hope it all goes right."
Comsat owns about 25% of the International Maritime Satellite Organization, or Inmarsat, a 71-nation group formed to provide radio communication and location services to ships at sea.
Inmarsat is expected to decide soon on the parameters of a satellite system it will create at a cost of $1 billion to $2 billion, to provide phone service on hand-held units.
Comsat and Motorola have the makings of a nasty feud.
Motorola owns 34% of Iridium Inc., an international consortium that is building a $3.37 billion satellite phone project.
Motorola has asked regulators to block the Inmarsat project, arguing that Comsat, as a quasi-governmental concern, has unfair tax and legal advantages.
Comsat's Mr. Mario responds, "All Motorola is trying to do is keep us out of the market. . . .
The tax issue is a joke."
The two companies have outlined sharply different systems.
Motorola plans a network of 66 satellites that will carry voice and data signals to and from handheld phones.
Comsat, however, will probably rely on many fewer satellites, using ground stations to find them.
Motorola says its system will provide faster and clearer reception; Comsat argues that its costs will be lower.
Indeed, Motorola's expected customer charges aren't for the faint of heart.
The company plans to sell its satellite phones initially for about $3,000, while calls will cost about $3 a minute.
Mr. Naik is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
