Rupert Murdoch's British satellite-TV venture, once derided as an albatross around his neck, has suddenly become a goose laying golden eggs.
The venture, British Sky Broadcasting Ltd., announced a sixfold jump in net income yesterday for the fiscal first half ended Dec. 31.
Profit soared to #81.8 million ($122.4 million) from #12.48 million a year earlier.
The venture said the number of its subscribers rose 40% during the half year to 3.25 million, or 15% of British homes.
As a dividend on its good fortune, it also said it has started paying back its #830 million debt to Mr. Murdoch's News Corp. and other holders.
The venture's results, which finally ended its reputation as a black hole for Mr. Murdoch's cash, also helped spruce up its parent company's performance.
On Wednesday, News Corp. reported a 70% jump in net income to 768.9 million Australian dollars ($550.1 million) for the half.
BSkyB began life as the Sky Channel in 1983, beaming TV programs by satellite to get around what was then a four-channel broadcast monopoly in Britain.
To succeed, it relied on people buying satellite dishes to receive the signals, or on Britain's then-tiny cable-TV industry distributing its programs.
Initially, neither caught on very well, and the venture ate through about 1.2 billion in cash from banks and shareholders, chiefly 50%-owner News Corp.
Other shareholders include French textile, transport and communications company Chargeurs SA, with a 17.5% stake; and British media companies Pearson PLC, with 17.5%; and Granada Group PLC, with 13.5%.
By 1990, BSkyB's losses appeared out of control, and some analysts began speculating that it might pull down Mr. Murdoch's entire global media empire.
But that year, it merged with a young rival, British Satellite Broadcasting PLC, eliminating competition and greatly expanding its programming.
More Britons, overcoming their initial distaste for mounting a dish on their houses, began subscribing.
In March 1992, the venture broke into the black.
But the latest boost came largely from a new programming and marketing campaign begun last September.
BSkyB added more channels and introduced a new fee structure encouraging viewers to pay extra to receive all of its channels, rather than just a few.
Monthly subscriptions range from #6.99 to #19.99.
The result: In the half, revenue ballooned 41% to #241.4 million from #171.5 million a year earlier.
London media analysts forecast that for at least the next few years, BSkyB has nowhere to go but up.
Its main potential rivals, Britain's cable networks, have so far proved allies by distributing BSkyB's programming to their own subscribers.
Another potential competitor, a video-on-demand service planned by British Telecommunications PLC in the mid-1990s, may similarly end up working with BSkyB.
By 2000, according to analyst Alastair Smellie of Lehman Brothers Inc., as many as 11 million British homes may be tuned in.
"I think BSkyB is an increasingly attractive proposition."
BSkyB said that last year it repaid #50 million of its debt to shareholders, leaving #500 million owed to News Corp., a total of #330 million to Pearson, Granada and Chargeurs, and #430 million to banks, said Richard Brooke, BSkyB's chief financial officer.
He added that BSkyB is considering refinancing some of the holders' debt, turning it into bank debt.
But the venture doesn't plan to tap the stock market.
Squelching widespread speculation yesterday, a News Corp. spokesman said it has "no interest" in seeing BSkyB shares sold in a public offering.
In Sydney trading Thursday, News Corp. shares rose 4.9% to close at A$10.56.
