It's been some couple of weeks in sports.
The big-time college men's basketball coaches talked strike over the National Collegiate Athletic Association's refusal to restore a 14th scholarship, probably marking the first time teachers ever aimed such an action at getting larger class sizes.
Michael Jordan said he wants to make a sports comeback -- in Major League Baseball.
And it took an earthquake to knock the Tonya Harding "Skategate" scandal off page one.
What's going on here?
I'm not sure I know.
In fact, I'm sure there are a lot of things I don't know about these cases.
But there are a few things I do know, and I'm happy to share them with you.
When evaluating l'affaire Jordan, one should keep in mind the numbers 85 and 81.
Those were the 18-hole scores he posted in the 1991 Western Amateur, his first -- and, so far as I know, last -- venture into honest-to-gosh tournament golf.
You may recall that throughout his professional basketball career, Jordan's second sporting love was golf, not baseball.
During the season, he'd travel with his golf clubs on the chance that an occasion to play the game might arise, and it was to the links, not the diamond, that he'd instantly repair once his courtly labors ended each June.
Under the "personal" section of his page in last season's Chicago Bulls media guide, he said that once his hoops days were done he'd like to try his hand on the PGA Tour.
This splendid athlete loved the game and practiced diligently.
By most accounts he became quite good at it, sometimes scoring in the mid-70s during rounds with his pals.
Many took his golf-pro talk seriously, which was why his entry into the medal-play '91 Western Amateur, on the formidable Point O'Woods course in Benton Harbor, Mich., was widely noted.
Alas, his scores there placed him 163rd in the field of 165, and he missed the 36-hole cut by 16 strokes.
The episode came to mind when, in their endless discussions of Jordan's baseball plans, Chicago TV stations ran videotapes of him hitting balls that barely cleared the left-field fence in Comiskey Park during a summer batting-practice session with the Chicago White Sox, the team he'd like to accompany to spring training.
Hitting a homer in batting practice is like shooting a 75 in a friendly golf game; I dare say it's harder to do "for real."
Meantime, those who feel that the world is a better place when Michael is performing for the Bulls can take heart in the thought that His Highness is bored enough after three months of retirement to pursue a baseball fantasy.
The most revealing thing I've read about the college basketball boycott threat was a piece in this week's Chicago Tribune.
It reported that last year, when the scholarship limit was 14, 166 of the 288 Division I schools had awarded fewer.
It went on to say that, while full current-season numbers weren't in yet, the trend had continued.
Among the teams making do with fewer than the currently permitted 13 scholarship players were those coached by men who'd been outspoken in favor of a strike/boycott.
Black coaches have been in the vanguard of the move to restore the scholarships phased from the sport in the name of economy.
They and others note that since roughly two-thirds of all Division I basketball players are black, the burden of the reductions has fallen heaviest on such youngsters.
"This is about opportunity," declared Arkansas coach Nolan Richardson.
In fact, though, top college basketball teams rarely use more than 10 players, and many coaches are loath to have to deal with the inevitable bench warmers who are, inevitably, unhappy.
The alacrity with which white as well as black coaches endorsed the boycott cry, and the language they used, showed that the fight really centers on whether the newly empowered college presidents or schools' athletics professionals will control the game.
Further, many coaches have long opposed NCAA actions to boost the academic requirements for athletic-scholarship recipients, albeit to still-very-modest levels.
Maybe they think that phrasing their protest cry in terms of "opportunity" will deflect attention from that less-than-admirable stance.
If it's educational opportunity they're interested in, the coaches might consider pushing to give the lost basketball scholarships to needy students who've proven themselves in the classroom instead of on the court.
Once in school, these kids could go about their business without the time-consuming need to shoulder their schools' big-money sports enterprises.
Maybe the coaches could finance the awards with some of their income from athletic-shoe endorsements and TV shows.
In Detroit for the U.S. Figure Skating Championships the Saturday before last, I escaped the freezing pressroom for a warm seat high in the stands of Joe Louis Arena during the early phase of the women's singles finals, when the skaters who didn't figure to win performed.
A woman spotted my press credentials and moved into the seat next to me.
She asked if I knew much about a skater on the evening's program.
I said I thought I knew a little.
She then launched into a lengthy recitation about the "unscrupulous people" who surrounded this young woman, their past misdeeds, and how they were exploiting her.
She concluded by saying that she "wouldn't be surprised" if the bunch had, somehow, been behind the appalling assault on Nancy Kerrigan two days earlier.
Sniffing mania, I uh-huhed my way through her spiel and retreated at earliest opportunity.
A couple days later, when I heard a radio flash that "another skater" had been implicated in the attack, I mentally kicked myself for not having taken notes.
It turned out, though, that the skater she told me about wasn't Tonya Harding.
I ask you: Is skating a great sport, or what?
