A wave of acquisitions paid for with high-flying stock helped make 1993 a boom year for mergers.
But the events of 1994 are showing the dark side of using stock instead of cash in megadeals.
On Wednesday, the planned marriage of Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. collapsed, due in part to a drop in the stock price of Bell Atlantic, which planned to issue as much as $20 billion in stock to acquire cable giant TCI.
Shareholders of Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. are up in arms over a steep slide in the stock price of Viacom Inc., which plans to use its stock to acquire Blockbuster as part of its bigger deal to buy Paramount Communications Inc. for $9.5 billion.
And Banc One Corp., the Ohio bank that has expanded rapidly through a string of stock-financed acquisitions, called off its purchase of FirsTier Financial Inc. last week because of a fall in Banc One's stock price.
In the 1980s merger boom, acquisition-hungry companies typically paid cash to shareholders of the corporations they bought.
Usually, the acquirer obtained the cash by borrowing from banks or selling junk bonds.
But in the current merger wave, with the stock market trading near record levels, equity, not cash, is king.
Many more deals are being paid for with stock; some 37% of U.S. deals announced last year were stock-for-stock mergers, compared with only 5% in 1988.
And that means the acquirer's stock price is a critical element in getting deals done.
"People in the 1980s got used to a very large proportion of cash deals," says Felix Rohatyn, general partner of Lazard Freres & Co.
In those deals, he explains, "the open issue was would the buyer have the financing to close, not what the value would be once the closing took place."
Nowadays, companies that launch stock acquisitions face a daily referendum by stock-market investors on the merits of their plans.
Jack Levy, co-head of mergers at Merrill Lynch & Co., says, "You put yourself at risk."
Mr. Levy adds: "Instead of dealing with a handful of credit officers at a few banks who make the lending decision, and then it's done, you are dealing with lot of equity investors who are constantly making decisions every day whether they like what's being done."
Lately, it seems, those investors have grown more skeptical.
Says Mr. Rohatyn: "Whenever you come up with these concept deals, if you will, and kind of lyrical descriptions of strategic alliances and `synergies,' there is a certain amount of skepticism.
You know you've heard that before in other times and other places."
It almost goes without saying that stock-financed deals depend on a stable, if not robust, stock market.
The acquirers' stocks that have wilted recently did so without the extra pressure of a marketwide downdraft.
But a general market decline remains a risk, as yesterday's 51.78-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average makes clear.
Jeffrey Sechrest, head of mergers at Lehman Brothers Inc., said that with the stock market near its peak and interest rates rising, "people are concerned about the big correction.
As long as uncertainty exists in the stock market, it's going to be harder to do stock deals in general, and sellers are going to demand price protection."
In the case of regional phone company Bell Atlantic, its stock went down partly because of a rise in interest rates, which cuts the value of the dividends paid by any utility.
In addition, investors' skepticism has been rising about how soon the information superhighway promised by Bell Atlantic and other telecommunications companies will be paved with gold.
At Banc One, investors turned skeptical not over the banking company's operating results, but more over what they perceived as the risk of Banc One's exposure to derivative securities, whose value is linked to the value of other underlying assets.
In the recent five-month battle for control of entertainment and publishing giant Paramount, traders had to choose between two bids that both included stock and other securities.
When the contest began, the bids of both Viacom and its rival QVC Inc. consisted mostly of their own high-flying stock.
Both stocks came back down to earth as the contest wore on.
Viacom eventually prevailed by reducing the amount of common stock in its bid, and by adding other securities whose value wouldn't fluctuate as much, or whose value would increase if Viacom's common stock didn't appreciate.
QVC effectively conceded the contest by declining to promise investors any extra compensation if QVC stock didn't perform.
Another obvious difficulty of stock deals is that they take longer to complete.
Typically, the company issuing the stock must draw up a special prospectus outlining the deal and have it approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Then, the target company's shareholders must vote to approve the deal.
The biggest risk is that if the acquirer's stock falls in the meantime, shareholders may vote the deal down, as some Blockbuster holders now are threatening to do.
Viacom is offering Blockbuster holders extra compensation if its stock price doesn't reach $52 a share a year after the merger.
But that compensation doesn't increase if Viacom's stock falls below $36 a share.
Viacom Class B nonvoting stock, which closed at $25 a share yesterday in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, is trading far below that level.
