Keep it simple.
That's what some marketing experts advise consumer products companies trying to make a splash in China.
In a recent survey, consulting firm McKinsey & Co. found that some of the more successful companies in China -- including Coca-Cola Co., Unilever, Procter & Gamble Co., Johnson & Johnson, Nestle SA and Volkswagen AG -- tend to stick to the basics in their marketing.
"Contrary to conventional wisdom about the uniqueness of the China market, the excellent companies we studied do an absolute minimum of product tailoring," the report said.
The firms focus on their core global products, instead of immediately developing many new items specifically for China.
They also tend to offer Chinese consumers the latest merchandise, not castoffs that have failed to sell elsewhere.
Minor adjustments are in order, however.
While foreign brands have more cache than local ones, companies often assign Chinese names to their products.
The Chinese name of Procter's Rejoice shampoo roughly translates as "soft" and "flowing."
Makers of shampoos and other personal-care products are also reformulating their products slightly to accommodate differences in water quality and hair type.
As China's state-managed distribution networks crumble, companies such as Procter and Coke are setting up their own sales forces, creating opportunities to establish relationships with retailers.
Unilever uses heavy bursts of advertising.
Posters and other graphic materials appeared throughout Shanghai last year during the relaunch of the company's Lux soap.
Johnson & Johnson, which occupies prime selling space in most of Guangzhou's leading department stores, uses images of blond, blue-eyed Western babies in posters that hang above sales counters.
Meanwhile, the battle for Chinese market share could produce some new world-class companies, says Phil Day, a director of Pac Rim Consulting Group in Hong Kong.
"Local and regional companies that have already moved forcefully into China are going to emerge as major global players because of the size of the market," he says.
Mr. Day cites President Foods of Taiwan as an aggressive company that, based on its progress in China, "could emerge as the biggest global player in the food business."
