The sweeping break-in into the on-line accounts of thousands of Internet users may heighten already growing concern over the security of on-line systems.
Thousands of newcomers are signing on to the Internet each month, often unaware that the passwords they use and the accounts they open are vulnerable to unauthorized access.
Late last week, an Internet security investigation team spotted what may be the largest computer security breach on the Internet and urged tens of thousands of users to change their passwords.
The intruders who gained unauthorized access are known in cyberspace circles as "crackers," rather than the popular name "hacker."
The group that put out the warning, the Computer Emergency Response Team, said it isn't clear whether the "crackers" had vandalized computer systems or unleashed damaging "viruses."
Security experts speculated that the break-ins were connected to a handful of students known as the "Posse."
The group has been taunting systems operators on the Internet, demonstrating that they have inside knowledge of various computer systems, according to Len Rose, owner of Netsys Inc., a Palo Alto, Calif., company that sells access to the Internet.
"These guys go in and take down systems just to say they've done it," said Mr. Rose, a former hacker who has become a security consultant.
Security experts say some members of the group operate out of Philadelphia and Phoenix.
"We haven't identified who did it," said James Settle, special agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"There are so many people out there who can do this."
Mr. Settle says the same method of breaking in has been used since December 1991.
On Jan. 1, a program that logs passwords was installed on computers at the University of California at Berkeley.
The program collected more than 3,000 passwords between 7 a.m. and 9 p.m., forcing system administrators to send notices to those users to change their passwords.
Rob Robertson, a systems programmer there, said he spent a week shoring up the system's security and assessing damage.
There was none, he said.
"This isn't going to go away," a spokesman for the response team said of the incident, which was first reported Friday by the Washington Post.
The number of infected sites "could significantly increase," the spokesman said.
He said "crackers" had installed software programs that "watched" users link up with remote computers on the Internet, thereby creating a log of names and passwords and later signing on under assumed identities.
Eugene Spafford, who researches security issues at Purdue University, said he knows of a few dozen sites affected by the break-ins.
But he isn't confident that invaded organizations will concede they have been hit.
Businesses are so "extraordinarily paranoid" and "embarrassed" by the intruders that the issue of network security falls by the wayside.
"It's entirely the wrong approach," Mr. Spafford said.
"It hinders public awareness."
Experts say the rush of commercial traffic onto the Internet has frustrated efforts to track and thwart breaches.
Since mid-1990, the number of businesses connecting to the Internet has risen 30-fold to 11,000, said Howard Funk, an Internet consultant.
