Stock prices barreled to new records as investors rode the market's continuing momentum.
Bonds and the dollar fell.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 32.93 points to 3978.36.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index jumped 2.91 to 481.61 and the Nasdaq Composite Index surged 3.94 to 800.47.
All were records.
Investors piled into economically sensitive stocks, especially aluminum and auto concerns.
Aluminum stocks benefited from reports that major aluminum-producing countries agreed to cut output.
Auto stocks were buoyed by expectations of continued improvement in the U.S. car industry.
Investors also were encouraged by comments on the economy by Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan.
As the market closed, many traders expressed confidence that the 4000 barrier on the Dow will soon be breached.
"Tomorrow, for sure, with the momentum going the way it is," said Peter DaPuzzo, senior managing director at Cantor Fitzgerald in New York.
He added, however, that profit-taking after crossing that milestone may leave the industrial average below 4000 at the close.
Economic and monetary conditions look so favorable that many strategists are hard-pressed to find a dark cloud on the horizon.
Joseph Battipaglia, chief investment strategist at Gruntal & Co., said one possible danger is political or economic disintegration in Russia.
"It's a volatile situation that could break down at any time," he said.
"But waiting for that to happen could be hazardous to your wealth."
Byron Wien, investment strategist at Morgan Stanley, noted that the stock market is still benefiting from huge seasonal inflows into mutual funds.
"Right now, we're still in the most favorable part of that cycle," Mr. Wien said.
But he expects the flood into mutual funds to slow in February and March.
In preparation for a stock-market downturn of as much as 10% in the next few months, Mr. Wien has been increasing the cash portion of his portfolio.
Michael Metz, chief investment strategist at Oppenheimer & Co., said many investors who ventured overseas were rattled by the recent sharp price swings in foreign markets.
"A lot of momentum players are afraid to go overseas now, so they're coming home," Mr. Metz said.
But he argued that prices in the U.S. are climbing to dangerous levels.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index gained 3.47 to 118.60.
Stock prices rallied.
Volume totaled 322.8 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 1,396 issues rose and 733 fell.
Bond prices fell.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue lost more than 1/4 point, or more than $2.50 for each $1,000 face amount, to yield 6.23%.
The dollar weakened.
In late New York trading the currency was quoted at 1.7345 marks and 108.70 yen compared with 1.7425 marks and 110 yen Friday.
