Microsoft Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. unveiled plans this week to jointly develop a cable-television channel that will peddle computer hardware, software and accessories.
The software and cable giants expect to launch their electronic shopping channel next year.
That will put Microsoft and TCI a whole year behind the Desktop Channel, a small Peabody, Mass., company that, despite its name, has nothing to do with television but does offer 20,000 computer products to shoppers through an on-line computer service.
Customers purchase goods by communicating with the company through their personal computers.
Many small companies carve lucrative niches in emerging industries, only to have their markets gobbled up once corporate behemoths enter the fray.
Skeptics believe Desktop Channel could meet the same fate.
But Desktop Channel's founders think their head start and hard work will keep their franchise safe for some time.
"We will have the largest computer superstore in the world by the end of the year in terms of product offerings," says Henry Bertolon, Desktop Channel's president.
"Nobody will be able to compete with us" because Desktop keeps lean inventories that it can track and sell quickly, the official adds.
Mr. Bertolon's exuberance seems wellfounded.
He and his partner Jeff Filmore have already built an extremely successful enterprise brokering semiconductor sales for corporate users.
The partners say their experience running that business plus the three years spent developing the proprietary software at the core of Desktop Channel's service, should protect them from all competitors.
But skeptics raise eyebrows.
"They'll have to do enormous volume to be successful," says Casey Dworkin, general manager of Personal Technology Research Inc., a Waltham, Mass., research firm.
To be sure, Desktop Channel isn't the first company to offer computer products on line.
Major companies such as Prodigy Services Co., CompuServe Inc., and CUC International Inc., have retailed on-line for years, with computer products a very popular though somewhat limited category.
Other entrepreneurs besides Desktop Channel recently have found success by building their businesses around on-line marketing of particular computer products, such as International Business Machines Corp.'s OS/2 operating system.
But Desktop Channel represents one of the first attempts to offer a full-blown "superstore" on line, with a broad range of product categories and highly competitive pricing.
William Bluestein, research director at Forrester Research Inc., a computer consulting concern in Cambridge, Mass., is excited by the company's prospects.
"It shows for the first time how a private company can develop its own on-line service to directly reach its own customers."
And that customer base is booming.
The on-line service industry is expected to grow to $3 billion by 1998 from $530 million in 1993, according to Forrester Research.
Small companies such as Desktop Channel seek to snare a portion of this expanding business.
Though operating only since last month, Desktop Channel grew out of a Beverly, Mass., business launched 14 years ago by Messrs. Bertolon and Filmore.
The pair dubbed their venture New England Circuit Sales Inc., intending to capitalize on rising demand for personal computers by buying and selling semiconductors for corporate users.
Oddly enough, a bad economy helped.
The slackened demand for semiconductors that accompanied the 1982 recession led to an oversupply of the computer chips.
The chips were so cheap that the partners went on a buying spree, only to face the problem of disposing of their burgeoning inventory.
Their solution was to design software that could track their semiconductor inventory any time an order arrived.
"The experience of building an in-house data base and a staff for locating the availability of semiconductors is what allowed us to develop the competence to do what we're doing now," recalls Mr. Bertolon, 41 years old.
Mr. Bertolon says the closely held firm's revenue has doubled in each of the past four years, reaching $157 million in 1993, up from $78 million in 1992.
Encouraged by their success brokering semiconductors, the partners began developing software three years ago that would let them track a complete inventory of computer products.
The company, which recently renamed itself NECX Inc., spent $3 million on that software and started an on-line division, Desktop Channel, to manage the business.
NECX started to advertise the service in trade publications six weeks ago, and says it already has received 6,000 inquiries.
Users call a toll-free number to reach a computer menu listing information about price, specifications and reviews of products, including any industry awards.
Buyers can build a shopping list to meet their requirements, covering price, manufacturer or performance specifications.
About 800 brand-name manufacturers are represented.
NECX says it will offer 50,000 products by the end of the year.
Desktop initially is targeting corporate, governmental and educational users to generate the volume it needs to keep prices low.
The company says it will consider consumer sales later.
Despite strong initial interest, sales so far have been slow.
The company says it has sold about $400,000 of merchandise through Desktop Channel.
But officials say they are still refining the service and plan a bigger marketing effort over the next two months.
Even a year from now, Desktop Channel won't face a direct challenge from TCI and Microsoft, since those companies will target the consumer market and will sell through television.
But their approach raises the broader question of whether computers or television ultimately will appeal more to the general public.
"There's speculation that on-line services will leapfrog interactive television, but no one is sure," says Rick Fernandes, on-line services manager for CUC International in Stamford, Conn.
"Consumers are going to have many more options in terms of computer retailing.
The question is, who is going to make it work?"
