The New Hampshire primary is only 700 days away.
That means that the 1996 presidential contest is under way, especially for the tradition-bound Republicans; in modern presidential elections the GOP front-runner a year before New Hampshire invariably has won the nomination.
This year will determine which aspirant gets that inside position for 1996.
With California moving its primary next time from June to March 26, more than 80% of the GOP delegates will be chosen by the end of March.
This front-loaded process places a greater premium on a fast start and the ability to raise money; it may be necessary to raise as much as $30 million in the 1996 primaries.
With that backdrop here's the early line:
JACK KEMP: The ex-Buffalo congressman is a favorite of the conservative rank and file, and dominates the economic growth and equal opportunities issues, broadening his appeal.
He's the only candidate with the Ronald Reagan-like potential to expand the GOP base in a general election.
The energetic former quarterback may match up against Bill Clinton better than the others.
A Kemp drawback, some conservative activists complain, is that he lacks a hard edge; his message is hope, not hate.
His conservative base isn't that secure and his message is too narrowly economic.
Most important, however, is an omnipresent lack of discipline, a fatal flaw in his 1988 presidential quest.
Even some admirers doubt he's learned from that experience.
The odds: 3-to-1.
BOB DOLE: The front-runner in the current polls -- with 29% in this week's Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey -- the Kansas Republican is expected to dominate politics this year as he cuts into Bill Clinton at every opportunity.
This skillful and powerful legislator will use this clout to raise sufficient funds.
The downside is that Bob Dole, who'll be 73 in 1996, is a much better indoor, or legislative, politician than he is outdoor candidate; his sharp humor that delights Washington insiders becomes mean-spirited outside the Beltway.
And he has a remarkable penchant for not listening to good advice while heeding those he should ignore.
This hasn't changed; currently, for example, he's scheming with self-promoter Jude Wanniski, a fallen away Kemp confidant, to become the candidate of the supply-siders despite his record.
The odds: 7-to-2.
DICK CHENEY: This is the consummate remainderman -- he's the second or third choice of almost everyone.
If Republican politicians privately picked who in the field they thought would be the best president, the former defense chief would win handily.
Also, if Mr. Clinton continues to stumble on foreign policy, Mr. Cheney would be best positioned to take advantage of that weakness.
But he's never run outside Wyoming, has had three heart attacks and isn't very captivating on the stump; a recent major speech to the American Enterprise Institute bombed.
And economics, not foreign policy, is more likely to dominate the next presidential election.
The odds: 5-to-1.
PHIL GRAMM: The Texas senator is the most disciplined politician in the field.
He's tough-minded, and very well-versed in economics.
With a wealthy base, the Democrat-turned-Republican is a phenomenal fund-raiser; he already has an impressive $7.2 million on hand.
But Phil Gramm is unlikely to wear well; he has all the warmth of a Tonya Harding bodyguard.
And he's not the candidate to take advantage of Whitewater or ethics issues.
Several years ago a shady Texas S&L operator, who cost taxpayers $200 million, absorbed $53,000 of the tab on the Gramms' Maryland vacation home.
The odds: 10-to-1.
PETE WILSON: The governor of the nation's most populous state is trying to ride an anti-immigration and anti-crime wave to an upset re-election.
If successful, he could be formidable in the early California primary.
This week he insisted he wouldn't run in 1996, but if he wins re-election some California observers suspect he'll forget that pledge.
By this time next year, however, he may be ex-Gov.
Wilson, especially if he runs against California Treasurer Kathleen Brown.
He's also a pedestrian campaigner and, by most accounts, has been a mediocre governor.
The odds: 15-to-1.
DAN QUAYLE: Some Indiana associates say the former vice president is leaning toward running.
He thinks he's as good as anyone else in the field; has been vindicated on his family-values "Murphy Brown" flap, and is counting on favorable publicity from a soon-to-be published vice presidential memoir.
Few Republican professionals share this assessment.
They aren't sure if his reputation ever can be rehabilitated, but 1996 clearly would be premature.
Better, they say, to run for Indiana governor first.
The odds: 15-to-1.
PAT BUCHANAN: The capital pundit and unsuccessful Bush challenger may run again.
He's the most articulate advocate of radical change and has the most committed core constituency.
He's the most comfortable with social issues and right-wing "populist" ones like term limits.
But Pat Buchanan is a deeply polarizing figure, an anathema to conservative traditionalists both on economics (he's a protectionist) and on foreign policy (he's an isolationist).
Moreover, Pat Buchanan's favorite social issues may be receding in political importance.
The odds: 20-to-1.
LONG SHOTS: The most fascinating and oft-speculated long shots are Colin Powell and Jim Baker.
Don't count on either one entering the fray, and nothing will be handed to them.
Of the other dark horses, the two with the best shot are Lamar Alexander, former education secretary, and South Carolina Gov. Carroll Campbell.
The odds on any one: 25-to-1 or more.
Overall, it's what one leading party figure calls "the great shrinking field."
The odds are that Whitewater won't mushroom into a major scandal and the economy will look pretty good in two years.
Given the incumbent's considerable political skills, 1996 will be an uphill battle -- President Clinton beats front-runner Bob Dole, 48% to 39%, now.
But there's a silver lining for the GOP: The field is better, and the odds are shorter than those the Democrats faced against George Bush on this exact date four years ago.
