Here's the verdict on the world's first commercial test here of a hot new type of cellular-phone technology called "personal communications services": bumpy but promising.
Amid much curiosity from the world mobile-phone industry, the new service, called Mercury One-2-One, was launched in September by a joint venture of two multinational phone companies, Englewood, Colo.-based U S West Inc. and Britain's Cable & Wireless PLC.
Yesterday, at the venture's first public progress report, executives said the service had encountered some unexpected problems, but was generally doing better than expected.
Furthermore, it will soon begin a further, #130 million ($193.2 million) expansion of its network.
Business growth "is significantly ahead of target," said Richard Goswell, the venture's managing director, at a news conference.
He declined to provide figures, saying it might aid competitors; some outside analysts have guessed the service may have more than 40,000 subscribers -- a small but fast-growing number, compared with Britain's two million subscribers to conventional cellular services.
As evidence of success, Mr. Goswell said the venture had shipped its entire stock of mobile phones in the first two weeks of service.
But he indicated the venture dealt with a heavy proportion of customers who hadn't used a mobile phone and who consequently needed more costly hand-holding than a typical cellular-phone user expects.
To cope, the venture spent #2 million expanding its customer-service center to 160 employees, and offered dissatisfied customers their money back; Mr. Goswell called the number of such returns "fairly low."
Overall, more than 80% of the clientele reports being "very satisfied" or "satisfied," he added.
Such tidbits are likely to be closely studied by the mobile-phone industry, which is betting that this type of low-cost, mass-market service will become its future.
Personal communications services is a term covering a broad range of mobile-digital technologies that use lighter, cheaper phones, smaller transmitting "cells," and higher radio frequencies than a normal cellular-phone system.
The industry's hope is that the greater ease of use and lower cost will turn mobile communications into an everyday consumer purchase like buying a television set or a camera.
