HIGH SCHOOLS became accustomed to declining rolls in the 1980s as the smaller baby-bust generation followed the large baby boom.
But schools soon will see a long-term resurgence of graduates as the baby boomlet comes of age.
Today's U.S. high school graduates were born in the mid-1970s, when the number of births began to turn upward after more than a decade of decline.
Eighteen years later, the baby boomlet continues and soon will boost the ranks of those attending commencement exercises.
After declining throughout the 1980s, the number of high school graduates will rise in 1995, according to the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education, based in Boulder, Colo.
The number of public and private high school graduates nationwide should grow 32% between 1992 and 2009.
This increase will be almost entirely due to a growing population of high school seniors, although the projections also assume that a slight decline in dropout rates will continue.
The gains will be particularly strong in rapidly growing Western states.
Nevada is expected to lead the nation, with a projected 198% gain in high school graduates between 1992 and 2009, followed by an 81% increase in California and 77% in Arizona.
Most states will see more modest increases in numbers of high school graduates.
And despite the baby boomlet, a few states that have had heavy population outflows will see declines: Louisiana, Maine, North Dakota, West Virginia and Wyoming.
These states may have to compete with their neighbors for qualified entry-level workers and college students.
PEOPLE WHO relocate across county or state lines are older than the average mover, who mostly are on the young side.
Of the 41.5 million Americans aged one year or older who relocated between March 1991 and March 1992, 64% chose a home in the same county.
A new Census Bureau report shows that 19% went to another county in the same state and 17% moved to another state.
An additional 1.3 million people settled in the U.S. from abroad.
Seventeen percent of people who moved across county or state lines were aged 45 and older, compared with 13% of those who moved within the same county.
Intercounty movers also were better educated, more affluent and more likely to be homeowners than were those who didn't cross county lines.
However, the majority of movers overall are young and rent their homes.
And, reflecting the overall population, 51% of all movers aged 15 or older had 1991 personal incomes below $15,000.
Younger people and renters are more likely to move in a given year.
People aged one to 30 made up 43% of the U.S. population in March 1992, but they accounted for 62% of those who made a recent local move and 57% of those who moved to another county or state.
And although just 33% of the general population lived in rental housing, 68% of short-distance and 61% of long-distance movers rented their homes.
IN THESE DAYS of depreciating home values, home-equity loans appeal to people who want to improve the homes they already own.
In 1993, 11% of American homeowners had loans secured by the home equity they owned, according to a study conducted by Bank Advertising News and The Gallup Organization.
Nine percent of homeowners had revolving lines of credit secured by home equity.
Both shares have fallen from 1990's levels of 21% and 13%, respectively, but Gallup senior analyst Philip Doriot says the downward trend isn't statistically significant.
Those with loans differ from those with lines of credit.
Northeastern homeowners are almost twice as likely as those in the Midwest to have loans secured by home equity -- 15% compared with 9%.
But Midwesterners are more likely to have a revolving line of credit secured by home equity -- 11% compared with 8% of Northeasterners and Southerners.
Homeowners with some college education or annual incomes of $40,000 to $59,999 are most likely to have home-equity loans, at 17%.
Those with college degrees and incomes of $60,000 or more are most likely to have revolving lines of credit, 12% and 13%, respectively.
The most common reason people give for borrowing against their home's equity is to fix up those homes.
Twenty-nine percent of borrowers cited home improvements, repairs or additions for obtaining such a loan or line of credit.
Other reasons included attractively low interest rates (10%), starting or maintaining a business (9%) and consolidating bills (9%).
People often choose home-equity loans over other types because they offer lower interest rates; 29% mentioned this reason.
Seventeen percent cited tax advantages (the interest paid on home-equity loans is tax-deductible) and 15% said these loans are easier to apply for and obtain.
ONE IN 10 American adults enjoys woodworking as a hobby, finds a survey conducted for American Woodworker Magazine by NFO Research.
Beginners average three hours a week on their hobby, compared with 14 hours for advanced craftsmen.
Forty percent of novices have their own workshops, compared with 79% of their more expert counterparts. . . .
Americans made nearly 19 million visits a year to psychiatrists in 1989 and 1990, says a new report from the National Center for Health Statistics.
Boys under the age of 15 are significantly more likely than girls to do so, while women aged 65 or older are more likely than elderly men to visit a psychiatrist.
