Two months have passed since the Southern California earthquake, but in this seaside suburb of Los Angeles, famed for a yuppie brand of collectivism that has earned it the nickname The People's Republic of Santa Monica, the political aftershocks show no sign of letup.
The quake opened potentially crippling fissures in the system around which the ruling "progressives" still organize their power: one of the nation's most draconian rent-control laws, which for 15 years has guaranteed them a solid political base of grateful tenants.
At least 3,000 of Santa Monica's approximately 30,000 rent-controlled apartment units were heavily damaged by Jan. 17's 6.8-magnitude temblor.
By some estimates, as many as 150 landlords are stuck with buildings so far gone that tenants can't safely move back in.
Given the punishing economics of rent control, some owners of maimed buildings say the incentive to restore or rebuild -- unless they're granted total exemption from price restrictions -- isn't there.
But true to form, the city has offered only halfway relief.
Yes, landlords are told they'll be able to pass along the cost of earthquake repairs in the form of higher rents; but the amortization formula can be dizzying; tenants get to protest "unfair" hikes, or charges for fixing problems not caused by the quake; and the approval process moves at the city's patented slo-mo pace.
Owners whose buildings are beyond fixing have been promised at least partial price decontrol if they rebuild, but the city is stingy with demolition permits, and decontrol won't extend to all the apartments in a replacement structure: Between 15% and 30% of new units must go to low-income renters.
More than a few apartment owners are talking about collecting what insurance they can and throwing in the towel.
Others aren't that lucky.
"I've been ruined," a tearful Mary Tabatabai said at a City Council meeting the other night.
Before the quake, the Iranian immigrant lived in her eight-unit apartment building.
Now it is uninhabitable, its damages greater than her equity in the building.
Homeless and broke, she says "the Rent Control Board is responsible," because the $440 rents she was allowed to charge for her two-bedroom units didn't leave her enough to pay for earthquake coverage.
But despite the grim tales, some believers in property rights still see a silver lining in the way the quake has thrown the leftist power structure off-balance.
Campaign slates run by Santa Monicans for Renters Rights can usually count on a victory margin of just over 6,000 votes.
"If 1,400 apartments are lost, and I think that will be the final total, about 3,000 tenants are eliminated from the rolls if you figure 2.2 voters per unit," says John Rodriguez, a barber and former president of a local apartment-owners association.
"That could really tighten things up in city politics."
Opponents of the status quo also have a new argument in their arsenal: Rent control may have been one of the reasons the apartment stock took such a hit despite the fact that the quake's epicenter was miles north, on the far side of the Santa Monica Mountains.
While geological reports say the shaking was more intense in Santa Monica than in many surrounding communities, it's also true that some of the worst damage was to decades-old frame-and-stucco buildings that would have been replaced in the '80s had it not been for regulatory roadblocks.
Rents are based on the levels of April 1978 -- one year before the law took effect -- with only slight annual adjustments that have kept prices at times 30% to 50% below market levels as reflected, say, in neighboring Brentwood.
Landlords have found it next to impossible to win special increases to finance maintenance, so roof repairs, termite fumigation, and plumbing and wiring overhauls have been widely deferred.
"Structural stresses from termites played a big part in the earthquake mess," says Mark Markevicius, who manages about 1,500 apartment units.
Stroll around the parts of town that were hardest hit, and you'll see apartment buildings with buckling walls, which can be a sign of timber weakened by dry rot or termites.
Even Tom Hayden, who erected the City Hall machine back in the '70s and today is the local state senator and a candidate for governor, chided city officials after the quake.
While more than 90% of unreinforced masonry buildings in Los Angeles had been torn down or retrofitted before the quake, he said "Santa Monica had retrofitted only slightly more than half" of its own similar structures.
But if rent control has taken a toll on the housing stock, the bureaucracy that administers the law is doing just fine.
The Rent Control Board's budget has grown from $745,000 in the late '70s to nearly $5 million today, its 55 employees earning an average of about $53,000, not including benefits.
To pay the bill, tenants are levied a $156-per-unit yearly fee (up from $84 in 1986); but landlords have to collect it -- and carry the costs if a renter is late anteing up.
The establishment isn't going to let all this go without a struggle, and a determined effort is on to limit the number of rent-controlled apartments lost to the quake.
Some landlords charged that in its desperation to shore up its electoral base, the city hierarchy was disturbingly eager to get tenants back into buildings of questionable soundness.
Officials swear they're taking every precaution, but attorney Carl Lambert, for one, still expresses concern.
He says an apartment building he manages was torn off its foundation but an inspector brought in by the city insisted the damage was cosmetic and tenants should be invited back in.
Another lawyer, Rosario Perry, headed to court when the city tried to force a couple of his clients to reopen their small complex of rent-controlled bungalows before they could make basic repairs.
"Parts of the chimneys had fallen down; the roofs were separated from the walls; gas lines were leaking -- but we were supposed to let tenants back in," he says.
"And there was no guarantee my clients wouldn't be held liable for any injuries to renters."
A Los Angeles County judge issued an injunction giving the owners time for some rudimentary safety work.
In the end, fewer than half the tenants moved back in.
Meanwhile, Sen. Barbara Boxer told Santa Monica Mayor Judy Abdo that she'd ask federal housing officials to consider buying severely damaged, rent-controlled buildings.
For those foes of rent control who've long claimed that the unspoken aim was to drive landlords out of business so government could take over their property, Ms. Boxer's promise offered an opportunity for some we-told-you-so's.
But how much money, if any, will actually materialize is unclear.
And in the long run, even the feds may not be able to cough up enough to save the rent controllers from the consequences of their flat-earth economics.
Mr. Johnson is an editorial writer at the Orange County Register and editor of National Review West, National Review magazine's West Coast supplement published in conjunction with the Claremont Institute.
