It isn't every day that Wall Street can read the tea leaves and predict which companies are likely to win their battles with the Internal Revenue Service.
But Robert Willens is willing to do it.
Besides being a Lehman Brothers analyst, Mr. Willens is a tax accountant.
He thinks that a recent IRS ruling involving boat maker Brunswick Corp. rolls out the crystal ball for investors, suggesting that other unrelated companies -- including International Multifoods, Charles Schwab, First USA and Petroleum Heat & Power -- may manage to settle their tax disputes favorably.
The ruling involves an oddity found on the books of a lot of acquisition-hungry companies.
"Intangible assets," the accountants call them.
Included are such items as customer lists, dealer networks and computer software.
A steel mill generally raises no eyebrows at the IRS when its value is depreciated -- deducted from a company's taxable income over a period of years.
But the IRS has long squirmed at depreciation of intangibles, because of the cost to Uncle Sam.
In the Brunswick case involving intangibles, however, the company last month agreed to pay the IRS only $55 million out of $500 million that the agency had claimed was owed.
The IRS approved the settlement provided Brunswick would stretch the depreciation period to 15 years from an average of less than 10.
"It could set a precedent for other corporations battling the IRS on intangible assets," Mr. Willens says of the Brunswick case.
The IRS insisted it wasn't establishing a pattern.
But there's a bit of history behind the IRS move.
Last year the Supreme Court, in deciding the separate case of Newark Morning Ledger, bolstered Brunswick's argument that $500 million of intangible assets acquired in 1986 should be deductible.
And in August a major tax law affirmed the high court's stance, directing the IRS to settle such disputes with companies, though also shaving potential intangibles-related deductions by stretching the depreciation period to 15 years.
At International Multifoods, a Minneapolis food-service concern, the IRS isn't allowing intangible-asset deductions for the year ended Feb. 29, 1988, or for the prior year.
Those assets -- including distributor networks and customer lists -- were obtained by acquiring distributors and wholesalers during the two years.
John Schaefer, International Multifoods' director of taxes, says about $20 million to $30 million in taxes are involved.
"We've been told by the IRS that it will soon issue guidelines, and we hope that the Brunswick decision points the way," he adds.
He estimates a favorable IRS decision could boost cash flow of International Multifoods by $1 million to $2 million a year, for a decade or more.
Charles Schwab, the San Francisco discount brokerage house, two years ago filed a U.S. Tax Court petition rebutting an IRS claim for added taxes of $28 million for 1988.
The 1992 annual report says the IRS claim relates to a management buyout of Schwab in 1988; the brokerage house now is publicly traded, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Hugo Quackenbush, senior vice president, says the IRS is disputing depreciation of intangible assets such as software involved in the management buyout.
If Schwab's claim for 1988 is accepted by the IRS, similar deductions of intangible assets from 1989 through 1992 also could prevail, the annual report indicates.
"If the IRS tax settlement is reasonable -- as indicated by the Brunswick case -- we expect to pay little of the $28 million," says Mr. Quackenbush.
"The Brunswick decision has lifted a cloud from the company."
First USA of Dallas, in the credit-card business, has taken tax deductions to depreciate intangible assets ranging from $53 million to more than $56 million in each of the three consecutive fiscal years through June 30, 1993.
As of Dec. 31, however, First USA still had $204 million in intangible assets left to depreciate.
The assets involve overpayments in buying credit-card loans when management with Merrill Lynch Partners bought First USA from Lomas Financial in 1989.
First USA went public in 1992.
In a regulatory filing, First USA says the company believes its deductions were proper.
George McCane, senior vice president, says "the company is studying the Brunswick case but hasn't yet formed an opinion" about its effect on First USA.
At Petroleum Heat & Power, a Stamford, Conn., fuel-oil dealer, George Leibowitz, senior vice president, finance, notes that the company was audited by the IRS from late 1991 until early 1993 over intangible-asset deductions resulting from 120 acquisitions of distributors from 1979 through 1990.
In 1992, for example, the company deducted $23.5 million for acquiring customer lists, he says.
Petroleum Heat hasn't needed to use these deductions lately to reduce taxable income because it has been unprofitable, with a net loss wider than $8 million for 1993.
"But there could always have been a potential problem with the IRS going forward," he says,"so the Brunswick case helps remove any uncertainty about our company."
