In threatening to impose unilateral trade sanctions against Tokyo, the Clinton administration has taken up the cudgels on behalf of Motorola Inc. and tried to portray the telecommunications giant as a victim of Japanese protectionism and bureaucratic foot-dragging.
"This is, in many ways, a classic case of the determination of Japan to keep its markets closed," said U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor shortly after the Clinton-Hosokawa summit fell apart in recrimination over trade.
(President Clinton is expected to sign an executive order as early as today to reinstate the Super 301 trade provision targeting Japan for punitive tariffs.)
The U.S. has publicly accused the Japanese of reneging on their promises and throwing up barrier after barrier to block Motorola's market access.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The history of Motorola in Japan reveals a company that has repeatedly used the U.S. government as a battering ram to knock aside Japanese regulations and win special favors to accelerate market entry.
Mr. Kantor's latest Motorola gambit not only includes demands for a specific market share in Japan but would actually compel a private Japanese company to pre-purchase a large quantity of soon-to-be-obsolete Motorola equipment in a kind of year-end clearance sale.
Failure to comply with these demands would require the Japanese government to break up this Japanese company, assign its license to a third party and forcibly transfer cellular frequencies from a competing system to Motorola!
Is it any wonder Prime Minister Hosokawa said "no"?
To understand the egregiousness of the American position, we need to go back to 1985, when Lionel Olmer, then the U.S. undersecretary of commerce for international trade, wrote the Japanese vice minister for posts and telecommunications that the cellular telephone system then in use all over Japan was not compatible with U.S. or European standards.
The Olmer letter, with remarkable arrogance, went on to note that Japanese firms had achieved "considerable success" selling cellular equipment in the U.S. and "I would hope that equitable standards for cellular telephones could be rapidly adopted {in Japan}."
In other words, scrap your system, use ours.
Never mind that our own Federal Communications Commission had taken the sensible course and adopted a single standard in this country, and that the Europeans had their own system (incompatible, by the way, with Motorola's), and that Japan, too, had been installing its own Nippon Telegraph & Telephone system since 1979 in the reasonable expectation that its citizens could converse with each other nationwide.
It is not difficult to imagine how France or Germany might have reacted if Motorola had taken the Olmer line over there.
Or suppose Sony had blustered its way into the U.S. and demanded the right to install a parallel, noncompatible system here?
The FCC would have welcomed it with open arms, right?
Nonetheless, that's what eventually happened in Japan.
The Tokyo authorities understandably resisted the Motorola-led attack on their sovereignty, but the pressure was relentless.
In April 1986, Prime Minister Nakasone's government approved a compromise to allow the partial introduction of a second cellular standard -- Motorola's.
As it happened, Japan -- like the U.S. after the bust-up of AT&T -- was already in the process of deregulating its telecommunications industry to allow competition among common carriers.
Accordingly, in February 1987 regulators divided the country into two regions, and two private Japanese firms -- DDI (Daini-Denden Inc.) and IDO (Nippon Idou Tsushin Corp.) -- were granted licenses to compete with NTT in each region.
DDI chose the Motorola standard in western Japan, with its large metropolitan area around Osaka and Kyoto; IDO entered the eastern half, with the densely populated Tokyo-Nagoya corridor, but decided to go with a system compatible with NTT.
Both Motorola and U.S. negotiators voiced their approval.
In 1989, however, all bets were off.
Motorola now complained that their DDI customers' phones didn't work when they were in the Tokyo region.
This should not have come as a surprise, since Motorola had understood the terms of the compromise.
But the company complained bitterly nevertheless.
The U.S. determined that Japan was in violation of the 1986 agreement and threatened to impose 100% tariffs on a variety of Japanese products unless frequencies were assigned to let Motorola phones "roam" in the Tokyo region.
Once again, Japan relented, making additional band-width available.
Later, the government helped to broker a deal under which IDO would begin installing Motorola infrastructure and equipment as well.
This required a huge commitment by IDO shareholders, as well as mammoth new loans to pay for the system (which the Japanese government also helped broker at favorable rates).
IDO began operating the Motorola system in November 1991.
Some months later, IDO and Motorola negotiated an investment plan under which IDO promised to install 189 Motorola base stations by June of this year.
In a letter dated March 18, 1992, Motorola Chairman George Fisher wrote IDO's chief executive, Takeo Tsukada, approving the plan and stating "that there is no problem at this time with the progress toward implementation."
Indeed, it now appears that IDO will complete that installation three months ahead of schedule.
But hold the phone!
Are Mr. Fisher and Mr. Kantor happy?
Of course not.
Last fall, the U.S. raised the ante once again, demanding that the Japanese government intervene with IDO, a privately owned company, to guarantee it will install equipment by the end of this year to give Motorola, after three years in the Tokyo region, as much population coverage as NTT now enjoys after 15 years.
This is apparently the U.S. definition of "comparable market access."
Still, IDO tried to come up with a workable plan.
Last November, the company offered to install enough base stations to give the Motorola system access to 93% of the Tokyo region's population by 1995, more than IDO's coverage with the NTT system.
This, too, was rejected.
Instead, the U.S. cranked up its demands.
IDO must double the number of existing Motorola channels in the Tokyo region, necessitating a capital expenditure that could bankrupt IDO.
Failure to comply by the end of the year would require Japanese regulators to revoke IDO's license.
In addition, Japan must transfer a fixed amount of NTT frequencies to Motorola's format, which Tokyo says would involve the recall of about 300,000 cellular phones already in use by subscribers.
Then, two days after the Clinton-Hosokawa summit fell apart, the Motorola demands reached even more ludicrous proportions.
IDO must immediately buy 225,000 handsets from Motorola as a way of guaranteeing it would seek at least that many customers.
This last demand was apparently precipitated by Motorola's desire to unload its existing inventory of analog phones prior to Japan's inauguration of digital service next month.
Under the new regulations, which Motorola has known were coming for years, individual retailers will be allowed to sell both analog and digital phones directly to customers.
It is not at all clear that Motorola's old analog technology will continue to be popular.
Indeed, Morgan Bengtsson, president of Sweden's Ericsson Corp., a world leader in cellular technology, attacked the U.S. position in Tokyo Monday.
"The Japanese market is open as far as the cellular market is concerned," he said.
"Because of U.S. pressure, U.S. companies should not be given unfair advantages over other companies {here}."
Despite its complaints, Motorola currently has an overall cellular phone market share in Japan of 23%.
Its share of the U.S. market is about 38%, and Toshiba -- its nearest Japanese competitor in the U.S. -- has less than a 9% share in this country.
Motorola's combined 1993 sales of cellular equipment and semiconductors in Japan were projected at $1.3 billion, out of $17 billion in world-wide sales.
Given this record of success, the question arises: Why has the U.S. government invested so much time, effort and taxpayer money on behalf of Motorola over the years?
We often hear American complaints about the cozy relationship that exists between Japanese elected officials, businessmen and bureaucrats.
What about Motorola and U.S. officials?
There seems to be quite a trail.
Lionel Olmer, mentioned in his capacity as undersecretary of commerce, worked for Motorola for four years prior to joining the Reagan administration in 1981 and helped negotiate the company's first supplier agreement with Japan's NTT (yes, Motorola sells directly to NTT as well).
At Commerce, of course, he helped negotiate the 1986 agreement that led to Motorola's system being approved in Japan.
In his book "The Fair Trade Fraud," James Bovard notes that Michael Galvin, the son of the then-Motorola chairman, "donated over $100,000 to Republican candidates in 1988 and was subsequently chairman of the Illinois Bush campaign.
Bush subsequently appointed Galvin as Commerce's assistant secretary for export administration and Michael Skarzynski, a Motorola lawyer, as Commerce's assistant secretary for trade development."
This special relationship continues to exist.
Ira Wolf, now the number three official in the office of the U.S. trade representative, was the public affairs director for Motorola Japan immediately before being appointed by the Clinton administration.
The former head of the trade office's Telecommunications Trade Policy Division is Marian Barell, now a lobbyist for Motorola.
Of course, none of this means that these aren't nice people or that they acted illegally.
But it does raise questions about influence and the revolving door in American government and industry.
And this, coupled with the history of Motorola in Japan, ought to give us pause as Mr. Kantor presses his case against Tokyo.
Mr. Latham is an international management consultant based in Philadelphia.
