As Banco Espanol de Credito's new managers wrestle with the task of assessing a financial shortfall now thought likely to reach at least 700 billion pesetas ($4.85 billion), a battle is being fought behind the scenes over how much of the burden should be borne by the bank's shareholders.
To cover the shortfall, Banesto's new management team is expected to propose a package including aid from a central deposit-guarantee fund, the writing off of most the bank's 330 billion-peseta capital and reserves, and a subsequent capital increase.
This would involve, among other things, a reduction in the nominal value of Banesto shares, currently 700 pesetas, to 500 pesetas and possibly substantially lower.
Still undecided is just how large this reduction should be.
While purists, including officials at other Spanish banks, argue that the write-off should be total, shareholders are trying to persuade the Spanish government to take a softer line.
Representatives of shareholder associations argue that a total write-off would be unfair to those investors who bought Banesto shares on the basis of optimistic predictions published by J.P. Morgan & Co., the New York-based investment bank, in the context of a Banesto capital increase it led last year.
J.P. Morgan and the Spanish bank's discredited former chairman, Mario Conde, have their own interests to defend.
In addition to leading the capital increase, Morgan invested $162 million of its own and its clients' money in a 7.9% stake in the bank.
Mr. Conde pledged most of his personal assets in return for a seven billion-peseta loan from Banco Central Hispano that enabled him to participate in the capital increase.
Banesto shares were last quoted on the Madrid Stock Exchange at 1,995 pesetas on Dec. 28, the day the Bank of Spain intervened to oust Mr. Conde and his entire board because of fears of a run on deposits.
The shares are currently changing hands in small quantities outside the official market at prices averaging 550 pesetas.
The 700 billion-peseta shortfall includes losses from nonperforming loans and from the bank's leasing and mortgage units and foreign investments, among other things.
Hanging over the debate is Spain's credibility as a financial marketplace.
Spanish authorities are worried about the investor reaction to a reduction in the value of Banesto's capital.
But bankers and financial analysts believe that a failure to make shareholders pay the price of the bank's mismanagement could be interpreted as a sign that Spain lacks the will or the ability to impose effective discipline in its financial markets.
Any bail-out operation in a nation's banking system "poses an appalling dilemma in terms of the future behavior of banks and depositors in that it undermines market discipline," says Richard Dale, professor of international banking at Southampton University in England.
Unless shareholders are forced to accept their share of the cost of such a bail-out, he observes, "you end up undermining the whole concept of risk capital."
