Ellen Scott is a senior human-resources representative at Rockwell International Corp.'s Rocketdyne division.
She is young -- 27 years old -- and successful.
Ms. Scott is also part of a fast-growing group in corporate America: black professional women.
Between 1982 and 1992, this group grew a heady 125%.
Black female professionals in the 38,000 companies that report to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission now number almost 200,000.
This is, of course, minuscule compared with the number of white professionals -- male and female.
But it is nearly twice the number of black male professionals.
According to an analysis by The Wall Street Journal of EEOC data, there were 1.2 black female professionals for every black male professional in 1982.
Now, there are 1.8.
Though white women have made substantial gains relative to white men, white men continue to have a greater share of professional jobs: In 1982 there were 0.62 white women professionals for every white man; in 1992, there were 0.94.
Black women also are making strides in the more general category of "white collar, excluding clerical."
In 1982, there were slightly more black women than black men in that category.
By 1992, the number of black women in those jobs had grown 90% to about 815,000, while the number of men had grown less than 50%, to about 564,000.
That black women are rising more rapidly than black men in corporate America is a source of mixed feelings for blacks.
Considering the obstacles to promotion that minorities of all kinds often face, the success of black women professionals is reason for pride.
But a number of male and female corporate executives of both races, government officials, scholars and behaviorists interviewed for this story see the gap as posing new challenges for a corporate culture already grappling with sexual and racial bias and a black community increasingly worried about the future of its young men and women.
Many blacks fear a future of more struggling, women-led households, fewer men in positions of power and responsibility, and a social and economic disparity that makes the basic social customs of dating and marrying more difficult.
The progress of women and the lowered expectations for men "speaks to the availability of marriageable men, of family formation, the health of the black community," says Charles Betsey, chairman of the economics department at historically black Howard University in Washington.
The reasons black women are overtaking black men are many and complex.
They begin with the factors that keep black men from entering the corporate world in the first place and include the attitudes that often end up favoring black women over black men once they get through the corporate door.
Many black men have been sidetracked by crime, drugs and inadequate education; some drop out of a system they are convinced will never treat them fairly.
Statistics show that more young black men die from homicide than from any other single cause.
More black men are in jail than in college.
While black people's jobless rate is about twice that of whites, more black men are on the unemployment rolls than black women.
Lastly, the government attracts a good number of ambitious, young black men away from corporations.
According to the Pentagon, more than 270,000 black men are in the military alone.
Consequently, there are now more black women than black men at companies reporting to the EEOC, a situation unique among ethnic groups in corporate America.
These companies employed 2.77 million black women and 2.44 million black men in 1992.
Some companies attribute the larger number of black female professionals at their firms to the greater number of college-educated women in the work force.
(The EEOC defines professional jobs as "occupations requiring either college graduation or experience of such kind and amount as to provide a comparable background.")
Charles Reid, director of diversity for Kraft General Foods Inc., a unit of Philip Morris Cos., says the disparity between male and female professionals at his company probably reflects black women's predominance in the college-educated applicant pool.
Between 1989 and 1992, black women increased their ranks from 131 to 172; black men, from 101 to 131, the company says.
Education also is a factor at Detroit Edison Co.
The number of black women professionals at the utility grew more dramatically than the number of black male professionals: From 1982 to 1992, the number of women professionals grew 90%, while the number of men increased 16%.
Malcolm Dade, vice president for human resources, says although he doesn't have "hard evidence," he believes that the increase in black women at his company has to do with their greater numbers in the college-educated work force.
It is indeed the case that more black women graduate from college and professional schools than do black men.
Roughly 14.2% of the black women in the civilian work force have bachelor or postgraduate degrees compared with 11.9% for black males.
By contrast, 22.7% of white females in the work force held bachelor or postgraduate degrees, while 26.2% of white males had similar credentials.
"Over time, more and more African-American women are getting credentials and fewer and fewer African-American men are," says David Thomas, associate professor of economics at the Harvard Business School.
"This is endemic to society rather than something internally happening in companies.
Black men are being pushed out of the process so early that they don't even qualify to compete.
They don't have the requisite skills to get into the labor force."
To be sure, the majority of black women still labor in low-paying, low-status jobs with little chance of advancement -- just like black men.
And women will stay in dead-end jobs longer than men, economists say, especially if they have children.
A study shows that salaries of black women in the work force trail those of black men by 14 percentage points.
In the higher ranks of corporations -- what the EEOC calls the "officials and managers" category -- black men still outnumber women, in large part because they entered the work force first, says Ella Bell, of Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of Management.
In 1992, black men held about 146,000 such jobs; black women, 113,000.
But black women are closing that gap, too, although some economists say that recent corporate layoffs have slowed the upward mobility of black managers -- and managers in general.
Still, between 1982 and 1992, according to the Journal's analysis, black men increased their numbers in management by 22%; black females increased theirs by 64%.
In all other areas of the white-collar work force, there are more black women than black men.
Armed with diplomas, black women are getting hired -- and working hard to get ahead.
In their quest, they are aided, many blacks say, by both subtle and not-so-subtle attitudes that help them more than black men.
For instance, there is a feeling among many blacks, especially males, that black women succeed because white men prefer working with them.
The comfort level has nothing to do with sex, but rather, the theory goes, that ambitious, direct and assertive black males are often seen by white supervisors as aggressive, suspicious or arrogant.
Women are viewed as more compliant, easier to get along with.
"Black women are taught from a young age to be multitalented, multifaceted and to be able to be a chameleon.
And for industry that's very crucial.
You need people you can put into a particular environment and know they'll thrive," says 32-year-old Amanda Harris.
She is the youngest nonwhite manager at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala.
John J. Higgins, a white senior vice president and general counsel at GM Hughes Electronics and Hughes Aircraft Co., subsidiaries of General Motors Corp., speaks to this issue based on his own experience.
He helped mentor Wanda Denson-Low, a young black woman who is staff vice president for patents and licensing, assistant general counsel -- and the company's highest ranking minority female.
"In Wanda's case, she accepted me as I was," Mr. Higgins says.
"She wasn't looking for an agenda; she wasn't suspicious of my motives.
She took me at my word.
"Based upon my interface with black males, the initial encounters will involve a chip on their shoulder, some obvious skepticism," he adds.
But what is perceived by white managers as arrogance sometimes can be the armor black people wear to protect themselves from the pain of being devalued or misunderstood.
Says Michael Sales, a black senior patent counsel who works with Ms. Denson-Low and Mr. Higgins, "There is a shell; there is a certain defensiveness, a certain distancing thing until the personal relationship develops."
He says corporations can help turn around the distressing trend for black men if top management cares enough to mentor and network with black males.
"It's like the movie `Schindler's List,' " he says.
"You have one gentleman who says, `I'm going to do what I can do.' " For him, it was his mentor, Mr. Higgins, whom Mr. Sales describes as "the one out of 10 white men who is sensitive and fair."
Dace Richardson, 34, a project manager with Rocketdyne, sees the white male/black male relationship as a problem of assimilation.
"It's not that you have to act white, you've got to understand the rules to get ahead," he says.
"Black men sometimes take a long time to learn that.
We want to do it our way.
We fail to bond.
We focus on being the best engineer, the best person we can be.
You need to be competent, but the side that gets you ahead is how well you can work with other people."
Still, most black women and men interviewed agree that black men's "maleness" sometimes eventually works for them.
"Once white men realize who you are and what your goals and objectives are and all of the misgivings and misinterpretations have been dealt with, it's a male-to-male exchange," says Mr. Richardson.
"From that standpoint, we do come out a little bit better."
Ms. Scott of Rockwell adds, "The willingness to share power with a black woman may be greater because the fear is not there that black women may catch up with them and compete.
Men can compete."
There is a widespread perception that black women also have an advantage over black men because they are "two-fers" -- fulfilling companies' desires to have more women and more blacks, all for the price of one.
EEOC numbers don't double-count black females; employers must list black women simply as black women, an EEOC spokesman says.
But, though few managers will address it openly, the "two-fer" has real public-relations value.
"If you're in the business . . . it's not said like that.
It's not as ruthless," says Ms. Scott.
"With individual managers, they're looking for the best people.
But I know when we're negotiating to hire one person vs. another, all things being equal that dual factor can help."
Mr. Higgins of Hughes Aircraft, who took Ms. Denson-Low under his wing, says that senior managers worried about her youth and inexperience -- not her race or sex -- before they promoted her in 1989.
But he candidly adds that her race and sex were "plus factors, because they would help us meet our moral and legal obligations."
Nevertheless, Ms. Denson-Low, 32, says the dual status "works to my disadvantage because there's the immediate perception that you're only there because of that -- and I'm young on top of that.
It's been a great barrier to overcome."
Despite the burgeoning number of black professional females, people who study these trends caution that the success of this group must be put in context.
"One thing we cannot assume from these trends is that they will translate into the glass ceiling becoming more permeable for black women than it has been," says Mr. Thomas of Harvard.
"You're still likely to see a large collection of black women at the glass ceiling, sort of piling up there.
The good news is that they're sitting there waiting in professional jobs that provide good, stable opportunities."
And neither black women nor black men are doing as well as whites.
Blacks account for only 5.9% of professionals in EEOC companies and 5.0% of officials and managers.
Black women still tend to be employed in segregated female positions -- often ones that white women have vacated -- working in expendable support positions, far from the company's core business.
And salaries for black women continue to lag.
According to a study by Audrey Murrell, professor of business administration and psychology at the Katz Graduate School of Business at the University of Pittsburgh, black women in the work force earn about 86% of what black men and white women earn, and about 60% of what white men earn.
Because of black women's low pay, says economist Lynn Burbridge at the Wellesley College Center for Research on Women, the financial health of their families is more at risk than those headed by white women.
Not only do white women earn more, they are more likely to have relatives who can help them financially, she says.
That makes the presence of a second wage earner in a black family all the more crucial to its well-being and, by extension, the well-being of the black community.
But who is the second wage-earner for black professional women?
In the past, the black community had many marriages where women had higher economic status than their husbands.
And some women, like Ms. Scott, wonder whether "we need to redefine success so that if a firefighter is everything you ever wanted in a man, it's OK."
Earl S. Washington, a vice president of Rockwell and president of the Executive Leadership Council, an organization of black executives, has two daughters -- one with a bachelor's degree in engineering and a master's in business, the other with a bachelor's degree in psychology.
He always assumed they would marry black men.
Now, he says, "As crazy as this world is, maybe the most important requirement is that they find someone who loves them."
But most black professional women interviewed seek black men of similar accomplishments; men who "can realistically fit their lifestyle and feel comfortable in the worlds these women travel in," notes Ms. Bell of MIT's Sloan School of Management.
Tosha McNeal, a 32-year-old technician with Potomac Electric Power Co. in Washington, says she and her closest female friends -- a lawyer, a journalist and a television-company technician -- would like to be married to black men.
But, she says bluntly, "once you take away the guys who aren't about anything, take away the criminals, the drug addicts, the homosexuals, the married men, it's slim pickings."
Sometimes, she adds, black men are put off by successful black women.
"They get intimidated by our education level, our economic level.
They look at us and say, `Wow, she's got her own car, her own apartment, her own wardrobe, her own benefits.'
And they're intimidated and jealous."
Older black businessmen worry about the increasing disparity between black men and women, and the growing lack of role models for young men in the workplace as those in the first big wave of blacks in corporate America retire or leave to start their own business.
One of those role models, Bob Johnson, Sears, Roebuck & Co.'s first black officer, thinks that both corporations and blacks should give higher priority to ensuring that black women and men have access to all professional and executive positions, including those at the highest level.
"The energy should be directed at opening up the jobs," says Mr. Johnson, who retired from the company in 1991 after 26 years.
If gender disparity in the corporation becomes a divisive issue for black women and black men, he warns, "We're going to make a lot less progress."
As the black community struggles with the issues of being black in the white corporate world, Ms. Scott considers her own personal future.
Every time she has a birthday, she says she thinks about growing older -- alone.
"My mom used to say to me, `Hey, you can get a man when you can't get anything else -- when you're one-eyed and have one leg.'
Part of me believes that.
But sometimes I think, `Oh boy, you're not getting any younger.'
And sometimes I think if I don't have someone to share all this with me, it will be meaningless."
