ISRAEL DISARMED some settlers, and soldiers killed two youths in Jericho.
Israeli soldiers killed two Palestinian youths as fury over the Hebron mosque massacre spread to the West Bank town of Jericho, where the PLO plans to set up its headquarters under a peace plan with Israel.
As part of an effort to curb violence, Israel's security forces disarmed seven extremist Jewish settlers in the occupied territories and banned them from Palestinian areas.
Militant Palestinians, meanwhile, called for revenge attacks for the Hebron killings, and Israel put its embassies and citizens abroad on alert.
Prime Minister Rabin's antiterrorism adviser urged Israelis with gun permits to carry their weapons at all times, reflecting concern about security.
Mexican rebels reached a tentative agreement with government negotiators for ending a peasant uprising in southern Mexico.
The 32-point accord, which includes proposed democratic reforms and economic measures to help indigenous peoples, still must be approved by rebel supporters in the state of Chiapas.
Serb forces intensified their military offensive on several fronts in Bosnia, despite new diplomatic efforts to end the fighting.
Serb artillery pounded the Muslim enclave of Maglaj in the north, and three rocket-propelled grenades were fired around the Jewish cemetery in Sarajevo, the U.N. said.
Serbs also blocked some relief convoys.
U.S. prosecutors asked a federal court to order accused CIA spy Ames and his wife to transfer over $2.2 million from foreign bank accounts so it can be seized if they are convicted.
Meanwhile, Defense Secretary Perry said it would take months to assess the damage that was allegedly caused by Ames.
Japan's Hosokawa backed away from plans to shuffle his cabinet -- a turnaround that reflects the fragility of his ruling coalition.
The prime minister indicated he regretted the reversal, which followed several days of infighting.
Chief Justice Rehnquist denied Sen. Packwood's request to withhold his diaries from a Senate panel while appealing a subpoena.
In a setback for the Oregon Republican, who is battling sexual misconduct charges, Rehnquist said the case was undermined by a disclosure that the transcripts and tapes may have been altered.
Hubbell denied reports that he overbilled clients, including a federal agency, as a private lawyer in Arkansas.
The associate attorney general was responding to a report that his former partners in the Rose Law Firm were investigating his billing practices.
Administration officials outlined scaled-back welfare reform proposals during a meeting with a group of cabinet members.
One plan would cost $6 billion in 1999, while a less costly alternative would provide less child-care funding.
Russia has told NATO it soon will join the "partnership for peace" plan for various military links with the Western alliance, according to NATO sources in Brussels.
Moscow's position on the partnership plan previously had been unclear.
Pennsylvania's Sen. Specter squared off against the Clinton administration as the Supreme Court heard arguments on whether federal judges should review government decisions to close military bases.
Specter, the first senator to appear before the court in 22 years, is challenging a 1991 decision to close the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.
New York police arrested a Lebanese man and charged him with 15 counts of attempted murder in connection with Tuesday's shooting attack on a van of Hasidic students.
Two Jordanians were arrested on lesser charges linked to the attack, which left one victim brain dead, another critically wounded and two with minor injuries.
The U.S. isn't likely to send Patriot missiles to South Korea for at least several weeks because Seoul is worried that the action would upset nuclear-weapons talks with Pyongyang, U.S. commanders said.
Vietnamese and U.S. negotiators agreed in principle on the opening of liaison offices and on U.S. war claims against Vietnam, Hanoi said.
The Vietnamese officials said they would do everything possible to open their Washington office quickly.
