John F. Akers may have quit IBM dispirited, but it turns out the company paid him handsomely for his troubles.
International Business Machines Corp. gave its former chairman and chief executive officer a severance payment of more than $3 million in cash last year, plus salary, pension, stock options, and a bonus.
The exact terms of Mr. Akers's departure package will be disclosed in IBM's 1994 proxy statement, which may be released as early as today.
IBM had initially said no to such severance payment, or "golden boot" -- corporate parlance for CEOs who are all but ousted -- would be made.
Mr. Akers resigned on Jan. 25 of last year, under board pressure, after vowing for months to see the troubled computer company through a wrenching restructuring.
"There's no such thing here as a golden parachute," an IBM spokesman said at the time.
But last March, the compensation committee of the IBM board authorized the $3 million-plus severance, according to one knowledgeable executive.
That was in addition to the annual pension of $1.2 million that Mr. Akers will receive -- and about 100,000 stock options that he was granted upon exit.
The options are exercisable at $46 a share, and would be worth almost $1 million at yesterday's closing price of $55.375.
The former chairman also was paid more than $300,000 for the four months of 1993 when he was on the payroll.
Moreover, Mr. Akers, who ran IBM as it posted its first operating loss, recorded more than $15 billion in charges, and had a stunning decline of $28 billion in its stock-market value, also received a bonus of about $100,000.
In 1992, Mr. Akers earned $925,000 in salary plus a $375,000 cash bonus.
An IBM spokesman said the company would have no comment until the proxy statement was released.
Mr. Akers couldn't be reached for comment.
IBM subsequently named Louis V. Gerstner Jr. of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. to replace Mr. Akers as chairman and CEO.
Should Mr. Gerstner someday get forced out, his contract calls for him to receive at least $6 million in severance -- three times his annual salary -- plus any bonus.
Joann S. Lublin contributed to this article.
