Ask for a sketch of the global economy and it's likely to be dominated by three big blobs for Japan, Western Europe and North America.
Well, it's time to go back to the drawing board, insists Jeffrey Garten, a sometime academic, merchant banker and economic polemicist who is now U.S. undersecretary of commerce for international trade.
He says 75% of the world's total trade growth for years to come will involve 10 quite different places, all of them large developing nations trying to expand free-market systems.
And because that's where the money is, U.S. foreign economic policy is being revised accordingly.
Expanding U.S. exports is the goal, and "this is where the efforts of government will pay off the most," he contends.
That makes sense to many American executives, who'd like more official help when competing in a complex, fast-changing world.
They want President Clinton to fight for them just as foreign leaders battle for their own commercial interests.
So far, so good.
"We're all encouraged that we're going down the right path together," says Daniel Meyer, chairman of Cincinnati Milacron Inc., a leading machine-tool maker.
The path leads mainly to Mr. Garten's 10 large emerging markets: Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Poland, South Africa, India, Turkey, South Korea and Indonesia plus the economic zone of China, Hong Kong and Taiwan.
Most have great geographical size and populations, free-market reforms and high growth rates.
By the year 2010, they'll double their share of global output.
And their merchandise imports by then will be $1 trillion higher than in 1990 (plus services).
That's triple the combined increase expected for Japan, Europe, North America and the world's 120 other developing nations.
Thus Mr. Garten, who wrote a book describing economic combat between the U.S., Japan and Germany, now says "the vision I once had of a tri-polar global economy begins to fade."
This top 10 isn't rigid.
Thailand could be added soon and Vietnam later, while political unrest might cause others, such as South Africa, to drop off.
Russia remains a special case, deserving great attention for reasons other than pure economics.
But the main point holds: There's a short list of big developing nations that offer a disproportionate share of economic opportunity, and that's where the U.S. government wants business to try harder.
It plans to help in several ways.
For one thing, it will offer more financing support, because sales terms can be decisive.
Washington will channel Export-Import Bank loans, tied aid (which economists hate but businessmen love) and political-risk insurance into these 10 areas -- although it's not likely to match amounts offered by, say, Japan.
A new advocacy center within the Commerce Department will track the 50 to 100 largest overseas projects viewed as interesting to U.S. companies, and there will be a vigorous lobbying effort.
"For too many years we have seen President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl and Prime Minister Major get on aircraft to fly to the distant corners of the world to promote their business and industry," complains Commerce Secretary Ron Brown.
U.S. leaders haven't been as aggressive, but "that has changed," he vows.
Such flag-waving can be an enormous help, says the export director of one large U.S. company.
The administration also is gathering better market data, especially for new export assistance centers in Miami, Baltimore, Chicago and Los Angeles (others will open soon).
These are supposed to help smaller companies; only 50 manufacturers now provide half of U.S. exports.
The data also will go into specific marketing plans for these 10 because U.S. market share in some of them, such as Indonesia, is slipping.
Washington also will relax more export controls, as it did recently for computers.
It wants U.S. companies free to export almost anything readily available on commercial terms.
Now they can't.
For example, the U.S. blocks truck sales to Iran, diverting up to $1 billion of annual sales to such rivals as Volvo and Mitsubishi.
There are also hints that human-rights sanctions may become less stringent, although Mr. Garten warns that no U.S. administration can ever be totally "mercantilist" about them.
The overall goal is a more coherent, longer-term export strategy than has been the U.S. habit.
Washington assumes it can't assist much in the mature European economy and Japan won't be a great bonanza even if trade barriers fall.
But it sees enormous opportunities elsewhereplus ways to help exploit them.
