The French, ever jealous of their cultural identity, are erecting a language barrier to defend against the English invasion.
If Parliament passes a bill announced by the government yesterday, advertising in France for "le Car" or hiring staff for "un job" could lead to a fine or possibly prison.
The bill sets strict rules to check a rampant invasion of foreign words into the French language and bring down the full weight of the law on offenders.
It bans the use of foreign words in public announcements, work contracts, advertising, and on radio and television -- except for foreign-language programs.
The bill, completing existing piecemeal regulations, will be enforced by police if it is passed by Parliament later this year.
Sanctions, to be defined later, would include fines and possible prison sentences.
Although the bill does not name the offending invader language, it is clearly aimed at English, which many intellectuals accuse of adulterating French into "Franglais."
"We have too often believed that relinquishing French was the price to pay to enter the modern world, to trade and to exchange scientific knowledge," Culture Minister Jacques Toubon said in an interview with the daily Le Monde.
Mr. Toubon, who will defend the bill in Parliament, said the time had come to head off an aggressive expansion of English in culture and trade.
"The government is turning the policy of French language into a national cause," he said.
French researchers often publish findings in English, and businessmen prefer to use English terms, sometimes understandably, such as when "cash-flow" translates into French as "marge brute d'auto-financement."
Worried by the increasing share of American films and books translated from English on the French market, France fought hard to win a "cultural exemption" keeping such goods out of the GATT world trade liberalization pact signed late last year.
"A foreign language . . . often becomes a tool of domination, uniformization, a factor of social exclusion and, when used snobbishly, a language of contempt," Mr. Toubon said.
The bill says in order to protect the right of the French to be addressed in their own language, announcements and signs in public places must not include any foreign word -- unless it has no French equivalent -- but can be accompanied by a translation if needed.
All advertising and broadcasts on radio and television must be in French except educational or foreign-language programs such as foreign films broadcast in the original language.
Contracts involving state bodies must be in French with a translation if one party is foreign, or state subsidies could be withheld.
Work contracts must be in French, with a French explanation of any foreign word which may have to be used.
The bill said seminars must allow French participants to use their own language, and addresses made in a foreign language should at least be accompanied by a French summary.
But, in a business-minded exception, it said the ban would be lifted if a meeting was meant to sell French goods abroad.
