Harry Cipriani, owner of Harry's Bar on the Grand Canal, recently published a cookbook.
His first sentence: "There's only one Harry's Bar."
If not for the Harry's Bar in Hong Kong and the one in Florence, that would be correct, as long as you didn't count the Harry's in Singapore, the three in London, the one in Shanghai or the two in Mexico, and left out the Harry's in Barcelona and Geneva, while ignoring the Harry's at sea on the MS Europa and the rumored Harry's on the Thai island of Koh Samui.
There are no Harry's Bars in the U.S., either, aside from New York's five and Philadelphia's four, the ones in New Orleans and Los Angeles, and 20-odd others, excluding Harry's Oyster Bar & American Grill in Oklahoma City, which has changed its name to Jake's.
So that settles it.
There is one Harry's Bar -- except for the original Harry's New York Bar at 5 Rue Daunou in Paris.
"There's only one Harry's," repeats Duncan MacElhone.
"That's where it gets maddening."
As the cocktail crowd thins on Rue Daunou, he sits in a back corner of his bar swizzling a drink.
"There's only one Harry as far as I'm concerned," he says.
"That was my grandfather."
"Most of them, they copy this one," Harry Cipriani is saying.
On a gray Venice morning, his bar is bright, the marble floor heated gently from below.
"These people come and say, `Harry, how are you?'
Their attitude is, you should be flattered."
Mr. MacElhone and Mr. Cipriani have something in common: Neither is a McDonald's.
The two are small-business men in a multinational world, and both lay claim to a name bartenders are wild about.
After 60 years, they have taken to tussling over it, and to hunting down every Tom, Dick and Harry who opens a Harry's Bar.
"You're dealing with people who have so little imagination they can't name a bar after themselves or their mother-in-law or their dog," Mr. MacElhone says.
"About a restaurant," says Mr. Cipriani, "what's important is that you remember the name."
Defining what makes Harry a great bar name is the problem.
The Venice Harry's has cachet and fine food, the Paris Harry's atmosphere and hot dogs.
Some places called Harry's copy Venice, some Paris.
Some fall between the stools, and some are owned by somebody else called Harry.
The Harry's in Barbados is a reggae music joint.
They play dominoes at the Harry's in Mexico City.
The Harry's in Tuscaloosa, Ala., is owned by 1972 University of Alabama basketball All-America Harry Hammond.
"My name's Peter, Peter Chow," says the owner of the Hong Kong Harry's on the phone.
"Yes, I know.
Harry's famous in the world.
Oyster, mussel.
Anything you want, we got."
Something crashes in the background.
"There's one in Paris?"
Mr. Chow says.
"In Italy?
I got no idea."
To Mr. Cipriani, owner of the one-and-only Harry's, his Venice bar affords a kind of luxury you can sense with your eyes closed.
"Simplicity," he says.
"It allows the spirit to develop."
He is 61, partial to bright ties, and the deftest of hosts.
His two airy rooms seat just 85.
The gray-marble bar seats five.
On the wall hangs a photo of lower Manhattan in the 1930s.
A near-duplicate of it hangs on Rue Daunou, not far from the boxing glove dangling above the bar.
"This is a cocktail bar," Mr. MacElhone says.
He is 40, a former banker in a sports coat.
"It's about drinks and the way people live in them."
The two bars couldn't be less alike, but Mr. MacElhone believes both spring from the same Harry.
In 1911, as he tells it, an ex-jockey crated up a mahogany-paneled bar in New York, shipped it to Paris and opened the bar.
Harry MacElhone, a Scot, came along to shake cocktails and took over in 1923.
"Harry'd go to Venice," his grandson says.
"He'd stay at a hotel where there was one Giuseppe Cipriani, who told Harry he wanted to open a trattoria.
Harry said that wasn't as good as opening a bar.
So they opened a bar.
It was called Harry's."
But Harry Cipriani says his father, Giuseppe, never knew Harry MacElhone.
In 1929, he says, Giuseppe met a Bostonian, Harry Pickering, who was out of cash.
Giuseppe paid his way home.
Two years later, when Mr. Pickering repaid the debt, Giuseppe opened a bar and named it Harry's.
When his son was born, Giuseppe named him after the bar.
"My father didn't think of the Harry's in Paris," says Harry Cipriani.
"It wasn't so famous."
According to Mr. Cipriani, Harry Pickering died in Monaco.
According to Mr. MacElhone, he didn't exist.
After World War II, he maintains, his grandfather revisited Venice and found that Harry's Bar was a restaurant.
"He had a major run-in with the Ciprianis," says his grandson, "and we've had a run-in ever since."
Whether Harry met Giuseppe or not, their legacy is a muddle.
They gained renown for fixing meals and mixing drinks, not for practicing trademark law.
Neither thought of untangling their reputations -- so their names escaped them.
Florence struck first.
Enrico Marlotti opened a knockoff of the Venice Harry's there in 1953.
Florence spawned a Rome Harry's and a Los Angeles Harry's, which once put out a mock movie poster with the line, "Based on the original by Enrico Marlotti."
Then came London: a private club where the bar is pink marble, and men must wear dark suits.
"It was just a name that sounded rather good," says Gavin Rankin, who helps manage it.
But the choice of name for Harry's Bar in London wasn't quite a coincidence.
Here's why: In 1958, Giuseppe Cipriani opened a hotel in Venice, Hotel Cipriani.
The hotel has changed hands, and the current owner is Orient Express Hotels Inc. of New York, which also owns 49% of the London Harry's.
Having annexed his first name, Orient Express is now after Mr. Cipriani's last one.
In the 1980s, Mr. Cipriani opened a restaurant in New York.
He called it by his full name: Harry Cipriani.
So Orient Express is suing him.
It says people booking rooms at Hotel Cipriani get mixed up.
"It's complicated," Mr. Cipriani admits.
And the fight for his last name is just the half of it.
He says, "We also have a little problem with Mr. MacElhone."
After years on the ropes, the MacElhones began sparring with Harry's bars in the 1970s.
They put five under license: two German, two Swiss and one at sea.
They closed Harry's in Portugal and Austria.
Duncan MacElhone's invitation to the grand opening of a Harry's in Toronto, he says, quickly led to its "grand closing."
But no global trademark code supports him.
Mr. MacElhone shut a Cannes Harry's only to have it reopen in Monte Carlo.
Spain denied him the Harry's name in Barcelona, then gave it to a clone.
Once, he went after Harry Helmsley, but since Mr. Helmsley is a Harry with bars in New York, he was judged fit to own a Harry's New York Bar.
That leaves the original namesake: Harry's in Venice.
Mr. Cipriani puts out a line of pasta.
The label said Harry's Bar until Mr. MacElhone had a shipment of it seized in Germany.
Mr. Cipriani also bottles his Bellini cocktail.
The caps say Harry's Bar, so when a shipment arrived in France, Mr. MacElhone had it seized, too.
This led Mr. Cipriani to do what he had never done: He traveled to Paris a few months ago and set foot in another Harry's Bar.
Mr. MacElhone was willing to talk, on one condition.
"Harry is a gentleman extraordinaire," he says.
"But I won't let him go one inch sideways in not recognizing that my grandfather helped his father open up."
Mr. Cipriani went home, without an agreement, to nurse his identity crisis.
He has done a "Do you know me?"
American Express ad, and finished a novel about a surreal Harry's that opens in Beirut.
When celebrities come to his bar, as they do, he still chats amiably, even if he is too distracted to know exactly who they are.
"I'm good with faces," Harry Cipriani says often.
"I'm no good with names."
