As I have stated in its Introduction, this public report to the Congress is incomplete because, as you know, Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6 (e) forbids disclosure of matters occurring before the grand jury, and this was very largely a grand jury investigation.
Moreover, there are other legal and ethical considerations governing my release of any matters of a testimonial nature.
My report to the Attorney General, on the other hand, is complete and summarizes fully all that has been done and found in this investigation.
Should the Congress in its wisdom decide that the public interest in favor of disclosure of that full report outweighs in this case the policy reasons underlying existing requirements of secrecy, Congress undoubtedly may act to release the full report.
So read the cover letter to Congress the last time the business affairs of the president of the United States were under investigation by a special counsel appointed on the same terms as Robert Fiske.
In 1979 Paul J. Curran, a Republican former prosecutor, was called in to investigate President Carter's peanut business, which had received a swirl of loans from the National Bank of Georgia, owned by Mr. Carter's friend and budget director Bert Lance.
The suspicion was that the loans were illegally diverted to finance Mr. Carter's presidential campaign.
That is to say that the Carter peanut investigation looked a lot like Whitewater.
Or at least like a little Whitewater; Mr. Lance and Mr. Carter never actually entered into a partnership, and so far as is known Rosalynn Carter made no killings in the commodities market.
But the cases are similar enough to shed light on what we can expect, and not expect, from Mr. Fiske's investigation.
In particular, the testimony he is gathering before a grand jury will also be subject to rule 6 (e).
In the peanut case, Mr. Curran and a staff of lawyers investigated for six months, reviewed 80,000 subpoenaed documents, heard 64 witnesses before a federal grand jury in Atlanta, conducted 34 additional witness interviews, complemented by 21 further interviews by the FBI.
They also conducted a four-hour deposition of President Carter, under oath in the White House.
In October 1979, Mr. Curran issued his report.
"There is no evidence to establish that President Jimmy Carter committed any crimes," he said.
"Every nickel and every peanut have been tracked into and out of the warehouse, and no funds were unlawfully diverted."
While none of the loans were diverted into the presidential campaign, they did have their problems.
The warehouse had expanded with equipment loans and took the usual commodity loans secured by its peanut inventory.
But at one point there was no collateral when it owed Mr. Lance's bank over a million dollars.
Overdrafts in the warehouse account at the NBG "appeared very frequently," with the peak being $369,415.
The bank often held loan repayment checks until funds were available.
Ultimately President Carter and Carter Farms, in which he held 91% interest, bailed the warehouse out of its financial difficulties with a loan of $440,000.
The tale did not concern a conspiracy to finance Mr. Carter's campaign, that is, but a failure of business management.
Most of the loans were granted when the peanut business was run by the president's brother Billy.
Mr. Lance's bank was surely forbearing, but its loans were ultimately redeemed by the presidential loan.
Mr. Curran decided that none of this crossed the line of criminality -- probably for lack of mens rea, criminal intent -- and that "based on all the evidence and the applicable law, no indictment can or should be brought against anyone.
None will be filed."
At the time, Mr. Lance was already under indictment for his banking practices on matters not related to the Carter loans; he was later acquitted on fraud charges and the judge dismissed lesser charges on which a jury deadlocked.
By then, he'd resigned as budget director and sold his interest in NBG to BCCI figure Ghaith Pharaon.
At the end of the peanut investigation, Mr. Curran faced the issue of what he should do with all of the information he'd gathered.
As a special counsel, he was bound by the rules that apply to criminal prosecutions, in particular rule 6 (e) prohibiting the release of grand jury evidence.
Since he had decided against indictment and trials, in an ordinary case this would have been the end of the matter.
But stoney silence scarcely seemed appropriate, especially since the attorney general asked for a public report.
So Mr. Curran prepared two reports, a 179-page public document and a 239-page report sent only to the attorney general.
In the public version, he said, "I stress right here at the beginning, this public document cannot and does not purport to set forth the totality of the investigation."
President Carter could also have chosen to release his own deposition, as a New York Times editorial urged, speculating on the president's "continuing knowledge of the family business and its financial and legal difficulties."
But the president never released the transcript, and Congress never asked for the full report.
In the peanut case this may have been a tolerable outcome, but Whitewater is a far more sweeping matter.
Say that Mr. Fiske concludes that indictments are precluded by the statute of limitations; rule 6 (e) would then prevent him from releasing the evidence he'd taken before his grand jury.
Similarly, if he concludes it's a stretch to see George Stephanopoulos' phone calls to the Treasury as an obstruction of justice, the testimony on them would be kept from public view.
"Bob Fiske will get all the facts," Mr. Curran says in reflecting on the prospects for the Whitewater probe, but "Bob Fiske will never be able to get `all the facts out.'
If he did, he would be acting illegally and, in any event, it is not his right or his duty to do so."
The claims of some Democrats and the expectations of the public will be frustrated by rule 6 (e).
He says, "Prosecutors are not investigating commissions."
Between the Curran and Fiske investigations, Congress tried to combine prosecutors with investigating commissions through the Ethics in Government Act.
Under this act a judge might release some grand jury testimony after lengthy arguments among the parties -- Lawrence Walsh's final report added little to the congressional hearings six years earlier.
It would be better to face up to the fact that the roles do not mix.
Plain and special prosecutors decide whether to indict.
And let investigating commissions be run the old-fashioned way, in public and under congressional authority.
Mr. Bartley is editor of the Journal.
