Chevron Corp., intent on maintaining its cost-cutting momentum by saving an additional $250 million this year, is expected to announce plans today to consolidate and shrink its U.S. operations further.
As part of its long-term strategy, which also seeks to combine rigorous overhead reductions with stepped-up growth overseas, Chevron yesterday said it was raising its quarterly dividend for the sixth time in as many years, to 92.5 cents a share from 87.5 cents, payable March 10 to stock of record Feb. 10.
It also said stockholders will be asked to approve a 2-for-1 stock split at the annual meeting in May.
Chevron shares closed yesterday at $92, off 50 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
The news of the stock split and dividend increase was announced just before the end of normal trading hours.
While the cost cuts will range from personnel reductions in its struggling chemical business to anticipated further shrinkage of primarily domestic refining, marketing and exploration operations, they don't entail the kind of extensive work-force reductions or asset sales Chevron has carried out over the past few years.
Those have slashed about $1.2 billion from operating expenses on an annual basis.
But taken together, analysts and industry officials said, the latest moves are significant because they show the company's increasing emphasis on using improved cash flow to pursue both upstream (exploration) and downstream (refining and marketing) opportunities more aggressively outside the U.S.
Chevron spokesmen declined to comment on whether any announcement was planned for today, but analysts said Chairman Kenneth Derr was scheduled to hold a televised conference with thousands of employees around the world.
Portions of the cost-cutting plan began leaking out even as officials at the company's San Francisco headquarters announced the dividend-related board decisions.
Chevron's specialty chemicals division, for instance, quietly informed employees on Tuesday that it intends to cut about 500 jobs, or nearly 10% of the work force, over the next three years, mostly as a result of plant closings or sales.
The roughly $100 million saving from those steps appears to be on top of the roughly $250 million cost-savings estimate analysts used for the company's core oil and natural-gas operations.
Paul Ting, an oil-industry analyst with Oppenheimer & Co., said the steps Chevron executives have telegraphed in the past few days suggest that the oil concern's costs could drop by as much as 30 cents a barrel by the end of the year.
The company's costs have dropped to $6.51 a barrel from more than $7.40 two years ago.
Chevron's strategy "certainly shows that the theme of cost reductions by Big Oil is far from over," according to Mr. Ting.
Chevron's Mr. Derr, who in the past five years has guided the company from being one of the industry's highest-cost producers to a position of rough parity with the competition, has stressed the importance of focusing on long-term growth.
A major element of any future expansion is about $1 billion in cash currently being generated by domestic exploration and development operations.
For the rest of the 1990s, Mr. Derr said in an interview before yesterday's announcement, Chevron's goal won't be just to "squeeze your costs and watch them come back 12 months later, which is historically" what all the major oil companies have done.
Rather, the chairman said, management wants to make sure the savings are permanent.
And the company, he added, is pursuing a variety of ways to "shift more from a restructuring to a growth" mode by focusing on international ventures.
By 1995, Chevron has told analysts, only about 20% of the company's total capital will be devoted to U.S. exploration and development, about half of what it was in 1990.
In today's announcement, Chevron also is expected to indicate that its overall capital budget will remain roughly unchanged from current levels.
But spending on key offshore business, ranging from enhanced production in Indonesia and Africa to new or expanded refineries in the Pacific, already has climbed sharply.
Though Chevron officials publicly suggested in the past that further personnel cuts were possible from the chemical operation, they stayed away from telling even analysts about more wide-ranging cuts until just the past few days.
According to Mr. Ting, executives indicated this week that the newest version of Chevron's strategic plan envisions a roughly 5% annual increase in world-wide liquids production through most of the rest of the decade.
A Chevron spokesman said the company has 325 million shares outstanding.
If approved, the stock split will be effective May 11 to shares of record on that date.
The additional shares will be payable June 10.
Stockholders also will be asked to double to one billion the number of authorized shares.
