The collapse of Venezuela's second-largest bank and uncertainty about the economic program of the country's president-elect are sending tremors through the Venezuelan financial system.
Bankers say that nervous Venezuelan investors have transferred roughly $500 million out of the country during the past week.
Venezuela, however, is well-positioned to defend its currency against a speculative attack; the country's total hard currency and gold reserves stood at $12.7 billion at year end.
Nevertheless, the turmoil in the financial system is putting added pressure on President-elect Rafael Caldera, who campaigned on a vaguely populist platform, to clearly define his economic program before he takes office Feb. 2.
The financial crisis started two weeks ago when Banco Latino, the country's second-largest bank with deposits of $1.6 billion, was shut down by the government after a run on deposits.
As prices of Venezuelan government debt started sinking on international markets and some small Venezuelan investors began withdrawing money from other banks, the government of interim president Ramon Velasquez moved to try to contain the damage.
Mr. Velasquez announced a lowering of the bank reserve requirement and a reshuffling of bank regulators.
The government also pledged to cover losses suffered by Banco Latino depositors, which analysts say could cost the government $500 million.
It's still unclear whether the government intends to liquidate the bank or to provide it with an infusion of capital.
Banco Latino was the victim of a reckless expansion strategy, bankers say.
Management practices at Banco Latino were so lax that problem loans came to represent about 70% of the bank's net worth.
Bankers note that Banco Latino's risky practices may have been winked at by regulators in the administration of former President Carlos Andres Perez, who had close ties to the bank ownership group.
Mr. Perez, who was forced out of office last year, is awaiting trial on corruption charges in an unrelated case.
While Banco Latino seems to have been a case of extreme mismanagement, analysts don't discount further negative surprises in a banking system that has traditionally been both undercapitalized and loosely regulated.
"Venezuela has arguably one of the weakest banking systems in Latin America," said a recent report by Salomon Brothers Inc.
Exacerbating the bank problem has been uncertainty regarding the policies of Mr. Caldera, who has yet to reveal who he intends to name to his cabinet.
Over the past year, Mr. Caldera, who is 77 years old and previously served as president from 1969 to 1974, sent out contradictory signals by attacking free-market reforms on the campaign trail while appearing more open to them in meetings with investors.
Nevertheless the difficult economic situation he will inherit, including stagnation, high inflation and a huge public deficit, has caused many analysts to question his ability to keep the promises he made to voters.
Another constraint on Mr. Caldera will be Ruth de Krivoy, the president of the Central Bank, which was recently granted independence from the government through a change in the Venezuelan banking law.
Her response to the bank crisis has been to spend reserves to defend Venezuela's currency, the bolivar, rather than to devalue it.
A devaluation would feed inflation and the Central Bank has repeatedly identified the control of inflation as the major goal of economic policy.
Also, since the Venezuelan economy is driven by dollar-based oil revenue, a devaluation would have the effect of lowering Venezuela's towering public deficit and temporarily giving Mr. Caldera license to spend freely.
Some analysts think that the market's sensitivity to the recent crisis could make Mr. Caldera think twice about trying to implement the populist measures he promised during his campaign.
"It certainly sends a warning that the markets are extremely sensitive to any sign of economic mismanagement," says Eduardo Cabrera, chief Latin America strategist for Merrill Lynch, based in New York.
