Foreign-stock mutual funds are suffering from jet lag.
After five market-beating years, stock funds that invest outside the U.S. are up less than 2% for 1994 through last Thursday, compared with a gain of nearly 7% for Morgan Stanley's widely watched benchmark -- the Europe, Australia and Far East index.
What's going wrong?
Mutual funds have long steered clear of Japan, while betting big on smaller Asian markets such as Hong Kong and Singapore.
That strategy worked well in the past, but has bombed this year.
Smaller Asian markets have gone into a swoon in 1994, while Japan has turned in a fine performance for U.S. investors, thanks to a strong yen and generally buoyant stock prices.
"If Japan continues to outperform the rest of Asia, the active managers will trail the index for a long time," says John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a Chicago newsletter.
"There's a tremendous amount of skepticism about Japan, and I don't think it will go away quickly."
So what should an investor do?
Analysts suggest boosting your Japanese exposure, either by buying funds with hefty Japanese holdings or by purchasing the stocks of Japanese companies that trade in the U.S.
The recent lackluster foreign-fund returns may be a shock to U.S. mutual-fund investors who have grown accustomed to seeing their funds run rings around the foreign-stock markets.
On average, foreign-stock funds returned a cumulative 62.5% in the five years through 1993, far ahead of the 10.5% gain for Morgan Stanley's EAFE index.
Of the 43 funds around for the entire period, all but one beat the EAFE index, according to fund researcher Lipper Analytical Services.
Beating the index won't be so easy in the future, some managers reckon.
"There are periods when these things look like a pushover," says Nicholas Carn, manager of the TNE International Equity Fund.
"But they always come back to bite you."
Mr. Carn notes that funds could have beaten the index's five-year gain simply by avoiding Japan, which fell 30.2% in the period.
Moreover, he says, funds have benefited from big holdings in hot Asian markets such as Malaysia, Singapore and especially Hong Kong, which soared 407.2% over the five years.
In fact, historically, foreign mutual funds have tended to lag behind the EAFE index.
Over 10 years, for instance, foreign funds returned 303.7%, while the EAFE index soared 401.8%.
If you're concerned about your foreign-stock fund, analysts suggest checking your international fund's latest annual or semiannual report, to make sure the fund isn't heavily overweighted in smaller Asian markets and tremendously underweighted in Japan.
On average, diversified international funds have more than 18% of their assets in Pacific Rim countries such as Australia, Hong Kong and Singapore, according to Morningstar Mutual Funds.
Indeed, funds have almost as much invested in these markets as the 19% they have in Japan.
The EAFE index assigns Japan a 44% weight, though few foreign funds have more than 25% invested in Tokyo stocks.
Investors may want to consider one of the foreign-stock funds that have sizable positions in Japan, such as Alliance International Fund, with 43% in Japan, and Vanguard/Trustees' International Portfolio, with 31%.
Alternatively, investors could add a Japan specialty fund to their portfolio, suggests Chip Norton, managing editor of Donoghue's Moneyletter, a monthly newsletter.
Mr. Norton is currently advising his subscribers to have 15% of their stock portfolios in a fund such as Fidelity Japan Fund, T. Rowe Price Japan Fund or the Japan Fund, managed by Scudder, Stevens & Clark.
"We think that the Japanese market has some good upside from here," he says.
If you want to make sure you don't lag badly behind the EAFE index, the simplest strategy is to purchase an index fund, which simply buys the stocks in an international-stock index in an effort to copy the index's performance.
"If you're buying the typical international fund, you're betting against Japan," notes Morningstar's Mr. Rekenthaler.
"If you think that Japan will continue to outperform, and that the sell-off among the smaller Asian markets has only just begun, an index fund is definitely going to outperform most international funds."
Vanguard Group offers two no-load foreign index funds, one for Europe and one for the Pacific region.
Taken together, these funds will replicate the EAFE index.
Charles Schwab Corp. also offers a no-load international index fund, though the fund doesn't seek to track the EAFE index.
Instead, Schwab International Index Fund invests in the 350 largest foreign companies, based on stock-market value.
The Schwab fund has 32% of its assets invested in Japan.
Another alternative is to skip funds altogether, and instead dabble in foreign shares listed in the U.S., which trade in the form of American depositary receipts.
"The advantage of going with the ADRs is that you have more control," says Markus Barth, an analyst in Merrill Lynch & Co.'s quantitative department.
"You get to decide what you want to own and what you don't want to own."
By using ADRs, for instance, you can skew your portfolio more heavily toward Japan and away from smaller Asian markets.
And using ADRs won't necessarily crimp your returns.
Mr. Barth recently began tracking the performance of 184 nationally listed ADRs.
He found that ADRs, on average, tend to perform at least as well as their domestic market.
This suggests that, while only a small portion of foreign stocks trade in the U.S. as listed ADRs, U.S. investors won't necessarily get mediocre returns if they stick only with these stocks.
How should you pick among ADRs?
David Umstead, manager of the Quantitative Group of Fund's Boston Foreign Growth & Income portfolio, argues that you should favor stocks that are cheap relative to their book value, which is the difference between a corporation's assets and its liabilities.
He studied foreign-stock returns since 1975 and found that stocks that trade at a low price-to-book value outperformed high price-to-book-value stocks in 14 out of the past 18 years.
According to Mr. Umstead, the most attractive Japanese ADRs based on priceto-book value include Hitachi Ltd. and Matsushita Electric Industrial Ltd.
Among European ADRs, he favors such choices as British Steel PLC and Fiat SpA.
All four ADRs are listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
