Legend Holdings Ltd., a Hong Kong company that last week closed subscriptions on its first share issue, will begin marketing personal-computer components internationally in March, its vice chairman said.
Danny T.P. Lui, who is responsible for international sales, said the company plans to market an upgradable all-in-one board for PCs starting in March.
Legend hopes to sell the component, and future products such as specialized add-on boards, to brand-name computer companies.
The components will be designed and made by Legend in China.
Selling such products overseas would be a new business strategy for the group.
Legend, a Sino-Hong Kong joint venture, is one of the largest distributors and makers of personal computers in China and Hong Kong.
The group's sales in the year ended in March 1993 totaled HK$1.8 billion (US$233 million), on which it earned an after-tax profit of HK$26.5 million.
The group has projected after-tax profit for the current year of at least HK$65 million.
While the outlook is bright, Michael L.Y. Ng, deputy general manager, said Legend's share of the Chinese-made personal-computer market may have slipped last year.
Legend-brand computers, made in China, accounted for about 6.5% of the 240,000 or so computers sold in China during 1992.
Mr. Ng estimated that as many as 400,000 PCs were sold last year in China.
Of Legend's own-brand sales there, Mr. Ng said, "the volume has grown, but I don't know about market share."
He said his uncertainty stemmed from surging popularity of more-expensive foreign brand-name computers.
However, because Legend is the largest distributor of AST Research Inc. computers and a big distributor of other foreign brands in China, he said the company's overall sales in China continue to grow rapidly.
Legend also is a leader in supplying computers for specialized, value-added purposes.
It also provides components useful for Chinese-language programs, and is designing new semiconductor chips and motherboards.
Such sales are rising fast, Mr. Ng said, and the group is investing heavily in research and development.
The company's new issue of 168.8 million shares is expected to raise HK$224.5 million.
The securities will trade on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
Late Wednesday, the company announced that its new issue was about 405 times oversubscribed.
Applications for shares brought in HK$91.8 billion.
Refunds for unsuccessful applications will be refunded after shares are allotted.
Legend plans to use the funds it raises to expand its production and research and development capabilities.
It also will put about HK$60 million toward establishing an international-sales network.
