The Internal Revenue Service is making a one-time-only settlement offer to companies with some $14.5 billion in tax disputes.
The disputes involve how the companies account for "intangible" corporate assets, such as mailing lists, computer software and other items.
Some companies depreciate them -- that is, deduct their value from taxable income over a period of years -- as they would other assets such as manufacturing plants.
Determining the value of intangible assets, as well as how they may be depreciated, has been a murky issue for years.
But the Supreme Court ruled against the IRS last year in a case involving intangibles claimed by the Newark Morning Ledger Co.
And the 1993 budget law spelled out how companies must account for intangible assets.
The law, however, didn't address intangible assets claimed before July 25, 1991.
That left unresolved disputes involving deductions claimed before that date by some 1,500 companies.
"The major goal is to settle a signficant part of the inventory," said James J. Keightley, special counsel to the IRS.
Under the settlement, the IRS would plug each company's disputed amount of intangible assets into two formulas, and let the company deduct whichever resulting amount is greater.
In general, the IRS said, the more aggressive the position the company took on the tax return, the more it would have to give back under the settlement.
The settlement offer is less generous than the treatment permitted under the 1993 budget law.
But the IRS said Congress made clear that companies not covered by the law weren't to get such favorable treatment, Mr. Keightley said.
He said both the IRS and the companies would eliminate uncertainties and save on litigation costs by settling.
"We think we have picked a number that makes sense from a settlement perspective," he said.
On April 1, the IRS will notify the companies that they have 90 days to compute how the settlement offer would affect their taxes, and state their willingness to accept or reject the settlement.
A single company with multiple disputes over intangibles must settle or reject all of them.
"It's take it or leave it," said Mr. Keightley.
If companies reject the settlement, they may proceed with the customary IRS hearings and court appeals, if necessary, to determine the fate of the deductions.
Companies were just learning of the settlement proposal yesterday, and most declined to comment.
The tax director at International Multifoods, a Minneapolis food-service company that has between $20 million and $30 million in disputed taxes, said the company couldn't comment for a few days, until it reviewed the complicated settlement formula.
