Corporate profits, fueled by strong economic growth and continued cost-cutting, turned in another sharp rise in the fourth quarter.
For the period, 674 major corporations reported net income surged a cumulative 61% from the 1992 quarter, according to a Wall Street Journal survey.
The result compared with a 24% gain in the third quarter.
After-tax profits from continuing operations also jumped in the latest quarter, with a gain of 38%; in the third quarter, the rise was 31%.
Analysts had been looking for a sizable earnings gain, since the Commerce Department had reported that the gross domestic product rose at an annual rate of 5.9% in the period, sharply higher than the 2.9% rate in the third quarter.
But the actual results far exceeded expectations.
Although economists don't see the economy continuing to grow at the swift pace of the fourth quarter, they do look for real GDP growth of more than 3% this year, up from the 2.9% rate for 1993.
The effects of the January earthquake in California and the wretched weather in most parts of the country, they believe, will be more than offset by gains later on.
"Profits should be surprisingly robust," says Edward Yardeni of C.J. Lawrence.
"The efforts made by corporate America to become lean and mean will pay off in a big way."
The corporate downsizing is leading to sharp increases in productivity, or output per man-hour.
Stephen S. Roach, of Morgan Stanley & Co., says, "Productivity in the quarter surged at a 4.2% annual rate, fully one percentage point faster than we were expecting.
That's the second quarter in a row of 4% gains, a welcome turnaround from the 1% average decline in the first half of 1993."
Lacy H. Hunt, chief economist of Carroll McEntee & McGinley, notes that efforts to maximize worker output have left a great deal of slack in the labor markets.
This has allowed companies to keep wage increases extremely small -- another factor bolstering profits.
"For 1993 as a whole," he says, "unit labor costs rose 1.9%, the smallest increase since 1984.
Before that, the last time wage costs were this well-contained was in the 1960s."
Yet another factor aiding profits is lower interest costs.
"Profits have been boosted by a $21 billion drop in net interest payments since the third quarter of 1991," Mr. Yardeni says.
"Our forecast of stilllower long-term interest rates suggests interest costs could fall further."
Most analysts expect inflation to remain subdued in 1994, a situation that should contribute to profit gains.
The Federal Reserve's recent increase in the federal funds rate, the fee banks charge on overnight loans to one another, lifted optimism that the inflation rate this year will remain a bit below 3%.
One drag on profits in the past year or so has been a large trade deficit.
The U.S. economy has recovered much faster than major economies overseas, boosting demand for imports and weakening foreign markets for U.S. exports.
But the outlook seems to be improving.
"With most industrialized countries on the road to recovery from their worst economic experience since the World War II reconstruction period, U.S. exports are likely to gain strength by the middle of 1994," says Gary Ciminero, chief economist of the Fleet Financial Group.
Among industry groups, auto makers had an impressive quarter, while builders benefited from a surging housing sector.
Oil companies, meantime, struggled with lower crude prices.
The aerospace industry showed mixed results.
General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler, riding on brisk vehicle sales and competitive benefits of the strong yen, posted substantially improved fourth-quarter profits.
GM and Ford reversed year-earlier losses, and Chrysler more than doubled its profit.
The surge in vehicle sales prompted Detroit to boost fourth-quarter output to its strongest pace since 1988.
And the strong yen has forced up prices of Japanese cars, allowing the Big Three to raise their prices.
The industry is expected to pick up even more steam this year, and the Big Three are taking steps to boost profits further.
GM, Ford and Chrysler have vowed to continue slashing rebates and other incentives to customers, which cut into earnings.
Analysts expect Detroit to show strong gains in core North American operations.
GM, for the first time since 1989, posted a small fourth-quarter profit in its North American operations.
GM's 1992 quarter included a $744.1 million write-down of its investment in National Car Rental Systems.
Ford took charges in the year-earlier quarter totaling $419 million related to the restructuring of its European auto operations and European financial-services activities.
Builders, helped by a year of strong housing starts, posted robust gains.
Companies benefited from the biggest fourth quarter in 16 years for single-family residential construction.
Indeed, housing was the fastest-growing segment of the economy in the quarter.
Historically low interest rates continued to entice buyers into the market.
Even the long-suffering California markets reported encouraging sales.
Oakwood's earnings were driven by a booming Southeast market for manufactured homes.
Standard Pacific, while posting a drop in profit, reported heavy orders and pared down debt.
Kaufman & Broad took charges on its French operations, crimped by a recession.
Looking ahead, recent lumber price volatility and land availability are concerns.
But despite these factors -- and a huge drop in starts during January because of cold weather -- the industry expects another big year in 1994.
Sharply lower crude oil prices continued to plague major oil companies.
Crude prices in the quarter were about $4 a barrel below year-earlier levels; natural gas prices, though strong, were also lower.
The drop in prices hurt the oil-producing sectors of many companies, but helped companies with big refining and marketing operations.
Ashland said its profit was based largely on highly favorable refinery profit margins.
Mobil, which posted a solid operating profit, said its downstream operations in the U.S. and Far East were especially lucrative.
Mobil's results included a charge of $253 million.
Companies that could increase output were somewhat able to offset the drop in crude prices.
Exxon's production jumped as it brought on several oil and gas projects.
Conversely, Arco's oil production slipped in the U.S. Arco's loss was the result of a $487 million charge related to the reorganization of oil and gas operations.
Chevron said it was able to maintain a relatively strong operating performance because of the strength of its international operations in both upstream and downstream businesses.
But the company's net was affected by a $221 million charge, while the year-earlier quarter included a gain of $546 million.
Aerospace companies' mixed performance reflected the industry's recent state of extremes.
As the industry continued to consolidate because of lower spending by the military, companies such as Loral and Martin Marietta came away winners, benefiting from previous acquisitions.
But others suffered amid the shrinkage.
Some companies were hit by charges for plant closures and other restructuring moves; Grumman took an $85 million restructuring charge.
Others were hurt by a continued reliance on fixed-price Pentagon development contracts: McDonnell Douglas took a $450 million pretax charge associated with its C-17 transport plane, while Northrop's TSSAM missile prompted a charge of $107 million.
General Dynamics' earnings drop reflected its dwindling volume of business and gains a year-earlier associated with a sell-off of some operations.
Profits also tumbled at Boeing, but for different reasons, among them persistent hard times in the airline industry and heavy investment in new jet types in anticipation of better days ahead.
Here are the fourth-quarter profits for various industry groups and comparisons with the year-earlier quarter.
When individual companies report for three-month periods other than calendar quarters, the nearest comparable periods are used.
In all of the tables, 000s are omitted.
Steel companies, coming out of a deep industry recession, saw demand continue to climb as the economy strengthened.
The main propellant for higher orders and shipments was the auto industry, though other buyers including appliance makers also contributed.
Producers were operating at or near capacity, and several were forced to import semifinished steel to keep up with demand.
Bethlehem Steel's loss reflected a $290 million restructuring charge.
The steel industry expects a strong first quarter.
A 3% price increase in January is sticking, and most steelmakers already are booked through the quarter's end.
A global aluminum glut continued to plague producers.
The glut was caused largely by sharply higher Russian exports, a result of the collapse of the former Soviet Union and its military, which was a huge aluminum consumer.
The oversupply sent prices plunging to historic lows on an inflation-adjusted basis.
Alcoa's results included a $70.2 million charge for a workforce reduction and plant closings.
Reynolds's results included restructuring charges of $219.5 million.
Forest-products companies finished strong in 1993, buoyed by the rebound in the housing market and regional supply constraints.
In the Pacific Northwest, logging cutbacks on federal timberland pushed fourth-quarter lumber prices to record highs.
Prices slipped somewhat in January because of harsh weather in the Northeast and Midwest; but with housing starts expected to continue its strong performance this year, analysts said prices will remain high.
Georgia-Pacific's results mostly reflected a $95 million loss on the company's pulp and paper side.
Several pulp and paper companies showed a slight improvement, with analysts predicting the sector's prolonged recession may be ready to bottom out if the economy remains strong.
Fourth-quarter price increases for linerboard and uncoated white paper will temper expected losses in the overall paper sector.
Chemical makers benefited from continued strengthening in the North American economy, particularly in the housing and auto sectors.
Unit volume climbed, and earlier cost-cutting efforts continued to improve profit margins at a number of companies.
But prices for many commodity chemicals and plastics remained soft, and the important European market remained severely depressed, with sales in Japan also soft.
Underlying operating results showed year-to-year improvement for many companies, although a slew of special charges -- such as the $131.7 million restructuring charge at Olin, the $200 million gain at W.R. Grace, or the year-earlier $327 million charge at DuPont -- skewed comparisons on a net-income basis.
While the industry remains in a cyclical low, it's thought to have hit bottom in the latter part of 1993.
Natural-gas pipeline profits generally rose.
Many companies reported higher volumes and lower operating expenses, the latter due to widespread cost-reduction programs in the past year.
Analysts said most of the companies began recouping their transitional operating costs under new federal rules, under which they have largely shed their buyer-seller role to become gas transporters.
Many industrial and utilities customers rushed to keep their gas storage tanks filled to get ahead of rising prices resulting from the cold spell that struck parts of the U.S. in December.
Analysts expect gas demand will continue strong in the first quarter because of the cold weather that hit much of the country.
Panhandle Eastern's results included a charge of $60.2 million from the settlement of certain federal regulatory issues.
Transco had a charge from a reduction in its estimate of certain reserves.
Major railroads reported stronger earnings, benefiting from robust shipments of new automobiles and containers, and continued gains in productivity.
Norfolk Southern said it reduced expenses at its trucking unit and on its railroad, while freight-traffic gains in most commodities offset weak coal shipments.
Santa Fe Pacific's year-earlier quarter included a pretax gain of $204.9 million from the sale of rail lines.
Analysts expect significant gains in the current quarter, reflecting strong freight volumes tempered by higher costs from the harsh winter weather.
Truck companies also improved their earnings, helped by the economic recovery and some stabilization of freight rates in the fiercely competitive less-than-truckload market.
Consolidated Freightways said a turnaround at its air-freight concern and continued strong earnings from its regional trucking units offset declining profits at its long-haul trucking business.
Roadway Services said its earnings decline was primarily from expected startup losses at its new air-freight company.
Earnings for air-freight carriers continued to improve, helped by lower costs, rising volume and stable prices.
Federal Express posted a profit in international operations of $2.1 million, after years of losses.
Yields, however, continued to fall in the industry as customers turn to cheaper afternoon or second-day service.
Industry executives say the first quarter will be depressed by effects of the winter storms and California earthquake.
A resurgence in demand continued to help makers of heavy machinery.
Caterpillar's strong profit surprised even optimistic analysts, and Deere posted its best fourth quarter ever.
Both benefited from higher production and higher prices.
Despite the strengthening economy and improving consumer confidence, earnings for big retailers were held back by continued consumer indifference to apparel purchases and slimmer profit margins resulting from tough competition.
The severe weather through much of the country in December and January and the Los Angeles earthquake hurt fourth-quarter results, say industry watchers.
The fiscal year for most retailers didn't conclude until the end of January, and most companies haven't yet reported fourth-quarter earnings.
Sears Roebuck, one of few that report on a calendar-year basis, posted a strong profit, but the result fell short of expectations.
Its earnings were hurt by intense price competition and larger-than-normal advertising expenses.
The year-earlier period included charges of $2.42 billion for restructuring, hurricane losses and accounting changes.
Hotel and casino companies generally produced somewhat stronger results for the quarter, usually a slow time for both industries.
Lodging companies continued to experience gradual improvements in occupancy, while several casino operators began to show revenue increases from major new Las Vegas resorts and riverboat casinos.
In the restaurant industry, overall earnings were up as consumer demand recovered and food and labor costs remained manageable.
McDonald's was helped in part by restaurant expansion and higher sales at existing restaurants worldwide.
Newspaper publishers turned in strong earnings gains, with most exceeding analysts' estimates.
The turnaround was due to a long-awaited jump in classified ads, coupled with several years of cost-cutting.
McGraw-Hill's results included pretax charges of $230 million associated with an acquisition.
Times Mirror's results reflected a restructuring charge of $76.4 million in the latest quarter, and a $183.7 million charge a year earlier.
New York Times' loss reflected several charges.
Airlines showed narrowed losses from a year earlier, and many carriers had small operating profits.
Those are further signs that the industry is pulling itself out of its doldrums, especially considering that the fourth quarter is typically very weak for airlines.
Even so, one reason for the improvement was the comparison with an unfavorable 1992 quarter.
For many carriers, that period included effects from bruising fare wars and big accounting changes.
There were several exceptions to the quarter's pattern.
AMR's losses widened because its American Airlines unit was crippled by a five-day flight attendants' strike in November; the company said the walkout cost it $190 million.
And while Delta Air Lines managed to narrow its losses, its $180.1 million operating loss was still sky-high.
Southwest Airlines again posted a higher profit, fueled in part by its successful addition of Baltimore -- its first East Coast city -- to its route structure.
Consumer food companies slogged through a difficult quarter as higher commodity costs, value-conscious U.S. consumers and weak overseas currencies hobbled results.
Borden was hit by disappointing dairy and pasta sales, partly because of inroads by private-label companies, as well as by a $632 million restructuring charge.
Pet took a one-time charge for divestment of some units.
Dole Food reported another fourth-quarter loss, reflecting lower prices for fruits and beverages and the Japanese recession.
RJR Nabisco's loss largely reflected a charge related to work-force cuts.
Campbell Soup reported higher overseas soup volume and a "slight" earnings improvement in the U.S.
The major beverage companies reported higher profits, helped by continued growth of noncola drinks in the U.S. and lower packaging costs.
Coca-Cola's overseas sales volume was up 7%, reflecting improved performance in key profit centers -- Japan, Britain and Germany -- that had been posting declines in recent quarters.
PepsiCo's international beverage profits fell, hurt by expansion costs and other factors.
Although expanded brewing capacity helped Anheuser-Busch increase volume, the company still suffered from competitive pricing conditions and the strength of lower-priced brands that are edging out premium brands.
Health-maintenance organizations reported another quarter of robust earnings growth, benefiting from a slowdown in medical inflation.
U.S. Healthcare said its medical-loss ratio -- the standard industry gauge of expenses associated with patient care -- amounted to just 68% of revenue, down from 73% a year earlier.
Hospital chains reported mixed results.
Several groups were aided by increased revenue from outpatient services.
But National Medical's loss for its fiscal second quarter reflected a $287 million loss from discontinued operations.
The pharmaceutical industry's profits were mixed, with several companies reporting big charges.
Bristol-Myers had a $500 million pretax special charge to settle pending and future breast-implant product liability claims.
Eli Lilly took a $1.2 billion pretax restructuring charge.
Warner-Lambert's loss reflected a $468 million pretax restructuring charge.
Wall Street was sorely disappointed with Pfizer's sales and earnings.
Pfizer had been considered the strongest of the pharmaceutical companies.
In the computer industry, competitive pricing pressures and unfavorable currency translations restrained profits and made turnarounds difficult for struggling companies such as International Business Machines and Digital Equipment.
Though IBM reported its first profit in two years and is expected to remain in the black in 1994 -- its massive restructuring charges appear to be over -- most analysts aren't declaring a turnaround yet.
As with other companies, the question remains how to increase revenue and maintain profit margins in such a tough environment.
Analysts believe workstation hardware sales were depressed because Microsoft's much-anticipated advanced operating system NT was slow to catch on.
Sun Microsystems and Hewlett-Packard both showed strong sales nonetheless.
Amdahl's surprise loss reflected the continuing slide of mainframe sales.
Compaq's strong showing surprised analysts; its sales growth and efficiency threaten IBM and Apple.
Apple had a poor showing in the quarter and is in the midst of a risky transition in its personal computer line.
Among chip manufacturers, demand for computing and communications power had factories running at full tilt and kept profit margins healthy.
Intel, chief supplier to the computer industry, posted slower-than-expected earnings growth because of heavy spending to shift its popular microprocessor chips to a new production process.
Advanced Micro's profit drop resulted from costs related to fighting Intel in court and some missed shipments that should be completed in the first quarter.
Software makers saw strong growth and healthy profits as customers continued to pay a premium for programs that bring out the value in their computers.
Adobe Systems and Lotus Development led a pack of companies that target PCs.
Even Borland, the PC software laggard, edged into the black.
In database software, Oracle continued to set the pace.
Banks continued to report impressive earnings, benefiting from wide margins between lending rates and the banks' own cost of funds.
They were also helped by lower loan-loss provisions, continued costcutting and increased lending.
For big banks, trading profits continued to be strong, particularly at J.P. Morgan and Bankers Trust New York.
Bankers Trust reported a record $449 million in trading revenue, while Morgan's was $606 million, up sharply from $200 million a year earlier.
For most banks, which continue to rely on lending for a major portion of their revenue, net interest margins slipped somewhat in the latest period but remained at historically wide levels.
Thrifts generally posted a solid quarter, buoyed by low interest rates and the improving economy.
H.F. Ahmanson's results reflected a sharp drop in nonperforming assets, to 1.89% of total assets, their lowest level since January 1991.
Golden West's earnings, though down slightly, were a bit above analysts' expectations.
Great Western, in the midst of what some analysts say is an overdue campaign to cut costs and clean up its portfolio, drove down its level of bad assets to 2.09% from an extremely high 5.12% a year earlier.
In the brokerage industry, it was hard not to make money on Wall Street in the fourth quarter.
In general, trading, money management and sales of securities were profitable businesses for securities firms as the industry's three-year-old boom rolled on.
Powering the industry's profit surge was, in the U.S., record issuance of new stocks and bonds and, in the overseas markets, double-digit and even triple-digit gains in stocks and bonds.
Moreover, many firms reported that commission income rose 20% or more, as individual investors continued to seek securities that offer richer yields than the standard bank certificate of deposit.
The regional Bell telephone companies turned in a stellar performance, as they continued to court possible cable partners and push ahead with plans to build interactive networks.
Access line growth, one measure of Bell health, showed strong growth, and cellular growth continued to gain steam.
But the companies' financial performances were overshadowed by expected but massive write-offs to pay for long-overdue downsizings.
Meantime, while American Telephone & Telegraph's net slipped because of accounting-related charges, increases in long-distance calling and phone-equipment orders overseas boosted operating profit.
