One of the biggest problems facing women in the computer industry is their small number.
Last year, women accounted for only 16% of undergraduate engineering degrees.
That's a sharp rise from 1970, when less than 1% of engineering graduates were women.
But it's only a slight increase from 1986, and substantially fewer women are entering industrial engineering and research than, say, the fields of law and health care.
"Ten years ago, I thought we'd reach 25% women graduates before the numbers leveled off," says Betty Vetter, director of the Commission on Professionals in Science and Engineering.
"But there are a lot of stubborn forces in the work force that discourage women."
Industry is also attracting a significantly smaller percentage of women engineers and scientists than academia and government, according to a recent report by the National Academy of Sciences.
The study -- entitled "Why So Few?" -- concludes that women "perceive the climate in industry as less favorable" than technical work elsewhere.
Esther Conwell, a physicist at Xerox Corp. who chaired the study, warns that more companies must address the special needs of their technical women.
"You can't just assume that men and women are equal and will have the same problems," she says.
Things are better than they were.
When Therese Stowell joined Microsoft Corp., the big software maker in Redmond, Wash., six years ago, fresh from Brown University's computer science department, she found "a fraternity atmosphere.
It was like a boy's club."
Within groups that wrote or tested software, managers tacitly permitted jokes and posters that demeaned women.
The relative isolation of women programmers also made it more difficult for women to win credibility for their technical ideas and skills.
Four years ago, Ms. Stowell and about two dozen other female codewriters formed an electronic network over which they could air grievances and forge bonds.
The group successfully pressed management to ban pictures of nude women on office and hallway walls, and Microsoft issued a formal policy on sexual harassment.
Women codewriters say men at Microsoft show more respect and sensitivity toward them now.
More efforts are made to recruit women from college and to support them once they arrive.
But in a company with thousands of programmers, there are still only a few women managers, and there is a suspicion that Microsoft's culture, which encourages conflict and hallway shouting matches, still makes it hard for talented women to advance.
Microsoft isn't the only high-tech company that has changed.
In 1987, when Laurie Mittelstadt helped organize the first conference of women engineers and researchers at Hewlett-Packard Co., she had to quiet skeptics with the remark, "Every day at H-P is a conference for men.
So why can't the women get together once in awhile?"
The conference is now a biannual affair at the big Palo Alto, Calif., electronics maker.
Women engineers and scientists account for a quarter of Hewlett-Packard's annual hiring of new college graduates, and more women are moving into research management.
As they try to accommodate more women, though, high-tech companies can't count on technical women to always cry foul.
Not all women speak out against perceived slights or organize to identify and overcome barriers to equal treatment.
"You don't complain.
That would be the quickest way to get ostracized by men," says a woman software designer for a major electronic media company.
On the job, "you lay low," she says.
As a result, "no one knows I'm so angry I'm ready to quit."
When their paths are blocked, some women follow the many new avenues opened by technology and start their own companies.
Engineering is "a meritocracy," says Christine Comaford, who owns and runs Corporate Computing Inc., a software design concern in Bannockburn, Illinois.
"If you work hard and come up with good ideas, high tech is the best place for a woman."
Women chief executives also often set a tone that's appealing to their female technical staff.
Lisa Ann Barnes, who designs software for Ms. Comaford's company, feels more comfortable at a female-run company than she did at her previous company, where she did essentially the same job.
"Here I can be more of the person I naturally am," she says.
In any case, the situation isn't nearly as bad as it once was.
Ms.Conwell, the Xerox physicist, was turned down for jobs in the mid-1940s -- even though she had a master's degree -- because she was married.
She also had to accept a job as an engineer's assistant because the Western Electric arm of American Telephone & Telegraph Co., which hired her, had no category for female engineers.
