The envelope, please.
All of the government figures have finally been tabulated and crosschecked, and so it is with great pride that we can announce that the metropolitan area with the highest job growth rate in the nation last year was . . .
That's right.
Once considered a Rio Grande Valley backwater, the McAllen-Edinburg-Mission area surpassed every other population center in the country last year in job creation -- in percentage terms -- with 6.7% growth.
That's twice as fast as in 1992, and more than four times the overall U.S. job growth rate last year.
But the rest of Texas also has plenty of cause for celebration: Texas locales captured four of the top 10 spots nationwide, and eight of the top 35, according to an analysis by Arizona State University's Economic Outlook Center.
The Texas winners, which came from several areas around the state, reflect the breadth of the economic strength here.
Three high finishers -- McAllen (No. 1), the Brownsville area (No. 6) and Laredo (No. 14) -- have enjoyed a surge of business activity because of their proximity to Mexico.
Austin, ranked No. 2, has emerged as a major high-tech center.
And even hard-hit Northwest Texas produced a winner -- Wichita Falls, whose 30th-place finish was due in part to the growth of Sheppard Air Force Base.
Significantly, the biggest cities in the state didn't make the cut, even though San Antonio, Dallas and Fort Worth-Arlington all registered growth in excess of a healthy 2.5%.
And even though Texas as a whole generated more jobs in 1993 than any other state, it couldn't crack the top-10 list of highest employment growth rates, coming in at No. 14 with 2.9% growth.
Although many analysts believe the North American Free Trade Agreement will eventually harm the border economies by moving trade and manufacturing operations toward the interior of both the U.S. and Mexico, there's little sign that businesses here are worried.
Last year, just about every category of jobs surged, including services, construction, transportation and manufacturing, as companies jockeyed to take advantage of growing ties with Mexico.
"It just went boom, really," says Mike Allen, president of the McAllen Economic Development Corp.
In the past 18 months, developers have added a million square feet of retail space, including Las Tiendas shopping center, whose electronics stores and trendy specialty outlets make it a favorite of Mexican visitors.
Similarly, there's no sign of weakness in twin-plant operations, which employ low-wage Mexican workers south of the border to process materials brought in from the U.S. for re-export.
And increasingly, those operations are leading to new jobs north of the border.
For instance, Converse Inc., North Reading, Mass., just set up a new Mission plant to attach the rubber soles of tennis shoes to canvas tops that are sewn in a Mexican plant.
Total new jobs: 150.
Manufacturing was the linchpin of Austin's 6.3% employment growth last year.
Indeed, one out of every four new manufacturing jobs in the state last year was created here.
In the past decade, Austin's 24,500 total new manufacturing positions actually bested manufacturing job growth in all of Texas.
Because each manufacturing job typically supports three additional jobs in the area, the growth has radiated rapidly through the Austin economy.
Among other things, construction jobs shot up 19% last year, and trade jobs rose 6.6%.
Much of the highest-profile growth came from Austin's 725 high-tech companies, which employ about 80,000 people.
According to the Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce, annual growth in the sector has averaged about 8% over the past decade.
The biggest source of new jobs here doesn't even show up on employment data handled by the Texas Employment Commission.
That's because they're military jobs: soldiers who have been transferred to the Fort Hood Army post near here as part of base consolidations around the world.
Still, when Fort Hood grew to more than 44,000 soldiers from 33,000 in little over a year, nearby communities boomed.
The Killeen-Temple area gained 4,700 new civilian jobs last year, a 6% jump.
Much of the increase came from housing construction, though national retailers and restaurant chains have been expanding quickly as well.
"Two years ago, those companies didn't know where this area was -- and now we're just inundated with calls daily," says Judy Raefski, director of business development for the Greater Killeen Chamber of Commere.
Source: Economic Outlook Center, Arizona State University.
Source: Economic Outlook Center, Arizona State University.
