Canada's railroads, long a unifying symbol for the far-flung nation, are about to become a symbol of a new trend: downsizing.
Canadian Pacific Ltd. and government-owned Canadian National Railways are expected to forge in coming weeks a tentative proposal to merge rail operations across eastern and central Canada, and possibly in the U.S.
The two major Canadian freight railroads have suffered heavy losses on their eastern operations in recent years.
Both say they must shed thousands of miles of underused tracks to remain viable.
After a year of talks between the companies, their chief executives are signaling that they'd like to set up a jointly held company east of Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Such a proposal requires government approval.
Critics will charge the railroads with trying to establish a monopoly.
Whatever the outcome, the industry has reached a turning point in its history -- one interlaced with the nation's own.
The Canadian Pacific railway was etched across the Western prairies and the Rocky Mountains in the late 19th century to tie British Columbia to the rest of the country.
Canadian National was formed after World War I to take over several bankrupt railroads, the result of years of speculative railway building.
As in the U.S., the railroads eventually ran into stiff competition from truckers, particularly for shipments of manufactured goods.
But while U.S. railroads capitalized on transportation deregulation in 1980 to dramatically improve operating performance in the past few years, Canada's railroads failed to keep pace.
A 1987 change in Canadian regulations strengthened shippers' ability to bargain over rates, pressuring railways' revenues.
And the economic slump of the early 1990s depressed business, driving both of the big freight carriers into the red and underscoring the need to downsize.
Canadian National, for example, carries 92% of its total volume of traffic on only 39% of its track.
Paul Tellier, president and chief executive officer, says the railway wants to shed about 20% of its eastern and central network by 1995, and sell another third to short-line operators, a form of low-cost feeder railway that is common in the U.S. but just catching on in Canada.
Canadian Pacific's rail arm, CP Rail System, in 1992 ranked third among North American railroads in miles of track but seventh in revenue-ton miles, a measure of freight hauled.
Canadian regulations, designed to preserve rail services, have made it difficult to shed tracks, although that is beginning to change.
CP Rail last summer secured government clearance to sell or abandon most of its rail operations from Sherbrooke, Quebec, to the port city of Saint John, New Brunswick.
(The company is still awaiting clearance from the U.S. Interstate Commerce Commission to shed a portion of that line across northern Maine.)
In November, Canadian authorities approved a request by Canadian National and CP Rail to share a 300-mile line in the Ottawa Valley between Quebec and Ontario, where the carriers had been operating parallel tracks a few miles apart.
Many observers expected the Ottawa Valley track-sharing formula to serve as a model for broader cooperation.
The railways currently operate parallel lines across much of eastern and central Canada, hauling goods ranging from auto parts to beer to pulp and paper.
But the companies' chief executives are indicating they want to go further, forming a new, jointly owned company that would meld marketing and administrative functions, as well as tracks and rail yards.
The idea promises to be contentious.
With a single carrier there will be "a perception of much greater reduction in competition" than with shared infrastructure but competing services, says John Heads, director of the University of Manitoba's Transport Institute.
The proposal may founder on negotiations between the railways, themselves.
Terms of a merger, including capital, ownership and management structures, won't be negotiated until the government gives a go-ahead to the concept.
Among matters to be settled is how much of the companies' U.S. lines would be included in the merger.
Both have invested heavily to improve access to the U.S.
Canadian National is digging a 200-million Canadian dollar (US$153 million) tunnel under the St. Clair River between Sarnia, Ontario, and Port Huron, Mich., to speed cross-border shipments.
Mr. Tellier says the tunnel could be included in the merger, along with Canadian National's Grand Trunk Western lines from Port Huron to Chicago and Cincinnati.
Canadian Pacific's chairman, William Stinson, has indicated that CP Rail's Delaware & Hudson lines might be included.
The Canadian conglomerate bought the D&H in 1991, bringing it out of bankruptcy proceedings; the D&H provides access to eastern U.S. ports.
CP Rail men traditionally scorned Canadian National, based nearby in Montreal, as a sleepy government outpost.
But Mr. Tellier, a former senior civil servant, brought a hard-charging style to CN when he joined the company in 1992.
In short order, Mr. Tellier swept a layer of vice presidents from the executive suite and announced a charge of C$887 million to eliminate 11,000 jobs, or 30% of the work force, by 1995.
CN also initiated revenue-generating measures, including an arrangement with U.S. railway Burlington Northern Inc. to streamline shipments from western Canada to Chicago, and an alliance with J.B. Hunt Transport Services Inc. in the U.S., to haul trailers for the trucking company by rail between Chicago and central Canada.
There are signs the railroads are making headway.
CP Rail had operating profit of C$103.5 million in the first nine months of 1993, compared with a year-earlier loss of C$174.9 million, which included a C$270.2 million charge to convert to two-person train crews from three-person crews.
CN says it hopes to turn a small net profit this year, following a 1993 loss estimated at C$70 million.
But both companies say much more progress is needed if they are to compete with U.S. railroads, which can draw traffic from central Canada to U.S. ports.
Among other measures, they are pressing their unions for greater labor flexibility.
Operating expenses consume well over 90% of revenue at the Canadian carriers, compared with the 85% or less for most major U.S. railroads.
With interest payments running to C$200 million a year at Canadian National alone, the tight operating margin leaves little money to reinvest in infrastructure.
