It isn't too common to find money lying around on Wall Street.
But some think it could happen to investors in Associated Communications, a Pittsburgh-based company that agreed in mid-February to merge its cellular-phone business with Southwestern Bell.
Associated's A shares have slid to 23 1/2, off 1/4 yesterday, on the Nasdaq Stock Market, but they could be worth as much as $31, say some investors and deal experts.
The extra value they envision arises from the noteworthy nature of the two companies' agreement.
Associated is selling its cellular business for $680 million of Southwestern Bell shares, with the deal valued at about $14.75 a share to Associated's shareholders.
But right before that merger becomes effective, Associated will split itself in two and distribute to shareholders its remaining non-cellular businesses -- principally a chunk of Tele-Communications and Liberty Media stock valued at about $500 million.
The transaction is structured to be tax-free to Associated shareholders, because they are swapping stock in one company for stock in another.
The key to reaping the added value, says Robert Willens, Lehman Brothers' resident tax expert, is that the company is poised to pass along millions of dollars of untapped value directly to shareholders without triggering taxes.
Here's why.
The company has owned its cable holdings since 1979, when the Berkman family spun Associated Communications out of a family-controlled greeting-card company.
At the time, Associated's TCI holdings were valued at only about $6 million.
But since then, TCI's stock soared so far that Associated's basis for tax purposes in the stock is about 25 cents, adjusted for a spate of splits.
"If the company wanted to sell that stock and distribute the proceeds, the tax burden would be way over 50%," says Mr. Willens.
Both the company and its shareholders would be taxed on the paper gain in TCI and Liberty Media's stock, a burden he estimates at $291 million.
Add other Associated businesses -- such as a cellular franchise in Mexico, a New York art gallery, and a couple of radio stations -- and the new company's stock could be worth $16 (before counting that estimated $14.75 of Southwestern Bell stock being distributed directly to Associated holders.)
The Berkmans own about 20% of each class of Associated stock.
Myles Berkman, Associated's chairman and son of company founder Jack Berkman, says he isn't currently contemplating a further spinoff of the TCI shares: "We're just taking one step at a time.
You have to see what the rules are at the time."
But favorable tax treatment is only part of the appeal for some stalwart shareholders.
"This has been a great company, and the spinoff is just another reason to buy," says Salvatore Muoio, director of research at Gabelli & Co., which has owned Associated Communications stock since 1979, when the company was started.
Mr. Muoio, who also runs a telecommunications fund for Gabelli, believes the Berkmans will use what's left after the cellular spinoff as the basis for building a new company, just as they did with Associated.
"These are among the smartest people I know in telecommunications," Mr. Muoio says, adding: "There are only a few companies that have made as much money for their shareholders."
Scott Black of Delphi Management, who prides himself on being a value player, has owned Associated stock since 1989 in the hope that the company will break itself up completely.
Now, he sees it as a cheap way to buy TCI stock, which has fallen about 33% in the wake of federal cable regulation fears and the abandoned merger with Bell Atlantic.
Every dollar gain for TCI adds 40 cents to the value of Associated's holdings.
If TCI regains its luster, Associated's stock will be worth $35, says Mr. Black, who owns 232,000 shares in the funds he manages.
Merger experts expect to see a growing number of spinoff-studded deals like this that avoid tax burdens by rewarding shareholders directly.
"You can expect to see more of these," says Fred Seegal, co-head of corporate finance at Salomon Brothers, which is representing Associated in the deal with Southwestern Bell.
Associated's Class A shares each have 25 times the voting power of the Class B shares.
The Berkman family holdings are about evenly split between the classes but investors make little distinction; the two classes tend to trade about 50 cents apart.
