Firearms have almost replaced motor-vehicle crashes as the leading cause of injury-related death in the U.S., new federal studies say.
For decades, motor-vehicle accidents have claimed more lives through injury than any other cause.
But from 1985 through 1991, the death rate from such accidents fell 10%, while the death rate linked to firearms jumped 14%, according to reports issued by the National Center for Health Statistics and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The trends, which accelerated between 1988 and 1991, mean that firearm injuries could become the nation's leading cause of injury death within the next two to three years.
In 1991 alone, according to the reports, six states -- California, New York, Texas, Louisiana, Nevada and Virginia, as well as the District of Columbia -- had more firearm deaths than motor-vehicle deaths.
And already, firearms cause more deaths among people aged 25 to 34 than any other injury.
Previous studies have noted the exploding number of gun-related deaths in selected groups, particularly among young black males.
But the new reports are the first to highlight the breadth of the problem.
"We've just begun to focus on firearm deaths and violence as a health issue," said Jim Mercy, acting director of the division of Violence Prevention at the CDC.
While legislators and health officials have made progress in reducing the fatality rate from motor-vehicle accidents, he said, "There's been little, if any, systematic approach to preventing firearm injuries."
The new statistics will likely add fuel to the debate on how to stem violence.
In a recent Wall Street Journal/NBC Poll, 93% of the respondents said dealing with crime is an absolute priority for elected officials; just 67% cited health care.
Indeed, President Clinton, in his State of the Union address Tuesday evening, promised to give the issue of violence near-equal billing with his top priority, health-care reform.
The reports issued yesterday found that in 1991, the most recent year for which data are available, 43,536 people died from injuries in motor-vehicle accidents, while 38,317 people died from injuries tied to firearms.
Of the latter, 47% were homicides, 48% were suicides and 4% were categorized as unintentional deaths.
(The next leading causes of death by injury were falls, poisonings, drownings and fires and burns.)
The greatest increases in firearm deaths, according to the reports, occurred among adolescents and young adults.
From 1988 to 1991, the mortality rate from firearm injuries jumped 40% among individuals aged 15 to 24.
Among Americans aged 25 to 34, the rate increased 8%.
Given the deep and complex roots of violence, said Dr. Mercy at the CDC, any efforts to reduce the number of deaths linked to firearms may prove equally involved.
But the CDC called yesterday for a massive education program, among other steps, to help prevent such injuries.
Other recent studies have shown that the simple presence of a gun in a home is linked to an approximately fivefold increase in the risk of suicide and a threefold increase in the risk of homicide for household members.
