The new Clinton budget looks for the economy to grow 3% between the fourth quarter of 1993 and the final period of this year, and for short-term interest rates to remain below 4.5% for the rest of the decade.
The forecast for economic growth is about in line with the consensus among top economists in the Blue Chip Economic Indicators newsletter.
However, it is a bit rosier than other forecasts on interest rates.
The administration, for instance, sees the rate on 10-year Treasury securities remaining below 6% through 1999; the Congressional Budget Office and many private forecasters expect it to rise above that point by next year.
The new budget estimates that the gross domestic product -- the value of goods and services produced in the U.S. -- will grow 2.7% in 1995 and 1996, fourth quarter over fourth quarter growth.
For the calendar year, which most analysts use in their forecasts, the Clinton administration expects growth of 3.1% this year, 2.8% in 1995 and 2.7% in 1996.
Some economists, though, think that growth in the coming years could be a bit better than projected, especially given the robust 5.9% growth rate in the last quarter of 1993.
The WEFA Group in suburban Philadelphia puts growth at roughly 0.2 percentage point higher than the White House for each of those years.
Mickey Levy, chief economist of NationsBank, estimates growth may be as high as 3.5% this year.
"We're probably going to see a little more growth" than the administration's forecast, said James Glassman, senior economist for Chemical Securities Inc. in New York.
"It's hard to think what could be holding us back."
In recent months, manufacturing has shown new signs of life and the housing sector, which at first seemed immune to low interest rates, has kicked in as well.
Analysts say the defense sector and trade with Europe and Japan will probably not be as much of a drag on the economy as they have been in the recent past.
The White House is optimistic that short-term rates will remain very low, not exceeding 4% over the next two years.
The Blue Chip forecast is in line with that view as well.
The CBO, on the other hand, forecast the three-month Treasury bill rate will move to 4.3% in 1995 and 4.6% in 1996, from roughly 3% last year.
(The White House sees higher inflation during this period than does the CBO.
Higher interest rates are associated with higher inflation.)
In particular, the Federal Reserve's tightening of short-term rates Friday -- it nudged the federal funds rate to 3.25% -- leads many economists to believe that interest rates are bound to head up further.
"The Fed will continue to be aggressive if there are any signs of inflation," said Kurt Karl, head of macroeconomic forecasting at the WEFA Group.
After a week-long battle, the parties in Japan's ruling coalition government reached agreement on how to finance a long-awaited $56 billion tax cut.
The government will reduce income and other taxes by six trillion yen for the year beginning April 1, a government spokesman said.
Coalition leaders put off a decision on thorny issues such as whether to extend the tax cut and how to finance it.
In addition to the tax reduction, the spokesman said the politicians will try to pass other tax bills this year, possibly including a new tax.
Fiscal conservatives have demanded new taxes in order to pay for any tax decrease.
Economists fret that the compromise decision to opt for a temporary tax cut, rather than a permanent one, may rob the reduction of some of its impact by discouraging consumers from spending the money.
"If the cash back is just a windfall for one year, it's hard to believe it will inflate consumption," said Kozo Koide, economist at Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd.
The agreement could allow Japan's government to deliver the rest of its planned economic-stimulus package.
In addition to an income-tax reduction of six trillion yen, the package is expected to contain additional spending and investment valued at nine trillion yen.
It also may include measures to aid the nation's troubled banks.
Disagreement over how to pay for the measures has paralyzed policymakers for months.
The compromise plan approved by the coalition boils down to agreeing now to lower the tax burden, and putting off until later this year a decision on how to offset the revenue loss.
Tokyo stocks soared on early reports of the compromise.
The Nikkei Stock Average ended the morning session at 20516.35, up 501.95 points, or 2.5%.
The market was active from the opening, traders said, with foreign investors dominating the buying.
The tax-policy imbroglio has battered Prime Minister Hosokawa's popularity.
Politicians and analysts credited U.S. pressure with breaking the policy stalemate.
Tokyo is desperate to deliver a stimulative economic plan to President Clinton when he and the prime minister meet on Friday in Washington.
The U.S. has been pressing Japan to stimulate its economy and thus demand for U.S. imports.
Economists estimate that the expected package, valued at a total of 15 trillion yen, could add as much as two percentage points to Japan's gross domestic product once the money hits the pipeline.
The Japan Center for Economic Research estimates that the economy contracted at a stunning annual rate of 6.3% in the quarter ended Dec. 31.
The package would help, but it wouldn't cure the economy's ills, most economists agree.
Most analysts expect the economy to grow by less than one percent in 1994, even if the government cuts taxes and increases spending.
Japan's powerful Finance Ministry, which staunchly opposes deficit spending, fought tenaciously for assurance that any tax-cut legislation include a guarantee of higher consumption taxes later.
Members of the ruling coalition, especially the Socialists, resisted the idea of committing to a tax increase while the nation is still in recession.
Mr. Hosokawa came down on the side of the Finance Ministry.
He proposed last week to more than double the nation's sales tax in 1997 to offset the income-tax cut.
People accept the need for higher consumption taxes in the future, but strongly oppose the notion of legislating an increase now, while Japan is in recession.
Mr. Hosokawa had to withdraw the idea after Socialist members of his coalition threatened to leave the government.
Tuesday morning's compromise splits the difference between the Socialist and Finance Ministry positions.
The tax battle has battered Mr. Hosokawa's enormous popularity.
A poll published Tuesday morning by the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, a business daily, showed the prime minister's public-support rate has plummeted to 53% from 70% in December.
The pollsters attributed the plunge to the tax debate.
