Viacom International Inc. said it plans to plunge into the homeshopping market by testing the concept on MTV and its other cable networks.
Beginning in April, the MTV Networks unit will offer recorded music, CDs and cassettes, concert tickets and other musicrelated products.
The networks, which provide music-video programming, already have a high profile among a young, music-oriented audience.
Depending on the test results, MTV will consider launching a stand-alone shopping channel in the first quarter of 1995.
MTV Networks said it had been working on the concept for about two years, but the announcement formally moves MTV into home shopping as its parent, Viacom Inc., battles home-shopping giant QVC Network Inc. to acquire Paramount Communications Inc.
Such a venture is likely to face formidible competition.
Recently, cable broadcaster Tele-Communications Inc. joined with German record company Bertelsmann AG to launch a music-video/homeshopping cable channel that will sell music-related merchandise such as T-shirts and concert tickets as well tapes and CDs not available in stores.
The venture is expected to be launched in mid-1994.
"They have a six-month head start," conceded Tom Freston, chairman and chief executive of MTV Networks, "but we don't see this as the end of the world."
He said MTV expects to spend "a significant amount" to launch its home-shopping service, but said it was less than $100 million.
He said MTV has had discussions with six major record labels that expressed "enthusiasm but no firm commitment" about selling their products.
There could be competition from other sources.
Several record companies, led by Sony Corp.'s Sony Music and Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Music Group, are discussing forming world-wide televised music-video services that could be the first significant competitor to MTV Networks.
"An increasing percentage of recorded music purchases are being made directly from the home through record clubs and mail-order sales," Mr. Freston said.
"We will be well-positioned to take advantage of this trend."
He added, "We will be an adjunct to record stores and other retailers, not competitive with them.
We'll be increasing the size of the pie by bringing more people to music and other products."
MTV said cable operators will participate in revenue generated by the shopping programming.
Such a shopping service raises the prospect of a clash over record company relationships with well-established music retailers and sellers of music-related merchandise.
"We have talked to the record companies and they don't see their retail businesses being cannibalized," Mr. Freston said.
MTV Networks owns and operates three television programming networks, MTV: Music Television, VH-1 and Nickelodeon/Nick at Nite.
