The wire in the Atlanta Olympic Committee's high-wire act has just gotten higher.
But officials here say they still aren't worried about falling off.
In their annual financial forecast, Olympics officials yesterday said they no longer plan to have a surplus at the end of the 1996 Summer Games here.
A year ago, the projected surplus was $16 million.
Moreover, a contingency fund that was budgeted at $100 million last year has been reduced in the new budget to $60 million.
Yesterday's forecast, detailing projected revenue and expenditures, shows that the size of the pies themselves are little changed: It will still cost close to $1.6 billion to stage the Games.
But the margin for error has all but vanished.
The forecast, as well as the shrinking size of the Olympic Committee's safety net, is critical to a number of constituencies.
The local organizing committee is a private, nonprofit group that has pledged to stage the Games without using any public money.
The sheer size of the undertaking, however, including a hefty $516.6 million in planned construction costs, has raised questions among some government officials, international sports federations and others about whether the committee might end up in the red or be forced to scale back some of its ambitious plans.
The answer to both those questions, according to A.D. Frazier Jr., chief operating officer for Atlanta's Olympic Committee, is "no."
Mr. Frazier, who describes the committee's finances as "right on track," says further: "The taxpayer can rest easy about spending money to put on the Olympics."
Moreover, he says, no significant changes have been made in plans for any sports facilities or athletic events.
While acknowledging that there is still "some risk," Mr. Frazier describes himself as being "more comfortable with these statistics than ever before."
The size of the contingency, he says, is less important today than it was even a year ago because Olympic officials now have more precise estimates for the cost of, say, training, feeding and outfitting volunteers (about $4 million less than originally planned).
Moreover, large sources of revenue that were still question marks a year ago -- such as the sale of U.S. television rights, which went to the National Broadcasting Co. last July for $456 million -- are now accounted for.
With regard to the surplus, now eliminated, Mr. Frazier says simply that "we weren't setting out to create a pot of cash at the end" of the Games.
While that may be technically true, Olympic officials have become victims of their own rhetoric when it comes to excess cash.
In the late 1980s, when the city was campaigning to win the Games, and in the early 1990s, once that prize was awarded, local Olympic officials talked of a surplus of $150 million or more.
No longer.
Raising money from private sources proved more difficult than imagined, and some expenses -- for security and technology, for example -- have gone up.
Indeed, the biggest change in the budget released yesterday came in the broad area of operations, where projected expenditures climbed to $405.4 million from $335.4 million a year ago, an increase of 20%.
That category, which includes expenses for security and equipment at various athletic sites, has been affected by decisions to add several sports to the Games (including beach volleyball and mountain biking) and to move the location of several others (including rowing and canoeing).
The changes have pumped up costs for security and logistics.
In previous Olympics, some cities, most notably Montreal in 1976, have been plagued by enormous cost overruns in construction.
As Olympic construction quickens in Atlanta this year, there is some concern that similar problems will occur.
But Mr. Frazier says Olympic officials are leaving a fair amount of breathing room in their agreements with contractors, designers and builders.
"We're not pinned to a lot of absolutes," Mr. Frazier says.
"If need be, we'll scale back the scope of some of the work.
But that hasn't happened so far, and I don't expect it to happen."
Indeed, the public panel that oversees the Atlanta Olympic Committee, the Metropolitan Atlanta Olympic Games Authority, yesterday authorized Olympic officials to continue with construction of a $209 million Olympic stadium, the planned centerpiece of the Games.
In all, Olympic officials say they have commitments for about half the money they need to stage the 16-day event.
A good chunk of the remainder will come from ticket sales -- a projected $261.2 million -- as well as from additional sales of TV rights overseas and from additional sponsorship agreements.
"We're steaming ahead," says Mr. Frazier.
Projected revenue now equal projected expenditures for the 1996 Summer Games, eliminating plans for a surplus and reducing a planned contingency to $60 million from $100 million.
