After signing the Israel-Palestine Liberation Organization peace pact, the PLO set up an official office to plan for Palestinian self-rule in this West Bank city.
The accord has yet to be implemented, but the PLO is now divided into four separate offices.
Each office sports two Palestinian flags flying from the window, liberal amounts of graffiti proclaiming in bold colors "PLO office," and wall decorations consisting primarily of pictures of PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat.
Despite the physical similarities, each office maintains separate leadership, activists and finances.
Each spends most its time helping residents resolve social problems ranging from traffic accidents to family disputes.
Many disappointments have followed the Sept. 13 signing of the peace pact.
The Israeli pullout from Jericho and the Gaza Strip was expected to begin Dec. 13 and is still on hold.
Israeli Prime Minister says the two sides remain weeks away from an agreement on implementing their accord.
The Israeli press reported that a secret poll commissioned by the prime minister's office revealed that Israeli public support for the accord has dipped to 34%, less than half of what it was at the signing.
Mr. Arafat's El Fatah faction also has been rocked by growing public disillusionment with the peace pact.
In elections held last weekend, El Fatah and its allies lost their majorities in two professional associations in the West Bank and Gaza.
Yet some Palestinian activists say the most disturbing result of the long wait for the start of Palestinian autonomy has been the proliferation of PLO offices.
The phenomenon has reached such levels that, like rival hamburger chains, when one PLO office opens its doors, two more serving much the same fare are sure to follow.
Nablus and Bethlehem already boast three PLO offices each.
One West Bank village has only 5,000 residents -- and four PLO offices.
In many cases, the activists end up fighting not just against the Israeli occupation but among themselves.
"This is a very weird period.
Waiting for Arafat to arrive was supposed to last two months and instead has already stretched to five.
No one is giving orders, there is no central authority, and a lot of money and power in the future Palestinian entity is at stake.
When you put all this together, it is inevitable that there will be a certain level of anarchy," says Barry Rubin, author of "Revolution Until Victory?
The Politics and History of the PLO."
Adnan Hammad, head of the PLO-affiliated Palestinian Democratic Union, looks sheepish when he is asked why the PLO has four offices in Jericho.
"We don't need that many but it would be impossible to get us all in one office," he says.
"Everyone is always quarreling."
Despite being Mr. Arafat's political ally, Mr. Hammad is openly critical of the way the PLO has handled the negotiations with Israel.
"We spend more time organizing lectures in Jericho than they do running the peace talks," he says, complaining that political procrastination means that delegates to the various committees are appointed at the last moment and given insufficient time to prepare.
For Jericho's 14,000 residents, having a wide selection of PLO offices from which to choose does have certain advantages.
Palestinian activists say the Israeli authorities prefer to refrain from involvement in resolving civil disputes, letting the political groups work it out among themselves.
Residents with a beef have their pick of PLO offices, naturally gravitating to the one where they enjoy family or social connections or wield political clout.
If they are unhappy with the result, a different office can always be enlisted to help out.
Saeb Nadif, head of the Fatah faction's office, disputes the idea that the splintering of the PLO organization into separate offices is a reflection of any sort of dissatisfaction with Mr. Arafat's leadership.
He prefers instead to call it a sign of burgeoning political expression.
But he's quick to add that his office is actually the only one which enjoys Mr. Arafat's approval.
"We are the official PLO office in Jericho," he declares.
Down the street at the Palestinian Democratic Union, Mr. Hammad sits below a portrait of Mr. Arafat and shakes his head slowly, the hint of a small smile emerging.
"We don't consider them the PLO," he sniffs.
"We consider them Fatah."
