Wall Street is doling out the fattest bonus paychecks in the brokerage industry's history.
But on millionaire's row, the tenants are grouchy.
Big discrepancies between top producers and the rank-and-file banker or trader, plus new stringent and subjective pay criteria, are sparking bitterness and a round of brokerage-house musical chairs.
On Wall Street, bonuses account for a disproportionate 75% or more of total annual compensation.
Many investment bankers, traders and analysts "got their number" in recent days or weeks, and for most it was a sweet 15% to 30% above year-earlier bonuses, which were already 20% above 1991 levels.
The bulging pay envelopes reflect Wall Street's record year for underwriting new stock and bond issues -- over $1 trillion came to market.
But the corporate "share-the-wealth" mentality of the 1980s doesn't exist anymore, says Joan Zimmerman, executive vice president at G.Z. Stephens Inc., a New York executive-search firm.
While their bonuses made some people "very, very happy," she says, "This year we've seen the largest gaps ever -- big vast differences" between compensation for the stars and for the cogs.
Shed no tears for the midlevel investment banker, however.
Securities-firm executives say that this year's average bonus jump means a typical investment banker with a salary of $150,000 and a bonus last year of $725,000 will get a $906,000 bonus this year, for a total pay package cracking $1 million.
In the past, securities firms tried to keep compensation for midlevel bankers below seven figures, but the street's raging profits in 1993 threw restraint out the window.
The rub, though, is that firms are paying less of the 1993 bonuses in cash or in stock options; instead, stock grants with strings attached are becoming increasingly common.
Consider Salomon Brothers, the brokerage unit of Salomon Inc., which has completely overhauled its compensation system to directly link bonuses to each business unit's productivity and profits, not to the firm's overall results.
The compensation changes were made to "make people feel like owners . . . and to make people more directly accountable for the results of their actions, both in raising revenues and cutting costs," says Salomon Chairman Robert Denham.
At Salomon, bonuses for star performers in powerhouse areas were up as much as 40%, in part to stem the wave of defections that often follow sharply lower year-end bonuses.
But a $3 million Salomon banker will end up being paid 42% of that in Salomon stock (at a 15% discount), which is tied up for five years.
Stock options have been phased out.
Partial stock awards were also made at firms such as Merrill Lynch & Co. and PaineWebber Group Inc., but they weren't popular, even with share prices at a discount to the market.
Some of Wall Street's own analysts contend that the rally in brokerage shares is out of steam.
At Merrill Lynch, the largest U.S. brokerage firm, generous bonuses of 25% above last year's levels were the norm -- but investment bankers are smarting because the retail side of the business won the lion's share of the booty.
At Goldman, Sachs & Co., even junior partners took home a reported $5 million each.
Compensation was also quite generous at boutique Dillon, Read & Co., where mergers and acquisitions had the best year in the firm's history.
At CS First Boston, a unit of CS Holding, anxious to make up for past years when its compensation lagged behind the industry, 25% to 40% bonus increases were common.
Lehman Brothers Inc.'s bonuses were among the most restrained at 10% to 15% above year-earlier levels, some of that in "phantom" stock.
Lehman employees are in something of a financial limbo until Lehman's parent, American Express Co., spins it off as a public company in late April or May.
Employees at other companies such as Morgan, Stanley & Co. and Smith Barney Shearson, the brokerage unit of Travelers Inc., will hear their bonus numbers in the next few days.
At Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, a unit of Equitable Cos., bonuses for traders and bankers are expected to be up about 20% over 1992 levels, according to Wall Street officials.
And as usual, when the bonus checks are cut (at most firms, on or before Feb. 28), the job-hopping begins.
Executive recruiters say this has been their busiest season in months.
Smith Barney, which lured away mergers superstar Robert Greenhill last June from Morgan, is seen raiding Morgan again.
Smith Barney officials say the firm plans to add 30 people in the next two months, and a total of 75 by year end.
Smith Barney's siren song to potential hires: We'll pay for performance, regardless of seniority, not like tradition-bound Morgan.
Morgan's reply: Smith Barney's rapidly expanding investment-banking operation is unproven and isn't in position for a down market.
Several CS First Boston employees are also out job hunting, perhaps filling some gaps at Morgan.
Also on the move, or attempting to be, executive recruiters say, are Prudential Securities Inc. brokers seeking to jump ship as limited-partnership woes mount at this unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
Among brokerage firms that are hiring, the specialties most in demand are derivatives, debt restructuring and emerging markets, in particular, bankers with Eastern-bloc expertise, says Abram Claude Jr., managing director in charge of investment-banking practices at Russell Reynolds Associates Inc.
Analysts specializing in health, real-estate investment trusts and "information superhighway" companies can almost name their own price, recruiters say.
Also being paid bigger bucks currently are "techies" who develop and monitor computer-trading and tracking systems for brokerage firms.
Not all Wall Street departures are voluntary.
Both First Boston and Merrill Lynch had recent housecleanings of managing directors.
But many of those walking are motivated by distress at their bonuses, executive recruiters say.
Despite paychecks that would be considered munificent in most businesses, letdowns and stinging disappointments were the order of the day for many traders, analysts and investment bankers who had expected to participate more fully and intimately in the raging Wall Street boom.
Some "individual managers didn't manage expectations well," says one top-level executive.
How big were the bonus discrepancies?
For midlevel Wall Street analysts, the bonuses ranged from about $60,000, a paltry sum given as a hint to print up resumes, to $250,000 for analysts with powerhouse clients, or who could prove they had brought revenue to the firm.
Senior analysts can earn twice that bonus if they are top-ranked in Institutional Investor magazine's annual poll.
And since even an unexceptional banker or trader thrived in 1993's volatile markets, managers demanded that employees who wanted top dollar prove they had opened up new businesses, cut costs or risk for the company or worked on team projects with other divisions.
Bonuses have taken on a bigger financial and motivational role, since the stock-market crash of October 1987 and the subsequent mass firings in the brokerage industry.
"Wall Street has shown an inability to manage down markets.
When you produce big you want your share, because the retrenchment in the late 1980s showed that when you don't produce, you're out," says one Wall Street veteran managing director.
