We have here a report, by correspondent John Stossel, on regulation -- or lack thereof -- of the chicken industry.
Mr. Stossel points out that the fever, chills, vomiting and nausea that passes for the "stomach flu" in a good quarter of the population is, according to epidemiologists, very often a case of food poisoning from bacteria found in chicken.
This "20/20" segment (which dispenses some sage advice on ways to eat chicken without being poisoned) tells an instructive story of bureacratic bungling -- if not worse.
Would that the great S.J. Perelman, author of the immortal comic work "Chicken Inspector No. 23," were here to tell us what to do.
-- 10-11 p.m. EST, on ABC.
The 1971 Attica prison riot comes to the screen via a John Frankenheimer ("Seven Days in May," "The Manchurian Candidate") made-for-TV movie.
There are no subtleties in this superheated and unrelenting brief in celebration of the Attica rioters and their cause.
It is told from the point of view of former guard Michael Smith (Kyle MacLachlan), who emerges, because films must have heroes, as the sole representative of humanity and goodness within the ranks of a brutal and sadistic pack of Attica guards.
Frederic Forrest, for example, portrays guard Lt. Weisbad -- something of a cross between an Ausch-witz commandant and Charles Manson.
All that said, this is one polished, taut and thoroughly absorbing movie thriller, whose riot scenes alone are worth the price of admission.
So are the performances by Philip Bosco and Harry Dean Stanton.
Also worth the price of admission -- especially for anyone nostalgic for the glory days of '70s radicalism -- is the bizarre scene in which the world famous tribune for oppressed criminals everywhere, attorney William Kunstler (David Ackroyd), stands amid the throng of rioting prisoners, shouting "Power to the people!"
-- 8-10 p.m. EST, on HBO.
A mother who is, as the script describes her, "developmentally slow," fights to maintain custody of her six sons in this film said to be inspired by actual events.
This is the sort of made-for-TV theme that causes the levelheaded to reach for the remote -- an impulse perfectly justified most of the time.
Not, however, in this case -- a production bolstered by a superior cast led by Jean Smart and Robert Pastorelli.
Drenched though this film may be in sentimentality -- and it is, positively drenched -- there's no denying its dramatic force.
A watchable work indeed.
-- 9-11 p.m. EST, on ABC.
This is the history of the season the Stanford women's basketball team set out to win a national championship.
And a highflying chronicle it is, as it details newly arrived coach Tara VanDerveer's efforts to turn a losing team into a winning one.
By the time she is done, the Stanford women's team is playing to packed houses, outdrawing the men's team.
Not that this impresses the university administrators, who, the film points out, continue (till she threatens a suit) to pay coach VanDerveer half the salary of the men's coach.
Generously packed with locker-room drama, as well as the kind played out on the basketball court, this is a tale of true grit all right, and a sizzling one at that.
-- 9-10 p.m. EST, on PBS.
PBS air dates and times vary so check local listings.
Robbie Coltrane plays Dr. Eddie Fitzgerald, sleuth about town -- and quite a change he is from the moody detective-aesthetes peopling all the British mysteries on our TV screens.
A grubby, fat forensic psychologist with a genuinely nasty mouth and even nastier social outlook, Eddie is a far cry from Inspector Morse, etc.
In the first episode of this series, the psychologist sets about trying to find out who killed a young woman on a train.
If this is a plot without any real suspense (which it is), and one also encumbered by a pretentious musical soundtrack, there is, nonetheless, something about the character of the brutish Eddie likely to keep a viewer watching.
-- 9-11 p.m. EST, on Arts & Entertainment.
