Standard & Poor's Corp. affirmed its triple-A ratings of the senior long-term debt issues of several units of this regional phone company, and removed the ratings from CreditWatch.
About $7.6 billion of outstanding long-term debt is affected, the ratings agency said.
The units affected are BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., BellSouth Capital Funding Corp., BellSouth Savings & Employee Stock Ownership Trust, and BellSouth Savings & Security ESOP Trust.
The ratings were placed on CreditWatch following BellSouth's announcement that it would provide financial backing for QVC Inc.'s bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
Ratings on all affected issuers other than BellSouth Telecommunications are dependent on parent BellSouth Corp.'s credit strength.
S&P said the affirmations follow the failure of QVC's bid for Paramount, which relieved BellSouth Corp. of the obligation to invest $2 billion in QVC.
S&P, however, said the outlook for the ratings were negative, citing BellSouth's "evident interest" in investing in noncommunications operations where it would have a much weaker business position.
This could lead to a decline in creditworthiness over time, S&P said.
NEXTEL COMMUNICATIONS Inc. (Rutherford, N.J.) -- Standard & Poor's Corp. raised its ratings on about $900 million of this dispatch-services company's debt, reflecting a recent decision by MCI Communications Corp. to invest $1.3 billion in Nextel.
The ratings agency said MCI's investment gives Nextel added financial flexibility to build its ambitious nationwide digital network, which is expected to carry voice, data and dispatch communications on cellular-like phones.
S&P raised its ratings on Nextel's senior unsecured debt to triple-C-plus from triple-C-minus.
Nextel operates dispatch services for taxis, plumbers and other mobile workers.
SAFETY-KLEEN Corp. (Elgin, Ill.) -- Standard & Poor's Corp. lowered its rating of $200 million of this industrial waste fluids recycling concern's senior debt to triple-B from single-A, citing "less attractive industry fundamentals" and "subpar performance" by several of its operations.
S&P also said the company's $136 million in restructuring charges and environmental reserves reduce "near-term financial flexibility and stretches the balance sheet."
S&P said that while recent performance has been adversely affected by soft economic conditions and other factors, "looking ahead, performance should gradually improve, benefiting primarily from a lower cost structure" as well as a new parts cleaner filtration system.
"We are certainly disappointed but understand S&P's position in light of our restructuring program and increase in our reserves," said Laurence Rudnick, Safety-Kleen's treasurer.
"We share the agency's comments that they believe our performance should gradually improve, and we look forward to strong cash-flow generation and increased earnings."
WESTMORELAND COAL Co. -- Moody's Investors Service Inc. downgraded the credit rating on $50 million of Philadelphia-based Westmoreland's preferred stock to Caa from single-B-3 because of continuing weakness in the company's core coal operations, poor liquidity and dwindling equity position.
Westmoreland officials couldn't be reached for comment.
The company, which reported a $92.3 million loss for the fourth quarter, last month said that its projected cash needs this year are "significantly in excess" of cash expected to be generated from operations.
It said then that a sale of a major asset would be likely.
But Moody's said "the timing and feasibility of any asset sale is highly uncertain.
