I was having lunch one day with George Haley at the old Roger Smith Hotel, and he told me his brother was planning to write a book on his family's history.
"You're a nice fellow, George," I thought to myself, "but who is going to buy a book about your family."
If the playwright Drury Pifer had told me he was going to write a book about growing up in South Africa in the '30s and '40s I would have reacted the same way.
So much for insight!
The Haley book turned out to be "Roots."
Drury Pifer's bittersweet remembrance of his family's struggles in a country that never accepted them, "Innocents in Africa" (Harcourt Brace, 338 pages, $24.95), takes its place among books like Elspeth Huxley's "Flame Trees of Thika" as one of the best autobiographical tales to come out of Africa.
South Africa, with the world's biggest diamond mines, the spartan life of company towns, the sullen Afrikaners, the Hitler rallies, the concentration camps, and apartheid in fact if not in law, is the fascinating background of his family's story, and Mr. Pifer tells it movingly.
In 1932, two starry-eyed innocents hocked everything they owned, even wedding presents, borrowed the rest and went to South Africa.
There was no work in Seattle for Gus Pifer, a mining engineer, but a South African mining company offered him a job.
Not much of a job, really, little better than a day laborer, but Pifer was, in his son's words, "one of those creatures attracted to treasure, to minerals that run like a network of metal nerves under the earth."
He just couldn't pass up a chance to work in a gold mine in the Transvaal.
He believed in himself, and with hard work and know-how he would make his name and fortune.
His wife, Patricia, believed too, and for a while it looked like their dream was coming true.
Gus caught the attention of Sir Ernest Oppenheimer who hired him to run diamond mines for DeBeers.
Drury and his sister were born as Gus and Patricia moved around grim mining towns like Kleinzee in the Namaqualand desert and Orangemund in present day Namibia.
Gus never learned how to play company politics, and the great promotions Oppenheimer promised him always had a way of going to Oppenheimer's cronies.
Thirteen years after arriving in South Africa, Pifer quit and took his family on a desperate 1,000-mile journey north to the Congo.
There were no boats or planes for civilians in 1945, but he had heard about a Norwegian freighter in Mitadi and gambled that he could talk the eccentric captain into taking them back to the States.
(Actually, Drury's mother did the talking.)
If the elder Pifer's mining career went sour in South Africa, the Pifer family life was rich and warm.
Nearly half a century later, diaries, letters home, family photo albums and old home movies of those African days, conjured them up for Drury all over again: the times he squished himself on the back ledge of their Lincoln Zephyr clunker as it chugged through the desert; the awe he felt for Rudolph, the Khoikoi, who taught him how to ride; the blasts off the Atlantic that transformed the electric wires of a diamond mining town into "a great Aeolian harp."
Drury's mother was a witty, adventurous woman who could withstand every privation as long as she had her piano.
It is she who buoys up the family through their disappointments, who grows gardens in the desert, turns sheds into libraries, educates Afrikaner children and writes wonderful letters home.
Though Drury spoke Afrikaans like an Afrikaner, the Afrikaners thought he was English and despised him.
Nastier ones terrorized him in gangs after school until one day the gang's leader, "the handsome boy," just died, to Drury's considerable happiness.
Drury fared even worse with the older Afrikaner population.
What probably sealed his fate with this group was the Siamese twins episode.
He had just read an article on Siamese twins in a scientific journal when to his amazement he encountered a two-headed dog.
Excited, he raced next door to the home of the doyenne of the Afrikaner community, the kind of person Margaret Hamilton used to play in the movies.
He dragged her out to see his amazing phenomenon which on closer inspection turned out to be actually two dogs in flagrante delicto.
She went back inside, muttering something like "little pervert" in Afrikaans.
He brings a playwright's sense of drama to some of his liveliest descriptions.
Recalling the boisterous, leatherstrap-wielding Brother Keene at the Catholic school he attended, Drury thinks of "a creature dredged up from the depths of a frozen lake in some Hans Christian Andersen tale -- the North Wind who freezes little Kai and blows the Snow Queen's sled out past the pole star."
Drury Pifer never returned to South Africa.
The people who were once his universe are dead now, most of them, and their South Africa ends for good with the country's first free elections this April.
There's a certain symmetry that Mr. Pifer's remembrances of a South Africa of long ago should appear just as the world gets ready to welcome the South Africa of the future.
Mr. Ruddy is a former U.S. Ambassador to Equatorial Guinea.
