With Fernando Henrique Cardoso virtually certain to resign as finance minister to seek Brazil's presidency, Rubens Ricupero is set to succeed him.
Though the formal announcement of the change hasn't been made yet and Mr. Cardoso still says he hasn't made up his mind, President Itamar Franco cut short the suspense, confirming over the weekend that he had selected Mr. Ricupero, a career diplomat who is currently environment minister, to become the fifth finance minister in Mr. Franco's 18-month-old presidency.
"He's good because he's of the same caliber as Fernando," Mr. Franco, who is not allowed to run in the election, told the newspaper Jornal do Brasil.
"He's an intellectual, well-prepared, he understands economics and the country's financial difficulties.
I will regret Fernando's departure," Mr. Franco added, "but as a politician this is an opportunity he can't waste."
A government official confirmed yesterday that Mr. Ricupero had been offered the job and is only awaiting Mr. Cardoso's announcement to accept.
Mr. Cardoso, a 62-year-old Social Democrat who has managed to parlay his position into high personal popularity despite Brazil's 40% a month inflation, is expected to resign by tomorrow at the latest.
Brazil's constitution obliges executive office-seekers to leave their jobs six months before the elections, which are scheduled for Oct. 3.
Mr. Cardoso's likely departure only weeks after unveiling Brazil's latest plan to curb runaway inflation is already exposing him to criticism from his leading rival, Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, the leader of the left-wing Workers' Party.
"Fernando Henrique is acting like a mother who enters a maternity to give birth and then forgets the baby," says Mr. da Silva, who currently ranks first in public opinion polls.
Mr. Cardoso is likely to argue that the best way to ensure the continuity of the stabilization plan is to elect him to a four-year term as president.
And in the meantime, the team of economists and officials with whom he conceived the plan is expected to stay in office to advise Mr. Ricupero, who is known to be a firm enemy of inflation.
"In the shortterm, nothing is more important for Brazil than to end inflation," Mr. Ricupero, who was ambassador to the U.S., wrote recently.
Still, Mr. Ricupero faces tough challenges.
On the international front, he has to put the finishing touches to Brazil's long-delayed restructuring agreement on its $52 billion debt to foreign creditors, which is due to be completed by April 15.
And at home, he faces the difficult task of implementing the centerpiece of Mr. Cardoso's plan, the progressive phasing in of a new currency.
He also will have to rein in public spending in an election year, which could trigger political struggles.
Mr. Franco is already embroiled in battles with members of Congress and the Supreme Court, who he accused of undermining the plan by granting themselves large raises.
