The Dow Jones Industrial Average staged a stunning comeback after plunging more than 50 points amid plummeting bond prices at home and abroad.
The U.S. bond market also recovered, with prices rising modestly.
The dollar fell.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 22.51 points to 3831.74.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index edged up 0.37 to 464.81, but the Nasdaq Composite Index fell 5.17 to 783.47.
Investors had barely wiped the sleep from their eyes yesterday morning when the stock and bond markets appeared to be headed for another rout.
The Dow Jones industrials plummeted 1.4% in the first 20 minutes, and bond prices tumbled nearly a point, driving long-term interest rates up as high as 6.85%.
"You walk in and you're up against the wall," said Joseph Battipaglia, chief investment strategist at Gruntal & Co.
"But then as everyone sifted through things, the market found some support."
The turmoil in the U.S. had its roots overseas.
A sell-off began in Asia, swept into Europe and then landed on U.S. shores.
Adding to the U.S. bond market's woes early in the session were January data showing strong personal spending and gains in wages and salaries.
But the sharp declines awakened enough buyers to stabilize the markets, and prices recovered sharply.
Mr. Battipaglia predicted the industrial average will rally from here, recovering half of its losses from its high of 3978.36.
"On a short-term basis, we can get a rally based on how well the market withstood these pressures," he said.
However, many bond investors remain wary.
"I don't see a lot of institutions like myself buying right now," said Wayne F. Wong, senior fixed-income strategist at HSBC Asset Management, which has $2 billion in fixed-income investments.
"This is a very volatile market, and it's very difficult for me to say this is the bottom."
Overseas, Japanese markets were battered by fallout from Tuesday's U.S. Treasury market slump and U.S.-Japan trade tensions.
Japanese government bonds plunged to their lowest levels in six months, pushing stocks down 2.3%.
Stocks in Hong Kong and Bangkok fell 2.7%.
In Europe, stock and bond markets rode a roller-coaster.
Early in the day, French stocks plunged as much as 4.8%, German shares 3.6%, and British stocks 2.4%.
Prices recovered a bit as the U.S. market rebounded, with Germany ending down 2.3%, France 1.8% and Britain 0.7%.
All of Europe's other stock markets fell, most between 1.6% and 2.8%.
"The market was like a yo-yo -- nobody knew where it would settle," said Hans von Haza, head of institutional stock advising at Dresdner Bank AG in Frankfurt.
Also weighing on European markets was news that Germany's money supply growth soared in January.
"Investors fear that means the process of cutting interest rates in continental Europe will again be slowed down," said Gilles Bazy-Sire, a first vice president at brokers DelahayeRipault SA in Paris.
The recent sell-off in global bond markets is partly because of a supply-demand imbalance, said Robert Harding, a managing director at UBS Ltd. in London.
Major industrial nations are continuing to raise money to finance their deficits at a time when fewer buyers are around, he explained.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 1.05 to 115.20.
Stock prices were mixed.
Volume totaled 361.1 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 1,404 issues fell and 788 rose.
Bond prices rose.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue gained 1/8 point, or $1.25 for each $1,000 face amount, to yield 6.77%.
The dollar fell.
In late New York trading, the currency was quoted at 1.7040 marks and 104.10 yen, compared with 1.7095 marks and 104.60 yen Tuesday.
