CORPORATE JARGON: If you don't know the inside skinny, it can be a jumble.
At Coors Co., new beers are referred to as "the liquid," as in "the problem wasn't the marketing, but the liquid."
At Microsoft Corp., executives refer to an employee's "bandwidth," sometimes offering "that guy doesn't have the bandwidth to handle that project," notes computer consultant Cheryl Currid.
One for linguists to cringe over: a new verb "incentivize," meaning to revise pay arrangements for managers.
Companies come up with derivations of their names.
At Wal-Mart Stores Inc., executives "Wal-Martize" employees at firms they acquire -- that is, train them to smile often and offer extra service.
At Intel Corp., officials use the "-ize" formulation for trying to get involved in a new business; these days, the company is trying to Intellize the video-teleconferencing industry.
New York marketing consultant Fred Pfaff, who uses "incentivize" in speeches, wonders, "What would Miss Adcock, my first-grade teacher, say?"
A JURY OF YOUR big-firm peers?
Jury duty gives small employers headaches.
Small-business owners often scramble to keep themselves or key workers out of the jury box.
Craig Hatkoff, a principal in the New York real-estate firm Victor Capital Group, is battling the state after five postponements.
"There's never a convenient time for a small business," he says.
New York restaurateur Jeff Bliss went before an administrative clerk to get a chef at trendy Mesa Grill out of his assignment on the final summons.
Slightly larger workplaces use a variety of fill-ins for workers doing their civic duty.
Miller Tool & Die of Jackson, Mich., "crosstrains" its 80 employees to substitute for key workers.
Gala Hallmark in Dearborn, Mich., uses college students and other part-timers to keep things running.
UNIONS TRY TO REGAIN their edge on health care after a slow start.
Bitterness over Nafta crimps their financial contributions to health-care reform, and they have done little aside from training campaign coordinators.
Health-care campaign coffers collect just over $1 million so far -- an amount expected by the end of last year.
The Health Care Reform Project, the advertising campaign financed in part by labor, is being outspent 7 to 1 by the health-care industry fighting the Clinton plan, says AFL-CIO's Rex Hardesty.
Unions say they have held off intentionally, and now will pick up the pace.
They expect to send out 360,000 pieces of direct mail to constituents of 72 key members of Congress during the President's Day recess.
Radio ads will run in swing districts.
"We're really into our lobbying effort now," says Joanna Reagan, political director for the bricklayers' union.
Union letters to their members will criticize in particular the competing plan offered by Tennessee Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper.
WANT A COMMITTED WORKER?
Hire a new one.
Employees grow much less loyal after two years on the job, says a study of young managers by researchers at New York University and Northwestern University.
Experienced workers also feel they deserve faster promotions and high pay, according to the study in the Academy of Management Journal.
FOR LIGHTER FINES, put out the welcome mat for safety inspectors.
A review of Occupational Safety and Health Administration data by OSHA Data of Morristown, N.J., shows companies that initially denied access to OSHA inspectors were charged with almost twice as many violations per inspection.
And the safety agency sought fines against them nearly double those against more cooperative firms.
SPLIT DECISION: A Harris poll shows three-quarters of Americans believe that unions improve wages and working conditions.
But 70% say unions are too involved in political activities, and nearly two-thirds think unions fight harder against change than for it.
TELECOMMUTING GETS a boost from the Los Angeles earthquake.
The battered highways become a marketing tool.
Pacific Bell signs up 1,490 new customers for services such as voice mail and call waiting.
Heavily damaged California State University at Northridge sets up space for 1,000 telecommuters to use "semiremote" services; they can travel a short distance to the campus, avoiding driving all the way to their offices.
A telecommuting center that Newhall Land & Farming Co. set up in Valencia before the quake has lured so many customers that the company plans to build again.
Newhall partner Steve Valenziano predicts that "the demand for our space will fall off" in the next year or so.
But even after the freeways are back in action, he says, some companies "are going to want to continue to do it to some extent."
Even advocates wonder if the trend will continue once the highways are fixed.
A Pac Bell spokesman says telecommuting works, though it's unclear how many new users will be telecommuting "a year from now."
THE CHECKOFF: Executive recruiters surveyed by newsletter Workplace America received a record 1.6 million resumes in the past year.
They had only 11,900 positions to fill. . . .
Resumes we never finished reading: An applicant to this newspaper writes, "I would like to be considered for a photography position . . ."
