Oil industry insiders are showing a growing appetite for their beaten-up shares.
So far, the buying activity is cropping up primarily among second-tier companies, not the big integrated multinationals, analysts who track insider activity said.
Among those companies with executives and directors placing bullish bets since November are Quaker State Corp., Ashland Oil Inc., Tesoro Petroleum Corp., Pogo Producing Co., Wainoco Oil Corp., Oryx Energy Co., Louisiana Land & Exploration Co. and Red Eagle Resources Corp., recent Securities and Exchange Commission filings show.
"As energy-sector share prices deteriorated through the fall and winter, insider buying activity picked up," said Michael Painchaud, director of research and a partner at Market Profile Theorems, a Seattle investment advisory concern that tracks insider buying and selling.
Mr. Painchaud said he's advising his institutional clients to follow the insiders' lead and go bargain-hunting.
"We're telling our clients they should be buying the energy sector: apparently insiders see value in these prices, and we also think the sector has good defensive characteristics" in a market buffeted by interest-rate risk.
The analyst noted that oil-industry insiders tend to be prescient -- moving in force to sell shares when they sense that crude-oil prices and energy-stock valuations are getting high and, conversely, moving to buy when they sense the oil market is about to hit bottom.
Last summer, for instance, oil-group insiders sold heavily when crude prices reached highs of around $18.50 a barrel.
During the past several months, however, with crude-oil prices down to around $14-to-$15 a barrel, oil-sector insiders have become among the most active buyers of any industry group tracked by Market Profile Theorems, precisely at a time when the oil group's share price performance relative to other industry sectors has been dismal, Mr. Painchaud noted.
Bob Gabele, president of CDA/Investnet, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., company that analyzes insider activity, also sees bullish sentiment on the rise: "Insiders are starting to bet that oil will not be this cheap six months to a year out."
But he's not getting overly excited about a big move in oil shares as an inflation hedge, given the amount of insider selling in other important commodity sectors, such as gold and copper.
His advice for prospective investors is to look for further bullish insider activity in those companies whose stock has yet to move higher.
"The group is still cheap, and it wouldn't surprise us to see more accumulation by insiders in those issues that have yet to recover any ground," he said.
Mr. Gabele pointed out, for example, that Tesoro's stock has jumped to just over $10 a share -- or nearly double the level at which three insiders at the company bought when they purchased a combined 56,000 shares in mid-November.
Michael Burke, Tesoro's chief executive officer and president, bought 50,000 shares at an average of $6 each at the time and said he intends to buy more.
"My purchases relate more to the fact that the company is in a turnaround situation.
We've been able to put in place a lower cost structure," he said.
He added that the San Antonio refining and marketing company also has benefited from strong natural-gas operations in south Texas.
But Mr. Burke said he's not counting on any major upswing in the oil or gas market.
"The market is risky and prices are volatile," he said.
"No one can speak very confidently about where they're going in the future."
Several companies at which insiders have been active have seen little or no upward movement since their respective insiders bought.
These include Quaker State shares, which insiders bought at an average of $13 and that now fetch $14; Louisiana Land, in which insiders bought shares at an average of $40 that now trade at $38.50; and Oryx Energy, which has dropped to $18.375 a share from the $20 at which insiders made purchases.
Oil-industry analysts agree that betting on a price rise anytime soon is risky, given the disarray within the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and the ample flow of crude oil into the market from non-OPEC sources.
In fact, a number of oil stocks have been downgraded in recent weeks as expectations of higher oil prices have dimmed.
"Oil prices are just as likely to go down as up," said Alvin Silber, an energy industry analyst with Herzog, Heine, Geduld in New York.
"Those investors who claim OPEC will ride to the rescue at its meeting next month are really out on a limb.
Supply and demand have overtaken OPEC as a determining influence on price, and there's excess supply out there right now."
Some analysts say oil prices could fall another $2 or $3 a barrel in the coming months.
Philip Verleger, senior energy analyst with the Institute for International Economics in Washington, said "inventories are going to build during the second quarter and OPEC will not do anything to tighten up supply.
I think we could see the spot price on West Texas intermediate crude drop to $12 a barrel in the May-July period."
According to John Lichtblau, chairman of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation in New York, there's only a 50% chance that OPEC might cut its output.
That's despite new data from the group's own advisers, who said yesterday that demand for OPEC crude during the second quarter will be only 23.2 million barrels daily, less than earlier anticipated.
OPEC is currently pumping out about 24.7 million barrels a day, at least 200,000 barrels beyond its production ceiling of 24.5 million barrels daily.
"Even though it makes eminent sense economically to cut, it has become more of a political issue," Mr. Lichtblau said.
Mr. Silber said that investors in second-tier domestic producers should focus on companies with natural-gas exposure, such as Tesoro and Pogo.
Natural-gas prices have been climbing.
Although some of the recent increases have been weather-related, gas prices for the long haul are expected to be heading up during the next four to five years.
If and when crude-oil prices do rise, they won't jump much beyond $18 a barrel, industry analysts say.
That's good for refiners, who use crude oil as the feedstock from which they make their products.
During recent months when a cold snap wracked much of the country, prices of oil products, especially heating oil, jumped.
Ashland, a major refiner, has benefited from low crude-oil prices, as well as from an improvement in margins in most divisions, including its chemical business.
With crude prices running recently at five-year lows, "our stock was looking bright," says Paul Chellgren, Ashland's president.
He said he exercised Ashland options twice, once in December and again in January.
Each time he exercised 6,000 options and has held on to those shares.
