Yesterday ended another of Washington's wee political eras.
At an agency little known "outside the Beltway," the International Trade Commission, an intellectual force for free markets said her goodbye to government.
Anne Brunsdale's eight years at the ITC brought modern economics to a policy-shaping backwater.
The frustrations were as many as the victories, however, and the future for free trade is anything but clear.
The ITC, the body that rules on domestic industry's complaints of unfair foreign competition, is molded by protectionist sentiment in Congress and the muddled messages sent by successive presidents.
Ronald Reagan appointed Ms. Brunsdale after she'd spent 18 years at the American Enterprise Institute, the last nine editing Regulation magazine, a forum for many of the market-based ideas that she and others would bring to office in the 1980s.
For 3 1/2 years, mostly under President Bush, she chaired the ITC.
While there, she had some allies.
Feisty Susan Liebeler preceded her as chairwoman and was an even stronger vote for free trade.
Yet Republican White Houses nominated other commissioners of a different bent.
Mr. Reagan's first selections were Alfred Eckes, then a congressional staffer and now an Ohio professor who defends Smoot and Hawley of tariff infamy, and Eugene Frank of Pittsburgh, a booster of the U.S. steel industry.
Mr. Reagan had a record of bowing to Big Steel, as James Bovard's book "The Fair Trade Fraud" describes (an article by Mr. Bovard appears on the editorial page today).
His curbs lasted through most of Mr. Bush's reign, but then came Ms. Brunsdale's crowning moment.
After the lids expired, old-line manufacturers asked the commission in a high-profile case to find that imports had illegally harmed them.
A panel majority last July largely refused, using economic principles Ms. Brunsdale & Co. had brought to the ITC.
Furious steel titans asked President Clinton to hasten her exit ("a great honor," she says) but she ultimately left on her own, at age 70, with a successor still not confirmed.
What Ms. Brunsdale's side brought to the ITC was a more sophisticated approach to markets.
For example, they recognized that commodities are no longer interchangeable.
In steel's case, U.S. buyers demanded particular formulas or processes that domestic makers couldn't provide.
So, even under laws drawn to favor the home industry, steel firms' claims could be denied.
This methodology contrasts with the so-called trends approach, which surmises that there's something wrong if domestic manufacturers are in long-term decline while imports are growing and prices falling.
That view employs a post hoc fallacy, Ms. Brunsdale says, and is "like playing golf with a tennis racket."
She similarly rejected complaints aimed at imports ranging from minivans and machine tools to pork and flowers.
The Brunsdale position didn't always prevail.
She dissented in the case of flat screens for laptop computers -- and then was proved right when laptop makers in the U.S. moved overseas to avoid a 62% duty slapped on the critical Japanese component.
Globalization of production and markets has made it more difficult to shield U.S. firms against "predatory" acts without hurting other U.S. producers, let alone consumers.
Nevertheless, Big Steel keeps the protectionist ingot hot.
Ms. Brunsdale notes it got the Clinton administration to include in the just-negotiated GATT treaty a revision in the way foreigners' market share is measured.
This effectively lowers the threshold below which imports are considered "negligible" and can escape trade sanctions.
"This change would have reduced the `negatives' {rejections of damages} in the steel case a lot," she says.
Aggregated over much time and many industries, such negative votes show that, notwithstanding Ms. Brunsdale et al., the ITC has been more protectionist in recent years than it was before the mid-1970s.
The reason is stronger anti-import sentiment in the Democratic Party, transmitted via Congress.
As past ITC chief economist John Suomela explains in a new book, "Free Trade vs. Fair Trade," the commission's structure invites congressional sway.
Only half of its six members may be from one party, so no easy majority can be created.
When presidents have leaned to nominees favoring free trade, Congress has stalled until it could balance them with other appointments.
This doesn't bode well for open commerce, especially given Republican ambivalence on the issue.
(Remember it was Mr. Reagan who introduced "voluntary restraints" on Japanese autos, the most sweeping protection of recent memory, as well as semiconductor strictures on Tokyo.)
Because the ITC is adjudicatory, Congress eschews its typical browbeating for more subtle persuasion through two oversight committees, Senate Finance and House Ways & Means.
The current protectionist ITC chairman, Don Newquist, owes his post to Lloyd Bentsen, who formerly chaired the finance panel (and now enjoys a free-trader image at Treasury).
Members of Congress are tight with constituent industries, and "it was easy on occasion to step into a political problem without knowing it," remembers Ron Cass, who was Ms. Brunsdale's vice chairman at the ITC.
On the commission itself, relations have been tense, with the Liebeler-Brunsdale faction attacked by Commissioner Eckes for "substituting academic fictions for the factual record" and trying to rewrite trade law to suit their ends.
In the staggered turnover of members, the free-traders appear to have lost the upper hand; of the sitting five, only Carol Crawford, a former aide of Reagan deregulator Jim Miller, is solidly antiprotectionist.
Yet, as Ms. Liebeler observes, lawyers appearing before the panel now routinely couch arguments in terms of the economics that the Reagan group brought to the ITC.
Ms. Brunsdale, too, thinks the free-trade light is still burning, if flickering.
She regards the ITC as worthwhile for its ability -- indeed, its statutory duty -- to produce authoritative studies by its 120 industry specialists, who, thanks to her, work more closely with economists.
Carla Hills, whom she praises highly, requested a major analysis of antidumping laws while trade representative for President Bush.
After some tussling at the ITC, the request is going forward.
"The question," says Ms. Brunsdale, is whether "commissioners who don't respect economics or don't know how to use it" will muck up this and other work.
For all the ITC reforms, new ideas do not take easily at a body created in 1916 (as the Tariff Commission), particularly with a reactionary Congress so close.
That is what Ms. Brunsdale has in mind with these words for her successor: "Listen carefully to the general counsel whenever she says things have always been done this way.
Then, do the opposite."
