By any stretch of logic, Russia should pull out of its misery.
The country boasts huge reserves of nearly every resource on the planet, it has a well-educated work force and it is developing a go-go younger generation that is poised to conquer the brave new capitalist world.
And yet, every time Russia seems to face smooth sailing, something unexpected goes wrong.
So how can anyone reasonably forecast the future of this unpredictable giant, which stretches across a staggering 11 time zones from Central Europe to Alaska?
As a foreign correspondent in Moscow, I appreciate the difficulties.
In this chaotic environment, we're generally reduced to analyzing whether yesterday's developments will be reversed today.
It's hard to think about tomorrow.
A pair of American political analysts have bravely taken up the task.
In "Russia 2010: And What It Means for the World" (Random House, 276 pages, $23), Daniel Yergin, who won the 1992 Pulitzer Prize for nonfiction for "The Prize," and Thane Gustafson attempt to tell us just where Russia might be headed.
Wisely, the authors refrain from trying to divine Russia's exact course.
They spin a series of complex scenarios that seem equally likely to grow out of the post-Soviet muddle into which Russia has sunk.
In the authors' words, they are attempting to write "histories of the future."
"Russia 2010" identifies five plausible scenarios: continued muddling, a military-industrial reassertion of centralized power, a dangerous breakdown of order, authoritarianism and a capitalist economic miracle.
Each is argued cogently, and the authors bring to the task an impressive grasp of Russia's history and even of its current subtleties.
But just how useful is any of this?
The range of scenarios is so broad -- from cuddly, free-market success story to belligerent military machine -- that most readers are likely to lose their way.
That's especially true in light of the authors' candid, if sobering, admission that the outside world can do little to affect how Russia develops.
Worse, the book often lapses into stilted and annoying terminology.
The scenarios get childlike monikers such as Muddling Down, the Long Good-bye and the Two-Headed Eagle.
And as the "what ifs" begin to multiply, the ideas sometimes seem to lead nowhere.
"Muddling Down in Russia coincides with Two-Headed Eagle in Ukraine," the authors write.
"But if Ukrainian politics lapses into Muddling Down . . ."
This reviewer was tempted to advance to the scenario of the Great Closed Book.
But "Russia 2010" does have something to offer.
First, the book's snapshot descriptions of Russian society and its major actors and institutions are concise and generally on the mark.
And occasionally, the authors, who describe themselves as "cautiously optimistic," are willing to go out on a short limb to make a few solid predictions for where Russia will be 16 years from now.
Most importantly, they argue, the country will continue to develop in the direction of capitalism, Russia-style.
Despite inevitable setbacks along the way, the genie won't slip back into the bottle.
Messrs. Yergin and Gustafson also are probably on the mark in identifying Russia's biggest danger: conflict with Ukraine.
It is here that the scenario-spinning seems most useful.
They forecast a possible clash four years from now, maybe sooner, as a dismal economy prompts the largely Russian-populated provinces of eastern Ukraine to secede, sparking an aggressive nationalist backlash in Kiev.
It's a stark reminder to the West to do whatever it can to keep the two countries from starting a conflict that could engulf much of Central Europe.
Some of the authors' advice also is worth pondering.
Among the soundest, and most controversial, observations: "If Russia is to be a partner with the West, then Russia will have to become a member of the club."
The West can't simply wait for signs of good behavior before it offers a reward.
"No proud people," the authors write, "will tolerate being made to wait at the door, as the Russians are being asked to wait today."
For foreign investors, too, there are useful insights.
No matter how widely Russia opens to the outside world, the authors argue, it will always be ambivalent toward foreign capital.
They advise potential investors to enter the market gradually, get their CEOs personally involved, find a solid local partner and be willing to settle for less than total equity control.
For all their attempted prescience, however, the authors omit several critical questions.
Most obviously, they fail to discuss the complicated future of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Russia's perception of the threat from an expanded NATO could go a long way toward determining the nation's foreign policy and its sense of self.
Nevertheless, the authors must already be basking in the glow of partly fulfilled scenarios.
Russia's parliamentary elections in December, which took place after publication, followed the script of the Muddling Down scenario: "fertile ground for Russia's nationalists and neo-fascists."
Come 2010, it's a safe bet that Messrs. Yergin and Gustafson will point to a few other selected passages to show that they saw it all coming.
Mr. Ignatius, the Journal's Moscow bureau chief, predicts that by 2010 he will be living in Russia, not living in Russia, or something else entirely.
