The decision by hard-line North Korea to end its yearlong refusal to permit inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency won't resolve the debate over whether Pyongyang is developing nuclear weapons.
North Korea still won't permit inspections of two other sites suspected of possible use in a nuclear-weapons program.
Furthermore, the agreement won't completely resolve the question of whether North Korea already has developed a nuclear device.
But the inspections, which IAEA information director David Kyd said could begin as soon as next week, are likely to head off a confrontation with the U.S. and other nations.
Pyongyang reached an agreement in principle with the U.S. a month ago to permit inspection of the seven sites, but later balked in talks with the IAEA.
President Clinton said last week that United Nations economic sanctions were "one option" if North Korea continued to refuse to cooperate.
The IAEA board, which is to meet next week, had been expected to turn the matter over to the U.N. if inspections weren't agreed to.
North Korea, in turn, has said it would consider international sanctions an act of war.
The U.S. welcomed the announcement yesterday.
Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, said, "We look forward to the beginning of these inspections as soon as possible."
The U.S. and North Korea are resuming informal talks in New York, where the two sides will discuss details of the inspections.
If the inspections are completed to the IAEA's satisfaction, and if North Korea agrees to resume a dialogue on denuclearization with South Korea, the U.S. would hold its third round of high-level talks with Pyongyang.
These talks are designed to provide North Korea's impoverished and isolated regime with the rewards of international economic aid and possible diplomatic recognition if it agrees to end its nuclear-weapons program.
A satisfactory completion of the inspections is also likely to bring about the suspension of a major annual U.S.-South Korean military exercise known as "Team Spirit," U.S. officials say.
These steps all are part of an international poker game being played by the U.S. and North Korea.
The North Koreans, whose only significant asset is their nuclear program, are expected to dribble out concessions one at a time.
"They will sit on their hands and keep alarming the international community.
They have to do that to keep their bargaining strategy credible," predicts Peter Hayes, a researcher at the Nautilus Foundation, a private research group.
U.S. officials acknowledged yesterday that a lot of work lies ahead before the international community can defang North Korea's nuclear-weapons program.
But, said Jack Mendelsohn, deputy director of the private Arms Control Association, at least so far, "the worst thing hasn't gone wrong.
The plug hasn't been pulled at the IAEA, leading to sanctions.
That seems to have been avoided for now."
