Shares of Broderbund Software Inc. rose 22% in the three days of trading preceding its announced acquisition by Electronic Arts Inc., leading some analysts to assert that inside information about the deal had leaked out.
Electronic Arts, a San Mateo, Calif., maker of computer and video games, disclosed its agreement to buy Broderbund for 15.4 million shares of its stock after close of trading Wednesday.
That day, Broderbund closed at $41.25 in National Stock Market trading, up $3.75 from the previous day and up $7.50 from Friday's close.
Wertheim Schroder & Co. analyst Alfred Tobia Jr. said Wednesday's rise in Broderbund stock may have forced the company and Electronic Arts to announce the merger sooner than planned.
Investors "obviously got wind of what was going on," he said.
Another analyst, who requested anonymity, also said buying on Wednesday was based on a rumor of a pending acquisition of Broderbund.
The stock deal was valued at $400 million, or $41.67 a share, to Broderbund shareholders on the basis of Wednesday's close.
Yesterday, Electronic Arts' stock jumped $3.50 to $29, giving the deal a value of $46.56 a share to Broderbund holders; Broderbund closed at $45.875, up $4.625, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Broderbund said it didn't know of any reason why its stock rose before the announcement, although a spokeswoman said analysts recently had made some favorable comments about the company.
Hambrecht & Quist put out a report on the educational software industry Wednesday that might have had some effect on Broderbund's stock price.
The report was "generally positive, but voiced some caution, including concern about increased competition," said analyst Todd Bakar.
In conjunction with that report, Hambrecht & Quist upgraded its recommendation on Broderbund's stock to "hold" from "underperform."
Last Thursday, Robertson, Stephens & Co. reiterated a "buy" recommendation on Broderbund stock.
A spokesman for the Securities and Exchange Commission in Washington wouldn't comment on whether the agency will look into reasons for the stock's rise.
Lee Isgur, of Volpe Welty & Co., said a rumor that Broderbund will make products using Dr. Seuss characters could have boosted the stock price.
A Broderbund spokeswoman said the company hasn't made any such announcement.
The deal between Electronic Arts and Broderbund would create one of the largest consumer-software vendors, serving the home-education and entertainment markets.
The combined company will compete against Redmond, Wash.-based Microsoft Corp.'s home-software unit and Acclaim Entertainment Inc., Oyster Bay., N.Y.
The proposed deal gives Electronic Arts a strong presence in the education market, where it has struggled, and offers Broderbund the chance to expand through Electronic Arts' strong distribution network.
"We intend to be a world-wide software company," said William McDonagh, Broderbund's chief financial officer.
"The battle is going to be for shelf space," said Andrew Brosseau of Cowen & Co.
Betty Lyter, of Montgomery Securities, said she expects companies with solid distribution, such as Electronic Arts, Acclaim and Davidson & Associates Inc. of Torrance, Calif., to consider acquiring such companies as Sierra On-Line Inc., Bellevue, Wash., (which once almost merged with Broderbund); Software Toolworks Inc., Novato, Calif.; and Learning Co., Fremont, Calif.
David Readerman, of Lehman Brothers, estimates the combined companies will post earnings of 93 cents a share on revenue of $518 million for the fiscal year ending in March.
For the 1995 fiscal year, he estimates earnings of $1.25 a share on revenue of $677 million.
Mr. Readerman doubted Microsoft would bid for Broderbund because "they already have more people in home software research and development than in the entire company of Broderbund."
With few other players in the educational and entertainment-software markets big enough to acquire Broderbund, other offers would "have to come from outside the software industry," he said.
Analysts mentioned Walt Disney Co., Paramount Communications and Advance Publications Inc.'s Random House, with which Broderbund has an agreement for a venture in childrens' software, as possibilities.
A Broderbund spokeswoman said no other suitors are currently courting the company.
