Banco Espanol de Credito, the big commercial bank that was taken over by the Bank of Spain on Dec. 28, will be restored to financial health by the end of the year and sold to one or more Spanish banks, said Bank of Spain's governor.
Appearing on national television after Spain's five biggest banks agreed on a rescue plan for Banesto, as the troubled bank is called, Luis Angel Rojo said the bank's 605 billion-peseta ($4.33 billion) financial shortfall will be covered through asset sales of 285 billion pesetas and a write-down of capital and reserves of 320 billion pesetas.
That will reduce the nominal value of Banesto shares to 400 pesetas from 700 pesetas each, he said.
To recapitalize Banesto, the deposit-guarantee fund will subscribe to a 180-billion-peseta rights issue, later auctioning off its shareholding in the bank.
Current shareholders will be encouraged to participate in the capital increase, Mr. Rojo said.
The rescue plan "signifies a big sacrifice for" shareholders, he acknowledged.
"But it also signifies a big sacrifice for the rest of the country, which is going to have to put up 285 billion pesetas to cover Banesto's so-called shortfall."
Under the complex plan, which shareholders will be asked to approve in mid-March, Banesto will write off reserves of 244 billion pesetas and write down capital by 49 billion pesetas.
The bank will also make deferred provisions of 27 billion pesetas, bringing its total contribution to the bailout program to 320 billion pesetas, according to the Bank of Spain.
The deposit-guarantee fund will provide the bank's additional funding needs by acquiring 285 billion pesetas worth of Banesto's assets, the central bank said.
While the Bank of Spain didn't specify how the deposit-guarantee fund is to be financed, bankers said Spanish commercial banks will grant it a 600 billion-peseta loan at market rates to enable it to acquire assets for the same value from Banesto.
Of this amount, all but 285 billion pesetas in bad loans will be recovered when the assets are liquidated, the bankers said.
The fund will eventually finance half of the remaining 285 billion pesetas with money from the banks' annual contributions, which will be raised to 0.2% of their own deposits from its current 0.15%.
As a result, banks will pay into the fund about 35 billion pesetas a year, or just over 140 billion pesetas in four years.
The Bank of Spain said it will provide an additional 142.5 billion pesetas over a period of several years.
Once Banesto has been recapitalized through the 180 billion-peseta share issue, it will be auctioned off "as quickly as possible and in any case within a year," with the authorities "deciding in favor of the offer that presents the most advantageous conditions for acquisition," the Bank of Spain said.
News that Banesto will be up for sale set off a whirl of rumors in Madrid over which of the five big banks would make a bid for it.
Since most of Banesto's current management team is on loan from Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, or BBV, the Basque bank has been high on the list of possible candidates.
Furthermore, acquiring Banesto would enable BBV to recapture its position as Spain's biggest bank, lost when Banco Central Hispano arose through a merger three years ago.
But BBV is still struggling to close overlapping branch offices inherited from its own merger six years ago.
In fact, because its top-level management was duplicated through the merger, BBV was able to donate executives to Banesto's bailout effort.
The most likely candidate, many analysts think, is Banco Santander, one of Spain's most profitable banks.
A linkup with a fully recovered Banesto would enable Santander to become the leading player in Spanish banking.
Another possible candidate is Argentaria Corp.
Bancaria de Espana SA, the state-controlled banking group that was created in 1991.
Despite its solid financial health, though, Argentaria is likely to shy clear of Banesto as it seeks to break all ties with its past role as a tool of government policy, analysts said.
On Friday, Mario Conde appealed the Bank of Spain's decision a month earlier to remove him as chairman of Banesto.
Mr. Conde and several former Banesto board members filed an appeal with the Ministry of Economy, alleging that the Bank of Spain exaggerated the bank's financial woes in order to take over the bank.
Mr. Conde and J.P. Morgan & Co., the U.S. bank that helped arrange a 95-billion-peseta capital increase for Banesto last year, put the bank's financial shortfall at 264.5 billion pesetas.
Banesto's auditors, however, estimate that the bank is suffering a shortfall of 605 billion pesetas.
