I commend Paul Gigot on his excellent Dec. 31 Potomac Watch column "John & Bill, Anita & Gennifer, Sex & Standards."
Americans must be reminded of the double standard liberals use about morality and sex.
Last year, news reporters called me for "how has your life been changed?" (since you were a witness at the Clarence Thomas hearings) stories as we approached the anniversary of the Thomas hearings and the left's attack, via Anita Hill, on his very essence.
I will never forget the conversation I had with a young woman from the Gannet New Service.
She was obsessed with trying to find dirt on Mr. Thomas, but totally uninterested in looking at Ms. Hill.
I asked her why the press was still going after Clarence but had totally ignored the evidence presented by David Brock's book "The Real Anita Hill."
She told me that "Anita's not important because she does not have a lifetime Supreme Court appointment."
I said, "But Anita is going around the country making tens of thousands of dollars giving speeches and trying to influence public policy.
What if Anita Hill lied on the stand?
What if she committed perjury before a national audience?
Wouldn't that be news?"
The reporter said, "No, it does not make any difference whether Anita was telling the truth or not.
The key is that she brought the issue of sexual harassment to the public's attention."
Well, so much for truth, justice, fairness or a man's reputation.
Thanks again, Mr. Gigot, for letting us know that there still are some people who deserve the title journalist.
John N. Doggett III
Three cheers for Paul Gigot.
As a long-ago reporter for the Detroit Free Press and the Los Angeles Times, it is refreshing to read someone in the media today who isn't an apologist for the Democratic Party.
When it comes to aggressive reporting of political peccadillos, we have had a double standard for too many years.
Sen. Packwood's constitutional rights would not be so grossly violated today if he were a Democrat.
Conversely, you can imagine the whipping Wandering Willy would be getting today from the Washington Post and New York Times crowd if he were a Republican.
William C. Johnston
Pasadena, Calif.
