Mexico's political crisis appears to be slowing economic growth.
A survey of five economists, representing research firms here and abroad, shows average expectations of first-quarter gross domestic product growth ranging from 0.3% to 0.6%.
That is down significantly from previous predictions of about 1%.
To be sure, the first three months have been distracting for Mexican businesses, with the New Year's peasant revolt in Chiapas, infighting within the ruling party and most recently the assassination of the party's presidential candidate.
But, analysts say, there is still plenty of uncertainty to come.
Mexican businesses must still accommodate their operations to a new world of lower tariffs, falling inflation and changing labor costs.
And any change or uncertainty over the political regime will upset expectations about all of these factors.
Stocks rose and the peso strengthened yesterday on the naming of Ernesto Zedillo as the replacement candidate of the ruling party, called the PRI.
But, overall, the markets' reaction was muted.
After rising out of a 21-point loss to a gain of nearly 40 points, the Mexican Bolsa's IPC index finished 11.44 points higher.
The peso strengthened by as much as three centavos against the dollar, but then settled about unchanged on the day at 3.35 pesos per dollar.
Mr. Zedillo, analysts say, faces the stiff challenge of uniting the warring factions within the PRI.
Until this is accomplished, a strong PRI victory is uncertain.
"His leadership ability is not clear," says Borja Ussia, president of the research firm Grupo Moneda, Mexico City.
"For the time being, the markets are going to be very volatile."
Mexico's economic planners are aiming for 3% growth for 1994, and an inflation target of 5%.
But the average of estimates by economists surveyed ranged from 2% to 2.7% for 1994 GDP growth; an average of their inflation expectations ranged from 7.6% to 7.8%.
Mexico's inflation rate stood at 8% in 1993.
Persistently high inflation and weaker growth could upset labor leaders because many unions were pushed into accepting wage increases of 7% this yearthe rationale was that the increases would include a 2% rise beyond inflation, but Mexican workers may now see their wages drop in real terms.
Rogelio Ramirez de la O, the head of the economics firm Ecanal, expects 1994 economic growth of 2%, but "only on the basis that the political situation goes back to normal.
If it continues in upheaval like this, we will have zero growth.
We are just going to drift."
Stock investors are already expecting weak first-quarter earnings, and have marked share prices down about 13% in dollar terms this year.
At the Mexican Bolsa's IPC index level of 2457.59, "the market in general is still overvalued" given the current slow rate of growth, Mr. Ussia says.
"We recommend a buy at around 2200."
An average of estimates by the economists surveyed shows expectations for the peso to remain about 8% lower for this year, at about 3.36 pesos per dollar.
The economists expect yields on 28-day Mexican treasury certificates to average 9.6% to 9.8% for the year, down from 10.7% last year.
A weaker peso vs. the dollar this year could give a lift to "domestic producers and the Mexican export market," says Luis R. Luis, economist at investment firm Scudder, Stevens & Clark.
"But this usually takes four to eight months."
Consequently, Mr. Luis believes that the Mexican economy will show its strongest growth in the second half.
Indeed, the peso, rather than large fiscal spending, seems to be the government's main tool to encourage direct investment and export-led growth.
Jaime de Pinies, head of research at Santander Investment in Madrid, thinks Mexican monetary authorities could double the peso's crawling devaluation to 0.0008 pesos a day later in the year.
"In the short term, I have no doubt the peso will be defended," he said.
"In the medium term, I expect a faster rate of crawling devaluation."
He concluded: "The peso has appreciated in inflation-adjusted terms very significantly" over the past few years, making Mexican products less competitive.
"Correcting the value of the peso might be a good thing."
