Compaq Computer Corp. said it is rethinking the design of its coming hand-held personal computer following blistering criticism of a similar machine from Apple Computer Inc.
As a result, Compaq said its so-called mobile-companion device, initially expected out during this year's first half, will be delayed until the fall.
Compaq's machine, like the Apple Newton MessagePad against which it will compete, was expected to use a special pen and the user's handwriting, instead of a keyboard, for its basic commands.
But Compaq officials say the handwriting-recognition capabilities of the Newton have been so widely ridiculed that they have begun to question whether a pen-based machine can still succeed.
Lorie Strong, a Compaq vice president spearheading the hand-held effort at the computer giant, said the company's new machine most likely will include a keyboard option and won't require handwritten commands to operate.
"We're reasonably convinced that we ought to do a product where handwriting recognition is not required," Ms. Strong said.
"It seems to remain unacceptable to users."
Analysts praised the news of Compaq's shift, saying the woes of the Newton have temporarily soured the market on penbased PCs.
The Apple machine, a pet project of former company Chairman John Sculley, has been widely panned, even by the national comic strip "Doonesbury," which mocked the Newton's handwriting-recognition errors.
"There's been an incredible backlash," said Jeffrey Henning, an analyst at BIS Strategic Decisions Inc. in Norwell, Mass.
"Now, you have to undersell the handwriting part."
Kimball Brown, an analyst at Dataquest Inc. in San Jose, Calif., said Compaq is "absolutely on the right track" in including a keyboard option on its new machine.
"If you're going to include handwriting," he advises, "downplay it to death."
At Apple, a spokeswoman declined to talk about Compaq's plans but said her company has acknowledged that the Newton isn't flawless.
"No handwriting-recognition technology is perfect," she said.
"But this is still the best that exists in the industry."
Ms. Strong noted that the differences between the Newton and Compaq's device go beyond simply the handwriting function.
She said Compaq plans to pitch its mobile companion as an extension of the desktop PC for business users.
The notion is that people ought to be able to use the mobile machine to do many of the same things they do at their desks, including running programs based on Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
The Newton, by contrast, has been marketed as a personal-communications device separate from the desktop.
"It's a different approach than the Newton," Ms. Strong said.
"We felt we needed to distance ourselves."
Compaq's machine will run on a Microsoft platform called WinPad, which the software giant is hoping will become the next standard operating system for mobile computing.
