It ain't heavy, it's our endowment.
Boys Town, the Nebraska institution made famous by a Hollywood movie and symbolized by a boy toting his brother, is suing a new watchdog group for besmirching the charity's name.
In a suit filed in federal court in Brooklyn, Father Flanagan's Boys' Home, known as Boys Town, alleges that the St. Louis-based American Institute of Philanthropy and its president, Daniel Borochoff, defamed and damaged the charity by giving it a grade of "F" in a rating guide and by listing it as one of the "least needy charities" due to an endowment fund of about a half billion dollars.
The unusual action spotlights the delicate philanthropic issue of public fund-raising by charities that have big asset holdings in endowments and other reserves.
The suit also marks a rare move by a charity to openly brawl with a gadfly.
Underlying the conflict is the broader issue of asset accumulation in the nonprofit world.
"Fund-raising with a big surplus is a touchy issue," says Elaine Allen, head of not-for-profit organizations at Ernst & Young.
The biggest concern, she said, centers on taking gifts from a public that believes it is funding immediate programs, while the funds may be "squirreled away" without a clear plan for spending them.
Accumulated assets in the forms of true endowments, board-designated endowments, restricted funds, unrestricted funds and reserves raise issues that have kept accountants humming for years in deciding how to treat the sums.
(New accounting standards for nonprofits next year will require clearer distinctions between restricted and unrestricted funds.)
Mr. Borochoff started the latest fracas in November when he issued his first ratings guide, headlined "givers beware," assigning letter grades to nearly 300 charities based on their required financial filings, and ranking them based on how much they spend on fund-raising and on programs.
He also named "the least needy charities," calculating the number of years funds on hand would last.
Boys Town ranked sixth, he calculated, with $567.8 million that would last 5.9 years.
He gave charities with five years or more of funds on hand an overall "F" rating.
Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children took first place, with $4.4 billion, or 13.5 times annual spending.
"We were bothered by" the article, said a Shriners official, who called the characterization unfair but added that no legal action was likely.
"If you want to totally disregard inflation, disregard expanding services and go out of business in 13 years, I guess he's right," he said.
The group operates 19 hospitals for crippled children and three burn institutes.
The Council of Better Business Bureaus' Philanthropic Advisory Service in Washington says Boys Town meets its standards.
The National Charities Information Bureau in New York doesn't currently have a report on Boys Town, saying it has insufficient information.
As a general rule of thumb, the bureau considers having assets on hand to cover two years' worth of operating expenses to be a reasonable cushion.
Represented by the Manhattan law firm Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, Boys Town charged that the watchdog report implies several corrupt and wasteful practices, and has already cost the group some contributions.
The suit seeks $2 million in compensatory damages as well as unspecified punitive damages, as well as an order blocking Mr. Borochoff from distributing the report.
"There's a big difference between being a watchdog and an attack dog," said the Rev. Val J. Peter, executive director of Boys Town.
Mr. Peter said in an interview that such a "potshot" at Boys Town could help the fledgling report "make a name" for itself.
He added, "A lot of people told us not to fight that "F" but I said `damn the torpedos, full speed ahead.'"
Mr. Borochoff, for his part, said: "We have a right to scale them and leave it to the public if they want to give."
He noted that his report does "point out the positive stuff, that they give a lot of money to programs."
It isn't the first time that Boys Town has taken heat for its endowment.
In 1972, after criticism that the organization was soliciting money even though it had about $200 million in a board-designated endowment fund, Boys Town vigorously revamped its finances and its child-service programs.
Today, the 76-year-old charity serves over 17,000 children in nine states and the District of Columbia with residential care, a Nebraska hospital, and other programs.
Father Flanagan's Foundation Fund Inc., which contains the endowment fund, contributes about 30% to 40% of the Boys Town annual expenditures of about $80 million a year.
Boys Town says it hasn't put any general gifts into the endowment fund since 1971.
At issue in the lawsuit is the public's interpretation of the grading system Mr. Borochoff used.
Mr. Borochoff gave Boys Town the "F" solely because the charity's accumulated assets surpassed a maximum amount he deemed excessive -- five years' worth of operating funds.
The lawsuit charges that donors read news stories on the report issued last November and interpreted the "F" to mean Boys Town might be related to general references elsewhere in the report to "outright corruption" at unspecified charities.
Mr. Peter said he might have lived with the Borochoff rating if the report had further explained that there are "philosophical differences about the criteria."
Some donors, for instance, prefer giving to well-endowed, well-run groups because they believe those organizations will be around forever, while other donors prefer helping out "hand-to-mouth" organizations, he said.
