Two high-level U.S. delegations in Beijing reflect the split in Washington over renewal of Most Favored Nation trading status for China.
Undersecretary of Commerce Jeffrey Garten spent the past three days promoting U.S. exports and backing U.S. companies' bids for Chinese projects worth $6 billion.
"There are huge stakes for the United States here and we're looking very much to deepen them in the long term," he told reporters Wednesday.
Over the same days, John Shattuck, U.S. undersecretary of state, met with Chinese officials to demand that China meet certain human rights conditions or face the revocation of its MFN status.
"Further progress is needed if MFN is to be renewed in June.
It's now up to the Chinese government to move in that direction," he said at a news conference a few hours after Mr. Garten's.
Such mixed signals underscore the Clinton administration's quandary over China policy.
U.S. companies are eager to pile into China, as its economy steams ahead at double-digit speed.
But President Clinton said last year that MFN (which entitles a nation to the lowest tariffs charged on imports to the U.S.) will only be renewed if China improves its human rights record.
Now there are increasing signs that Washington would consider extending MFN to China on a multiyear basis -- or even permanently -- if it were to pass the annual Washington review this June by showing dramatic progress.
Some believe the U.S. would like to uncouple the issues of trade and human rights if China gave Mr. Clinton a good excuse to do so.
One problem seems to be that China hasn't known exactly what it is that the U.S. wants.
One U.S. executive with good access to Chinese officials says Beijing has "a real interest in meeting U.S. demands . . . but it needs Washington to give a concrete idea of what it wants.
China doesn't want to stick its neck out if the U.S. then says no, we want more."
Mr. Shattuck has addressed this problem during his visit.
He discussed with Chinese officials in detail the MFN executive order issued by Mr. Clinton in June.
The order sets two mandatory conditions and five areas in which China must make "overall, significant progress" to gain an MFN extension this year.
These include ending prison labor exports to the U.S. and releasing and accounting for political prisoners.
Fifty-four senators reportedly have signed a letter addressed to Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Jiang Zemin and delivered by Mr. Shattuck, asking China to grant medical parole to five prominent dissidents jailed after the 1989 democracy protests.
It says such an action would constitute a "significant gesture."
China has already taken some steps.
It released three political prisoners last month and agreed to allow the U.S. to inspect five prisons alleged to be producing goods for export.
But it has also recently launched a crackdown on religion and culture and arrested other dissidents.
It is unclear what further actions, if any, China might be considering.
Neither side has been willing to comment on specifics, although a senior Chinese foreign ministry official told reporters Monday that China is "willing to do what we can within the law.
What we can't do, we'll tell the U.S. clearly."
Mr. Shattuck struck an optimistic note at his news conference.
"The discussions have become more businesslike and intense," he said.
"I think . . . there's a more positive atmosphere."
He added that Washington and Beijing have held detailed talks on the status of 235 political prisoners submitted in a list by the U.S. last year and "very positive and constructive" discussions on the possibility of releasing some on medical parole.
Ever since Mr. Clinton met Mr. Jiang in Seattle in November, both sides have appeared more eager to compromise.
Shelving the MFN issue would be good for business for both sides.
Two-way trade has surged from $2.3 billion in 1979 to more than $40 billion last year, and the U.S. is now China's largest export market.
The immediate stakes are some $6 billion of Chinese contracts for which U.S. telecommunications, transport and power companies are bidding.
One purpose of Mr. Garten's trip was to lobby on behalf of these companies and "that's just a drop in the bucket.
We're talking hundreds of billions of dollars in infrastructure projects," he said.
