Financier George Soros is negotiating with U.S. government-supported Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty to take over the broadcaster's research institute and archives.
Such a deal would create a media venture that rescues some of the broadcaster's activities from U.S. budget cuts by privatizing and integrating them into the Central European University, a Soros-financed graduate school with campuses in Prague and Budapest.
A draft proposal from Mr. Soros's philanthropic organization, the Soros Foundations, calls for Mr. Soros to invest as much as $25 million during the first two years to move the institute and the archives to Prague from Munich, and to computerize the operations.
The broadcasting facilities of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, which will remain U.S. government supported, also might be relocated to the Czech capital, but that had been under consideration earlier.
In three years, responsibility for the institute -- which provides written news summaries and in-depth reports to subscribers -- and its core financing would come under the control of the Soros Foundations.
Under the plan, the institute would continue to provide its services to Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and to a new School for Media Studies at the university.
The archives -- with their rich collection of underground publications from the Communist era -- would become a vital resource for scholars.
Although the broadcaster played a crucial role during the Cold War, many people now regard its operations as an expensive anachronism.
Last year, President Clinton wanted to ax the broadcaster's budget, but protests from Eastern Europe and concern in Congress stopped the move.
Though Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty was saved, its budget is to be slashed to $75 million for fiscal 1996 from the current $208 million.
It also was mandated to save more money, which led to the current proposal to spin off and privatize the institute.
"We consider the Soros proposal an exciting solution that helps us continue the work of this prestigious entity," said Ross Johnson, interim president of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
It also fits well with the activities of the Soros Foundations.
Besides running his successful hedge fund, called Soros Fund Management, the Hungarian-born Mr. Soros has been putting millions of dollars into 22 foundations in Eastern Europe and South Africa to support cultural, health, education, media and other projects.
