A growing number of cities and towns are trying to fight crime by forcing teenagers off the streets at night.
But curfews have a mixed record for lowering crime, and some business people say curfews do little to protect their enterprises.
In 1992, Newark, N.J., imposed a 10 p.m. curfew on people under 18.
The police say the curfew worked, pointing to 1,000 citations issued last summer for curfew violations.
But Norberto Otero, who runs a pet store in downtown Newark, isn't so sure.
The kids simply ignore the curfew, he says, and the police are too busy to do much about it.
Vandals -- teenaged or not -- still spray-paint graffiti on the grates of his shop after he closes in the early evening.
And the night-time robberies haven't stopped: Twice since the curfew was imposed, burglars have broken into his store and stolen exotic birds.
"The people ruining the city aren't affected by the curfew," Mr. Otero says.
Similarly, Santa Monica, Calif., enacted a 10 p.m. to sunrise curfew last September, in part because merchants at a local mall complained that loitering youths were scaring off business.
The teens cleared out of the mall, but store owners say the curfew hasn't increased adult traffic.
"In reality, I think the kids had very little impact on business," says one of the mall's managers.
Yet new curfews are being imposed, and old curfew laws are being reactivated, in cities and towns as large as Houston and as small as Netcong, N.J. (pop. 5,000).
Curfews are appealing crime-fighting tools because they're easy to invoke, they sound tough, and they are popular with the electorate.
"Fear is the driving factor here," says Hubert Williams, president of the Police Foundation, a law enforcement think tank, and a former police chief of Newark, N.J. "Curfews get pushed down the throats of police by elected officials reacting to public outrage over crime."
No one knows exactly how many communities in the U.S. have curfews, but in New Jersey alone, the number has doubled in the past year to about 200.
Five towns in Los Angeles County, Calif., imposed curfews last year.
On Feb. 17, a curfew went into effect in Dade County, Fla., as they did recently in Tampa and Orlando.
Legislators in Florida will soon consider a bill to establish a statewide curfew.
One problem with curfews is that few cities allocate additional funds to enforce them, leaving enforcement spotty and lax.
"I don't feel like I have to go inside when it's late," says 13-year-old Elex Blanks of Newark.
"The police don't stop you or check your I.D."
Adds 19-year-old Haslyn Hunte of Newark: "A curfew can be very effective -- for all of five minutes when the police clear off a street corner.
But as soon as they leave, people are back out on the corner."
While overall crime rates have decreased over the past two years, juvenile crime has increased.
In 1992, 95,723 juveniles, or 5% more than the previous year, were arrested for violent offenses, including murder, rape and aggravated assault.
Teenagers also are increasingly crime victims.
Of the 22,540 homicide victims in 1992 whose ages were known, 2,428 were under 18, an 8% rise from 1991.
Proponents argue that curfews not only help prevent crime but also keep children out of harm's way.
But crime statistics in some cities with curfews suggest that curfews may not be the answer to juvenile crime.
In Atlanta, which imposed a curfew in late 1990, arrests of juveniles for assault last year jumped nearly 20% to 658 from 1992, and juvenile arrests for murder doubled to 15.
In Baltimore, which has had a curfew for 18 years, juvenile arrests for assault account for 27% of all assault arrests, nearly double the national average.
"A curfew won't really deter those who want to commit crimes," acknowledges Newark Police Director William R. Celester.
In a few cities curfews have had an impact -- and quickly, too.
In the late 1980s, groups of teens often got into fights with customers outside the nightclubs in the entertainment district of Austin, Texas.
Merchants complained, and the city prohibited teenagers from being in the district after 10 p.m.
Perhaps because the rule applied to a very specific, easily patrolled area of Austin, its enforcement was effective.
Jerry Creagh, who runs a restaurant there, says sales improved almost immediately by 10% to 15%.
But the bigger success stories tend to be in cities that have instituted other programs for youths at the same time they imposed curfews.
In those cases, the effect on crime is apparent.
In 1991, the city of San Antonio decided part of the reason kids were out at night, sometimes committing crimes, was because there was so little else to do.
The city enacted a curfew, but also boosted spending on social services and programs for the young during earlier evening hours.
Merchants offered discounts on food and apparel to teens who participated in the programs.
The cost to the city: $2 million.
The result: In 1993, crimes against youths in San Antonio dropped 77% during the curfew hours of 12 a.m. to 6 a.m., compared with the year before.
Arrests of juveniles fell 5%.
"A curfew in and of itself won't work," says Sergio Soto, who runs the city's youth programs.
"You can't be wholly punitive.
You have to reward kids and show them being good is cool."
