In the coming weeks a year-long effort by the Clinton administration should culminate in the scrapping of Cocom, the 17-member Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls, the export control framework that has dominated East-West relations for the past 45 years.
It may well be time to replace Cocom, the roots of which were in the Cold War.
But a partial or poor replacement of the nonproliferation framework that has worked well for nearly half a century could result in U.S. business losing billions of dollars of high-tech exports in such critical industries as computers, telecommunications and biotechnology.
Although the president is expected to finalize the terms of Cocom's successor soon, the administration's plans have been far from clear.
But an outline is emerging.
In particular, the administration appears ready to abandon a key aspect of the system that ensured a level playing field for exporters from all member countries.
It also appears ready to continue to impose on U.S. industry significant unilateral restrictions on certain exports.
As a result, Western European and Japanese competitors could move into markets in the former Soviet states and China that will remain off-limits to U.S. companies.
These competitors could supplant the U.S. as the supplier-of-choice in these markets.
The impact on the profitability and ultimate technological leadership of U.S. exporters -- from International Business Machines Corp. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to start-up ventures -- could be significant.
To understand the problem, it helps to take a look at how Cocom has worked.
One of its most important features has been its rule of unanimity, or "single-member veto."
If a U.S. company wanted to sell a controlled item, such as an advanced computer, to a Warsaw Pact country, Cocom first had to approve the export.
Importantly, Cocom operated on a veto basis under which any single member could block the export of a controlled item to a target country.
Thus if the Soviet Union or North Korea or China faced an embargo of a certain kind of technology (say, optical fiber cable) it could not purchase it from any Cocom member.
If Germany wanted to sell technology to the Soviet Union, the U.S. or any other member of Cocom could singly block the move.
But just as easily, Germany could unilaterally block a U.S. sale.
For its members, the system has been restrictive and draconian but fair.
The Clinton administration's plans for a successor reflect changes in the post-Cold War world: Instead of focusing on a Communist bloc enemy, the policy aims to create a successor regime that will control technology transfers by and to "rogue states."
Last summer the administration pledged to enlist Cocom allies in a counterproliferation regime to isolate nations such as Iran, Iraq, Libya and North Korea.
However, many issues were not addressed, including the exact relationship of the new regime to other existing multilateral nonproliferation regimes, such as the Australia Group, which deals with chemical and biological weapons, the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile Technology Control Regime.
Nonetheless, U.S. officials have acknowledged that they have abandoned trying to achieve the single-member veto in the successor organization.
In its place they foresee "clearly defined criteria concerning adherence to export controls and nonproliferation norms," which is bureaucratic jargon for a weaker regime.
While pursuing multilateral agreements in framing a successor regime, the Clinton administration has tellingly reserved the right of the U.S. "to act unilaterally where necessary."
Thus, even though the administration has liberalized certain export controls in the past year, it has not yet phased out U.S. unilateral controls.
The problem is that without the "unanimity" feature, members of the new control regime may indeed be able to export sensitive technology to the former Soviet states and even to the "rogue states."
If a member, for example, unilaterally decides that exporting a certain product to Libya is "legal" under the new rules, it will be difficult for other countries to stop it.
Is there a better solution?
One would be to coordinate carefully the elimination of the rule of unanimity with the phase out of unilateral controls so that U.S. exporters are not disadvantaged.
In addition, some U.S. industry groups have advocated amalgamation of the Australia Group and the other nonproliferation organizations into Cocom's successor for purposes of simplicity and transparency.
Regrettably, this does not appear to be occurring.
It would be a shame not to utilize fully Cocom's multilateral secretariat that was built up over the years, with its singular credibility and competence in the evaluation of intelligence and development of lists of controlled technologies.
This expertise would appear to be important as export control regimes evolve toward more refined control of so-called "choke point" technologies (that is, a "short list" of technologies critical to an adversary's war-making ability) and as Russia and the other former Soviet states strive to develop their own export control regimes.
Mr. Crocker is an international trade lawyer in Washington.
