California state transportation officials said that, prior to last week's earthquake, they had temporarily frozen spending on additional highway projects and had allocated only about one-third of the projected $1 billion needed to shore up highways against seismic stress.
Testifying before a state legislative committee in Sacramento, these officials provided the most sobering assessment yet of California's highway-financing woes and the difficulties the state faces in rebuilding damaged roads and overpasses.
The shortcomings highlighted at the hearing could create big headaches for state politicians and are likely to fuel demands for heftier federal assistance to economically hard-hit Southern California.
Indeed, earlier yesterday in Washington, the Clinton administration indicated its intention to ask Congress, perhaps during the next few days, to appropriate about $4 billion in quake relief.
Despite calls from some Republicans that such unanticipated spending should be offset by spending cuts elsewhere, Laura Tyson, head of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, said that the White House plans to use an emergency clause in the deficit-reduction law to exempt the appropriations from existing caps on spending.
"We're talking in the range of $4 billion," she said, cautioning that the final number could be larger.
Mindful of California's political importance, the Environmental Protection Agency, as expected, also canceled plans to withhold as much as $800 million in federal highway funds as a result of the state's refusal to set up centralized auto-inspection stations.
But unless a compromise is worked out, federal clean air laws could put those funds in jeopardy next year.
At the hearing, James Van Loben Sels, director the state's transportation agency, declined to provide specific repair costs for the eight major freeway structures that collapsed or other damaged roadways in the area.
Some lawmakers were sharply critical of past spending priorities, with one state senator accusing the agency of spending more money on freeway landscaping than on seismic safety.
According to new figures released by lawmakers, less than 10% of 1,056 multiple-column bridges slated for seismic retrofits after the 1989 San Francisco-area quake have been completed, "with another 334 in various stages of pre-construction."
It will cost a total of $1.5 billion just to shore up those bridges and 15 large toll bridges around the state, according to the report by the state Assembly Transportation Committee, which concludes that such retrofit projects have "languished as a priority."
The temporary freeze on new projects and hiring by the transportation agency days before the quake reflects estimates that the state faces a shortage of as much as $6 billion in highway repair and construction accounts later in the decade.
To cope with the road damage, record numbers of area residents took to trains, carpools and other means of getting to work that are relatively unusual for Southern California.
More than 25,000 commuters, 10 times the typical number on some routes, took double-deck Metrolink trains to reach offices in Burbank, downtown Los Angeles and elsewhere.
Separately, building officials already have identified about $1 billion in earthquake-related structural damage in Los Angeles, with only 60% of damaged buildings inspected so far.
