The more we become familiar with the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, the more we're inclined to think it's one of the more monstrous pieces of federal legislation passed in our era.
It's worth one's attention if for no other reason than that it typifies so well the nature of much modern legislation: Beyond the goo-goo name, the public actually knows little if anything about the law's abstruse details, and the public is going to have next to nothing to do with its implementation and nothing whatsoever to say about its costs, which they will pay.
For instance, the law may increase the cost of a new car in many states by $1,000.
Today, 13 bureaucrats will vote on that.
They make up something called the Ozone Transport Commission.
The Clean Air Amendments created the Ozone Transport Commission, which consists of the environmental officers of 12 states in the East from Virginia to Maine, plus the District of Columbia.
The congressional staffers and others who wrote the Clean Air amendments assigned some smog-reduction goals, with deadlines, and then gave the compliance job to the states, which in reality means their respective unelected environmental bureaucracies.
Today's vote is an interesting and clever example of how the process works once the law has been passed.
The state officers are voting on whether they should "ask" the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to propose a federal rule that would require the sale of California-type "low emission vehicles" in their states.
And beyond this "vote" always lies the possibility of litigation from the Sierra Club and Henry Waxman to enlist federal judges in the process.
Clean-air merits aside, what fascinates us about this is how the process makes it nearly impossible to identify who is responsible or accountable for anything here beyond the original vote in Congress for "clean air."
In fact, the vote today by the Ozone Transport Commission is being hotly contested, but it's unlikely that any citizen of these 12 states other than the immediate combatants knows much of anything about the battle over whether to make people pay perhaps $1,000 extra for "low emission" cars.
That's the auto industry's educated guess of introducing what's known as "the California car" to the Northeast, but few observers doubt that putting the compliance burdens on new cars would increase their price.
Not to mention the added cost of "reformulated" gasoline to run them.
Last July, Science magazine published an article on this subject by four specialists on emissions from MIT, Berkeley, Cal Tech and the National Center for Atmospheric Research.
We particularly liked the authors' ironic description of the law's fuel requirements: "Oxygenate requirements in that act were arbitrary, in a scientific sense. . . .
As data are becoming available, the complex problem of fuel, emissions and atmospheric reactivity is becoming apparent."
The good news is that our federal system still tries to restrain how far Congress can drive with the lights off.
Virginia, Delaware, New Hampshire, New Jersey and Pennsylvania have reportedly concluded that there may be more cost-effective approaches than the squeaky clean "California car."
New Jersey's new Governor, Christie Whitman, has already ordered her environmental nominee to vote today for a delay.
A report by the New Jersey Institute of Technology predicted millions of dollars in added costs.
(The Science magazine authors said the "evermore expensive fuel recipes" were simply a "subsidy" for the small number of dirty, old cars that actually cause the smog problem.)
The most aggressive environmentalists and bureaucrats have a stock answer now to cost-benefit objections: Better safe than sorry.
Our own view would be that the Clean Air Amendments are a case history of policy hubris.
Again, as is becoming increasingly typical of modern legislating, there seems to have been an assumption here that yes, the law is going to impose significant costs, but the details are too arcane to generate wide public opposition and you can push it all through on a wave of good if vague intentions.
They've largely been right about that, too.
But if these 12 bureaucrats plus the District indeed vote today to "ask" the EPA to mandate significantly more expensive new cars via administrative fiat, there may be a backlash this time.
That doesn't mean an angry public will win.
The Clean Air Monster was voted into law back in 1990.
Congress, at least a Democratically controlled Congress, doesn't much like to revisit its creations for purposes of shrinking them.
But the Clean Air Monster will be worth remembering as Congress undertakes the Clintons' health care plan.
The subject is different.
The process is the same.
