A new survey shows that corporate buyers of health-care plans are more concerned with low prices than high quality.
Peter Brumleve of Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound in Seattle said he recently showed a longtime customer data on the improved quality of care his healthmaintenance organization was delivering.
After 10 minutes, the customer, a chief financial officer for a company with 850 employees, interrupted and said: "This is all fine and good, but what I want to know is, `When are our premium rates going to go down?'"
Conversations like this one corroborate the findings of a recent survey by Foster Higgins, an employee-benefits consultant.
The survey of 102 managed-care organizations and 127 hospitals and physician practices around the country found that, by a large measure, subjects rated price over quality as the major factor for success in their markets over the next three to five years.
"In every business, price is king, but one would have expected to see quality, or outcomes, rated higher," said Glenn Meister, a principal at Foster Higgins.
Indeed, 69% of the managed-care groups that participated in the survey listed price as either first or second among seven ingredients for success, while only 9% rated published data on outcomes of care, a quality measure, as that important.
Most managed-care respondents ranked outcomes last -- suggesting that quality doesn't yet play a significant role in purchasing decisions.
One result, the survey suggests, is that only a few health plans and provider groups are aggressively trying to measure the quality of the care they offer.
Only 24% of all survey participants considered themselves "very active" or "extremely active" in research projects that study the impact of their care on the well-being of their members; 32% said they weren't participating in such activities.
Participants in the Foster Higgins survey, conducted among medical directors of the health-care organizations last summer, rated patient satisfaction as the second most important factor in marketplace success.
Employers increasingly consider patient satisfaction an important measure of quality.
But Mr. Meister maintained that few health plans compile scientifically valid data on patient satisfaction that relate directly to quality of care.
While 77% of respondents said they believe that accurate research on the outcomes of treatment at various plans will improve quality, just 30% of managed-care plans and 46% of hospitals and physician practices said it will save money.
That contrasts with the views of many quality-improvement advocates who say such research can lead both to better quality and lower costs.
Sheila Leatherman, president of the Center for Health Care Policy and Evaluation, a unit of United HealthCare Corp., Minneapolis, said that, while quality issues scored low in the survey, they are "moving up very quickly" as a public concern in the national health-care reform debate.
Meanwhile, stiff competition in some markets is already beginning to narrow price differences among providers of care, said Group Health's Mr. Brumleve, a development that will make quality a top priority.
"How are plans going to differentiate themselves in the market?" he asked.
"It's not going to be on price.
It's going to be on service, access to doctors and on outcomes -- the actual quality of care being delivered."
How 102 managed-care organizations ranked factors important to success in the marketplace.
Percentage of plans ranking a factor first or second:
