Investment bank Goldman, Sachs & Co. is buying $1 billion of GE Capital Mortgage Corp. mortgage loans considered too risky for federal mortgage agencies.
The loans, which carry a higher default risk than standard mortgages, will be made over the next year by banks and thrifts to borrowers who will be required to make only a 3% down payment on their homes.
Goldman plans to resell the loans, and the monthly income stream they produce, to institutional investors.
The agreement was reported Friday in American Banker magazine.
The loans are designed for low-income and middle-income buyers and generally can't be granted to borrowers who earn more than 15% above a region's median annual income.
Loan recipients will pay an interest rate about 0.625% higher than the standard mortgage rate, currently about 7%, according to GE Capital.
Howard S. Altarescu, head of mortgage finance for Goldman, said the mortgages may be perceived as "riskier than generic loans" because of the lower down payment.
However, before being sold to investors, the loans may feature credit enhancement, he said.
The purchase doesn't mean Goldman is trying to create a mortgage junk market, he said, because many or most of the loans will carry the top credit rating of triple-A after the credit enhancement.
For Goldman, the deal provides product for the pipeline: The brokerage industry's hugely profitable practice of pooling mortgages and selling them as securities has been running dry.
In the current low-interest-rate environment, bankers and analysts say, many home buyers who planned to take out mortgages or to refinance existing mortgages have already done so.
GE Capital, part of a financial-services subsidiary of General Electric Co., usually resells mortgages it buys from banks and thrifts to the two federal mortgage agencies, the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
But those agencies, with some exceptions, won't buy mortgage loans in which the borrower has made a down payment of less than 20%.
Historically, loans with less than a 20% down payment have higher default rates than those with more sizable down payments.
Not only are buyers' incomes typically lower, the buyers also have made less of an investment, diminishing their incentive to stay on the property.
At a 10% down payment or below, the default rate "really begins to accelerate," said Andrew Carron, a director of fixed-income research at CS First Boston Inc., the brokerage unit of CS Holdings Inc.
In the standard triple-A-rated mortgage security, investors are covered even if as much as 6% to 10% of the mortgages' principal amount is lost through default.
For mortgages with lower down payments, more loss coverage will be required if they are sold as securities, said Goldman's Mr. Altarescu.
They could, however, be sold outright as whole loans, as opposed to being repackaged as securities.
In that case, they might or might not offer credit enhancement, he said.
General Electric's GE Mortgage Insurance unit has offered to provide the credit enhancement.
The profit for Goldman will come not only in sales of the loans, but also in trading profit when the firm makes a secondary market for the loans.
The new low-down-payment mortgage also meets the needs of local banks and savings and loans, which are under pressure to correct past practices of excluding minorities and low-income regions from their mortgage-loan programs.
"We're hoping there will be a strong demand for the loans" from both borrowers and investors, said Mark Goldhaber, a GE Capital executive involved in structuring the program.
Pension funds and banks have shown "real interest," he said.
He added that a detailed "program of home buyer education" will encourage borrowers not to buy "more home than they can afford" and will counsel them after the purchase on any financial problems.
Home buyers are eligible if they earn 115% or less of a region's median annual income.
For example, the median annual income for Dallas is $32,825, according to U.S. Census figures used by GE Capital; the figure for Minneapolis is $36,565.
Goldman is making the deal at a time when late payments on home loans are at a historic low.
The Mortgage Bankers Association put the seasonally adjusted rate for the past three months at 4%.
Last month, the Federal National Mortgage Association agreed to buy $500 million of loans with 3% down payments from GE Capital.
However, that was a pilot program and Fannie Mae has so far declined to make additional purchases, according to GE Capital.
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or Freddie Mac, has declined to buy any of the loans.
