Nelson Mandela's African National Congress, with an eye on South Africa's first free elections in April, unveiled far-reaching proposals aimed at helping the victims of apartheid.
"An election victory is only a first step," declared the ANC, which is widely expected to dominate the government that will take office after the elections scheduled for April 27.
"No political democracy can survive and flourish if the mass of our people remain in poverty, without land, without tangible prospects for a better life," it said in a draft of its Reconstruction and Development Program.
The proposals have caused concern among investors that they could lead to nationalization of some industries.
In a draft document released last week, the ANC called for revamping the mining industry to ensure assets are shared by all.
Among other things, the document suggests moving away from private mine ownership by instituting a tax on mineral rights and expropriating mines whose owners are willing.
Without citing specific industries, the ANC on Friday reserved the right to expand the public sector in strategic areas through state takeover of industry, new ventures or joint ventures with the private sector.
ANC economic chief Trevor Manuel declined to elaborate on possible nationalizations, stressing that the document was a framework on which other key players would be consulted.
"The state could in some circumstances enlarge or reduce," he told reporters.
"There is no idelogical wedding to nationalizations."
The ANC has denied that it plans to nationalize property, calling instead for a special court that would settle ownership claims and set prices for white-owned land slated for redistribution.
The program favors a mixed economy in which the government would play a leading but flexible role in what it called a balance between state, private-sector and civic interests.
The document outlines public-works projects to create jobs, build more than one million houses, electrify 2.5 million homes and extend affordable health care, clean water and sanitation to all.
It called the programs achievable over five years.
It also said its policies would seek to foster foreign investment in South Africa.
"Stable, consistent and predictable policies as well as a dynamic economy should create a climate conducive to foreign investment," the document said.
The document said South Africa's mining industry, the backbone of the economy and currently dominated by six conglomerates, should be reformed through appropriate antitrust legislation.
The plan will be submitted to a policy-making conference, on Jan. 22 and 23, of the ANC and its allied South African Communist Party and Confederation of South African Trade Unions.
The measures would include affirmative action to address gaps in wealth, opportunities and skills in an economy that Mr. Manuel said was "ravaged by apartheid."
He did not rule out quotas.
Mr. Manuel declined to estimate total funding needs for reconstruction, which the Development Bank of Southern Africa has said could cost $25 billion over 10 years.
Separately, in Pretoria, right-wing leaders agreed Friday to resume negotiations with the government and ANC on the transition to a post-apartheid democracy.
