Adm. Frank Kelso, trying to close the books on the Navy's Tailhook scandal, said he would leave his post as chief of naval operations and retire two months early, at the end of April.
"I made this decision because I clearly have become the lightning rod for Tailhook," he told reporters in his office.
The most likely successor to Adm. Kelso as the Navy's top officer is Adm. Jeremy "Mike" Boorda, who is commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's southern flank.
In that job, he has been intimately involved in NATO planning for possible air strikes in Bosnia.
The expected promotion of Adm. Boorda, who enlisted in the Navy as a teenager, isn't likely to result in major changes in the sea service.
Under the leadership of the soft-spoken, avuncular Adm. Kelso, the most tradition-laden of U.S. military services has won plaudits for the speed with which it has adjusted to the post-Cold War world.
Partly because of this flexibility, the Navy Department (which includes the Marine Corps) was the big winner in last year's "bottom-up review" of how to reshape the military to the changed world situation.
The Navy is retaining 12 aircraft carriers -- something President Clinton had opposed as a candidate -- and is getting new airplanes and a new carrier at a time when the Army is buying no new tanks and the Air Force no new fighters.
The Navy has been slower to adjust to social changes in the U.S.
But, partly spurred by the Tailhook scandal, it moved quickly this year to let women serve as fighter pilots and on the crews of combat ships.
Tailhook "was a watershed event that has brought about cultural change," Adm. Kelso said last year.
The Tailhook scandal grew out of a 1991 naval aviators' convention in Las Vegas at which scores of officers allegedly were involved in lewd behavior, indecent exposure and other offenses.
The Defense Department's inspector general subsequently accused junior officers of making false statements and senior officers of mishandling the investigation.
Adm. Kelso, a 37-year Navy veteran who has served as chief of naval operations since June 1990, said he wasn't pushed into leaving.
"My retirement wasn't requested by anyone," he said.
Yet statements issued by Defense Secretary William Perry and Navy Secretary John Dalton had an air of relief to them, with Mr. Dalton saying that the admiral had acted "with the best interests of the United States Navy in mind."
