"Talking Sex: Making Love in the '90s" will soon be coming to your screen, and when it does it will be clear that sex in the '90s is even more complicated than most of us supposed.
Let it be said at once that the HBO special airing Thursday (11 p.m.-midnight EST) has its brisk and useful side, as is evident in its outpouring of lore on the increasingly rich variety of sexually transmitted diseases now available to us.
Then there are the condom lessons dispensed by Rob Jiggetts Jr., a public-health educator with a flair for comedy.
That said, the first thing that must strike anyone watching this is that fear of AIDS has impelled at least some of the young and restless (and many of riper years, too) to find a way of sidestepping the sex act -- as it is traditionally understood.
The technique allows for all the usual activities (along with others less usual) short of full coupling.
If we are to believe what we hear and see in this program and elsewhere, a whole new sexual culture has been born: one whose cornerstone is the newly popular activity called, with the lyric grace so common to our age, "outercourse."
As always, the arrival of a cultural revolution brings with it advance men and other apostles of the new, true way.
So it is with outercourse, which -- we should not be surprised to hear on this show -- is superior to outercourse's now superannuated opposite.
To listen to some of the interviewees here (most of them young) talk about sex the old way is, indeed, to wonder why they ever put up with anything so boring.
There is, of course, much to be said, in the age of AIDS, for making a virtue of necessity.
And it is true, as one boomer bombshell and devotee of outercourse points out, "It puts less pressure on men."
And that's not all.
One of the show's guests has discovered "looking and watching" and how much more exciting it is than anything more directly carnal.
Another beauty eagerly explains that there is a certain spot, right behind her ear, that is the source of all she needs.
Many others offer similar testimonials in favor of noncoitional adventure.
One man, quite likely happy to learn how little it takes to make the earth move for some of these women, takes the loftier view that outercourse makes sex "a learning experience."
Some of us would like to think, of course, that there are still a few human activities left in the world that don't require sanctification as "a learning experience" -- and that sex is one of them.
But try telling that to the sex experts who make their living expounding on this subject.
On hand, along with other experts, is Dr. Lonnie Barbach, Ph.D. and sex therapist, who affirms that outercourse etc. is "more creative."
Another guest relates that the climaxes that ensue are "even more powerful."
And why?
It is, we learn, because "We can bring all sorts of energies to this interaction."
(Try reciting this sentence while gathering energies for your own interaction.)
Next, we visit with Carol and Robert, who read pornography to one another for excitement.
But more important, they have recently made a discovery that for one reason or another comes as big news to the generation that came of age in the '60s and after, namely that the postponement of pleasure has its advantages, sexually as in many other ways.
One woman goes on a good while about how she put off sex with a new love instead of jumping right in as usual, and found miraculous levels of excitement.
That word about this miracle has reached the do-it generation is, naturally, nice to hear.
Still, there is something eerie about the outercoursists who appear on camera here.
Or if they aren't eerie, they are, at the very least, exhausting.
One businesslike lady, for instance, instructs us in the use of the vegetable scrubber as a sex tool.
This is to be used on the skin -- presumably that of one's partner and/or self.
The scrubber can be followed, or preceded by, a feather.
In this way, so we are assured, we can bring "different textures" into play, which heighten stimulation.
As though we were not already busy enough bringing different energies to our interaction.
We are next informed that it would be good to have a blindfold on hand.
Why we can only guess -- though one would be quite useful as a means of keeping a partner in the dark about the fact that he/she is being romanced by a vegetable scrubber.
In this rich world of outercourse, it is clearly necessary to bring a lot more equipment into the bedroom than used to be required.
That is, if anybody is still doing things in bedrooms.
And there is so much to do.
Suzi and Guy, for instance, are very busy -- in the gym, from the look of things.
Guy's weakness, Suzi joyfully confides, is that he "needs to visualize.
He loves to see everything."
It is not necessary, here, to go into the many explicit and creative ways in which Suzi helps Guy visualize in order to appreciate how much hard work all this is.
This concupiscent toil, Suzi explains, "Is what we built the whole marriage on."
There is a sharp point lurking among all the mildly prurient vignettes and New Age blather: The fear of AIDS and other infection is having its effect, and an interesting point it is, however lost it gets in the parade of witnesses here.
One of them, a young woman and devout practitioner of outercourse, tells how she finds sex "easier and more fun now."
This note, sounded often in this program, can only confirm a lot of already strong suspicions that something happened to the experience of sex as a result of the sexual revolution that began some 30 years ago -- and that the something was not good.
This thirtyish woman indicates that she has, moreover, only just recently discovered the erotic pleasure of the long kiss.
Better late than never, dear.
And don't forget the vegetable scrubber.
