A federal district court will soon be deciding whether a plan devised to preserve the famously all-male character of the Virginia Military Institute -- while providing separate but equivalent military education for women -- will be acceptable.
The women in question would be students of Mary Baldwin College, an all-women's institution in nearby Staunton.
Beyond VMI, though, the court's decision will have an impact on other, larger issues -- among them the matter of whether gender segregation is an offense equal to racial segregation.
The Supreme Court hasn't yet ruled on this rich question, but the time may be approaching.
VMI's legal troubles began in 1990, when it refused to admit a female applicant -- which switched on the programmed wrath of Justice Department enforcers who charged the statefinanced school with discrimination.
Last May, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld an appeals court ruling that VMI could only retain its all-male status in two ways: either by becoming a private institution or by providing a separate but parallel VMI education for women.
Accordingly, a plan was conceived by administrators and faculty at all-women Mary Baldwin.
A new program -- in conjunction with VMI -- would be created for Mary Baldwin students.
With heavy emphasis on leadership and discipline, the program would be financed in part by a $6.9 million grant from VMI alumni.
It provides for ROTC, joint exercises with VMI, military science courses to be taught by VMI instructors, use of VMI facilities, rigorous physical training, an honor code and more of the kind.
The state would provide Mary Baldwin with the same funding per cadet that VMI gets.
It was to be expected that this enterprising and sane plan would provoke fierce opposition from women's-rights ideologues who see the destruction of VMI's all-male tradition as just one more necessary step in the perpetual march.
To his credit, then Governor Douglas Wilder, a Democrat, was among the first to endorse the plan developed last September -- and also to recognize its key virtue.
This was the fact that it was a plan that, in the governor's words, "recognized the physiological and psychological differences between men and women."
To be sure, there are enough women capable of surviving the rigors of cadet life at VMI, the illustrious military school where Stonewall Jackson once taught philosophy and whose most famous graduate in this century was one George C. Marshall.
Still it is no surprise that the educators who conceived the proposed Mary Baldwin program decided it would be unnecessary to emulate certain of the more distinctive features of life at VMI.
First year VMI students, for example, can look forward to walking the famous "rat line" -- that is, adhering to a rigid imaginary line while in the barracks, marching double-time up and down stairs, early morning wakeup summonses to "'sweat parties" (push-ups and other heavy-duty fun) and such.
Creators of the Mary Baldwin plan concluded that this sort of adversarial training wasn't likely to be productive with women, however cherished a tradition it was at VMI.
In its reasonableness and intelligence, the VMI-Mary Baldwin plan represents a kind of solution that doesn't come along all that often in our noisy political times.
It's probably hopeless to try to persuade the sort of true believers who want the VMI to be forced to admit women -- as has just happened to the Citadel in South Carolina.
Mary Baldwin's solution must not pass, the argument goes, lest the offending institution be allowed to "perpetuate the old-boy network."
Everyone else not living full-time on this particular rampart, however, might want to consider some of the complications that may ensue if the legal campaign to undo the character of the nation's oldest military college succeeds.
A court ruling that VMI must accept women would be bad news not only for that school but for the future of all-women's and possibly, all-black colleges, that receive state funds.
Dr. Cynthia Tyson, the president of Mary Baldwin College, notes that her support for the joint venture with VMI is largely due to her certainty -- which many share -- that what is at stake in the VMI case is nothing less than the survival of the single-sex college.
We would add to that a consideration that is in our view an even more important matter -- namely whether reason and sense can prevail against the clamor of fanatics.
