Christie Whitman's economic program for New Jersey is straightforward: cut taxes and restrain spending.
She proposes putting into place three annual 10% personal income-tax rate cuts (the first beginning retroactively, as she announced yesterday); eliminating income taxes for low-income families; and restraining state spending increases to the rate of inflation.
Mrs. Whitman, who takes over as governor this week, won her election on this program.
Now she has the opportunity to enact it into law.
But will it work?
The answer is yes, it will work.
When tax rates go down, revenue goes up.
When public-sector growth is restrained, private-sector opportunities increase.
And everyone is helped: the poor, the wealthy and the middle class.
How do we know?
Because 17 years ago, as the newly elected governor in the neighboring state of Delaware, I proposed and ultimately signed into law a program of tax cuts and spending restraints even more dramatic than Mrs. Whitman's proposals.
Seventeen years of experience demonstrate that they worked -- and worked, and worked.
To borrow a phrase, it's still going . . .
As the accompanying graph shows (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ, Jan. 19, 1994), between 1979 and 1988, Delaware's top income-tax rate was reduced to 7.7% from 19.8% -- a 60% cut in rates.
Since the program began, personal income-tax revenue has doubled and employment has increased 36%.
At the same time, the lowest-income 11% of taxpayers were removed from the tax rolls.
What the graph does not show is that welfare caseloads fell by 40% in the decade following the first tax cut; the state's bond rating (in 1979 the lowest in the nation) rose six times; and the unemployment rate fell to two percentage points below the national average, having begun two percentage points above it.
In 1977, Delaware desperately needed a new economic policy.
From 1970 through 1977, employment growth was 60% slower than what it was in the average state.
Personal income growth over the same period lagged the average state by 13% and several major companies headquartered in Delaware threatened to leave.
Small business formation, construction and housing growth were all sluggish relative to the rest of the country.
The reasons were obvious.
From 1970 to 1977, state spending had grown by 110%, double the rate of inflation.
In five of the seven years before I took office, the state's budgets showed operating deficits at the end of the year.
Delaware had begun a series of annual borrowings against anticipated tax revenues from the next year, resulting in the highest per-capita state debt burden in the country.
New Jersey's situation in 1994 is similar to that of Delaware 17 years earlier.
Over the past three years, real personal income has grown at only a 0.3% annual rate, representing a staggering $22 billion loss against the historic trend line.
Since 1989, the state has experienced a 7.5% rate of job decline compared with a 3% jobs increase nationwide.
In other words, while the U.S. was producing 3.2 million jobs, New Jersey was losing 277,000.
New Jersey's budget grew 25% in three years, three times the inflation rate.
Gov. Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax increase mirrored Delaware's 80% increase in the top bracket income-tax rates in the early 1970s, resulting in the highest income-tax rate in the nation.
But income-tax cuts and spending restraints will rapidly turn the bleakest of economic times toward prosperity.
Since 1980, employment in Delaware's private sector has grown 67% faster than that of the average state and its personal income advanced 22% more rapidly than the U.S. average.
In 1992, Delaware's poverty rate was the lowest of all 50 states.
Delaware has enjoyed a surplus cash position for 15 consecutive years.
Were there other factors involved?
Yes, the Democrat-controlled Legislature supported the economic program and a subsequent deregulation of the financial services industry that brought thousands of well-paying, nonpolluting jobs to the state.
But five across-the-board tax cuts and spending restraints set the course and led the strongest economic expansion in the state's memory.
So will Mrs. Whitman's economic program work?
Of course it will.
The issue is not whether it will work but whether Republican legislators will enact it.
Economically it is a slam dunk.
Well, now is the time for New Jersey Republicans to stand tall.
Mr. du Pont, governor of Delaware from 1977 to 1985, is chairman of the Committee for American Leadership, a nonprofit educational organization committed to free-market principles.
