A surprise cut in British interest rates yesterday sharply dented recent sterling bullishness and dragged down other European currencies.
It also helped propel the dollar to a 29-month high against the mark.
The Bank of England announced a cut in its base lending rate to 5.25% from 5.50%, which sent the pound spiraling downward against the mark and the dollar.
Traders said the move was unexpected because the U.K. economy is already recovering strongly, prompting fears of growing inflationary pressures.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7640 marks, up from 1.7590 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 108.75 yen, up marginally from 108.70 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4665, off sharply from $1.4825.
About midday Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.45 yen and at 1.7630 marks.
Following the rate-cut announcement, the pound fell more than two cents to an intraday low of $1.4654 -- a level not seen since Nov. 10.
Late in New York, the pound also traded at 2.5862 marks, down sharply from 2.6077 marks late Monday.
Traders said the dollar was the main beneficiary of the British rate cut with investors seeking refuge outside of economically depressed Europe and moving into the U.S., where short-term interest rates climbed on the Federal Reserve's tightening of credit policy last week.
The U.K. rate-cut announcement was initially greeted as a political move to help strengthen the U.K. economy prior to introduction of unpopular tax increases in April.
"Speculation was that they the British are doing it to hurt the currency in order to help their exporters," said Lizbeth Goldberg, assistant vice president at Bayerische Hypotheken-und WechselBank AG in New York.
A recent slew of bullish U.K. data had pushed the pound above 2.6200 marks earlier this year -- a level unseen since the pound was forced out of Europe's Exchange Rate Mechanism, or ERM, in September 1992.
Traders said the British goverment probably wants to keep the pound in check so that British exporters remain competitive.
Ms. Goldberg said the Bank of England's action should be seen as "a move against the mark, because sterling was too strong for their taste."
U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke said yesterday that he decided on a rate cut because U.K. inflation remains subdued.
Analysts also noted that a quarter-point reduction in base rates was relatively cautious -- the British central bank has tended to move its key rates in half-point increments.
The mark, meanwhile, lost ground against the dollar on continued poor economic data and threats of a labor strike.
German unemployment topped four million in January, increasing by 340,000 from December, the Federal Labor Office announced.
Also, leaders of German's IG Metall metal workers union yesterday set a Feb. 21 deadline for reaching a settlement in their arduous wage negotiations.
Talks yesterday were described as "frosty."
With the German economic picture bleak, the dollar reached an intraday high of 1.7686 marks, a new high for 1994, and a level last seen Aug. 21, 1991 -- two days after the attempted coup against former Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Traders noted, too, that the Bundesbank's decision to leave 14-day repos -- its main instrument for influencing the money market -- unchanged at a fixed rate of 6% left the impression Germany's central bank wasn't prepared to cut its key Lombard and discount rates anytime soon.
