Monsanto Co. said net income fell for the fourth quarter, but earnings before special items rose sharply, reflecting the U.S. economic recovery and the company's ongoing cost-cutting efforts.
Results were laced with special items, as were those of the year-ago quarter.
But excluding special charges and gains, the chemical, drug and food-product concern's earnings were $46 million, compared with the year-earlier period's $12 million.
The company reported net of $58 million, or 49 cents a share, which included a $7 million aggregate charge, and a $19 million gain linked to last-in first-out inventory accounting.
In the year-ago period, which was bolstered by a $554 million gain from the sale of a unit and hit by a $425 million charge linked to cost-cutting efforts, Monsanto's net was $141 million, or $1.14 a share.
Sales were $1.88 billion, up fractionally from the year-ago period's $1.87 billion.
Operating earnings at Monsanto's chemical group, excluding special items, more than doubled to $55 million from $26 million; sales increased just 1.8%, to $936 million.
The company cited lower prices for petrochemicals it uses in its production, as well as its internal cost-cutting efforts.
The chemical operation is getting a boost from the U.S. economy's recovery, particularly in sales of plastics for auto producers.
The U.S. housing surge is also strengthening demand for Monsanto's carpet fibers and other products.
But stagnant Western European and Japanese markets continue to put pressure on results.
Monsanto's Searle pharmaceutical unit recorded operating income of $25 million, compared with a year-ago operating loss of $3 million.
Sales from new Searle products, the company said, "more than offset the declines" in sales of its flagship Calan heart drug, which since mid-1992 has been subject to competition from generic products.
Monsanto shares, which have strengthened significantly in recent months to hover near the 52-week high, slumped $1.875 to $78.125 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
