Cablecasters are finally starting to realize that, whatever their ledgers may say, their fortunes will ultimately rise and fall not on "Leave It to Beaver" reruns or recycled cartoons, but on the original programming they produce.
And so they're getting ambitious.
Ambitious enough to attempt "Heart of Darkness," a work that has eluded filmmakers for as long as there have been filmmakers.
Orson Welles came to Hollywood with the intention of making the Joseph Conrad novella into a big-screen epic, and was stymied.
RKO, scared of Welles's big budget and his experimental camera ideas, forced him to abandon the project.
He ended up filming "Citizen Kane" instead.
But all his life, Welles dabbled with the idea of making "Darkness," as did other great directors such as John Huston.
Of course, Francis Ford Coppola fared best by taking the more sensible approach, conserving only the core of the story and shipping it from Africa to Vietnam -- if the financial and personal devastation he endured filming "Apocalypse Now" can be counted as faring best.
Adapting a classic work of fiction to the screen is almost always harrowing: What sings in one genre often clunks in another.
The challenge is doubled in "Heart of Darkness," as the plot is minimal, the action secondary and the development of the characters, above all, interior.
The journey into Africa is a journey into the soul.
How then to turn this piece of psychoanalysis into a movie?
How can the screenwriter and the director hack their way through Conrad's prose, as dense and forbidding as the jungle itself?
Nicolas Roeg -- a man whose movies ("Performance," "Don't Look Now," "The Man Who Fell to Earth") have been praised for their dazzling metaphoric leaps and lambasted for their slow-footed impenetrability -- was the intriguing choice to direct this enigmatic work, as Ted Turner's team set out to create its own "Heart of Darkness" (TNT, Friday, 8-10 p.m. EST; or Sunday, same time).
Mr. Roeg and screenwriter Benedict Fitzgerald take us from familiar ground to terra incognita, when Captain Marlow is sent by a Belgian shipping company deep into the Congo to check up on its agent Kurtz, who is manning the Inner Station, its most remote post in Africa.
Kurtz hasn't been heard from in a while, but as Marlow sets out aboard his steamship, the Roi des Belges, he keeps encountering stories about him -- odd, chilling tales of a civilized man who's been claimed by the jungle.
He hears that this Kurtz was "a prodigy, an illuminated man," but that Africa had "got into his veins, consumed his flesh, and sealed his soul to its own."
The stories, and the journey, will get stranger and stranger, until Marlow finally comes face to face with Kurtz.
As Marlow, Tim Roth is fresh-faced and pure arriving in Africa, resplendent in a white suit and white hat that shimmer in the heat.
At every moment, the eyes of the Africans seem to be on him, staring, peering into his soul.
With a crew who may or may not be cannibals, Marlow heads upriver toward a land where the maps run out.
But the further he goes the more soiled he gets, sullied by grease and blood and the raw, moist heat of the malevolent jungle.
Surprisingly enough, for an "experimental" filmmaker, Mr. Roeg is at his strongest laying out the classic adventure tale elements of "Darkness."
He captures the drama and the mystery, the sense of foreboding, of menace and claustrophobia, as the steamship inches its way into the unknown.
What's out there?
What's happened to Kurtz?
Mr. Roeg keeps the plot engine churning.
Visually too, the director has succeeded in finding an equivalent for the somber lyricism of Conrad's writing, conveying the moody atmospherics of his language with no words at all, just long, lingering shots of the lush, overgrown rain forest (with Belize standing in for the Belgian Congo) and brief flashes -- less flashback than flash-sideways -- of threatening masked figures, maybe real, maybe subconscious, called up by the great beating heart of the forest.
Clearly, this "Heart of Darkness" will rank among the best TV films of the season; clearly it will win its share of awards and deservedly so.
But good as it is, this "Heart" is not good enough.
That final transformative moment, when Marlow comes face to face with Kurtz and must acknowledge that they are not all that different, acknowledge just how thin the veneer of civilization is, how easily stripped away -- that moment when Marlow looks into the abyss and the abyss looks back -- here it just leaves the viewer scratching his head.
Part of the blame must lie with John Malkovich.
As Kurtz, Mr. Malkovich is an inspired choice, his demeanor sinister and deranged as he clumps around in a tattered cloak and an earring, quoting Goethe.
But he has chosen to play his Kurtz oddly flat, with a blank open-mouthed stare and soft, uninflected voice, and it's the wrong choice.
I'm a big fan of Mr. Malkovich's, but the strength and menace he brought to "In the Line of Fire" and to Sam Shepard's plays are nowhere evident here.
The other share of the blame lies with screenwriter Fitzgerald and director Roeg, though one can hardly fault them.
Freewheeling in their visual adaptation of Conrad's work, they are handcuffed by his words, and so the crux of this great psychodrama is never really conveyed.
After all, how does one put onscreen that the jungle "whispered to him things about himself which he didn't know . . . until he took counsel with this great solitude and the whisper proved irresistibly fascinating"?
Translating a classic has its drawbacks; too often one is too reverent, unwilling to change, to cut, to add and embellish in ways that might get closer to the truth of an important work.
One needs to hack away at it, to blaze a trail through it, or risk getting lost in the overgrowth.
Cable and TNT should be proud they're finally starting to present pieces of this caliber.
But the great savage heart of Conrad's jungle remains untamed.
