Wal-Mart Stores Inc., ever on the prowl for growth, entered the Canadian market by agreeing to acquire about 120 Woolco stores in that country from Woolworth Corp.'s Canadian subsidiary.
Terms weren't disclosed, although Woolworth said it expects the sale to generate about $300 million in cash.
Analysts greeted the move as good news for both companies, saying it gives Wal-Mart more than 14 million square feet of retail space in an important new market, and accelerates New York-based Woolworth's plan to flee mass-market retailing for the relatively more profitable area of specialty retailing.
In Canada, the news ignited fears of a price war in an industry already battered by the weak economy.
Investors ravaged the stocks of Canadian retailers that will compete directly with Wal-Mart, the largest retailer in the U.S. Hudson's Bay Co., which owns Canada's biggest discount-store chain, Zellers, lost 4.875 Canadian dollars (US$3.69), or 12%, to C$35 on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Friday.
Canadian Tire Corp., which sells hardware, sporting goods and automotive repair services, fell 10% to C$14.625, down C$1.625. Wise Stores Inc. fell 17.5% to C$5, down 87.5 Canadian cents on the Montreal exchange.
While some analysts called the declines an overreaction, several said they will trim earnings forecasts for a number of Canadian retailers.
"It's direct competition to Zellers.
There is going to be market share loss across-the-board," said Marilyn Brophy, analyst at Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion Inc.
For Wal-Mart, the move into Canada comes on the heels of its successful entry into the Mexican market.
Analysts estimate that some of Wal-Mart's Mexican stores are exceeding $100 million a year each in sales, well above the company's U.S. average.
"It's extremely important we position ourselves to be the dominant retailer in North America, not just in the United States, and that's what we're doing," said David Glass, Wal-Mart chairman and chief executive officer.
Mr. Glass said the company expects to modernize the units, which average 118,000 square feet, and convert them into Wal-Mart stores within a year.
As a result of the Canadian acquisition, Mr. Glass said, Wal-Mart will scale back 1994 U.S. store openings to about 125, from the previously planned 150.
Wal-Mart said it will hire "substantially all" of the Woolco employees in the acquired stores, and expects to hire other Woolworth Canada employees.
R. Bruce West, president and chief operating officer of Woolworth Canada's Woolco division, will become president and chief executive of Wal-Mart's Canadian operations.
Jeffrey Feiner, an analyst at Salomon Bros. Inc., said the Woolco stores posted about $1.3 billion in sales last year, and predicted that Wal-Mart "will be able to significantly improve those results."
However, Wal-Mart said that, because of the time and expense of conversion, it doesn't expect the acquisition to add to earnings for the year ending Jan. 31, 1995.
William K. Lavin, Woolworth's chairman and chief executive, said the sale of the Canadian Woolco stores would allow the retailer to "focus our resources on the specialty businesses that provide the highest returns to our shareholders."
Last year, the company said it would close about 450 of its F.W. Woolworth variety stores and about 300 Kinney shoe stores, while continuing to expand its specialty formats.
Woolworth said it would close, sell or convert to other formats the 22 Woolco stores Wal-Mart decided not to acquire and will continue to operate more than 1,400 stores in Canada, including specialty stores under such names as Foot Locker, Northern Reflections and Bargain Shop!
For the third quarter ended Oct. 30, Woolworth reported a loss of $452 million, or $3.43 a share, after a $480 million charge for closing or changing the formats of about 970 largely unprofitable stores.
Woolworth said the sale to Wal-Mart will result in a noncash charge to net income of about $45 million, or 34 cents a share, because of the recognition of foreign currency translation losses that had previously been charged to the foreign currency account in shareholders' equity.
The company said it hadn't decided yet to which quarter the charge would be applied.
Wal-Mart said that, subject to Canadian regulatory approval, it expects to complete the acquisition by the beginning of March.
Wal-Mart's major competitors in Canada will include the Zellers chain as well as Kmart Corp., which recently announced plans to enlarge its 127 Kmart stores in Canada -- most of which are decades old and relatively small -- by the end of 1996.
Because of Canada's higher wages and taxes, industry observers don't expect Wal-Mart to price its goods as low as it does in the U.S., although they expect aggressive pricing early on as Wal-Mart attempts to build its customer base.
In New York Stock Exchange trading Friday, Woolworth rose 50 cents to $25.625, and Wal-Mart shares rose 12.5 cents to $25.625.
