Bill Shutzer is either a former high-ranking investment banking official of Lehman Brothers Inc. -- or he isn't.
One thing is certain: He's the center of a Wall Street tiff over titles and egos.
Last week, the small New York brokerage firm of Furman Selz Inc. announced that William A. "Bill" Shutzer, banker for such big clients as Tiffany & Co. and Hallmark Cards Inc., was joining Furman as head of investment banking.
He'd spent 22 years at Lehman Brothers, the brokerage house unit of American Express Co.
Mr. Shutzer had been a member of Lehman's management committee, Furman Selz announced, and had once served as deputy chairman of mergers and acquisitions for Lehman's corporate predecessor, Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.
"Resume inflation!" charged a spokesman for Lehman, who said there is not -- and never has been -- a "deputy chairman" of mergers or any other department at Lehman.
Further, Mr. Shutzer was never on the management committee because Lehman doesn't have one, he said.
That was news to Mr. Shutzer, who says of himself: "Bill Shutzer was a very senior guy at Lehman Brothers."
Mr. Shutzer pointed to newspaper articles in July 1984 announcing his promotion to the position of deputy chairman of Shearson Lehman.
Lehman officials, after double-checking, agree that Mr. Shutzer was indeed once named a deputy chairman, and apologize for questioning his claim.
They also note he held the position for less than nine months.
Mr. Shutzer said he kept the deputy chairman title in his biography and that Lehman officials had no objection.
Furthermore, it's a common Wall Street practice to let executives keep their titles even when someone else is given the position.
As for the management committee claim, Mr. Shutzer concedes he was on Lehman's "manager's" committee, which is not quite the same as the committee of about 18 senior Lehman officials who run the firm.
That's called the operating committee.
Lehman says there is also no manager's committee.
Why all the fuss?
Lehman might be a little touchy these days because Mr. Shutzer was one of a handful of high-profile (or at least relatively high-profile) departures in recent weeks.
"They've lost a lot of people," says Mr. Shutzer -- and may lose more.
He'll need to do some hiring for Furman Selz, he says.
