Amid the wreckage of Linda Rae's, his San Fernando Valley knickknack shop, Dennis Black says Monday's earthquake delivered a sharp exclamation point to an increasingly grim reality: Operating a small business in a region already wracked by riots and recession is a shaky proposition.
Mr. Black says the downhill slide of his business has been under way for years and involves many forces other than geology.
Changing demographics, lingering recession, the 1992 riots and rising crime have all taken their toll on his finances as well as his outlook.
He still vividly recalls the bullet fired from a passing car that grazed his scalp four years ago as he stood outside his store.
"This business used to be fun," says Mr. Black of his shop in Reseda, a few minutes drive from the quake's epicenter.
But "it isn't fun anymore," he adds, picking up a shattered glass pitcher -- one of hundreds of items thrown about by the quake.
Mr. Black has lots of company.
As residents here dig out from under the wreckage of the area's worst earthquake this century, many of the biggest economic victims will be small-business owners.
Thousands like Mr. Black find themselves uninsured and without the reserves to quickly recover.
For unlike larger companies, many small businesses operate in an environment in which making enough money to get to the end of each month is a significant accomplishment.
"Small business, by its nature, has less insulation.
It is a tenuous existence," says Craig Aronoff, director of the Family Enterprise Center at Kennesaw State College in Marietta, Ga.
Disasters such as the quake can be the ultimate test for an entrepreneur, he adds.
"It is a time when the skin is ripped away and you see the heart of a small business."
Since Monday, the heart of the Smith Bros.
Coffee cafe near South Central Los Angeles has been soggy, its future brittle.
The floor is covered with broken glass and china, spilled soda and sugar, and sodden biscotti; the cafe was flooded when a water pipe broke during the quake.
Owner Gregory D. Smith doesn't have insurance and isn't sure where he can turn for help.
"To replace my inventory will be difficult . . . if not impossible," he says.
If past disasters are any guide, many small businesses in this region won't survive the Quake of '94.
Of 170 Korean-American-owned stores damaged and closed after the 1992 Los Angeles riots, only six have been able to reopen, says the Korean-American Grocer's Association, a trade group.
Such direct assaults on small businesses have been magnified by extraneous factors, not the least of which have been a lingering recession that began in 1990, and a subsequent shakeout in the region's important defense sector, which has cost tens of thousands of jobs.
Mr. Smith's coffee concern is a textbook case of how little companies wither under these repeated blows.
Though he suffered no direct physical damage in the riots, many of the customers propelling his brisk mail-order business with Smith Bros.
Coffee were wiped out.
Some moved away and others never rebuilt.
"My whole distribution network was severed," Mr. Smith says.
Like hundreds of other small-business owners, Mr. Smith applied for a federal disaster loan through the Small Business Administration.
Although such loans help many small-business operators, more than a third of those who apply historically are turned down, usually because of inadequate finances.
Mr. Smith says he was rejected because he lacked a five-year business plan.
So he scrambled to survive, switching his efforts from wholesale to a potentially higher-margin cafe.
To raise the $4,000 he needed to open a new location, he hustled odd jobs in his sideline as an actor.
Shaken by the riots, Mr. Smith tried to buy some business insurance.
Wary of fly-by-night firms, he contacted only major insurers.
But his inner-city location worked against him.
When he called, large companies "wouldn't even entertain the thought" of selling him a policy, Mr. Smith says.
So he remained uninsured.
Scores of other small-business owners discovered after the riots that having an insurance policy isn't necessarily the same as being insured.
Many were scammed by crooked insurers who took their premiums but disappeared when disaster struck.
The operator of one such firm recently was sentenced to 17 years in federal prison for various insurance frauds.
Even some of the few Southern California small-business owners who bought earthquake insurance are wondering how much it will help them.
In addition to being costly, such policies generally have high deductibles.
Jane Kennedy, who does have earthquake insurance, says Monday's tremor did about $15,000 in damage to the contents of her beauty-products shop, called Palmetto, in Santa Monica.
It sent three glass window displays loaded with merchandise crashing to the ground, breaking scores of bottles and damaging new carpeting.
Ms. Kennedy bought her policy three years ago after a few minor quakes rattled her shop.
But her deductible is about $10,000.
Making up that loss herself "will set me back one or two years," Ms. Kennedy says.
With its three full-time employees and $4,200 in monthly rent, Palmetto already was struggling to cover costs in the weak local economy.
Despite going to a seven-day workweek early last year, the shop's weekly sales of about $10,000 are still 10% below 1991 levels.
For Mr. Black, the owner of Linda Rae's, earthquake insurance was simply a luxury he couldn't afford.
With six children, "you often have to choose between putting food on the table" or money into the business, he says.
The business has never been highly profitable.
Selling used knickknacks "isn't the kind of business where you drive a Mercedes," the one-time accountant says.
But for years, the 16-year-old shop did allow him and his family to motor along in a modest but acceptable style -- a decent, though rented, house, two cars and an occasional night out at a nearby Sizzler restaurant.
Back in 1978, Mr. Black recalls, Reseda was like much of the San Fernando Valley, still a largely white, working-class area.
His low-priced collectible items -- which he describes as ranging from "junk to some nice old stuff" -- found a ready market among the locals.
His business was helped by surrounding thrift shops and a local pizza parlor, which attracted customers and helped generate foot traffic in the area.
Mr. Black wistfully recalls the Saturdays just a few years back when his store would be jammed with customers from morning to well after dark.
But then the neighborhood started changing, for the worse from Mr. Black's perspective.
A flood of immigrants from Latin America, Asia and the Middle East flowed into Los Angeles in the 1980s.
Many settled in the San Fernando Valley, dramatically changing the demographics, and spending habits, of the area.
The pizza parlor near Linda Rae's is now an Iranian shish-kebab restaurant.
Several stores across the street now sport signs partly written in Vietnamese.
The 52-year-old Mr. Black, a life-long resident of the area, concedes that he isn't in tune with the tastes of his new neighbors and they don't seem interested in buying what he has to sell.
But far worse, he says, is the problem plaguing much of urban America: rising crime.
Besides the unexpected hair trim by gunshot, Mr. Black says shots have been fired through the front window of his store three times.
To protect his back entrance after repeated break-in attempts, Mr. Black put up a chain-link fence, then topped it with barbed wire and later replaced that with much sharper razor wire.
"I've put more money into keeping people out of the store than bringing them in," he says.
Fear of crime has led to a precipitous drop in foot traffic in the area.
And the store rarely stays open after dark anymore.
"Crime is so bad that I'm afraid to say hello to anyone.
I don't feel like I belong here anymore," Mr. Black says.
Business is down more than 50% from its peak several years ago, he estimates.
The Blacks have thought about leaving the Valley and moving to Arkansas where Mr. Black lived for a time.
But his wife, Linda, who is co-owner of the store as well as its namesake, works for the Los Angeles school district; that job provides the family with health insurance they otherwise couldn't afford.
Unless she finds a job with similar coverage elsewhere, "we're trapped" in Los Angeles, Mr. Black says.
So, like other small-business quake victims, Mr. Black is turning his attention to cleaning up and rebuilding.
More than 75% of his stock has been damaged or destroyed.
The physical cleanup, with shards of broken glass and tumbled shelves everywhere, will take days if not weeks.
Cracks in the building will also have to be inspected for signs of structural damage.
Psychological damage may be harder to repair.
"Right now I am numb," says Mr. Black, as he and his wife pick their way through the jumble on the store's floor.
Sometimes, thinking about the work and sweat that went into building the store's collection, he says, "I just want to cry."
Still, in the past few days as scores of aftershocks have rolled through the area, Mr. Black has managed to maintain a surprisingly good humor and a certain resoluteness about the future.
He says he will try to avoid applying for disaster loans -- as a matter of principle.
"I've never asked for anything," he says, and he doesn't see why a quake should change that.
He does have some nascent revenue-raising ideas, even though most are more tongue in cheek than real.
Pointing to boxes of smashed objets d'art that he and his wife have hauled outside, Mr. Black jokingly invites a visitor to browse.
"We're having a broken-glass sale," he announces.
