The future of legislation governing television violence is expected to take a new twist today, when the broadcast networks and the cable-TV industry tell Congress that they have agreed on a plan to monitor the levels of violence on their programs.
In exchange, Sen. Paul Simon, (D., Ill.), a leader in the campaign to reduce violence on television, is expected to announce that he will neither introduce nor support legislation against TV violence this year.
There are 10 different bills on the topic in the works.
Separately, the cable-television industry, with at least one notable exception, also will announce today that it has agreed to develop a rating system for its entertainment networks.
Cable-TV companies also have agreed to support development of a technology that will let viewers block out shows with a violent rating.
One such device, the so-called v-chip, has already been proposed by Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.), who will participate in the cable-TV industry's announcement.
Others participants include Decker Anstrom, president of the National Cable Television Association, and Winston Cox, chairman of Viacom Inc.'s Showtime Networks Inc., who has led the industry initiative.
The future of cable TV's violence ratings plan is very much in doubt, however, because the plan requires that the broadcast networks and independent stations join any such program before it can be implemented.
For the most part, the broadcast networks have adamantly opposed such a system, with some executives arguing that it is the first step on the road to censorship.
Broadcasters also are concerned that advertisers will flee from shows that are labeled violent, although the networks also contend that they have few shows that would even get such a rating.
"We really do need broadcasters to get behind a ratings system," said Mr. Cox.
"We can only be effective if everybody is on board."
He added, "If we don't do something towards a self-policing effort, we'll be legislated, and the consquence will be more severe.
From a practical point, you're better off doing it to yourself."
The cable-TV ratings plan is being proposed over the objections of USA Network, an advertiser-supported network owned by Paramount Communications Inc. and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s MCA Inc.
USA Network has cited similar concerns over censorship.
In addition, there is a question as to what kind of technology the cable-TV industry supports.
Some in the industry oppose Rep. Markey's proposed system, which would automatically block out shows rated violent; other proposals would allow viewers to select the shows they wish to block.
"We don't support legislation," Showtime's Mr. Cox said.
"But we certainly support viewer-discretion technology.
We want people to control what type of programming is coming into their house."
The monitoring system agreed to by CBS Inc., Capital Cities/ABC Inc., General Electric Co.'s NBC and News Corp.'s Fox would provide qualitative analysis of the networks' programming, which would be performed by an outside monitor and reported to the public annually.
It is expected to be up and running no later than the beginning of this year's fall season.
In recent weeks, television programmers have faced increased pressure to develop a voluntary plan addressing TV violence.
The Corporation for Public Broadcasting today will release results of a study in which 82% of the 1,000 people polled said they think TV programming is too violent, with the broadcast networks coming in for criticism from 70% of respondents, cable-TV networks from 57%, and public television from just 14%.
At last week's convention of the National Association of Television Program Executives in Miami, the new Federal Communications Commisssion chairman, Reed Hundt, exhorted broadcasters to voluntarily cut back on violent scenes, and coupled that appeal with the threat that the FCC would vigorously enforce any legislation that Congress decided to pass.
