For 22 years, Hussein Abad al Hafad left his home in the West Bank in the early hours of the morning to arrive on time to his job at a construction company in Israel.
He earned 2000 shekels ($667.80) a month and, like all workers in Israel, 12.7% of his gross was deducted for social benefits such as an old-age pension, unemployment insurance and general disability payments.
But since being fired two years ago, the 67-year-old father of seven children never received any social-security payments.
The reason is a gap in Israeli law that is being challenged in a lawsuit by a group of 200 Palestinian workers in a Jerusalem court.
The suit, initiated by Israeli workers' rights group Kav La'Oved, tackles one of the most sensitive issues in the economic negotiations between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization and illustrates the strange alliances formed in the wake of the September peace accord.
In the legal battle over the Palestinian workers' social benefits, the PLO and the Israeli government have found themselves on the same side.
Under a 1970 decision by the Israeli government, Palestinian and Israeli workers are required to pay the same percentage of their salaries for social-security benefits.
The idea was to protect both groups by equalizing the cost of their employment to Israeli employers, who by law also must kick in a share of the payments.
But Israel's social-security law states that only residents of Israel are entitled to receive the vast majority of those benefits.
Palestinian workers who live in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip but commute daily to jobs in Israel receive compensation only in cases of work accidents, employer bankruptcy, or childbirth in an Israeli-government hospital.
Over the past two decades, about $1 billion has been deducted from the salaries of 600,000 Palestinian workers in Israel; many other Palestinians worked illegally in Israel without being registered with the government labor bureau.
The suit claims that it is illegal to deduct social-security payments for benefits the workers don't receive.
The suit seeks a court declaration that the Palestinian workers are entitled to the same benefits as Israeli workers or the return of the payments the workers have made.
"We're not speaking about terrorists.
We're talking about people who have worked for years in Israel under the most difficult conditions and for the lowest salaries and who when they reach age 65 don't receive a pension and when they are fired don't have any source of income," says Hanna Zohar, coordinator at Kav La'Oved in Tel Aviv.
The lawyer for the government declined to comment.
But in documents submitted to the court, the government argues that the workers' money was transfered to the budget of the Israeli Civil Administration in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and over the years was used to develop social, health and welfare services for Palestinian residents there.
The government notes in its papers that Palestinian employees actually are better off than other foreign workers, who are charged higher incometax rates.
In addition, the government says the issue of the social-security rights of Palestinian workers who want to work in Israel in the future is under discussion with the PLO and the case could harm those negotiations.
The lawyer for the government declined to comment.
But in documents submitted to the court, the government argues that the workers' money was transfered to the budget of the Israeli Civil Administration in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and over the years was used to develop social, health and welfare services for Palestinian residents there.
The government notes in its papers that Palestinian employees actually are better off than other foreign workers, who are charged higher income-tax rates.
In addition, the government says the issue of the social-security rights of Palestinian workers who want to work in Israel in the future is under discussion with the PLO and the case could harm those negotiations.
In 1991, the Organization of Flower Growers in Israel asked the Israeli Supreme Court to bar the government from collecting social-security payments from Israeli employers for their Palestinian workers since by law, the workers aren't entitled to most of the benefits.
Instead, the court ordered that a special committee be set up to make recommendations.
A proposed law to formally establish that Palestinian workers' social-security deductions be transferred to the Civil Administration passed its first reading in the parliament.
But the legislative process halted since Israel and the PLO signed their September accord.
The PLO would like the payments to be transferred to the Palestinian self-governing authority that is to be established in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
A court ruling that the deductions for individual workers' social benefits cannot be used for collective purposes would deal a serious blow both to the Israeli government's contention that the money went for the needs of the general Palestinian population and the PLO's hopes to control the funds after the start of Palestinian self-rule.
"The problem of the Palestinian workers is a political question that must be solved between the leaders of Palestine and the leaders of the Israeli government," says Rassen Biari, chairman of the Gaza Strip's trade union.
"Kav La'Oved is not allowed to talk in the name of our Palestinian workers because it is not their representative."
Even if Kav La'Oved's arguments are legally correct, Mr. Biari says, "We the Palestinians have paid and are still paying a very high price in order that others will not make decisions for us.
We want to be free from interference in running our lives."
