I was disappointed to read the unfair assessment of Brazilian society in your Jan. 4 page-one article "Moral Issue: Why Does Brazil Face Such Woes?"
You deserve credit for attempting to analyze a difficult and complicated subject: the moral, ethical and attitudinal factors contributing to Brazil's social, economic and political problems.
Your analysis had thoughtful and informative elements.
Overall, however, it was erroneous and unbalanced.
You examined in detail Brazil's continuing difficulties with inflation, poverty, corruption, criminality, violence and death squads.
Though much of what you said was accurate, you left out an important aspect of recent developments: the extent to which Brazil has made progress in most of these problem areas during the past few years.
You described how some Brazilians profit from inflation.
They would prefer no inflation, but, since it exists, they should not be condemned for trying to protect themselves from its perverse effects.
You described how the poor suffer greatly from inflation, but you failed to mention the national mobilization against hunger, poverty and unemployment.
You cited anecdotes to support the claim that in Brazil there is widespread acceptance of corruption, criminality and violence.
This simply is not true.
An analysis of opinion polls and election results, either of which would be a better measure than anecdotes, would demonstrate clearly that the Brazilian people have absolutely no tolerance for corruption, criminality and violence.
Rather than being "complacent" participants in "a pact of mediocrity," as you would have us believe, most Brazilians in fact are extremely angry about moral, ethical and attitudinal weaknesses such as the examples you cited.
This widespread popular anger has been reflected in government actions: Brazil in the past three years has been far more aggressive than most other countries in dealing with the problem of corruption.
The impeachment of President Collor was rapid, fair, peaceful and constitutional.
On Dec. 15 our Congress voted to expel three congressmen for corruption and a congressional investigatory committee is expected to recommend additional punishments and lasting corrective measures later this month.
This year, Brazil again will hold national, state and municipal elections, giving the electorate -- estimated to be about 100 million voters -- another opportunity to show Brazilians' commitment to democracy and high standards.
