Maclean Hunter Ltd. said its board rejected as "inadequate" the 2.79 billion Canadian dollar (US$2.07 billion) offer by Rogers Communications Inc. to acquire all the shares of Maclean Hunter it doesn't already own.
The Toronto-based cable television, printing and publishing concern said it is reviewing a range of alternatives to Rogers's C$17 (US$13) a share bid, including a recapitalization of the company as a whole, the sale of its Canadian cable television assets and the formation of partnerships with third parties.
"Clearly, we could be looking at options which would lead to a fairly large distribution of cash to our shareholders," said Robert Furse, chief financial officer of Maclean Hunter.
"Our belief is that the bid represents inadequate value and that we could realize more for shareholders by pursuing these options."
Whether or not Rogers is successful in its bid, Maclean Hunter's U.S. cable assets will be up for sale.
On top of its C$17 a share cash bid, Rogers is offering Maclean Hunter shareholders one participation right, which will give them the bulk of any net proceeds from such a sale in excess of C$1.5 billion.
But Maclean Hunter now appears to be willing to sell more than these assets, which it had earlier identified as not core holdings.
Specifically, Mr. Furse said the company could auction off the Canadian cable holdings, the assets in which Rogers is most interested.
It could also spin those holdings off to shareholders, and may seek to sell part interests in its publishing ventures in exchange for cash that could be distributed to shareholders.
Also up for consideration are a largescale share buyback or a special dividend to shareholders, either subsequent to, or ahead of, a major asset sale, Mr. Furse said.
He declined to give further details, saying that the board's review is in its early stages.
Analysts are divided on whether or not Maclean Hunter could realize in excess of the C$17 a share offered by Rogers for its shareholders with these strategies.
"I put the maximum value of these assets at C$16.70 a share, without a takeover bid," said Carla Larson, an analyst at Bunting Warburg Inc. in Toronto.
That estimate, she says, ascribes top market values to Maclean Hunter's printing and publishing assets, as well as to its strategically important cable holdings.
Both Ms. Larson and Barry Gruman, an analyst with First Marathon Securities in Montreal, believe Maclean Hunter wants Rogers to raise its bid.
"For strategic reasons, the company could be worth more to Rogers" than the C$17 a share it has offered, or than any other bidder would be willing to pay, Mr. Gruman said.
Although Edward Rogers, president and chief executive of Rogers, was adamant that no one could persuade him to raise his bid, the offering circular makes passing reference to the possibility of such a price increase.
Ms. Larson says Rogers could afford to pay C$18 a share for Maclean Hunter.
Elsewhere But if Mr. Rogers sticks to his guns, Maclean Hunter is well-positioned to follow through with its plans.
With only C$260 million (US$192.2 million) of debt, net of cash, analysts say it could raise as much as C$750 million from Canadian banks or more from U.S. institutional lenders to finance a share buyback or special dividend.
The takeover battle has brought expressions of interest in a number of Maclean Hunter assets from a range of Canadian publishing and broadcasting concerns, Mr. Furse says.
The company could pursue those, he added.
A final defense would be Maclean Hunter's shareholder-rights plan, which provides for the issuance of a large amount of stock cheaply to shareholders in the event of a takeover battle such as the one that is emerging.
Mr. Furse says it is too early to say whether Maclean Hunter will make use of this "poison pill," but the company has refused to cancel the plan as Rogers has requested.
"There's an antidote to the poison pill, and that's a permitted bid," Mr. Furse said.
Rogers opted not to make what the plan describes as a permitted bid, since the offer would have had to remain open for 120 days to allow the board to study alternatives.
Rogers's offer expires March 15.
In Toronto Stock Exchange trading yesterday, shares of Maclean Hunter ended the day at C$17, unchanged.
Class B shares of Rogers, a Toronto-based telecommunications concern, closed at C$21.75, up 13.5 Canadian cents.
