Now you too can own a piece of Whitewater, just as the Clintons once did.
One cubic foot of dirt from the infamous Whitewater development can be yours for just $20 -- although you have to fetch it yourself.
The marketing scheme is the brainchild of James McDougal, the former partner of President and Hillary Rodham Clinton in Whitewater Development Corp., and Chris Wade, who was the real-estate agent for the ill-fated plan to sell vacation homes in the Ozarks.
"We're gonna take the last lot, cut it into a zillion little pieces and let everybody own a little bit of Whitewater," says Mr. Wade.
Each new Whitewater investor will receive a parchment-like certificate signed by Mr. McDougal, his former wife, Susan McDougal, and Mr. Wade.
A recording on Mr. Wade's 800 phone number tells callers, "Thank you for calling the dirt on Whitewater."
It adds that, "Yes, this is the same Whitewater that the president and his wife, Hillary, were involved in."
Contributions aren't tax deductible.
But anyone who wants to experience part of the Whitewater nightmare can travel to the Ozarks and "dig you up a cubic foot of dirt and take it with you," says Mr. Wade.
Mr. McDougal couldn't be reached for comment.
The idea is to raise money for Mr. McDougal's legal expenses in the investigation by special counsel Robert Fiske.
"It may make some money, it may not," Mr. Wade says.
"It will be fun to do anyway."
He says the plan "started out as kind of a joke."
It's no joke to Little Rock attorney Sam Heuer.
He represents Mr. McDougal, who has been broke since his Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan was taken over by federal regulators in 1989.
Mr. Heuer, who typically charges $175 an hour for criminal work, says he hasn't been paid in some time although he has been spending about four hours a day on Whitewater legal work since December.
If dirt buyers "want to give us a couple of hundred thousand bucks, I think that would be OK, too," he says.
The Clintons, of course, have no say in any of this.
They sold their 50% stake in Whitewater in 1992.
But lest they worry about still more political repercussions from the dirt deal, Mr. Wade offers reassurance.
This, he promises, will be "nothing that will embarrass anybody."
