Aetna Life & Casualty Co. took further steps to streamline its sprawling insurance business, but analysts say the cutbacks might not be enough to solve the company's long-term problems.
Aetna announced Friday that it will take a $1.28 billion fourth-quarter charge to restructure, including abandoning a big part of its pension business and eliminating 4,000 jobs, or nearly 10% of its work force.
Among the pension products being shed are guaranteed investment contracts, or GICs, one of the hottest insurance products of the 1980s.
The job cuts had been expected, but the size of the resulting charge surprised Wall Street.
Still, analysts said the company might need to take further actions to end a decade of sluggish profits and lackluster stock price.
These could include focusing more on profitable businesses, such as health and life insurance, while continuing to shed unprofitable lines.
"This makes the short-term earnings look better, but it doesn't make it a better company going forward," said Alan Zimmerman, a stock analyst with Prudential Securities, New York.
Investors apparently recognized the short-term possibilities of the latest restructuring.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading Friday, Aetna rose $1.75, to $59.875.
With the charges, Aetna expects to report a loss for the fourth quarter and for the year.
Once one of the country's most profitable insurers, Aetna has been hurt in recent years by growing competition from more specialized and efficient rivals.
Like other big insurers, Aetna has tried to be all things to all customers.
At the same time, the company has incurred big losses on real-estate investments and environmental claims while being saddled with high overhead.
Even with the latest cutbacks, Aetna remains a huge insurance supermarket, offering everything from health insurance to commercial liability coverage to workers compensation policies.
Insurance experts say Aetna appears resolved to slim down, but it's unclear how far.
"Aetna is on the right track," said analyst Alice Cornish of Northington Partners, Hartford.
Aetna isn't alone.
Other so-called multiline insurers such as Cigna Corp., ITT Corp.'s Hartford insurance unit and Travelers Inc.'s Travelers insurance unit, have had problems focusing their operations.
Most of Aetna's charge stems from the company's decision to stop selling guaranteed investment contracts and single-premium annuities.
The two pension products have been a powerful drag on Aetna's profits in recent years.
With GICs, insurance companies guarantee a specific rate of return over the life of the contract.
During the 1980s, profit-sharing plans and corporate pension plans eagerly snapped up GICs to take advantage of the generous terms.
In Aetna's case, the GICs largely were backed by real-estate investments.
When property prices nose-dived in the late 1980s and early 1990s, those real-estate assets began earning less than what Aetna needed to pay GIC investors.
Rather than continuing to suffer losses each quarter, Aetna will take an $825 million charge to recognize future losses all at once.
Some insurers have pulled out of GICs, including Equitable Cos. and Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York.
Others continue to offer the contracts, although at less attractive terms than in the past.
Aetna says the 4,000 job cuts will save $300 million a year in pretax expenses by 1995.
It spent about $3.4 billion on operating expenses last year.
The company will take a $200 million charge for severance payments and related expenses.
Aetna employs about 42,300, about one-third of them in Connecticut.
The company said 2,000 job cuts will come in property and casualty, 1,000 in health and 1,000 in other businesses.
The jobs will be eliminated over the course of the year.
Analysts say Aetna now must focus on improving results in its property and casualty insurance businesses, which have suffered from intense price competition and the high costs of pollution claims.
Moody's Investors Service confirmed Aetna's senior debt rating at single-A-1 on Friday but said the outlook for the company's property and casualty insurance unit's ratings is negative "in light of their modest earnings in certain business units and their need to further reduce costs in a highly competitive environment."
Aetna Chairman Ronald Compton said the company's remaining businesses are well positioned but need fine tuning.
"As we look ahead, we will continue to re-engineer and reposition our businesses so that we can take full advantage of the profit opportunities in our chosen markets," he said.
"We need to move business functions closer to the customer, and we need to continue to find ways to improve revenue growth and service to our customers while driving down costs."
The job reductions represent the third wave of cuts in recent years, and are another blow to the city of Hartford.
In October 1990, Aetna laid off 3,000 workers when, in a bid to become more competitive, it split the company into 15 business units that report profits separately.
In June 1992 -- four months after Mr. Compton took the reins -- the company announced another 4,800 job cuts.
The cuts have improved results, but Aetna's profits are only about half as strong as more successful competitors, such as American International Group Inc.
"Every year Aetna does something and earnings look better, and then the next year they do something else" that involves a costly charge, said Michael Blumstein of Morgan Stanley, New York.
Aetna also changed the way it accounts for workers compensation reserves, recognizing that injured workers collect benefits longer than in the past.
The $574 million addition to workers compensation reserves will result in a $259 million charge.
If it hadn't taken the charges, Aetna would have reported about $600 million in operating profit for 1993, compared with $192 million in the prior year.
Aetna will report earnings on Feb. 9.
