An investment fund run by Leon Black is attempting to become a bigger player in the restructuring of Olympia & York's U.S. operations.
Mr. Black's fund, Apollo Real Estate Investments, has offered to buy about $140 million of debt secured by some of Olympia & York Cos.
(U.S.A.)'s best properties, including New York's World Financial Center.
The move follows the fund's purchase in November of mortgage bonds secured by three other buildings in New York for about $160 million.
It's unclear whether Mr. Black is attempting to position himself to gain control of O&Y (U.S.A.) or is merely trying to profit from the restructuring of the company's $5 billion of debt.
In any case, observers say the new debt holding would allow Mr. Black to become a thorn in the side of more-senior creditors as the company continues efforts to restructure without a bankruptcy-law filing.
Mr. Black formed the Apollo fund last year to invest in distressed real estate.
Unlike the November investment in O&Y (U.S.A.), the proposed new debt holding wouldn't give Mr. Black any direct claim on property.
But it eventually could allow him to convert the debt into an equity stake in the entire company.
"If anyone would look to buy this position, they would be doing so with the intent of influencing the overall restructuring," said an individual with knowledge of O&Y (U.S.A.)'s debt.
"It's a way to try to play Olympia & York U.S., as opposed to playing a building."
An Apollo spokesman said Mr. Black and his chief real-estate executive were out of the country and the firm wouldn't comment.
Debt restructurings often attract "vulture" investors such as Mr. Black.
The former head of mergers and acquisitions at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Mr. Black is known for buying debt of troubled companies and parlaying these holdings into dominant equity positions.
Apollo hasn't yet made a formal bid for the debt, which is currently owned by a bank group led by J.P. Morgan & Co., an individual familiar with the negotiations said.
In the meantime, the bank is expected to seek additional offers.
Other parties understood to have expressed an interest in buying the debt include Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka Shing and an unidentified U.S. pension fund.
The debt "is in play.
It's very strategic.
It's essentially collateralized by all of O&Y's prime real estate," the individual said.
A J.P. Morgan spokesman declined to comment on whether the group was talking to Apollo, but said it was "continuing to explore all options for recovering the value of its asset, including the sale of its loan, and of course, further negotiations with O&Y."
O&Y (U.S.A.) is a subsidiary of Toronto-based Olympia & York Developments Ltd., which during the 1980s became one of the world's biggest property developers but collapsed in 1992 when global real-estate values plunged.
The parent reorganized under Canadian bankruptcy law last year and is now effectively controlled by its creditors, mostly Canadian banks.
The U.S. unit, which wasn't part of the Canadian bankruptcy filing, is currently meeting interest payments on its debt.
But the U.S. company is attempting to renegotiate the terms of its obligations as part of its overall restructuring effort.
Creditors and the company say progress is being made in the restructuring talks.
In the meantime, the company has sold some of its smaller properties, including recent sales in Portland, Ore., and Boston, to offset a small operating cash deficit expected in 1994.
The J.P. Morgan-led group lent the money to O&Y (U.S.A.) in 1991.
It is secured by the company's ownership interests in Towers A and B of the World Financial Center, in other Manhattan office properties at 59 Maiden Lane and 245 Park Ave., and in a Los Angeles building.
As one of the last major loans extended to the company, it was considered a vote of confidence in Paul Reichmann, the company's former controlling shareholder, in the face of slumping real-estate markets.
If Mr. Black wanted to acquire any of the real estate that backs the debt, he would first have to buy out the lenders that have first liens on the properties.
O&Y built the World Financial Center, which is adjacent to the World Trade Center in downtown Manhattan, in the early 1980s and the complex is considered one of O&Y's more lucrative properties.
The buildings along the Hudson River house companies such as American Express, Merrill Lynch & Co. and Dow Jones & Co., publisher of this newspaper.
"The World Financial Center properties and 245 Park Ave. clearly have some value over and above the other mortgage debt," said an individual with knowledge of O&Y (U.S.A.)'s debt.
Still, some see acquiring the debt as risky because of its junior ranking.
"That kind of debt is very subject to complete elimination in a Chapter 11" bankruptcy-law filing, said Edwin Nordholm, an executive with Battery Park Holdings Inc., which owns a minority interest in the World Financial Center.
Battery Park Holdings is 50%-owned by Toronto's Bronfman family.
The J.P. Morgan-led group, which also includes Bank of Montreal and several European banks, has taken a hard line with O&Y (U.S.A.) for some time.
The group in 1992 seized an interest-rate-swap agreement that also served as collateral to the loan.
The exact amount of the loan currently outstanding is in dispute because of the difficulty of assigning a cash value to the swap agreement.
