Wisconsin's highest court upheld a ruling that so-called rent-to-own transactions are subject to tough consumer laws governing credit sales, in a setback to companies that rent goods to customers with the option to buy.
The order involving Thorn EMI PLC's Rent-A-Center Inc., the nation's largest rent-to-own chain, will make the industry subject in Wisconsin to a number of disclosures it has long resisted.
To comply with the Wisconsin Consumer Act, rent-to-own companies will have to reveal the straight cash price for their goods, the effective annual interest rates on rentals and the total cost of merchandise to consumers over the terms of their agreements.
Under a typical rent-to-own transaction, renters who make weekly or monthly payments, usually for a year and a half, become owners.
Customers who make every installment may end up paying several times the item's retail value, at effective annual interest rates that can top 200%.
The transactions have come under attack by some consumer activists, who claim they exploit the poor.
Rent-A-Center was the subject of a page one article in this newspaper last year.
Rent-A-Center has long argued that its transactions aren't credit sales because most customers don't ultimately buy the product and can cancel at any time.
Thus, the Wichita, Kan.-based chain says it doesn't charge interest at all.
In addition, it says that its prices reflect a variety of valuable benefits, including service and delivery.
The Wisconsin case was brought by Flora Hall of Milwaukee, who became a Rent-A-Center customer in April 1991.
Under her contract, Ms. Hall agreed to pay $77.96 a month to rent a new washer and dryer that she said was worth $600 at retail.
Under the arrangement, after 19 months of payments, she could own the appliances by making a final "balloon payment" of about $162.
This would bring the total cost of the transaction, excluding sales taxes and certain fees, to around $1,600.
After handing over $1,069 in rent during the course of the year, Ms. Hall stopped making payments, claiming she had already paid more than she believed the appliances were worth.
After Rent-A-Center sued to recover its merchandise, a small-claims-court commissioner referred the matter to Milwaukee Country Circuit Court, which ruled against Rent-A-Center on the grounds that the transaction violated the Wisconsin Consumer Act.
In late December, a state appeals court affirmed that decision.
Industry foes applauded the state Supreme Court's decision, by a 3-0 vote, not to consider the matter further.
Though Wisconsin doesn't set limits on the interest permissible on credit sales, roughly 30 states do.
Therefore, if Wisconsin's view is adopted elsewhere, rent-to-own companies may have to reduce their prices to comply with state interest regulations.
In some states, though, the rent-to-own transaction can't be construed as a credit sale under state laws that the industry helped draft.
"For the first time rent-to-own firms will now have to honestly disclose just how much it really costs for the consumers, who do business with them," said Patricia Cavey, a lawyer for the Legal Aid Society of Milwaukee, which represented Ms. Hall in the appeals court.
"The question is whether this huge industry can be honest and still survive."
Said David Ramp, a lawyer with the Legal Aid Society of Minneapolis and one of the industry's chief opponents: "This is the biggest victory that consumer advocates involved in rent-to-own have had in court to date."
In a prepared statement, Rent-A-Center said it was "surprised and disappointed" that the state Supreme Court woudn't review the case.
"We disagree with this decision, but we also recognize that this case has now been decided," the company said.
Rent-A-Center added, however, that the lower appeals court judges "did not agree among themselves" about why rent-to-own agreements are credit sales and "did not establish clear rules to govern future cases."
The Wisconsin Supreme Court order, made public on Wednesday, has implications for other cases pending against the industry.
Most notably, the closely watched Starks vs. Rent-A-Center lawsuit, which is now on appeal in the federal appeals court in St. Louis, involves the same issues as the Hall action.
A year ago, Rent-A-Center won the first round of Starks in federal district court in St. Paul, Minn.
In addition, a case against rival Colortyme Inc., filed last April by the Wisconsin Attorney General's office, is pending in state court in Milwaukee.
Its allegations include that Colortyme failed to disclose credit and finance terms.
Rent-A-Center, which operates in 49 states, controls about 25% of the $2.8 billion rent-to-own market.
As of 1991, the 1200-outlet chain had 18 stores in Wisconsin.
A client is challenging a $2,750,000 legal fee charged by Harvard Law School Professor Laurence H. Tribe in a corporate dispute in New Jersey.
The client, Ralph Venuto, is arguing that the fee Mr. Tribe and his associates charged for filing post-trial and appellate motions and for arguing an appeal were "unconscionable based on the amount of money involved and the result obtained."
This week, Mr. Venuto, owner of Lightning Lube Inc., Blackwood, N.J., filed a request for fee arbitration.
In addition, an attorney who had worked for Mr. Venuto in the same case has sued Mr. Tribe and Harvard Law School in federal court in Camden, N.J., alleging that Mr. Tribe didn't do much work on the case, yet still asked for a hefty fee.
The former lawyer, Steven Kramer, also says Mr. Tribe slandered him, falsely telling Mr. Venuto that Mr. Kramer was getting disbarred.
Mr. Kramer acknowledges he has an economic interest in persuading Mr. Tribe to cut his fee; Mr. Kramer gets 20% of the amount Mr. Venuto saves on Mr. Tribe's fee under a separate fee-settlement pact reached after Mr. Venuto challenged Mr. Kramer's trial fees.
Mr. Tribe called Mr. Kramer's lawsuit against him "silly and frivolous."
He declined to comment on Mr. Venuto's arbitration request, except to say that the case was complicated and took a lot of time and that the fee agreement "was not atypical."
Mr. Tribe was retained in June 1992 to represent Mr. Venuto and Lightning Lube, an operator of quick lube outlets.
Lightning Lube had already won a jury verdict of $11.5 million in actual damages and $50 million in punitive damages in a dispute with Witco Corp., but the federal judge presiding over the trial had thrown out the punitive-damage award.
Last year, the Third U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia upheld the lower-court decision, rejecting Prof. Tribe's arguments that punitive damages should be reinstated.
Prof. Tribe is a constitutional law specialist who has been mentioned as a possible Supreme Court nominee.
He has an active and lucrative law practice in addition to his teaching and academic-writing work.
Laurie P. Cohen contributed to this article.
