Early this week the market acted as if the Fed had slain inflation with its Friday quarter-point increase in the interest rate.
But before we pronounce inflation dead after a single stroke of the Fed sword, three cautionary notes are in order.
The first is that we must remember that the same bond market and the same forecasters who are now pooh-poohing inflation were telling a different tale early last year.
In general, neither the bond market nor the economists forecast accurately.
Long-term interest rates did not anticipate the inflation of the 1970s or the disinflation of the 1980s.
Interest rates remained below the inflation rate during much of the 1970s, and at 11% or 12% in 1984 or 1985 after inflation had fallen to about 4%.
It is not that the forecasters are incompetent.
It is that the factors driving price changes over short spans have a large random component.
Indeed, the recent volatility of long-term interest rates shows that bondholders, properly, have little confidence in forecasts of continued low inflation.
Second, inflation is not like an acute appendix that we remove once-and-for-all with an interest-rate shift.
Inflation slowed several times in the past 30 years.
In 1986 consumer prices rose only 1.1%, but by 1988 prices were rising at 4.5%.
In 1976 inflation fell to 4.9%, but it was back in double digits by 1979.
President Nixon's price controls held reported inflation below 3.5% in 197172.
Two years later, inflation was above 12%.
In each of these periods, and others, Federal Reserve policy was too expansive.
Last week's Fed action was a small, belated step in the right direction.
But it was not enough.
There is a third indicator that inflation still threatens.
It is the fact that growth of the monetary base -- bank reserves and currency supplied by the Federal Reserve -- has remained at a high 9%-10% for the past two years.
Such rates, in economists' language, represent "rapid money growth" or the seeds of classic inflation.
Some argue this growth doesn't matter because much of the money is absorbed in the former Soviet Union, Africa and parts of Latin America, where dollars circulate widely.
But it is not just currency growth that is worrisome.
Bank reserves have been rising rapidly and money -- currency and demand deposits -- shows similar rates of increase for the past two years.
Put in simple language, these rates mean that Americans have money to spend and may spend it soon, building inflation.
Each of these measures tells us that the necessary condition for rising inflation is in place.
Already, some commodity prices are whispering that higher inflation is ahead.
In the past year, oil prices were down almost 25%.
But Dow Jones futures prices rose 15%, and the spot index of current commodity prices started to rise.
A useful rule of thumb is that it takes two to three years of classic "rapid money growth" before inflation starts to rise.
As in many forecasts of short-term changes, the direction of change is more certain than its timing.
There are, however, only two outcomes possible for the U.S. economy if money continues to grow at or near the 10% rate of recent years.
Either people will willingly make relatively large additions to their cash balances, or they will spend the money on goods and services.
It's the latter possibility -- faster spending growth -- that makes bondholders nervous about inflation.
Through most of last year, spending grew slowly.
The public absorbed excess money growth by increasing its cash balances.
Some investors bought stocks, bonds and mutual funds, pushing bond prices down and stock prices up.
The sellers of these stocks and bonds did not rush to spend the money they received in exchange, so average cash balances increased.
If the public repeats that behavior this year, the rise in inflation will again be delayed.
If they spend more rapidly, inflation will rise.
Federal Reserve policy is inconsistent with this situation and the current inflation rate.
A 0.25% increase in the federal-funds rate does not remove the inconsistency.
In an economy like ours, where output grows at an average rate of 2% to 3%, inflation cannot remain at 3% if money grows at 10%.
To gauge how much inflation we should expect, we can compare growth of the nominal monetary base, which the Federal Reserve produces, with growth of the public's willingness to hold base money, shown by growth of real (or "deflated") base money.
The chart shows these data (see accompanying illustration: WSJ Feb. 9, 1994).
Entirely as a matter of arithmetic, the difference between the two lines would be the actual rate of inflation if both nominal and real base were measured for the same (one- or three-year) period.
The difference between the two lines is the steady or "equilibrium" rate of inflation.
When the Fed reaches its goal of inflation at 0%-2%, the distance between the two lines is no more than two percentage points.
Near the end of 1993, the difference between the two lines -- the equilibrium rate of inflation -- was 4.5 percentage points.
It has remained between 4.5 and 5.5 percentage points since early 1992.
This is also the inflation rate that the public anticipated over the next 10 years in surveys taken by the University of Michigan early last year.
Although the actual rate of inflation has remained below the equilibrium rate, the equilibrium rate has not been reduced.
The public's willingness to add to its cash balances -- shown by the growth of real base money -- has held inflation down.
Of course, divergent movements of the actual and equilibrium rates are not unusual.
Generally, the actual rate moves toward the equilibrium rate in two or three years.
The chart shows that from mid-1986 to the end of 1987, the equilibrium inflation rate was 4% to 5%; the actual rate reached this range in 1989-90.
Despite the oil price increase at the start of the Gulf War, inflation fell in 1991.
The reason is that the equilibrium rate of inflation had been brought down to less than 3% by tighter monetary policy -- slower base growth in 1989-90.
Last year, the Fed raised its forecasts of inflation, but took no action to reduce inflation.
It failed to tighten money.
This suggests that the members do not take their promises seriously.
The Fed may lower its projections this year, but it is actions -- not promises -- that matter.
The actions have been so slow in coming as to be imprudent.
The current Fed is still behind the curve.
One reason is that it places great weight on such lagging cyclical indicators as monthly changes in unemployment and inflation.
Effective monetary policy does not require such careful control of timing.
The low-cost way to maintain growth with low inflation is to lower money growth before inflation starts to rise.
Before Friday's belated move, a prudent policy would have slowed growth of the monetary base (or bank reserves) to an annual rate of 7% to 8% no later than last year.
It may be too late to lock in all of the recent reductions in the inflation rate, but it will certainly be too late if the Fed continues its hesitant policy.
Several foreign central banks -- England, Germany, New Zealand -- have now adopted long-term price stability as their primary or only goal.
They set targets to reduce inflation gradually over two or three years.
At last week's meeting, the Fed set the projections for inflation and growth that it will announce at congressional hearings later this month.
If it takes its announced goal of ending inflation seriously, it should tell us how and when it proposes to get there.
Mr. Meltzer is a professor of political economy at Carnegie Mellon University.
