The Securities and Exchange Commission, spurred by concerns about possible self-dealing by mutual-fund managers, is asking 30 fund groups for detailed information on personal trading by their portfolio managers.
The SEC's sweeping request for trading data has been sent to fund groups "over the course of the last few days," said Barry Barbash, director of the investment-management division of the SEC, which oversees mutual funds.
The inquiry will try to determine whether existing SEC rules, which require fund groups to police personal trading by managers, are adequate.
"If we found some widespread issues" of possible abuse, "we would consider rule making or, if need be, legislation" to deal with such problems, Mr. Barbash said.
While he called the latest action "a kicking of the tires of our procedures as they exist now," he didn't rule out an eventual ban on personal trading by fund managers.
However, he stressed that such a judgment would be "premature" now.
Mutual-fund managers are allowed to trade for their own account, but they must report those trades to their employers.
Moreover, they must not use inside information in trading, or profit at the expense of their funds' shareholders.
These practices, and their potential abuse by mutual-fund insiders, came under public scrutiny last month, after the Invesco Funds Group fired John Kaweske, a star portfolio manager, for allegedly failing to report some 10 to 20 personal trades.
To start with, the SEC's examination will try to determine whether mutual-fund groups are adequately enforcing the codes of ethics that they currently are mandated to have.
For instance, the inquiry asks what violations in the funds' codes of ethics occurred in 1993, and what the fund groups did in response.
But the inquiry also might go further, by checking for possible violations of insider-trading laws by mutual-fund managers.
The letter to fund groups was signed not only by Mr. Barbash, but also by William R. McLucas, director of the SEC's enforcement division.
The SEC wouldn't reveal which fund groups are receiving the letter.
Mr. Barbash said the 30 fund groups contacted weren't necessarily the largest.
Nor is the examination aimed at fund groups whose managers are suspected of wrongdoing, he added.
The inquiry is being sent to many different types of fund groups, including new, small groups as well as established ones, groups whose funds are sold directly to investors, and groups whose funds are sold through salespeople.
The inquiry is directed at fund groups that haven't recently had general inspections by the SEC, Mr. Barbash said.
The SEC usually scrutinizes personal trading by fund employees in its periodic examination of fund groups.
But for several years, those examinations focused more on money-market funds, which are less apt to be involved in insider-trading violations.
"I believe you will hear cries of anguish from the fund industry that we're being very intrusive, that we're responding to no great showing of a problem," Mr. Barbash said.
"Given the fiduciary nature of the fund managers' job, we thought it was appropriate to go out and get a pretty good picture of what's going on."
Meanwhile, Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance, in a statement expressed concern that mutual funds advised by banks are "exempt from . . . crucial provisions in the securities laws designed to limit conflicts of interest."
Mr. Markey helped spark the SEC inquiry in a Jan. 11 letter he addressed to SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt Jr., asking him to review personal-trading practices of mutual-fund managers and regulations governing them.
Mr. Levitt's reply to Mr. Markey included a copy of the request for personal-trading information sent to the 30 fund groups.
A senior aide to Mr. Markey said it appeared that some people at the SEC "have serious discomfort with the existing approaches and policies to the conflict-ofinterest question."
Moreover, the aide believes the commission has "a genuine intent to examine the issue thoroughly and to strengthen the existing rules substantially, if needed."
Roy Adams, a lawyer at Heller, Ehrman, White & McAuliffe in San Francisco, said, "this whole area has received so much attention, I think the SEC would be remiss if it didn't follow up on all the press reports."
The examination indicates the agency is "getting ready for the inevitable congressional inquiry," he added.
The Investment Company Institute, the national mutual-fund trade association, also is examining the code-of-conduct policies of mutual-fund companies and the trading practices of fund managers.
The ICI said it is "pleased that the SEC is seeking further information regarding personal-trading practices of mutual-fund personnel."
