YELTSIN ASSURED Clinton he'll press ahead with reforms despite opposition.
The Russian president emphasized that "there is no turning back from fighting inflation and continuing to privatize," Treasury Secretary Bentsen said after a Moscow meeting.
In fact, the Yeltsin government wants to accelerate some of its market reforms, Bentsen said.
Clinton and Yeltsin also agreed that the U.S. and Russia will stop aiming their nuclear weapons at each other, with the missiles retargeted toward oceans.
Yeltsin predicted the three-day summit would produce "profound" results.
As Ukraine's Kravchuk prepared to fly to Moscow to sign an accord today for dismantling the Ukrainian nuclear arsenal, criticism of the plan was mounting in that nation's parliament.
Reno and her aides began contacting prospective candidates to investigate Clinton's investment in a failed Arkansas realestate company.
The U.S. attorney general, asked by the president Wednesday to name a special counsel, offered no clues as to when she might announce her choice.
Sarajevo's main hospital took a direct hit in the latest round of shelling in Bosnia's capital, and one person died.
Meanwhile, Bosnian officials threatened to urge consumers in "friendly countries" to boycott goods from NATO states that obstruct Bosnia's defense, "whether in the context of air strikes or the arms embargo."
Italy's premier resigned, opening the way for general elections that are expected to oust the scandal-scarred parties that have dominated the country for five decades.
Ciampi, 73, was appointed in April to oversee reform.
Two men were arrested and charged with conspiracy in last week's attack on figure skater Nancy Kerrigan.
The bodyguard for a rival skater, Tonya Harding, and another man were arrested in connection with the crowbar attack in Detroit.
A judge in Los Angeles declared a mistrial in the murder case against Erik Menendez, one of two brothers who admitted killing their parents, after jurors couldn't reach a verdict.
A separate jury was deliberating charges against the other brother, Lyle.
Both claim the slayings were in self-defense after years of abuse.
Mental illness is concentrated among 14% of the U.S. population, who have three or more experiences with alcoholism, depression or other psychiatric disorders in their life, a survey found.
Nearly half of all Americans have a psychiatric disorder at least once, but that includes mild depression and anxiety.
TB researchers said they have discovered the gene mutation that enables the tuberculosis bacteria to develop resistance to a widely used anti-TB drug.
The finding is expected to help in the search for drugs to treat drug-resistant tuberculosis, which represents one-quarter of TB cases in some cities.
Mexico's official peace envoy accepted an Indian guerrilla movement as a political and military force, taking a second step toward meeting rebel demands for talks.
He also said he had received messages that appear to signal the beginning of a negotiating process, but it wasn't clear if he had heard directly from rebel leaders.
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope has been repaired and said the orbiting observatory can now take the sharpest photos in history of distant stars.
The $1.6 billion telescope was launched in 1990 with a flawed mirror.
A shuttle crew installed corrective optics and a new camera.
Aspin ordered the Army and Marine Corps to open combat support units to women troops while continuing to bar them from front-line infantry service.
The outgoing defense secretary said the current "risk rule" keeping women out of dangerous jobs would be lifted Oct. 1 and that the term "direct combat" would be redefined.
Israeli officials said they hope that Clinton will obtain a pledge from Syria's Assad at a Geneva summit Sunday to set up embassies and open the Israeli-Syrian borders to tourism and trade.
Israel has been waiting for Syria to define its peace terms before Israel says how much of the Golan Heights it is willing to return.
