The prospects for Euro Disney SCA, Walt Disney Co.'s beleaguered theme park outside the French capital, are starting to look a lot brighter, just as its financial problems have hit a low point.
Disney officials and the French-led creditor banks are due later this month to start discussing a crucial financial restructuring of the resort, which has debts of about 24 billion French francs ($4 billion) and equity of less than 400 million francs.
Without substantial financial relief, which analysts say will have to total at least 10 billion francs in debt write-offs and fresh funding, Euro Disney may have to close.
But in a paradox that gives hope for its future, the park seems to be solving its problems on the ground.
Analysts and tour operators in Europe are applauding a revamped marketing strategy recently put in place by Euro Disney's new management.
And attendance, which has lived up to expectations since its April 1992 opening, is seen strengthening further.
"The park is making money.
It's the underlying financial structure that is untenable," says Rebecca Winnington-Ingram, an analyst at Morgan Stanley International in London.
With its new marketing strategy, Euro Disney has sought to counter criticism from tour operators by focusing more clearly on short-term visitors staying for between one and three days, and by cutting prices sharply.
Moreover, the outlook for 1994 is brighter as Europe pulls its way out of recession.
Tour operators expect two big events in the coming months will help to boost attendance at the park: the opening of the Channel Tunnel between England and France and the completion of a new high-speed train line that will cross France and stop at a specially constructed station by the resort.
"It now does, we feel, represent good value for money," says Peter Shanks, commercial director of Thomas Cook, a large British tour operator.
Mr. Shanks says Euro Disney officials initially "didn't get the pricing structure right," and compounded their woes "by being very arrogant."
Thomas Cook sold about 15,000 Euro Disney holidays in 1993, but Mr. Shanks expects to sell 25,000 holidays to the resort this year and as many as 50,000 in 1995.
Indeed, the company says it enjoyed a hectic Christmas holiday season, with all its hotels completely filled on New Year's Eve, compared with an average occupancy at the resort's six hotels last year of just 55%.
One sign that Euro Disney could be in for a recovery is the emergence over the past few days of a secondary market for its debt.
Market participants say at least one large trade has been transacted, the sale of 130 million francs ($22 million) of Euro Disney debt at 60% of face value by Britain's Midland Bank PLC.
Other banks, both French and non-French, are also actively looking for potential buyers.
A Midland Bank spokesman declined to confirm what he described as "market rumor and speculation."
But people who specialize in trading the debt of distressed companies confirmed the transaction and the emergence of a market in Euro Disney over the past month.
Debt of the theme park itself is being offered at between 55 cents and 60 cents on the dollar, they say, while the separate debt of the troubled hotels at the park is being offered at between 25% and 40% of face value.
Jack Hersch, research director of M.J. Whitman, a New York trader of distressed companies, wouldn't deny that Euro Disney debt has traded, or that his company was involved.
Gary Klesch, chairman of Klesch & Co., a London-based company also active in secondary-debt markets, said the main buying interest is being shown by U.S. "vulture" funds, which feed off troubled companies.
It is the prospect of a sound company emerging from the debt restructuring talks that apparently accounts for why the vulture funds are interested in acquiring Euro Disney debt.
They are speculating that the debt will eventually be worth substantially more than they are paying for it.
One source says the park's debt now on sale at 60% of its face value could be worth 80 cents to the dollar in the future.
There is still a long way to go before Euro Disney emerges with a more tenable financial structure, however.
Creditor banks, led by Banque Nationale de Paris and Banque Indosuez, commissioned a report from accountants KPMG late last year on both Euro Disney's financial situation and its operating prospects.
The report is expected to be finished within the next few days, and it will be followed by the formal opening of talks between the banks and officials from Euro Disney and Walt Disney, which owns 49% of the European company.
Euro Disney in November reported a stunning 5.3 billion franc loss for its first fiscal year, ended Sept. 30, although that headline-grabbing figure included a one-time charge of 3.6 billion francs used to write off the park's start-up costs.
But in its financial report it acknowledges that it "will require significant funding" in 1994 to ward off "a liquidity problem."
Disney Chairman Michael D. Eisner, who has described Euro Disney as "our first real financial disappointment," is pressing for the restructuring to be in place by the end of March.
Because of the complex financing structure of the park, Disney's financial losses in the event of bankruptcy -- a worst case scenario that Mr. Eisner has raised but one that most analysts dismiss as rhetoric -- would be relatively light compared with the shortfall suffered by the banks and the French state, which guaranteed some loans.
The banks, sensing they are at a disadvantage in the coming talks, nonetheless say Disney itself would suffer a tremendous blow to its sterling reputation if the European resort failed.
"It's hard to see that they could allow it to go into bankruptcy," says one French banker familiar with the situation, who says all sides will have to make big sacrifices.
Ms. Winnington-Ingram of Morgan Stanley calculates that the park could break even in 1996-97, but only if five billion francs of debt is written off and there is an injection of fresh cash totaling another five billion francs.
Nonetheless, "I think it's very unlikely that Walt Disney would walk away from this," she says.
Some will inevitably lose heavily.
"One way or another, existing shareholders will be diluted very severely," contends Nigel Reed, an analyst at Paribas Capital Markets in London and a longstanding skeptic about the park.
He adds: "To stand any chance at all of a rights issue you must make the company look as though it will break even in 1995."
In a French stock market that was down overall yesterday, Euro Disney shares were in demand, gaining 2.5%, or 85 centimes, to 34.70 francs ($5.86).
