Compaq Computer Corp. has won what is believed to be the first jury verdict in a case attempting to link computer keyboards with crippling wrist injuries.
Attorneys said the decision, in a state court last week in Houston, could set the tone for thousands of similar product-liability cases pending throughout the country.
The claims, filed primarily by office workers and journalists, began flooding the courts two years ago and seek to tie repetitive use of personal computers and word processors to a host of debilitating hand disorders.
The most serious of those, carpal tunnel syndrome, develops when tissues in the wrist swell from overuse, pinching a nerve in the hand.
Donald McFall, the Houston attorney representing Compaq, said the jury's verdict, which found that Compaq didn't know that its computers could cause injury and therefore, wasn't obligated to warn users, came 55 minutes into its deliberation.
Mr. McFall said the decision exposes the shortcomings in a class of litigation that some experts have equated in scope to the asbestos claims of the 1980s.
"This is the disease du jour," Mr. McFall said.
"There is no scientific or medical evidence to show that a keyboard causes carpal tunnel syndrome."
The Houston case was filed in 1991 by Patsy Heard Woodcock, a legal secretary who blamed Compaq for wrist injuries that have left her unable to work.
Ms. Woodcock, who is now on disability and can't lift more than five pounds with her hands, sued the company for more than $800,000 in damages and lost wages and said the company should have known its products caused injuries and warned people who buy its machines.
Compaq, in response, argued that there was no way to tie Ms. Woodcock's woes to its products.
Mr. McFall said other medical issues, including stress and significant changes in weight, could have caused Ms. Woodcock's problems.
"This was the absolute hardest case to win, and we didn't," said Mark Collmer, Ms. Woodcock's attorney.
But Steven Phillips, a New York attorney pursuing about 2,000 keyboard cases in the Northeast, said it's not uncommon for early product-liability trials to fail.
"I am supremely confident that over time, these cases will succeed," he said.
Clearly, the cases already have proved nettlesome for a computer industry struggling through price wars and slipping profit margins.
At least three other cases against Compaq are pending in Houston, as are two cases filed against International Business Machines Corp. by airline reservations clerks.
Other companies targeted by similar suits include Apple Computer Inc., Zeos International Ltd., and Eastman Kodak Co.
Two years ago, the flood of repetitive-stress injury cases became so huge that a federal judge in Brooklyn, N.Y., ordered the cases consolidated in a single court.
Mr. Phillips, whose first keyboard case is expected to go to trial in June, said the Houston verdict, the first in the country, could help plaintiffs' lawyers fine-tune their strategy.
"I plan to study this closely," he said.
"With time, as the plaintiffs' counsel learns what's in the defendants' files, we'll undoubtedly be able to prevail."
Meantime, Mr. Collmer said his next case, filed by one of Ms. Woodcock's former co-workers, is scheduled for trial next month.
Parents can sue an adoption agency if a supposedly healthy child turns out to be genetically impaired or mentally ill, a New York state court ruled.
About eight other states have accepted the legal theory of "wrongful adoption," under which parents can win money damages and even a revocation of the adoption.
Most parents just want to be able to pay for the child's medical expenses -- nearly $2 million so far in the New York case, according to papers filed by the parents' attorney, Leonard R. Sperber of Mineola, N.Y.
In the case, Manhattan adoption agency Louise Wise Services allegedly failed to disclose that a boy's mother had a long history of mental illness and a frontal lobotomy before giving birth.
The boy, now in his late 20s, has a history of mental disorders including schizophrenia.
Justice Beverly S. Cohen said that to bring such cases, parents must show that the adoption agency lied and that the parents lost money as a result.
Courts in other states have allowed such suits if the agency was simply negligent.
Critics of wrongful-adoption lawsuits say that adoptive parents shouldn't be allowed to sue over their children, any more than natural parents could sue if they had a child with a disability.
But parents are convincing judges that adoption is different.
Adoption is a child-welfare service, they say, and agencies need to match children's backgrounds with couples who can take care of them.
Nancy Ledy-Gurren, an attorney for Louise Wise Services, said the agency denies the allegations and will challenge the ruling.
(Juman vs. Louise Wise Services, Supreme Court of New York, Manhattan, 5809-91)
Junda Woo contributed to this article.
