President Boris Yeltsin made a clear turn away from free-market economics, telling parliament that a strong state apparatus is the only means to end Russia's economic and social crises.
On every issue from street crime to international tension, Mr. Yeltsin called for a strong state.
"As long as we have a weak state, there's no order and stability in Russia," Mr. Yeltsin said in the opening of what was billed as the first annual State of the Union address to both houses of parliament.
In the nationally televised 50-minute speech, Mr. Yeltsin said, "A strong state is needed to curb crime," and "without a strong state, we can't overcome the economic crisis."
Although he pledged allegiance to the economic reforms begun in 1992, he also said it is essential to take steps to close the widening gap between rich and poor.
"There is more freedom in our country now.
But that is not enough.
Our task is to make sure there is more justice, more safety, more confidence in today and tomorrow," he said.
Mr. Yeltsin's speech, which included repeated calls for cooperation with the legislature, helped defuse tension between the president and the lower house of parliament, which is dominated by Communists and nationalists.
That body voted Wednesday to free hundreds of prisoners, including the leaders of last autumn's armed anti-Yeltsin rebellion.
Mr. Yeltsin didn't mention the decision, but urged everyone to put aside political games and focus on creating legislation and regulations.
Mr. Yeltsin's vision of a strong state is familiar in Russia, where leaders from Peter the Great to the Bolsheviks tried to bring progress through strong government.
But it directly contradicts the attempts by reformers to diminish the state structure.
"Yegor Gaidar former deputy prime minister speaks of the freedom of the people, the self-governing of the people, but Yeltsin never mentioned the civic society or self-governing," remarked Igor Torbakov, a historian at the Institute of Russian History.
"This is extremely important in the ideological sense."
Mr. Yeltsin devoted a large part of his speech to the need to combat crime and corruption.
He said a special law on fighting crime should be passed and financing be made available to carry out concentrated strikes against organized crime.
Although he criticized the expansion of control by "apparatchik" (bureaucrats) in the economy, he also blamed the rampant corruption not on an overabundance of corruptible bureaucrats, but on lack of state control.
"The state sector must be controlled by the state," he said, calling for state control over exports of oil and other strategic resources, and tougher penalties for funneling hard currency out of the country.
Such policies align Mr. Yeltsin with his prime minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin, a former gas-industry boss and conservative whose political star has been rising.
Although he gave few specifics, the president called for a simpler, more consistent tax policy and said the government should outline an industrial policy.
The state should define priority industries that will receive state support and reduce funding to nonpriority industries, he said.
In expanded excerpts from a 110-page policy document from which Mr. Yeltsin drew his speech, he also called for "deep reform" of the Central Bank in order to create a federal reserve system.
The excerpts were published by the official news agency Itar-Tass.
Mr. Yeltsin said he would guarantee that inflation not exceed a maximum level.
But he also warned that "a decent level of social protection" must be guaranteed by the government.
The speed of reforms must be correlated with the social price of reforms, he said, and state regulations should be created that are compatible with market mechanisms.
Mr. Yeltsin expressed concern that too little had been done to attract foreign investment.
But he also sounded a popular protectionist note: "The Russian state should defend the interests of its entrepreneurs in both the internal and external markets."
Russia will act as a strong state internationally, he said.
"Practice shows that no one but Russia is prepared to take on its shoulders the burden of peacemaking in this geographic region, so Russia's role is now growing."
Mr. Yeltsin said that Russia will pay "constant attention" to the needs of ethnic Russians living in other former Soviet states and will consider it a "national cause" to stop any discrimination against them.
In world affairs, he said, Russia "has the right to act firmly and toughly when it's necessary."
Russia will continue to work for nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and a reduction in armed forces, but he said all countries should do this.
"In 1994, we will put an end to the practice of unilateral concessions," he said, implying that Russia's defense budget wouldn't be cut further.
The West's attempt to build a broader international partnership also must be more egalitarian, he said.
For example, Russia opposes the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's accepting any new members unless Russia is also accepted.
"Russia isn't a guest in Europe; it is a fully fledged participant," Mr. Yeltsin said.
