With Congress set to reconvene this week, now is perhaps a good time to check on the spending habits of our federal legislators.
First, the good news.
In the first session of the 103rd Congress there was an explosion of spending-reduction legislation, led by freshmen and second-term members.
Bills to cut spending are in fact almost three times more numerous in the 103rd Congress than they were at the halfway point of the 102nd.
Yet Congress is unlikely to balance the budget anytime soon.
On average, legislators are sponsoring more net new spending than in the last Congress.
Meanwhile, most of their proposed spending cuts were in the form of across-the-board measures that set spending targets but failed to specify which programs to cut.
This evasive action suggests that many would-be budget cutters have yet to come to grips with the devilish details of reining in federal spending.
Since 1991, the National Taxpayers Union has kept a comprehensive, running tally of the cost of spending legislation before Congress (called the Congressional Budget Tracking System).
Below are the "winners" for the 103rd Congress so far.
The totals for individual members were developed by cross-indexing each member's sponsorship and co-sponsorship records with cost estimates for 492 Senate bills and 897 House bills introduced between Jan. 5, 1993, when the 103rd's first session began, and Nov. 22, when it ended.
Cost estimates are obtained from sponsors, the Congressional Budget Office and other sources.
The National Taxpayers Union offers each member an opportunity to correct his or her sponsorship record before the results are put into final form.
And yet each time spending surveys have been published (this is the seventh survey since 1991), the union is flooded with dozens of letters and faxes from members of Congress understandably eager to get their spending totals down.
In many cases, lawmakers seek to dissociate themselves from bills that they had earlier sponsored.
Rep. Kweisi Mfume's letter, excerpted nearby, came in response to our mid-November survey and shows him ending his sponsorship of a single-payer health bill (HR1200), among others.
Rep. Bill Paxon wants to add to his sponsorships; of course, the bills he mentions are for spending reduction.
Mr. Hewitt is vice president for research of the National Taxpayers Union.
The top 50 senators and congressmen ranked according to the total cost of the bills they have sponsored or co-sponsored in the 103rd Congress, which reconvenes today.
Totals are rounded to the nearest billion.
