Congress votes drastic reductions in Army and Marine force levels, raises corporate taxes by $50 billion, slices Social Security benefits and cuts billions of crime fighting and highway funds earmarked for Texas.
It may sound like political suicide, but all would be distinct possibilities if the Senate later this month approves a proposed constitutional amendment mandating a balanced budget.
Despite declining public fervor for deficit reduction, insiders say there's an even shot the amendment will pass Congress.
Every lawmaker who votes for it should have to answer one simple question: How, with specificity, would he or she balance the budget by the end of the decade?
To reach a balanced budget by fiscal 2000, an additional $600 billion in budget cuts or tax increases must be enacted over the next five years; by contrast, last year Congress -- by the grand margin of one vote -- reduced the deficit by $433 billion.
A politically realistic road map to balancing the budget in five years would have 25% come from cutting defense spending, another quarter from higher revenues and half from reducing spending, including entitlements.
On taxes, if a few more excise and energy levies are enacted, some loopholes are closed and the rates on upper-income taxpayers are boosted a little more, that still would raise less than $100 billion over five years.
Thus the most appetizing target: corporate taxes.
Polls show most Americans still think corporations don't pay enough taxes and corporate taxes would be an inevitable target.
On the domestic spending side, assume Medicare and Medicaid are whacked $100 billion, or almost double the politically agonizing cutbacks that Congress voted last year.
Then start eliminating entire programs: Kill outright every highway demonstration project, the space station, Amtrak subsidies, aid to public broadcasting, legal services, funding for the 100,000 new cops, and all federal support for the arts.
Likewise, do away with entire agencies: the Commerce Department, the Army Corps of Engineers, the General Services Administration the Interstate Commerce Commission and the Small Business Administration.
For good measure, cut Congress's budget by a third and eliminate half of the foreign aid to the two biggest recipients, Israel and Egypt.
Altogether, including health, those cutbacks still would total less than $200 billion over five years.
To get the $100 billion-plus more, there's only one target big enough: Social Security.
If these benefit increases are limited to the annual cost of living rise minus 2% -- something politicians insist is politically perilous -- we're still $20 billion short of the goal.
The defense budget would have to be slashed an additional 15%.
The Pentagon now is formulating what that would mean, and one top Defense department official laid out the likely consequences.
The projected 500,000 Army force level would be cut to 400,000.
Marines would drop from a projected 174,000 to about 145,000, and the reserves would be reduced by a third.
Most modernization efforts would be abandoned, and the $8 billion a year the Pentagon envisions spending on the new technologies would be scaled back to $5 billion.
The bottom line: The strategy of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and President Clinton that the U.S. be prepared to fight in two simultaneous regional conflicts would have to be scrapped.
To battle the measure, the White House has devised a series of budget-balancing options and spelled out the specific policy implications, including the effects on each state.
In Texas, for example, if the reductions came from an across-the-board spending cut, by 1999 the average Social Security recipient would get $946 less a year; the state would lose $1.8 billion in defense spending and almost $4 billion in reduced federal aid for domestic projects.
Scare tactics, proponents will scream.
Yeah, but it makes the point that this is real stuff.
Those who want to avoid higher taxes should say where they'd find an added $150 billion in spending cuts, or those who want to exempt defense should specify similar savings in more taxes or domestic outlays.
To simplify matters, ask lawmakers to balance one budget, fiscal 2000.
A good benchmark is the proposal by the Concord Coalition -- the Paul Tsongas and Warren Rudman-led effort to impose fiscal discipline -- that would lead to more than $200 billion of deficit reduction that year.
They would close underused Veterans Administration hospitals, end Amtrak subsidies, eliminate the space station, reduce the legislative branch's budget by 15% and cut farm payments, among other cutbacks.
That's less than $40 billion, however, so then the Concord Coalition gets pretty draconian: means testing all entitlements, including Social Security; raising the retirement age to 68; enacting a 50-cent-a-gallon gasoline tax, slapping added taxes on beer and booze, and sharply curtailing the home mortgage deduction.
Ask those budget-balancing politicians if they support this agenda.
Supply-sider Jack Kemp opposes the amendment because he thinks it's "a trap" to raise taxes; the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. John Shalikashvili opposes it out of fear it would decimate national security, and Robert Greenstein of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities worries it would unduly hurt poor people.
They all could be right.
There's little doubt that in several years tougher deficit-reduction measures will be necessary, including cracking down on the growth of entitlement spending and getting more revenues.
Health care legislation, the Republican proposals as well as the administration's, only adds to this inevitability.
But those issues ought to be debated, not hidden under the cloak of an amendment that balances the budget but doesn't tell people how it will be done.
Two decades ago a veteran House member, James Burke, explained how he stayed in Congress by voting for every spending bill and against every tax hike and debt-ceiling increase.
When a naive, young reporter suggested that this was a prescription for chaos, Jimmy Burke puffed on his cigar, smiled and said, "You think this place is on the level?"
In a couple of weeks those voting to amend the Constitution with this sham will, in the words of Jimmy Burke, show they too know the place isn't on the level.
