H. Wayne Huizenga, chairman and chief executive of Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., said he plans to buy the rest of the Miami Dolphins football team for an undisclosed sum.
Mr. Huizenga currently owns 15% of the Dolphins.
The remainder is owned by the heirs of Dolphins founder Joe Robbie, who have been trying to sell the team to pay estate taxes.
People close to the National Football League, citing the recent sale of the New England Patriots for about $160 million, estimate the Miami team is worth at least $150 million.
The Dolphins expect the deal to close by spring.
However, the sale must be approved by the National Football League which currently prohibits team owners from owning other sports franchises.
Mr. Huizenga owns controlling interests in both the Florida Marlins baseball team and the Florida Panthers hockey team.
Mr. Huizenga could receive a waiver from the NFL on its cross-ownership rule, or he could be forced to sell his stakes in the baseball and hockey teams to complete the Dolphins acquisition.
Blockbuster already has options to buy half-interests in both of the Marlins and Panthers.
Earlier this month, Blockbuster announced plans to merge with Viacom Inc., a cable television programmer.
Mr. Huizenga didn't return phone calls seeking comment.
Some analysts predicted that Mr. Huizenga would try to hold on to his interests in all three teams.
"I think Mr. Huizenga's confident he can get a waiver," said Craig Bibb, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst who has followed Blockbuster and Mr. Huizenga for years.
"I think he wants all three teams and he would buy the Miami Heat basketball team if he could."
The NFL could vote as early as March on whether to permit Mr. Huizenga to complete the Doplhins buyout and retain his interests in the other sports franchises.
Mr. Huizenga might divert more of his attention to his growing sports empire if he takes a less active role in the proposed Viacom-Blockbuster Inc., Mr. Bibb said.
Mr. Huizenga will be vice chairman of the combined entity.
He will be less active in Viacom-Blockbuster if that company does not win the bidding war for Paramount Communications Inc., he has said.
But if Viacom does win Paramount, Mr. Huizenga has said he will assume a more active role in the combined companies.
In either case, according to one person familiar with Mr. Huizenga's interests, he might sell or otherwise combine the sports teams with the entertainment companies.
Blockbuster has considered acquiring all or part of Mr. Huizenga's sports interests in the past, the person said.
In addition to its movie studio and publishing operations, Paramount owns the New York Knicks basketball team and the New York Rangers hockey team.
Although combining Mr. Huizenga's sports teams with the entertainment companies could force a divestiture of one or the other hockey team, it could make sense.
Sports teams have historically been strong sources of programming for cable TV networks such as Turner Broadcasting System Inc., which owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team and most of the Atlanta Hawks basketball team, and could be valuable programming assets to Viacom-Blockbuster.
