In response to Thomas T. Vogel Jr.'s Jan. 19 Leisure & Arts review of Frank Sinatra's "Duets" album:
Mr. Vogel reveals little about Frank Sinatra or the era he so delusively thinks he has a handle on, but plenty about himself and the generations born since 1945.
His melange of puerile declarations and his mangled ideas about those of us who preceded him inspire a mix of pity and fury.
Eisenhower and girdles?
What does that mean?
Sinatra "fans" wore tie clips?
Their wives had blue hair?
When was this?
In the post-war period when they were still in their 20s and 30s?
What is he talking about?
More important, why is he saying it in such a nasty voice?
To begin with, anyone who buys a copy of Sinatra's "Duets" and thinks it is in any way definitive is about as cool as Mortimer Snerd.
It is like reading Tarzan in the daily comics of old and considering oneself well-versed on jungle life.
Mr. Vogel snidely characterizes Sinatra fans as drivers of gas-guzzlers listening to radios and talking -- according to one of his more outre statements -- about Bob Hope's tours of Pacific military bases during World War II.
Bob Hope, his manic gifts notwithstanding, was hardly a high-priority topic of conversation either in the living rooms or in the gas-guzzlers driven by those clods who had just won the war.
And as to "blasting" music of any kind at "ear-piercing volumes," I suggest Mr. Vogel get his generations straight.
I don't remember ever having to get up at three in the morning when I lived in Laurel Canyon in the '60s and '70s to ask some old ex-GIs to lower their Tommy Dorsey or Duke Ellington records.
Not that this will be of any real significance to someone who considers Bono one of his "favorite hipsters."
Those anguished complaints from people like me, by then a bit long in the tooth, were part of the ecstasy for people like them -- that delightful '60s crowd, the mutants who preceded Mr. Vogel.
It's hard to understand, I must admit, why he brings up the subject of decibel level to begin with.
It's ironic coming from a member of the most infantile, primitive, cacophony-worshipping generation in the history of the Western world.
Fairlee, Vt.
I found Mr. Vogel's article curiously touching.
His "epiphany" served to remind me of the generation of Bobby Soxers that idolized the crooner and, indeed, might have been in some ways a bit more fortunate than the 25- to 55-year-olds targeted today by Madison Avenue.
However, there are some clarifications to be made regarding us Sinatra fans of yesteryear: like, not all mature ladies have blue hair; like, some of them were more impressed with Einstein than with Eisenhower; like, not all of us abandoned the city for suburban malls; like, we were not as lucky as the reviewer and his peers since we couldn't "access" past and present events as readily as we wished.
His review also pleased me by confirming that once in a while generational gaps can be bridged.
My daughter (no, not Melissa or Jennifer, but Clara) now can boast among her pals about her mother's cutting classes to line up outside the Paramount (theater) waiting for the chance to screech a deafening "Frankie!" along with her pals.
Not being "laid back," I kept this teenage lapse quiet until recently.
Clementine C. Rabassa
If Mr. Vogel is terrified by owning a Frank Sinatra CD, I am even more terrified of him owning one.
Frank belongs to my generation.
I can remember what I was doing when Pearl Harbor was bombed, when JFK was killed, and even when Don Larsen pitched his perfect World Series game for the New York Yankees.
I served in the Army, married once for life, never looked at another women, have gone to work every day of my adult life, never took drugs, never grew long hair.
Don't these young people realize our generation is morally superior to theirs?
That we are more intelligent than they?
The SAT scores prove that.
Why do they seek now to sully our icons?
We should be neatly partitioned from them, with no points actually touching, nothing in common.
Frank Sinatra will never sound quite the same to me ever again.
They have violated the holy grounds of their ancestors.
(P.S. Can you imagine how Mr. Vogel might have felt if he had listened to Frank Sinatra when he was still Frank Sinatra?)
Corrales, N.M.
I was mildly amused by Mr. Vogel's account of how it felt to buy his first Sinatra album ("My Epiphany With Blue Eyes").
It is always amusing to watch a member of Generation X discover that interesting things happened prior to 1970.
But I beg to differ with Mr. Vogel's astonishing claim that all Sinatra fans are aging bourgeois middlebrow lunkheads ("Frank Sinatra fans belong to the Rotary Club and wear tie clips. . . .
They'd steer their ship-sized gas-guzzling automobiles to the show from the congested suburban mall parking lots with `New York, New York' blasting at ear-piercing volumes").
I am 37, live on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, drive a Toyota, go to the ballet and own, at last count, 19 Frank Sinatra CDs, none of which contain "New York, New York."
(I do own one tie clip, but I never wear it.)
