The Clinton administration plans to introduce legislation that would speed up reviews of licensing requests for the export of sensitive technologies, but corporate America is already calling the proposal inadequate.
A U.S. official said the administration expects to reduce the length of the review process to about 60 days from the current process, which often exceeds 120 days.
Administration officials said they are trying to eliminate "a black hole" that licensing applications often fall into.
Since the end of the Cold War, the administration has been moving to liberalize export controls on goods that have military applications.
The controls, which were originally aimed at keeping high technology out of the hands of communist countries, now focuses more on such renegade nations as Libya, North Korea and Iraq.
Last night, President Clinton told the Business Council that his proposal "will be sufficiently better" than the present law.
But he warned that corporate leaders "won't like it all."
For instance, he said, it will "provide for the continuation of the capacity of the president and government to restrict exports for reasons that appear to be good and sufficient."
The legislation, to be introduced today, would reauthorize the Export Administration Act, which expires in June.
The proposal would introduce a process in which federal agencies that want to oppose an application have to respond within a certain amount of time.
In the past, applications would be held up by agencies that simply wouldn't respond quickly during their part of the review.
According to a document outlining the proposal, the use of unilateral controls would be curbed by a requirement that U.S. economic interests be considered.
But the extent of such limits was being decided by President Clinton.
High-tech companies have argued that the U.S. unilaterally restricts the sale of technologies to countries that end up buying the goods from non-U.S. sources, negating the point of the controls and shifting business from U.S. companies.
Trade associations representing hightech companies such as Cray Research Inc., Unisys Corp. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co. have been kept abreast of the legislation and are planning news briefings to attack various provisions.
Chamber of Commerce officials plan to showcase "The Chart from Hell," a flow chart of the government's export-control system, and make the point that the new plan wouldn't streamline the process much.
"This was an opportunity to do something that would address our legitimate security interests but put our economic interests in the front seat in a post-Cold War era." said Willard Workman, the Chamber of Commerce's top trade official and a former export-control official for the State and Commerce Departments.
"But they're not even moving to the back seat.
They're still in the trunk."
U.S. companies were seeking to expand the Commerce Department's lead role in export-licensing decisions, because the department is considered much friendlier to exporting than agencies such as the Defense and State departments, whose officials give more weight to national-security and foreign-policy concerns.
The legislation isn't expected to do that, however.
Corporate interests also wanted to authorize further decontrol on computers, telecommunications, semiconductors and encryption software, but the bill isn't expected to do that, either.
"The net is this isn't a big step forward," said Edward Black, vice president at the Computer and Communications Industry Association.
Despite the criticism, Mr. Black and other high-tech officials are careful to leave the door open for negotiating changes as the legislation winds through Congress.
The administration proposal is expected to allow U.S. companies to argue that controls should be lifted if the restrictions give competitors an "unfair impact" in the world marketplace.
The legislation would allow companies to argue three points: that there is "foreign availability" of the restricted goods from other countries; "ineffective control" on the sale of the restricted goods on the world market; and "competitive disadvantage," when the U.S. has tougher controls than other countries.
The problem, U.S. company officials said, is that the government won't automatically lift restrictions under those conditions, but just put the goods in question under review for possible liberalization.
Industry officials also expressed frustration that the administration isn't planning to relax restrictions on the re-export of restricted technology.
As it stands, a company in a foreign country that buys a restricted U.S. export has to get approval from the U.S. government to resell that technology.
