"Legends aren't legends," a grandfather tells his grandchildren.
"They are real."
The grandchildren already know this.
They haven't dismissed ancient stories of their family's troubled history as fairy tales.
For them, the distant past is close, so close that on a drive through the Italy of today they can "see" Napoleon's soldiers marching through the Tuscan countryside.
They feel they have actually witnessed the fatal attraction that spawned the Benedetti curse, even though it took place two centuries before.
The children are modern-day Benedettis, coming back to their Tuscan homeland for the first time.
Their father hasn't seen his father for 10 years, before his own children were born.
On the way, he tells them their family's history, perhaps just to pass the time, perhaps to warn them about their haunted lineage.
"Fiorile," the movie in which all this takes place, shows us how the children hear these stories -- not as legend but as life, vivid and inescapable.
This merging of experience and enchantment is a specialty of the Italian filmmakers Paolo and Vittorio Taviani.
At their best, most completely in "The Night of the Shooting Stars," these talented brothers create a feverish reality, the world as it might appear in a hallucination.
In "Fiorile," the magic comes and goes, like an early morning dream fighting the rude voices sputtering from the radio alarm.
The generational leaps are made abruptly, without an emotional bridge to connect one group of Benedettis to the next.
Still, even without fulfilling the epic promise in its big historical span, "Fiorile" contains much beauty, many scenes shot with stunning grace.
It's part of a cinematic vision the Tavianis have been developing over years of collaboration with cinematographer Giuseppe Lanci and composer Nicola Piovani as well as with the same editor, costume designer and art director.
Jumping down the decades, the filmmakers tell the tale of the Benedettis and how they became not Benedetti (the blessed) but Maledetti (the cursed).
It all began during the Napoleonic Wars, when a young French lieutenant named Jean (Michael Vartan) marched across Tuscany with his comrades.
The moviemakers paint these young men as idealists with plans to reinvent the world as they thought it should be.
They would change everything -- better the lot of the peasants, rename the calendar.
(They would call "May," the month they marched into Tuscany, "Fiorile," Floral.)
Handsome young Jean, in charge of guarding the army's gold, is distracted from his mission by a pretty Italian peasant girl, Elisabetta Benedetti (Galatea Ranzi).
His feelings toward her are not revolutionary at all, but very traditional.
He sees her and falls in love.
Ever the revolutionary, he renames her, too.
He gives her the name of the month when they meet, "Fiorile."
While Elisabetta and Jean make love, her brother steals the French army's gold.
Their parents want to return the gold until they find out what Jean's been doing with their daughter.
Then they feel justified in letting Jean take his punishment and keeping the money.
So passion leads to death for Jean, betrayal for Elisabetta -- and a change of fortune for the Benedetti family.
From then on they would be rich but haunted by the tainted source of their wealth.
As the story moves forward in time the themes continue.
Great passions are stopped by betrayal, good intentions are thwarted by forces of evil.
The Benedettis of the present have little of their ancestor's wild passions.
They are part of the homogenized upper-middle class, with their chinos and cordless telephones.
If they didn't speak French and Italian (the mother is French) they could be mistaken for well-heeled American tourists, or English, or German.
They have little connection to their past.
As they enter the mansion that once belonged to the family, one of the children asks about the crest over the door.
"Just a decoration," his mother says, without interest.
The blandness of these Benedettis makes them the movie's weak link.
The spell breaks whenever the story returns to them and the present.
In these scenes, the movie could be just any movie.
But when the narrative turns to the past the Tavianis unleash their special lyricism, their unusual capacity to visualize mythic characters in a way that is passionately intense yet natural.
In the end it accomplishes its mission, to bring to life the bonds between past and present, myth and reality.
VIDEO TIP: If you haven't seen it, give yourself the pleasure of "The Night of the Shooting Stars."
It's about a woman's memories of her World War II childhood in a Tuscan village, but it's like no other war movie.
It's terrifying and magical, and understands the way fantasy and memory can come together to transform horrifying events into something comprehensible, into myth.
