India's public-sector trade unions, worried that the country's economic reform program will lead to job losses and privatization, are beginning to flex their muscles.
Because the government is firmly committed to its program, the unions aren't likely to derail reform.
But they have been able to slow it down, and prolonged protests could further set back labor legislation that would give companies more flexibility to shed workers.
The unions promise a long struggle.
"We are determined to agitate," says R. Ramanathan, the Bombay-based general secretary of the Air Corporation Employees Union.
Workers went on symbolic strikes last month in several key government-owned businesses, protesting moves to open them up to private investment and competition.
On Dec. 31, most of the country's 450,000 telecommunications workers stayed away from work, objecting to the proposed entry of private Indian and foreign companies into basic telecom services, so far a government preserve.
More than half the 22,000 employees of Indian Airlines, the state-owned domestic airline, stayed away from work Dec. 17.
They were protesting a government plan to repeal the 41-year-old state monopoly on domestic flights -- a monopoly that already has been breached in recent years as private carriers have exploited a legal loophole to grab a fifth of the market.
Postal services were disrupted for four days in early December as the department's 600,000 workers struck for higher wages and protested moves to shift some peripheral services, such as bulk mail, to the private sector.
Fearful of a labor backlash supported by opposition parties, the government of Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao has in recent months slowed down on some of the more controversial aspects of liberalization.
Legislation to amend labor laws and permit easier closure of factories and businesses was promised in 1993.
But the Rao government was weakened by the communal violence and political turmoil that followed the destruction of a mosque in Ayodhya in December 1992 and has yet to introduce the legislation in Parliament.
Meanwhile, the government has put on hold an ambitious proposal from U S West Inc. to set up a telecom network in an industrial area of the southern state of Tamil Nadu in competition with the state-owned network.
Also delayed are decisions on several similar telecom proposals aimed at other regions.
For more than a year, political uncertainty held up legislation that would repeal a ban on private-sector airlines.
At present, some private carriers skirt the ban by operating as "air taxis," making regular flights, but refraining from publishing schedules.
The legislation was finally brought to Parliament last month and is due to be discussed in the session starting in February.
The only genuine privatization being considered by the Rao administration -- the sale of a dilapidated steel plant to Mukand Ltd. -- has been referred to a multiparty parliamentary committee.
The committee is expected to endorse the proposal.
Union spokesmen argue that the reforms eventually will lead to broad privatization, which they oppose on ideological grounds.
"The government is handing it over to the private sector," says M.K. Pandhe, general secretary of the Centre of Indian Trade Unions, a Marxist organization.
"The solution lies in changing the public sector, not dismantling the public sector."
The government's stated policies, however, fall well short of full privatization.
With rare exceptions, government plans are limited to selling as much as 49% of the equity of certain state-owned firms to financial institutions and individual investors.
The government argues that such sales would put pressure on public-sector managements to be more efficient, while retaining government control.
The unions -- supported mainly by socialist and communist lawmakers -- aren't buying that.
They're making a stand against plans to convert government telecom departments into corporations.
The government wants to create companies that could finance better telecom networks through sales of equity, as Videsh Sanchar Nigam Ltd., India's overseas telecom concern, is planning to do early this year with an offering of global depositary receipts, a type of share geared for foreigners.
"If foreign investment comes into these shares, it won't be in India's interest because the foreigners will come to dominate," argues Brijesh Upadhyaya, a general secretary of the Bharatiya Telecom Employees Federation, a trade union related to the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party.
"We'll definitely oppose this to the last extent."
For the same reason, unions have denounced recommendations by a government-appointed committee of experts that half of the equity of state-owned Life Insurance Corp. be sold and that private Indian and foreign companies be allowed into the insurance business.
The major unions, which are affiliated with political parties and thus have considerable clout, also fear that competition with private companies will mean a loss of jobs.
The government replies that rather than firing workers, it will retrain them.
