A panel of medical experts will decide this week whether a bacterium is the underlying cause of peptic ulcers and, if so, whether doctors should begin trying to treat ulcers by eradicating the bacterium.
The decision could dramatically affect the way doctors treat the 25 million Americans who will develop a peptic ulcer at least once in their lifetimes, including the four million who have the painful ailments.
The ruling is being anxiously awaited not only by ulcer patients and their doctors, but by some big drug makers and their investors.
Two ulcer medications are among the best-selling drugs in the world: Glaxo Holdings' Xantac brand of rantidine, with estimated world-wide sales of $2 billion annually, and SmithKline Beecham's Tagamet brand of cimetidine, with annual sales of $1 billion.
Most peptic-ulcer patients are treated with drugs that block the production of stomach acid.
These drugs, called H-2 antagonists, are highly effective in healing ulcers but, unless taken for months or years afterward, don't prevent recurrence in many patients.
If the bacterium is found guilty, the experts will then rule on whether several days of antibiotic treatment will safely and effectively eradicate it, curing the patient of ulcer disease.
Although the short-term antibiotic therapy will be combined with an ulcer-healing H-2 antagonist, it could free the patient from long-term use of the H-2 antagonists.
It also may severely limit the H-2 antagonistics' market.
The panel of 15 medical experts is being convened here this morning by the National Institutes of Health in a procedure called a Consensus Development Conference.
The experts are chosen because they haven't been involved in research on the bacterium and haven't taken sides on some of the more controversial issues.
For a day and a half they'll listen to presentations by researchers and then reach a consensus.
Chairman Tadataka Yamada, head of the internal medicine department at the University of Michigan medical school in Ann Arbor, says the panel also will try to agree on the best way to diagnose infections of the bacterium, which patients should be treated and the best way to treat them.
Although the issue probably won't be resolved, the experts also will consider the possible link of the bacterium to stomach cancer.
If proved, Dr. Yamada explains, it raises the question of whether doctors should try to prevent the cancer by eradicating the bacterium from the intestines of millions of people who are infected but don't have ulcers or other consequences.
But the link between peptic ulcers and the bacterium is the panel's first order of business.
Peptic ulcers are perforations of the mucous membrane lining the stomach or, more commonly, the duodenum (where the small intestine joins the stomach).
The ulcer exposes underlying tissues to the eroding effects of stomach acid.
The resulting pain, which can range from a mild hunger-like feeling to a severe burning sensation, can be relieved with antacids.
Some stomach ulcers are caused by chronic use of drugs like aspirin; others are due to genetic disorders or tumors.
But the cause of the large majority of peptic ulcers has been a mystery.
Evidence that psychological stress causes ulcers by increasing output of stomach acid, as popularly believed, was always inconclusive, medical scientists say.
A dozen years ago, gastroenterologists in Australia discovered that some ulcer patients harbored a strange, helicalshaped bacterium in a tiny structure, the pylorus, that lies at the bottom end of the stomach.
One of them, Barry Marshall (now at the University of Virginia), speculated that the bacterium was the cause of the ulcers, launching a decade of controversy and research.
Now the data are incontrovertible that the bacterium can cause peptic ulcers, says gastroenterologist David Graham of the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Houston.
But practicing doctors have been slow to try diagnosing and then eradicating the bacterial infection.
Dr. Yamada suggests that many physicians are waiting for the resolution of some of the issues the panel will tackle.
Others suggest there is a problem of getting the word out to doctors.
"There's no marketing support for the antibacterial side" of treating peptic ulcers, says Hemant K. Shah, an independent securities analyst specializing in the drug industry.
He explains that while Glaxo, SmithKline and others have sales people pushing the H-2 antagonists to doctors, there is no comparable sales force behind the use of antibiotics for peptic ulcers.
Many doctors may not have been fully aware of the evidence implicating the bacterium.
Moreover, Mr. Shah adds, "many people who use the H-2 antagonists are satisfied with them, since these drugs really help."
Thus, there isn't any strong pressure from patients for a new therapy.
Mr. Shah estimates that 60% of the ulcer drugs' sales are to patients on long-term maintenance therapy, which wouldn't be necessary if antibiotics cured peptic ulcer disease.
The others are taking the drugs to heal ulcers, but many will go on maintenance therapy in the future, he notes.
"If this antibacterial approach is proven the way to go, then about three-quarters of the H-2 market is at stake," Mr. Shah says.
