Philip Heymann is right; anti-crime bills like the one President Clinton is supporting are mostly cosmetic.
The departing Deputy Attorney General used a farewell session with reporters last week to attack his ex-boss's proposal as full of empty solutions that would do little to deter crime.
He hurled particular invective at the three-strikes-you're-out provision, which would lock up repeat violent felons for life.
Along the way, he also dismissed the President's proposals to put 100,000 more cops on the streets and build regional prisons for violent offenders, and he blasted mandatory minimum sentences for drug offenders as next to useless in reducing crime.
He said, "It's been too easy to pretend that we're going to solve the problem of crime with a set of remedies that look good for the first 15 seconds and look worse as you get to the half-minute."
We find it hard to believe that any commuter who braves his local subway to get to work or any shopper who circles the mall lot looking for a "safe" place to park has ever pretended any such thing.
Most of us are all too jaded, knowing from bitter experience that there are no simple solutions.
Yet that is not to say there are no solutions; what we really need to do is reverse the trends in law enforcement that have corresponded with the trend toward more pervasive crime.
The reason that measures such as three-strikes-you're-out carry so much appeal is because they are the only things that remain legally plausible in the wake of the court decisions, legislation and social thinking that gave us everything from Miranda censoring of confessions to activist judges declaring jails are "too crowded."
If the President and/or Mr. Heymann, or for that matter members of Congress, want a bill that would really do something about crime, what would it include?
The answers, we think, are anything but mysterious:
Reform the juvenile justice system.
When asked to name a cause for the increase in youth violence, law enforcement officials around the country point to the out-of-date juvenile justice laws, which were set up in the '50s and '60s when the most serious crime a kid committed was typically shoplifting or joy riding.
Colorado, Utah and Florida have already passed laws opening up their juvenile justice systems to greater public scrutiny and requiring swift punishment for offenders.
Other states are considering similar measures.
The aim is to deter children before they are embarked on a life of crime; but the present system mainly teaches impressionable youths that crime has no serious consequence.
Bring back the reform school.
Part of the problem of checking the growing violence among the young is how to create disciplined but nurturing environments for violent children, most of whom are boys and most of whom come from poor, fatherless families.
One answer is reform of the foster-care and adoption laws, which can bounce problem children in and out of the system for years.
Another is a modern day version of the reform school -- possibly even boarding schools -- where problem youths, separated from nonviolent children who want to learn, are subject to strict discipline.
Enforce the vagrancy laws.
Those who live in bad neighborhoods usually have a pretty good idea of who the troublemakers are.
Restoring the authority of the cop on the beat to arrest suspected drug pushers or other malefactors for loitering would go a long way to getting crime off the streets.
To that end, New York City announced this week that it is planning to start rounding up teenage truants.
Antitruancy programs are already under way in such cities as Philadelphia, Washington, Atlanta and St. Louis.
Repeal the exclusionary rule.
This is the rule that prohibits juries from hearing evidence that was obtained through some procedural error.
Courts have relaxed some impossible standards recently, but it would be better to drop the rule altogether.
We should retreat to the wisdom of Justice Cardozo's 1926 New York decision, that it makes no sense that "the criminal is to go free because the constable has blundered."
Give police officers in conflict with suspects a presumption of innocence.
Police officers have enough to deal with besides having to prove how and why they took a certain course of action with a suspected lawbreaker.
Afford them the same benefit of the doubt that our legal system affords criminals, and not so incidentally, the same protections against double jeopardy.
A serious crime bill, in short, would repeal what much of the legal community spent the last generation writing into the legal precedents, the statute books and the Constitution.
The elaborate protections that the U.S. legal system has set up for defendants makes it impossible for the community to assert its own rights in a measured way; criminals are not likely to be punished until they prove themselves hardened, which is a recipe for producing a lot of hardened criminals.
The set of attitudes and expectations involved cannot be changed at the stroke of a pen, but if anyone is serious, the direction is clear.
