New York -- For nearly 17 years, Jose Soto has been stopping after work at a shack he built in the South Bronx.
It's no different from thousands of homes that dot the countryside of his native Puerto Rico: one-room, with a half-dozen shuttered windows, a front door adorned with a picture of Jesus Christ, and no heat or running water.
On a blustery Saturday evening in early winter, the 48-year-old apartment super arrives at dusk, carrying a "quinto" drum -- a high-pitched Puerto Rican conga.
Inside, bundled in warm coats, a half-dozen men and women are watching a boxing match on a battered television set.
The door, as usual, is open to anyone with a fondness for traditional Puerto Rican food, drink and, above all, music.
Rincon Criollo, as this clubhouse is called, is the oldest of perhaps 50 "casitas," or "little houses," erected from scrap wood on vacant city-owned lots in East Harlem and the South Bronx.
New York City officials have long ignored building-code violations, for the huts serve as social centers for many of the city's 900,000 Puerto Ricans, who live in otherwise desolate neighborhoods.
After greeting his friends, Mr. Soto walks out into an orderly packed-dirt yard and screws a light bulb into an overhead electrical cord, which draws power from the methadone clinic next door.
He lights a small fire inside a metal box, picks up a rusty ax, and begins splintering scavenged window frames into fuel.
Several others begin chopping tropical vegetables for a stew called "mondongo," which simmers with pigs' feet over the fire.
Luis Ramos, still wearing the suit and tie from his day job with the Census Bureau hands out several "panderetas," hand-held goatskin drums resembling tambourines.
The sounds of "plena," a traditional Puerto Rican folk music, begin ringing into the night.
After a short, white-haired singer belts out several songs, Mr. Ramos scurries off to his car to retrieve a bottle of gin and a stack of cups.
Tonight's atmosphere aside, the past year has not been a festive one for Rincon Criollo.
City planners have launched a vast urban-renewal project here in Melrose, a neighborhood that was hard hit by abandonment and arson in the 1970s.
They have picked the casita's lot to build three multifamily homes.
This year, bulldozers are expected to flatten it.
The casita members "were allowed to do what they have done because this is a wilderness," says Petr Stand, a Manhattan architect working with a community group to save the casita.
"But with the coming urban renewal, building inspectors will be walking around."
And they're likely to view such structures not as valuable cultural centers or irreplaceable examples of age-old Caribbean architecture, but as firetraps.
"The city has never understood them as cultural centers," complains Luis Aponte-Pares, who teaches architecture at City College.
"It's always treated them as potential squatters' camps.
I think that, in most cases, casitas attract the best of the community.
They may be poor, but they're good citizens."
What's more, to those who study traditional Puerto Rican culture, Rincon Criollo is much more than a place for old-timers to pass time playing dominoes and cards.
It's the city's premier cultural casita, a magnet for Puerto Rican folk musicians, dancers and artists, and a regular stop for Latino musicians from across America as well as Puerto Rico.
The glue that holds the group together is plena -- a music akin to American blues and rooted in the work songs of cane cutters -- which blossomed around the turn of the century when Caribbean blacks migrated from the fields to the cities.
The lead singer spins a story, often improvised, while a chorus rings out responses and lays down the rhythm with panderetas, maracas and gourd-and-comb instruments called "guiros."
Like the blues, it is music that lends itself to merrymaking.
"To see it being knocked down, I might have a heart attack," moans Mr. Soto.
"I've never had any problems with city officials.
When I came to the Bronx, this was a dump.
Now the rest of the lots are dumps, and this isn't."
While casita veterans such as Mr. Soto considered it hopeless to fight city hall, Chique Perez, a 26-year-old insurance broker, didn't.
Homeowners and merchants had formed a community group to stop the city from mowing down dozens of private homes and businesses to fulfill its urban-renewal plans, and Mr. Perez set out to convince them the ramshackle building was a cultural center worth saving.
To demonstrate that to visitors, casita members invariably usher them to a wall of the shack covered with a decade's worth of snapshots.
Everywhere there are the musicians, playing at crowded summertime pig roasts and on stages in city parks, and dancers in traditional garb and handmade masks.
There are visiting singers and actors from Puerto Rico, where Rincon Criollo is known as a wellspring of traditional music and the place to buy the panderetas Mr. Soto fashions by hand from cooking pots, broken baby carriages and goatskin.
There are members dressed up as the Three Kings distributing Christmas gifts to needy children, and others parading through the streets in a mule costume, a year-end holiday tradition.
The community group agreed to lobby the city to save the casita, and after initial resistance, the city relented.
Jeff Baker, the deputy chief urban designer for the Department of City Planning, agreed to provide another lot in exchange for the current one.
"It's obviously a good thing to have in the community," he concedes.
That leaves the casita members facing a more intractable foe: building codes regulating "places of public assembly."
"The question came down to: How can we effectively re-create a casita so that it looks like a casita, feels like a casita but complies with the city building code?
I didn't have an answer," explains the community group's architect, Mr. Stand.
Mr. Perez, however, did.
He wants to build a two-story museum and cultural center in the front of the lot, then erect a simple wooden casita in the back, as a sort of exhibit.
Visitors, he explains, could "go into the casita and see the way we live."
Mr. Stand estimates the cost of a full-fledged cultural center at a daunting $250,000, while even a small, lowly one-room meeting hall would cost upward of $100,000.
As adept as casita members have become at building from scavenged materials, such a project is clearly beyond their means.
One recent evening, jamming musicians raised money for drink by pitching dollar bills into a pile on the floor.
"It's demoralized a lot of us," admits Mr. Ramos.
"We have to organize like $250,000.
That's impossible for us.
A lot of guys have lost their motivation.
We're hoping, praying, something will happen."
The eternally optimistic Mr. Perez is convinced that various grants will be available from community, city and cultural groups, but admits that pulling it off will require more-formal management of the organization.
Mr. Soto is resigned to the fact that he may have no other choice but to accept a sterile version of the real thing.
"But I don't feel it's something I can call home," he hastens to add.
"It's not a typical casita.
I would prefer it just like this."
Asked one raucous evening if he would welcome museum visitors at such a gathering, Mr. Soto responds without hesitation: "They'll serve themselves what they want, just like it's their home.
We won't charge anything.
We'll just take up a collection, like we do now."
Mr. Pacelle is a Journal reporter covering the real-estate industry.
