Atlanta -- The jocks-and-coaches union that cuts across sports lines -- no less real for being unofficial -- has decreed that losing is akin to death, and more than a bit shameful.
Enter a losers' locker room after the least important game and you're likely to find the players striking dejected poses, barely able to speak for humiliation and chagrin.
Any other sort of behavior would put them at risk of being considered insufficiently serious.
The fact is, however, that losing is the common lot of those who engage in sports.
Except for Rocky Marciano and the occasional racehorse, everybody loses sometime, and depending on how you define it, most lose most of the time.
If the late football coach George Allen was correct when he said "Every time you win, you're reborn; when you lose, you die a little," few athletes would reach their majority.
The subject of winning and losing, unadorned, is especially apt this week in this Southern metropolis, site of the professional football championship Super Bowl between the Dallas Cowboys and Buffalo Bills.
The contest won't be played out until Sunday, but one team -- the defending-champion Cowboys -- already has been cast in the role of winner, and its foe assigned the less desirable part.
Indeed, because they lost this game the past three times it was played, the Bills have been treated as if they have a lot of nerve being here at all.
This perception persists although all and sundry know that the Bills are, at worst, a very good club, winners of 58 of 76 over the past four seasons.
One of their victories in the current campaign was over the Cowboys.
Yet Jimmy Johnson, the Dallas coach, has been permitted to turn every interview session into a sermon on success (the distillation of his wisdom is that winning is something that's accomplished by "winners," as in "we have winners everywhere in our organization"), while Marv Levy, his Buffalo counterpart, is asked to second-guess his past practices.
"The past is history," Levy insists.
He's surely right about this -- he's a Harvard man, after all -- but we treat his words with skepticism.
It's been asserted that Levy's sin -- the failure to win the "big one" -- is uniquely grievous in football; we don't heap similar scorn upon, say, baseball pennant winners who don't win the World Series, or unsuccessful finalists in the NCAA basketball tourney.
"Maybe next year we'll try the World Series," Levy said Wednesday in response to one question along those lines.
There may be a point there; it has been football, the game closest to war, that's produced our most memorable (and absolute) quotes about winning and losing.
"Winning isn't everything.
It's the only thing," usually is attributed to Vince Lombardi, but the reference books say Henry "Red" Sanders, another old football coach, really said it.
"Good losers get into the habit of losing," said Knute Rockne.
"Without winners, there wouldn't be any goddamned civilization," said Woody Hayes.
But all those guys were coaches, and a couple days of quote-shagging here this week suggests that their troops -- er, players -- may have somewhat different ideas.
Football is a team game, which means that credit or blame usually is collective rather than individual.
That this is an idea many football players find comforting is seen in their willingness to absolve from blame those of their number who may have been more responsible than most for memorable defeats.
Yes, Buffalo kicker Scott Norwood -- no longer with the team -- did miss the last-play field goal that would have won the Bills' first Super Bowl appearance, in 1991, but he was a fine fellow who helped win other games and one shouldn't overlook other players' miscues that day, as his teammates still chorus.
And, yes, Leon Lett, the Dallas defensive lineman, did cost his team a Thanksgiving Day victory over Miami when his ill-advised swipe at the ball after a missed field goal turned into a Cowboy fumble, but that, too, was forgivable.
"We gave Leon a ball with a piece of string tied to it later, but that was a team thing.
He knew we were kidding," averred Russell Maryland, Lett's linemate.
Insight into how a large dose of defeat can be less than lethal is provided by the Bills' Steve Tasker.
He's an unusual player in a couple of respects.
At 5-foot-9 and 180 pounds, he's an ordinary-size man in a giants' game.
He was a part-time player in college who has made a 10-year professional career in that role, as a member of the so-called "special teams" that cover and return kicks.
Tasker comes from Leoti, Kan., a town that, he says, has one, blinking traffic signal and a single one-way street, which runs in front of the elementary school.
He mainly ran track in high school and, unrecruited, attended a community college for a year.
From there he went to Northwestern University, an estimable institution but a perennial football nonpower.
The teams he played on there, mostly as a kick returner, won but seven of 33 games.
Signed by the Houston Oilers as a special-teamer for his speed, Tasker was waived in 1986 after suffering two serious knee injuries in as many seasons.
Buffalo picked him up for the same chores.
He's made the Pro Bowl five times since in that capacity and was named the most valuable player of last year's game.
"Most guys who come to the pros were stars in college, and consider special teams a step down.
Not me," he says of his prowess.
Tasker thinks his Northwestern years were worthwhile despite the dearth of victories.
"We accomplished some things there that were good for the football program, and I loved just playing," he says.
He's liked being a pro more, "because I've showed I can do what I do at the very highest level."
He goes on: "If we lose again, I'm sure some people will continue to define us by our losses, but I won't.
I'll recall being a member of some very good teams."
Vince Lombardi said what he did say was: "Winning isn't everything, but making the effort to win is."
He also said, "If you can't accept losing, you can't win."
Maybe he really was a saint.
Maybe Steve Tasker is, too.
And maybe the Bills will win the Vince Lombardi Trophy on Sunday.
