Oil prices jumped on reports that bitterly cold weather will plague much of the U.S. through next week.
Concern that severe temperatures would cause oil use to rise engendered a surge of buying that grew throughout the trading session.
The buying turned "into a rally out of the blue," traders said, as short-term bullish factors took precedence over long-term bearish fundamentals.
"Seasonality took a front seat, while issues such as OPEC Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries overproduction took a back seat," said Peter Gignoux, manager of the petroleum desk for Smith Barney Shearson Ltd.'s London office.
Crude oil for March delivery soared 73 cents a barrel to $15.92 a barrel.
Heating oil for the same period jumped by 2.28 cents a gallon to 51.83 cents, while gasoline prices rose 2.33 cents a gallon to 45.55 cents.
Fueling the price increases were reports that unusually low temperatures through Sunday would cause energy use throughout the U.S. to rise by 25% above normal levels, according to Accu-Weather Inc. in State College, Pa.
James Candor, assistant vice president for the weather-forecasting organization, said that in the Northeast, the world's largest heating-oil market, temperatures were expected to be eight to 10 degrees below normal.
Normal temperatures in New York City for this time of year range between 25 degrees and 37 degrees fahrenheit, he said.
Next week, Accu-Weather expects temperatures in the Northeast and in the Midwest to log in at three degrees to six degrees fahrenheit below normal.
Jon Davis, meteorologist for Smith Barney Shearson, says, "Plain and simply, it's going to be brutally cold as two arctic air masses move down across the U.S." over the next week to 10 days.
Reports that heating-oil supplies in some areas are becoming tight helped to drive the rally.
According to a spokesman for Sun Co. in Philadelphia, contract customers aren't able to take the full volume they contracted for all at once as they sometimes choose to do.
Rather they will have to spread their purchases out over the month.
And noncontract customers are being barred from purchasing any supplies from certain Sun terminals as they sometimes do.
This condition will likely last through February.
The Sun spokesman said that barges have had trouble moving up the frozen rivers to the terminals.
In addition, the severe cold has caused some production problems at Sun refineries.
Following a series of fires possibly caused by cold weather, Amoco Corp. said that it is still allocating some supplies of diesel fuel, although the allocation of gasoline supplies has been lifted.
Amoco said its refinery in Whiting, Ind., was again operating at more than 75% of its capacity of 400,000 barrels a day.
Its production had been reduced because of the fires.
COPPER: Copper futures prices surged as demand for copper remained strong and industrial metals prices rose across the board.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, copper for March delivery was up 2.8 cents to 89.6 cents a pound.
Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man, said strong supply-and-demand factors continue to exert upward pressure on copper futures prices.
World-wide copper consumption was up 2.4% in 1993, while world-wide mine production dropped 1.8%, he said.
In the fourth quarter of 1993, U.S. consumption of copper was up more than 8% from the year-ago period.
In London, prices of alumnimum, nickel and zinc also rose yesterday.
LIVESTOCK & MEATS: Prices of cattle futures contracts fell amid continuing signs of weak demand at the retail level.
In trading at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the cattle contract for February delivery dropped 1.02 cents a pound to settle at 72.27 cents a pound.
Beef demand has been lackluster since last fall.
Traders are also beginning to focus on the Friday release of the Agriculture Department's Jan. 1 survey of the nation's cattle herd.
Dan Vaught, a livestock analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons, St. Louis, said he expects the government to report that the U.S. herd increased 1% to 101.9 million animals from a year earlier.
Hog prices slipped in sympathy with cattle.
