Amarillo has long been known as a down-to-earth place, endowed with the sort of common sense that comes from being at the center of the Texas beef and meat-packing industry.
But now, some people wonder if the city is embarking on a flight of fancy.
At issue is the Amarillo Economic Development Corp.'s surprise agreement to pay AMR Corp.'s American Airlines unit as much as $1 million in taxpayer funds to maintain jet service between Amarillo and Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, instead of letting American proceed with its plan to switch to turboprops.
Proponents say the accord, which was ratified yesterday in a 4-0 vote by the city commission, is an essential piece of Amarillo's economic-development efforts.
They argue that businesses won't be as likely to expand or move there without the prestige and convenience of jet connections.
And they maintain that Amarillo's subsidy won't wind up costing nearly as much as $1 million.
But critics insist Amarillo is just buying trouble.
Not only will the new arrangement provide little economic benefit, they argue, but it will actually lead to a deterioration in air service by eliminating some scheduled flights.
Moreover, foes contend the financial drain will prove quite large.
"That is civic hubris more than intelligence," says Michael J. Boyd, president of Aviation Systems Research Corp., Golden, Colo., and a well-known aviation analyst.
"If American were making enough money with jets in that market they would have kept them in there."
Amarillo isn't the only city to be confronting such issues, as airlines replace jets with cheaper-to-operate commuter planes in smaller markets throughout the nation.
In Texas alone, American last year eliminated jet service to Midland-Odessa, while Delta Air Lines Inc. switched to a regional affiliate in Corpus Christi, Lubbock and Amarillo.
What was unusual, though, was Amarillo's response.
Informed in February that American was eliminating its three daily jet flights to D-FW, and replacing them with smaller turboprops operated by AMR's American Eagle regional carrier, city leaders concluded the move would hit business hard.
(Although Southwest Airlines Co. flies jets between Amarillo and Dallas, it operates out of Love Field rather than Dallas-Fort Worth, and therefore lacks the international connections that city leaders so covet.)
"We have some difficulty in our recruiting anyway, because we're seen as being kind of an isolated area when you look at a map," says Michael Bourn, executive director of the Amarillo Economic Development Corp., which was set up to administer the funds generated by the city's half-cent economic-development sales tax.
After discarding some more drastic responses, such as having Amarillo essentially start its own airline using rented jets, officials hit on what they believe will be a much cheaper solution: subsidies.
After a series of meetings with American officials, the two sides hammered out an agreement under which the Amarillo Economic Development Corp. would guarantee a minimum revenue for American's three daily flights in the six-month period beginning July 1.
In return, American agreed to upgrade its jets to 142-seat MD-80 aircraft, from 97-seat F100s.
And it agreed to cut daily American Eagle turboprop service to as few as one flight from four, to funnel more passengers to the jets.
Under the agreement, Amarillo's maximum exposure is $1 million during the six months-an important consideration, given that American has been losing about $2 million every six months on the jets.
According to Mr. Bourn, the jets will need to carry an average of about 100 passengers per flight in order to avoid deficit payments.
He adds that officials "both hope and expect not to have to actually use very much or any of those funds.
If we thought we'd actually be paying a million dollars. . . we wouldn't be doing this."
But critics say that cutting back on American Eagle flights will decrease the travel options available.
"They're not looking at what's good for the community, which is frequency" of flights, says Edward Martelle, a spokesman for American Eagle.
"They're looking at whether they have a jet sitting there."
A traveler departing for London's Heathrow Airport tomorrow has two options on American: Leaving at 6:25 a.m. on an American jet, and then waiting more than five hours at D-FW for the flight to London; or boarding an American Eagle turboprop at 10:30, taking 15 minutes longer to get to D-FW, and making the London flight with just 45 minutes waiting at the airport.
William Fredrick, managing director of the Wadley-Donovan Group, a Morristown, N.J., corporate-relocation firm, says jet service is a plus in the recruiting game, but adds that, if Amarillo decreases the number of flights, the end result "almost becomes a wash."
A better strategy, he suggests, might be to recruit businesses that don't need to be close to an air hub -- such as manufacturers or back-office operations -- and spend economic-development money on improving education and infrastructure.
"The average businessperson," he says, "isn't going to go to Amarillo because of its good air service," he says.
