McCaffrey & McCall, the former Saatchi & Saatchi advertising agency whose billings had recently been in a free fall, yesterday called it quits and folded the last of its accounts into Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates agency.
The move marks the death of a once-healthy midsize agency, with billings of almost $300 million as recently as 1991 and a list of blue-chip clients including Mercedes-Benz, Tiffany, Bacardi Imports and ITT Corp.'s Hartford Insurance.
But McCaffrey ended its life on Madison Avenue with billings of only about $100 million, Backer said.
McCaffrey's fast demise runs counter to the latest trend on Madison Avenue: Other small and midsize shops are being hailed as the future of the ad business and are snaring such big accounts as MasterCard International and International Business Machines.
Small and midsize shops recently even shut giant international advertising networks out of one of the biggest account pitches in years, Grand Metropolitan's Burger King.
Many midsize agencies pride themselves on limiting their business to a small number of accounts.
But McCaffrey's end underscores the risk of following that strategy.
McCaffrey never could reverse the downward momentum after its most important client, Daimler-Benz's Mercedes Benz of North America, put its $90 million account into review in 1991.
The move sparked a stampede, as Bacardi, Tiffany and others left the agency.
McCaffrey was never able to recover its footing, partly because its management had divided into bitter factions, advertising industry executives said.
One group supported then-Chairman Bob Cherins, while another lined up behind William Vieser, the agency's president and head of the Mercedes account at the time.
In the wake of the Mercedes loss, both executives lost their power.
Mr. Cherins stepped aside to oversee the agency's direct-mail operations and has since left the agency.
Michael Robertson, then a newcomer to McCaffrey, was named its chief executive.
Soon after Mr. Vieser left for Scali McCabe Sloves to manage the Mercedes account.
The news marks the final chapter of an agency founded in 1962 by two veterans of the venerable Ogilvy & Mather agency, David McCall and Jim McCaffrey.
In the 1960s, the agency made waves with a corny commercial for Hai Karate cologne, featuring crowds of women attacking a sweetsmelling man in a phone booth.
It also was among the first agencies to create interactive ads, albeit in a primitive form: For Canadian Club whiskey, the agency published treasure maps in print ads, sending consumers off in search of a case of liquor hidden somewhere in the South Pacific or in midtown Manhattan.
But the agency also was known for high-brow ads, orchestrating Esso Corp.'s successful name and image change to Exxon.
Its Mercedes ads were considered pace-setters in automotive advertising: One featured a professional stunt driver, who walked out of a truck crash and into his Mercedes.
It was responsible for the well-known slogan, "Engineered like no other car in the world."
McCaffrey became part of the Saatchi empire in 1983, when the holding company bought it for $34 million.
As part of Saatchi, the agency was overshadowed by Saatchi's big international agencies, but still considered a gem in the advertising business.
Bill Tragos, chairman of TBWA Advertising, launched a short-lived effort to buy the agency.
In 1991, with the agency's founders retired, nine executives agreed to buy McCaffrey back from Saatchi, paying $2 million in cash and $15 million in the form of an interest-bearing note.
As part of the current transaction, no money changed hands, Saatchi said, in effect forgiving the money McCaffrey still owed.
In exchange, Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel said, it will absorb about 40 employees and the six clients of McCaffrey's New York office, including the Caribbean Tourism Organization, Ciba-Geigy's Ciba Vision contact lenses and Burroughs Wellcome's big Sudafed account.
McCaffrey's Indianapolis office, with 44 employees and five clients, will continue as a separate unit of Backer, as will McCaffrey's direct-mail business.
Mr. Robertson, 45 years old, was named a creative director at Backer's New York office.
Robert Henry, McCaffrey's 46-year-old chief operating officer, was named an executive vice president at Backer.
Mr. Robertson said McCaffrey's undoing ultimately stemmed from the fact that the agency wasn't big enough to help clients who wanted global advertising.
For example, Bacardi left for Interpublic Group's Lintas, while Tiffany moved its account to Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson.
"Medium-sized agencies will do well for clients that are domestic and small- or medium-sized themselves," said Mr. Robertson.
"A global client's needs are completely different.
That is where midsized agencies get stuck."
The search is on for an agency to handle the $10 million-plus Stolichnaya vodka account, now that distribution rights to the brand have moved to Grand Metropolitan's Carillon Importers, the former marketer of Absolut vodka.
Twenty-nine agencies are in line to pitch the business, said Michel Roux, Carillon's charismatic chief executive officer, declining to identify them.
But industry executives said the list includes shops of every size and stripe, including big agencies like Ayer and Saatchi & Saatchi's CME KHBB as well as small creative shops, such as Burkhardt & Christy and Grace & Rothschild.
Agencies are thirsting not so much for the size of the business but for the visibility of an account headed by Carillon and Mr. Roux, whose Absolut brand helped build TBWA Advertising.
"I have something in the back of my mind," Mr. Roux said cryptically.
"And whoever will come closest to that will get the account."
Grey Advertising said that it has resigned from Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America's dealer-association business, just two months after forming a dedicated "satellite" shop, dubbed "G2," to service the big automotive account.
Billings couldn't be determined.
Mitsubishi officials couldn't be reached.
A Grey spokeswoman said the agency resigned to focus its efforts on Mitsubishi's national brand advertising account.
Mitsubishi is a unit of Mitsubishi Motors Corp. of Japan.
Grey's G2 unit, based in Huntington Beach, Calif., worked for about half of the Mitsubishi dealer associations, including those in Dallas, Houston, Chicago, Los Angeles and San Francisco.
The other half had chosen their own local agencies last year, after Mitsubishi changed its advertising policies and allowed them to select their own shops.
Grey said it would continue to work for the associations until they choose a new agency.
