McDonnell Douglas Corp. and Boeing Co. will split a $6 billion order for commercial jets from the Saudi Arabian carrier Saudia in a long-awaited announcement expected today.
The order, which probably will be the largest for the world's producers of airliners over at least the next 18 months, doesn't call for any planes from Europe's Airbus Industrie consortium, according to several people familiar with it.
Some of them worry that intense U.S. government efforts to steer the order to domestic jet makers will increase trade tensions with Europe over alleged unfair subsidies for jet makers.
The agreement is expected to be announced after Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the Saudi ambassador to the U.S., meets today with President Clinton.
Officials at the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Washington, D.C., couldn't be reached for comment.
The order will include 60 to 66 aircraft, with the final number depending on how the Saudis dispose of their current aircraft and on the outcome of negotiations on final prices and delivery dates, said those familiar with the arrangements.
About 60% of the order's value is expected to go to Boeing, with the rest to McDonnell Douglas.
Details of the order weren't spelled out by those familiar with it.
Still, St. Louisbased McDonnell Douglas is a big winner in the Saudi agreement because it needed a large order badly, but its struggling commercial-airplane unit needs even more new orders soon.
The order includes about 25 of McDonnell Douglas's smaller MD-90 twin-jets, but the company's biggest coup is its placement of a substantial number of threeengine MD-11 aircraft in the Saudia fleet, and in the "Royal Flight" of airliners that carries the kingdom's top officials.
The order may also include some McDonnell Douglas KC-11 military tanker aircraft.
Seattle-based Boeing will get sorely needed orders for 10 to 12 of its 747 jumbo jets, more than had been expected, and a number of midsize twin-engine airplanes such as its new 777, or established 767 and 757 models.
Terms of the order remained cloaked in secrecy yesterday, partly because Saudi officials have been upset in the past by U.S. government disclosures about the transaction, including an announcement in the summer by Sen. Patty Murray, a Washington Democrat, that President Clinton had intervened to help win the order.
During the past year, U.S. officals including President Clinton, Commerce Secretary Ron Brown and Transportation Secretary Federico Pena have all promoted U.S. suppliers to the Saudis.
Spokesmen for Boeing and McDonnell Douglas wouldn't comment, or said they weren't aware of any new developments in the Saudi competition.
A spokesman for Airbus, which had hoped to place its smaller A-320 jetliner and larger A-330 and A-340 planes with Saudia, also said he wasn't aware of any new developments.
"There's certainly been an extraordinary amount of pressure from the U.S. government," he said, citing direct lobbying "right up to the highest levels" for a purchase from U.S. manufacturers.
He declined comment on whether Europeans would protest, either formally or informally, to the U.S. government.
Some officials of Airbus and its European member companies have also suggested that recent U.S. efforts to restructure $9.2 billion in Saudi payments for U.S. weapons were unfairly influencing the decision on what airliners to buy.
U.S. industry officials have maintained that the president and other federal officials are only trying to ensure a level playing field for the contest.
However, one person familiar with U.S. government plans to participate in the announcement suggested that even if the U.S. had done nothing unfair, "government interference is what it's going to sound like."
For the Clinton administration, the successful campaign to encourage purchases from U.S. manufacturers has been seen as essential to buoying the president's popularity on the West Coast.
McDonnell Douglas's commercial-jet unit is based in Long Beach, Calif.
Factories there have been ravaged by the loss of more than 25,000 jobs, and there have been serious concerns within the company and among outsiders about how McDonnell Douglas can sustain production of both its small and large jetliner types over the next few years.
A big order from Saudia will help the company, said Tassos Phillipakos, a credit analyst for Moody's Investor Services, "but it will take much more than that for Douglas to be a longterm survivor."
Boeing also has been staggered by the sharp downturn in aircraft orders, which has led it to cut its production rates twice in the past year.
Yesterday, Boeing announced it would further adjust its rates early in 1995, slowing production of smaller 757 jets to four a month from five, while increasing monthly production of its widebody 767 to four from three.
Ron Woodard, president of the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, said it is too early to determine the impact on employment.
Any negative impact, however, is expected to be partly offset by next year's deliveries of the first advanced 777 airliners.
Boeing's twin-engine line also got a boost yesterday from Kazakhstan Airlines.
The airline in the former Soviet state ordered four extended-range 767-300 models, which would put the total order at $360 million according to company price lists.
