For at least a decade, this newspaper has not used the word malacology.
Today, we make up for lost time.
Malacology is the study of mollusks -- including snails, scallops, clams and conchs, and their shells.
The study of mollusk shells is called conchology, another word seldom seen here.
Malacology dates back to 19th-century France, conchology to Victorian England.
The best-known malacologist in America is 74-year-old R. Tucker Abbott.
He has written about 30 books on shells, most of them for a general audience, as well as hundreds of scientific papers.
"He has probably done more to popularize the science than anybody else, living or dead," says Henry W. Chaney, curator of mollusks at California's Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History.
But there aren't all that many malacologists, living or dead, probably no more than 50 or so working in the U.S.
Some experts say even that estimate is high.
However, a lot of scientists from other disciplines study mollusks and shells, too.
And there is a legion of amateur shell collectors.
All in all, Dr. Abbott leads a rather big field.
"He is sort of Mr. Seashell," says Kenneth J. Boss, professor of biology and curator in malacology at Harvard College's Museum of Comparative Zoology.
Dr. Abbott recently accepted a position as director of a new shell museum that is being built on this barrier island off Florida's west coast.
The beaches of Sanibel, and neighboring Captiva Island, have some of the best shelling in the U.S.
"It's a full-time job," Dr. Abbott says of his post.
"By that, I mean an 18-hour day.
But it's fun.
You'll find that people become much busier when they retire."
The museum isn't due to be finished until late this year, so Dr. Abbott now often works in its "preview center," which has a few exhibits and is open to visitors.
He is a friendly man with a casual manner and graying hair, and he often sports a stick-on name tag reading, "Tucker."
He wears one set of glasses and keeps another tethered around his neck.
He is partial to a short-sleeved Hawaiian shirt decorated with brightly colored shells.
The preview center is housed in a few rooms of a former shell shop whose owner, Edith Mugridge, retired in 1992 at the age of 86.
She now lives in the back but drops in now and then to check on things.
Next-door on one side of the shell center is a restaurant called Cheeburger Cheeburger.
Its name pretty much sums up its menu.
Next-door on the other side is a Shell service station.
"What else?" says Dr. Abbott.
Dr. Abbott's career in malacology is unusual in that it spans both the scientific and the popular sides of shell collecting.
Over the past 50 years or so, he has published extensively in scientific journals, held positions in malacology at three major museums, and hunted marine life on scientific expeditions from Zanzibar to Fiji.
For 28 years, he edited The Nautilus, the oldest (105 years) American journal on mollusks.
But he also is known for his popular work on shells.
One of his many books, for children, "Quiz Me: Seashells," is in Braille.
He adapted two of his books for cassette; one cassette is mainly Dr. Abbott reading the index so his audience can learn how to pronounce the scientific names of shells.
Placopecten magellanicus and Argopecten irradians are both a mouthful.
The first is the sea scallop, the second the bay scallop.
His most-popular book, a Golden Nature Guide called "Sea Shells of the World," has been published in seven languages, from Norwegian to Portuguese.
Malacologists' Muse Rudiger Bieler, associate curator and head of the invertebrate division of Chicago's Field Museum, says Dr. Abbott's books were what hooked him on malacology as a boy in Hamburg, Germany.
"I think that's true for a lot of folks in my situation," Dr. Bieler says.
"I know his books have affected people from Holland to South Africa, which is pretty amazing."
Nonetheless, Dr. Abbott frets that popular knowledge of shells is going to the dogs.
"I have found that a very large percentage of schoolteachers don't know that shells come from living creatures," he says.
Where do they think they come from?
"Oh, God put them on the beach at 8 a.m., don't you know?"
Dr. Abbott responds.
Actually, mollusks are one of the oldest and most widely distributed animal groups on earth.
About 100,000 living species are known, and another 600 or so are scientifically described each year -- some newly discovered, others found in museum drawers.
More facts: Squid have beautiful eyes.
The edible oyster undergoes an annual sex change -- male one year, female the next.
The giant Tridacna clam can produce pearls the size of golf balls.
The largest known mollusk shell, from a creature that lived 400 million years ago, was 15 feet in diameter.
The Chinese are believed to have used cowrie shells for money as early as 2,000 B.C.
Which brings us to the Bailey-Matthews Shell Museum, as the facility here is called.
Its main goal is to educate the public -- in contrast to most major mollusk collections, which are primarily for researchers.
It has about three dozen exhibits planned, of which eight are finished.
"They are the finest and prettiest and most educational, if I may say so, exhibits on shells ever produced in the U.S.," Dr. Abbott says.
"I'm exaggerating, but it is true to a great extent.
Most big museums have to have butterflies and elephants and whales on exhibit, and the mollusk exhibits are miserable.
We're going to be shining in that area."
He adds: "To me, this is sort of the crowning accomplishment of my life."
Dr. Abbott has loved shells since boyhood -- "I had a little museum in the basement," he says.
He studied them as an undergraduate at Harvard and a graduate student at George Washington University, which he attended at night while working as a malacologist at the Smithsonian Institution, which has the world's largest shell collection.
In the early 1950s, a publisher asked him to write a seashell guide.
The book, "American Seashells," came out in 1954 -- and launched his writing career in the popular realm.
(In the nonpopular realm, he already had written such works as "Handbook of Medically Important Mollusks of the Orient and Western Pacific.")
"You write a book," he says.
"By the time you write two or three, everybody thinks you must be a guru . . . ."
Eight or so of his books are still in print, some of them published by American Malacologists Inc., a small publishing concern he owns and runs with his wife, Cecelia.
Royalties, he says, have never amounted to more than a few thousand dollars a year.
The books have made him a celebrity of sorts.
He says he appeared twice on the old television program "What's My Line?"
The first time was for shells, which the panel guessed.
The second was for his hobby of collecting paper clips, which the panel didn't guess -- although, he says, "Dorothy Kilgallen got as far as bottle tops."
Dr. Abbott says he intends to remain active in malacology "as long as my health holds up" -- which, to judge from his current energy level, could be a long time.
"It's like a physician's or a writer's career," he says of his pursuit.
"It never stops."
