Tokyo prices rose Thursday, though many investors stayed out of the market ahead of a three-day holiday weekend and the U.S.-Japan summit.
London stocks fell amid a general sense of uneasiness, though volume was strong.
Frankfurt shares scored gains despite jitters.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.80, down 0.16, reflecting lower European and American markets and higher Asia/Pacific markets.
Health care stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 160.64, up 4.19, or 2.7%, with Columbia Healthcare of the U.S. posting a 7.6% gain in its local currency.
Tobacco stocks trailed at 84.23, down 1.52, or 1.8%, with Philip Morris of the U.S. sliding 2.3% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which slumped 409.85 points Wednesday, gained 149.32 to 19990.70, near the day's highs.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 350 million shares, down from 453.4 million shares a day earlier.
Advancing issues outnumbered decliners 647-370.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which fell 18.68 points Wednesday, rose 10.12 to 1608.14.
Amid the light trading, a couple of late buy orders from overseas securities houses for Topix futures contracts propelled the Nikkei into its only major move of the day, nudging it briefly above 20000 before it sagged a bit at the end.
Most investors were sidelined ahead of the Friday market holiday and the summit between the U.S. and Japanese leaders, slowing the frenzied activity that has accompanied political battles in the past two weeks about Japanese government actions to stimulate the economy.
Japanese financial markets have been affected by uncertainties caused partly by lack of progress in trade talks between Japan and the U.S. preceding the summit.
The U.S. seeks to reduce Japan's persistent trade surplus and to allow or improve access by U.S. goods to Japan.
Many Tokyo investors were worried that failure to reach a compromise in the trade talks with the U.S. could send the Japanese yen soaring against the dollar, which could squeeze Japan's exporters by lowering the yen-denominated value of their overseas earnings, and in turn hurt the stock market.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index dropped 22.1 points to 3407.0.
The FT 30-stock index fell 14.8 points to 2619.4.
Volume was 989.9 million shares, compared with 912 million shares a day earlier.
The FT-SE 100 ranged from a high of 3446.1, which was lost quickly, to a low of 3400.3, before the index regained some of its loss.
Investors grew increasingly wary of picking up bargains, pressured by a mixed bag of company news, political concerns and monitoring of Wall Street.
Some investors consolidated positions ahead of several reports next week on British economic data that are expected to determine more forcefully the market's direction, which is generally expected to be up.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index advanced 33.67 points, or 1.6%, to 2118.96, led by the performance of government bond futures.
Though 29 of the DAX stocks rose, stock market sentiment was uncertain and hesitant, partly because of warning strikes in western Germany's metalworking sector.
When bond futures rose, stock prices followed, helped by some covering of positions that had been sold short, or buying to replace borrowed stock that had been sold in hopes of a price decline that could have allowed a profit.
In Paris, stocks shed strong early gains when profit-takers moved in, and prices finished with small losses.
In Amsterdam, shares ended mixed on some late weakness caused by a softer U.S. dollar in currency dealings and lower stock prices in London.
In Milan, prices rose handily as enough buying emerged to outweigh technical factors influencing the market on the eve of the February trading account's final day.
In Madrid, equities spent most of the session at higher levels but finished lower, and participants couldn't pinpoint a reason for the drop, citing only the lack of a theme.
In Stockholm, shares sank 2.1% in chopping trading, as concerns about interest rates and corporate earnings reversed the market's strong opening.
Likewise, in Zurich, prices opened higher but reversed direction at midday and finished lower, with futures activity influencing late selling; the market's sustained correction this week stemmed from a U.S. credit tightening last Friday, and banks again were the focus of selling.
In Mexico City, stocks tumbled 1.4% on continued profit-taking after the market hit record highs on Monday and Tuesday.
The correction didn't surprise investors, as prices had advanced almost 12% this year, a gain that was trimmed to 8.3% in the past two sessions.
In Sydney, shares slumped 1.6%.
Prices weakened at the opening, as investors were nervous about overseas markets and more profit-taking expected after a recent bull run, but the drop gathered momentum, taking some participants by surprise.
Some blamed technical trading for the losses.
Gold shares fell despite a rise in the metal's price.
In Manila, stocks gained solidly in light dealings including follow-up buying following a peaceful rally Wednesday in the Philippines to protest planned oil-price increases.
Holiday observances for the lunar new year closed many Asian bourses, including those in Hong Kong, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Taipei and Seoul.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
