With red and green spotlights twirling and a strobe light pulsating, Journey, a local rock band, launches into an old Chuck Berry favorite.
The crowd, a blur of bluejeans , miniskirts and sweat shirts, dances in the aisles and sings along with vocalist Basel Hag Youseff: "Just let me hear some of that rock-and-roll music, if you want to dance with me."
Rock, a despised symbol of Western decadence in neighboring capitals of Tehran and Baghdad, throbs happily under the authoritarian rule of Syria's Hafez al Assad.
Of course, rocking and rolling here isn't easy.
The music is strictly apolitical: Criticizing the government can land you in prison.
Nor is disco-Damascus heavy on glamour and glitz.
Rock stars often put up their own posters and supplement their musical careers with other pursuits, like practicing dentistry.
Still, the music blares over state-owned airwaves in this cradle of Arab nationalism, and Elvis is the king.
And then there is Sally al Shreikh.
The 21-year-old bass-guitar player, whose black nail polish matches her long hair, had members of the audience diving onto the stage last October in her debut at the Russian Culture Center here.
Her heavy-metal group, More Guts, plays hits by such Western musicians as Nirvana, Ozzy Osborne and Metalica.
Ms. al Shreikh says the older generation loathes the harsh sounds of heavy metal, but her parents have been supportive of her budding career.
Her mother, a pianist, once told her, "This is your life, do whatever you want."
Ms. al Shreikh enjoys a measure of celebrity, drawing stares at Damascus University, where she is an English-literature major.
But fame has its price.
"Some of my friends and all my teachers didn't agree with my being in a heavy-metal band," she says.
"They said people would say I'm not a good girl."
Even with government approval, rockers don't share in the adulation and wealth enjoyed by Western stars.
Journey, not to be confused with a group once popular in the U.S., earns only about $200 a concert, while a good set of drums can cost $3,000 here.
So musicians regularly borrow instruments from one another for concerts, and some band members work other jobs or make ends meet by giving private music lessons.
And, without roadies, an agent or an advance team, band members have to arrange their own bookings, find rehearsal halls and set up their own equipment.
By now, musicians are resigned to self-censorship.
"We cannot say anything political in our music," says Samer Akbik, a thin guitarist with a wispy beard who plays in Ms. al Shreikh's group.
"We're raised on not talking politics."
Still, Ms. al Shreikh, who learned to play guitar from an ex-boyfriend, glories in her self-proclaimed role as the only female heavy-metal rocker in the Arab world.
As she speaks, sitting at a sidewalk cafe, two women walk by wearing traditional Muslim veils.
She glances at them, blows cigarette smoke in their direction and laughs.
"I want to make a band full of girls," she says.
The fathers of modern Syrian rock are a group called Rockestra, which pioneered the use of lights, smoke machines and thousand-watt speakers to stage the first mass concert here in 1984 at the Meridien Hotel.
One fan in the audience that night was Ammar Alani, now a dentist who plays the electric keyboard for Journey.
For a 14-year-old studying classical piano, the event was an epiphany.
"I was expecting music, but what I found was people having fun," he recalls.
"After that day, people knew there was something called rock concerts, where you get crazy and dance."
The get-crazy concerts go along with a somewhat looser cultural climate in Syria, particularly for the children of the elite and middle class from whose ranks most rockers seem to come.
Hallah al Faysal, an artist, shocked some with an exhibition that included several nude self-portraits.
Free expression also bursts forth on a Damascus radio show on which callers vent their anger about steeply rising prices.
Though nudes and call-in complaining are recent phenomena, rock's roots go deeper.
In the early 1960s, a few bands, with names like Dynamite and the Bluebats, briefly had small local followings.
Then the Bluebats flew to Norway on tour and never came back.
In 1968, Johnny Komives, a Hungarian-Syrian drummer, started a rock band called the Tigers.
He says he learned his rock music by driving two hours across the mountains to Beirut, where the clubs were playing songs by Bill Haley and the Comets, the Beatles and Elvis Presley.
At first, the Tigers roared at local high schools.
"We all tried to imitate Presley," he says.
These days, the 44-year-old Mr. Komives's once-shoulder-length hair is close-cropped and thinning, and the band earns up to $2,000 a gig playing what he calls modernized Arab music at weddings, anniversaries and other social occasions.
And the beat goes on.
A huge supply of audio-tape cassettes available in Damascus gives Syria's budding rock musicians ample opportunity to learn imported rock.
Nearly all the tapes are mass-produced here with little concern for copyright laws.
A downtown music store, Nai, is brimming with 5,000 different titles, from Bob Dylan to Meatloaf.
All the tapes on the shelves look the same: blue and white packages with a picture of a gold compact disk.
They all are reproduced from CDs bought in the West.
Saturday nights at 8:15, TV viewers can watch "Letters and Songs," which plays requested hits.
Khalad Saran, who runs the program, gets 200 to 500 letters each week.
About a fourth of the requests are for rock, he says, including such favorite artists as Guns 'N Roses, Iron Maiden and Elton John.
By American standards, the Syrian rock scene is tame.
The crowds are much smaller, and there are virtually no drugs.
Beer flows freely.
Most of the musicians are amateurs.
Mostly, they play because they love the music.
For Akram, a college dropout and guitar player, the music is everything.
He doesn't want any other kind of job and doesn't care that when he walks down the street he is taunted about his ponytail.
He dreams of emigrating to the West, the source of the sounds he loves.
Indeed, Akram, with his big brown mournful eyes, is a '60s flower child stuck in Damascus, harboring unconventional thoughts.
"If you share musical thoughts with me, I don't care if you're from Mars," he says.
"Who cares if you're Israeli.
You're a human being.
You can feel.
You can get hurt.
I can put that together.
Maybe if you can, too, some kind of peace will happen."
