Here it is folks, the story you thought you'd never see: an upbeat feature on the New York subway.
The tale actually begins on Nov. 26, 1990, the day the Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal that argued that begging on the city's trains was protected under the First Amendment.
The original class-action suit, brought by two homeless men who begged and panhandled in the New York City subway system, was filed by the Legal Action Center for the Homeless.
Instead of going for a wide interpretation of the Framers' intent, the court stood by the Metropolitan Transit Authority and the other transportation agencies that were defendants in the case.
As a result of the ruling, the MTA could officially and loudly tell its passengers that panhandling was illegal.
In the early 1990s, passengers' number-one complaint was panhandler intrusion.
Following November's election of a tough-on-crime mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, the city agency launched a long-planned "quality-of-life" campaign.
The transit authority put up posters reminding riders that panhandling is illegal.
The simple advertisement reads, in part, "Give to the charity of your choice -- but not on the subway."
Brochures stacked by subway entrances explain that it is illegal to live in subway trains and tunnels and insist that customers not be intimidated into giving to panhandlers.
A task force has been assigned to arrest repeat offenders.
It isn't as if New Yorkers haven't felt and shown compassion for the city's estimated 90,000 homeless.
New Yorkers pay a greater share of the (particularly large) tax bill for public entitlement programs -- 25% -- than do residents of many other cities.
New Yorkers also support numerous private-charity assistance programs, such as soup kitchens and church shelter programs.
Over the years many train riders have handed coins to the unfortunates who ask for money.
But these days, when it sometimes seems that nearly every subway car features an eloquent or aggressive petitioner, riders are having second thoughts about generosity.
They are also tired of feeling guilty.
"I feel like I have to give to them," says 25-year-old Michelle Weber, who travels by subway to her advertising job every day.
"I feel like I have to give an explanation if I don't give."
Given the high rate of substance abuse in New York, riders wonder if their cash is supporting a drug habit.
Margaret Nolan, a nurse and mother of two pre-schoolers who lives on Manhattan's upper West Side, says: "Panhandlers use all kinds of tricks to get you to give.
`I'm not on drugs, I don't have a gun,' they say.
It makes me feel really uncomfortable, especially when I'm with my kids.
Now the newest gimmick is saying they're HIV positive."
Quantifiable evidence shows how panhandling has cost the city's transit system.
MTA spokesman John Cunningham reports that year after year, MTA surveys have found that panhandlers are the biggest source of rider complaints (90% of subway riders cited the issue).
After 1989, as more and more panhandlers appeared to be moving underground, ridership fell.
Nearly 10% of New Yorkers say they have cut back subway use due to the problem.
A few weeks into New York's campaign, commuters are already remarking that they notice a decline in panhandling, although some wonder if enforcing this program is a waste of the police force's time.
Robert James, 35 and homeless since, he says, a car accident three years ago left him disabled, reports that his eight-hour shift riding the rails and asking for money now pulls in between $20 and $30 -- half what he says he used to make a month ago, before the campaign began.
The MTA, for its part, is working hard to offer alternative help for those ejected from the trains.
Connections, a new MTA outreach program, sends caseworkers into the transit system to direct the homeless to medical and mental health facilities, substance abuse treatment centers, or places that provide food and shelter.
But the MTA also faces stiff opposition.
"What good does it do to criminalize the poor?" asks David Giffen, New York director of the Coalition for the Homeless.
"It is not helping people to become constructive members of society."
Out of the Shelters and Into the Streets and the Coalition for the Homeless, two advocacy groups, have sent graffiti troops into the subways to protest.
A counter-ad has been pasted over several MTA posters, showing what passengers should be thinking when beggars approach: "Why does Rudy Giuliani think it's a crime to be poor?
And why is the M.T.A. trying to tell ME what to do with MY money and MY conscience?" it reads.
But the MTA insists that the campaign is not designed to discourage compassion.
It says it is responding to its market.
"We have a right and responsibility to address our customers needs and complaints," spokesman John Cunningham says.
Ms. Hastings works on the Journal's editorial page.
