Cardiac Science Inc., a tiny medical research concern with ties to stockbroker Rafi Khan and his money-manager clients, suspended operations Friday after a multimillion dollar financing deal collapsed.
The Irvine, Calif., concern issued a statement saying it has "temporarily substantially curtailed operations due to lack of funds."
Several employees have agreed to stay on, "but nobody is getting paid," said Howard K. Cooper, president and chief executive officer.
The announcement came after Cardiac Science said an investment firm decided not to proceed with plans for an underwriting of Cardiac Science shares.
The underwriter, which Mr. Cooper declined to identify, had tentatively agreed to replace Beverly Hills, Calif.-based Reynolds Kendrick Stratton Inc., which dropped a planned offering last October after Mr. Khan left the firm.
Cardiac Science, which went public in July 1991, had hoped to raise up to $8 million through RKS.
The company didn't say how much it sought in the offering with RKS's replacement.
It was the latest blow for Cardiac Science, thrust into the spotlight because of its backing by Mr. Khan and his clients, who bought the bulk of the company's securities sold about a year ago in a $1.2 million private placement.
Among the buyers for his personal account was money manager John Kaweske, whose alleged failure to properly report certain personal stock trades led to his dismissal last month by Denver-based Invesco Funds Group.
An individual close to Cardiac Science said the underwriter, RAS Securities, New York, got cold feet because of all the adverse publicity and a related Securities and Exchange Commission probe into fund managers' personal trading.
RAS Securities, best known for its research director, Ray Dirks, couldn't be reached over the weekend.
Mr. Cooper said the underwriter's representatives told him that the decision was based on "market conditions" and other financing considerations.
Cardiac Science, he said, is still hoping to obtain private financing through the firm or other "funding groups."
Before Mr. Khan's abrupt resignation from Reynolds Kendrick Stratton in October, he accompanied Mr. Cooper on a promotional road show that began in the Middle East and included stops in Switzerland, France, England, and many U.S. cities.
"We completed the road show in Los Angeles and two days later Rafi resigned," Mr. Cooper said.
Mr. Cooper said he is "upset," but bears no "ill will" toward Mr. Khan.
Reached at his home office in La Canada, Calif., Mr. Khan declined to comment.
The stockbroker recently lost a proxy fight to oust the management of ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc., a Costa Mesa, Calif., drug maker.
Mr. Cooper was a director on Mr. Khan's slate.
Cardiac Science is trying to raise money to continue testing a bedside device designed to stop ventricular arrhythmias that lead to sudden cardiac death, one of the leading causes of death in the U.S. and other countries.
The announcement came late Friday, well after the unusually early close of New York markets.
