Italy's long march toward political renewal appeared to clear its last hurdle as Prime Minister Carlo Ciampi offered his resignation yesterday, paving the way for early general elections.
Mr. Ciampi, former governor of the Bank of Italy and the country's first nonpolitical premier, submitted his resignation to President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, a day after Parliament began debate on a no-confidence motion on his eight-month-old government.
The prime minister, 73 years old, was appointed in April as a crisis manager to oversee political and economic reform after the country's dramatic corruption scandal crippled the nearly half-century rule of the governing coalition led by the Christian Democrats.
Mr. Ciampi told the Chamber of Deputies on Wednesday that he was ready to step aside now that his government had accomplished its original goals of completing electoral reform and passing this year's budget.
Political commentators said Mr. Scalfaro is likely to dissolve Parliament over the weekend and ask Mr. Ciampi to continue as caretaker premier until elections, which could come as early as March 27.
Although the president also could reject Mr. Ciampi's resignation offer, Mr. Scalfaro repeatedly has stressed that new elections would be called once legislation reforming the electoral system was completed.
Parliament approved such a measure in late December.
Mr. Ciampi, who considered his job transitional from the outset, was considered a figure of stability during Italy's convulsive political scandals and reveled in his role as the country's first technocrat premier.
"I work here in the same manner I worked at the Bank of Italy -- without the distractions of political alchemy," he said in an interview last year.
He had been applauded by the international financial community for his efforts to trim the country's ballooning budget deficit, accelerate its long-stalled privatization program and complete vital electoral reform legislation.
Opposition parties, led by radical Marco Panella, had proposed the no-confidence motion as a means of speeding the process of dissolving Parliament and calling new elections.
Mr. Panella withdrew the motion yesterday, but Mr. Ciampi nevertheless decided to offer his resignation.
The opposition parties -- the former Communists, now known as the Democratic Party of the Left, the federalist Northern League and the neofascist Italian Social Movement -- have been clamoring for early elections after municipal voting last month demonstrated a total collapse of support for the former ruling parties.
"All Italians want elections as quickly as possible," Northern League leader Umberto Bossi said Thursday.
"To drag along the present legislature would mean going toward a quarrelsome agony," said Massimo D'Alema, a leader of the former Communists.
Mired in the corruption scandal, the centrist Christian Democrats and their coalition partners are expected to suffer significant losses in the national vote.
But the political landscape remains highly confused.
New electoral laws passed after the success of a popular referendum last April call for 75% of Parliament to be elected through direct elections, while the remaining quarter will be elected through the old proportional representation system, in which a party is allocated seats based on its tally.
As a result, political parties have been madly jockeying to form new alliances able to reach a majority under the new system.
