National Medical Enterprises Inc. took a $287.4 million write-down in its second quarter, ended Nov. 30, related to previously announced plans to dispose of its psychiatric hospitals.
The Santa Monica, Calif., company months ago said it expected to take a "sizable" charge against earnings in the period, but it didn't indicate how large it would be.
Even yesterday, National Medical didn't break out the exact size of the one-time charge for the actual sale of its troubled psychiatric facilities.
Christi Sulzbach, senior vice president, said that the $287.4 million figure, described by the company as a loss from discontinued operations, includes anticipated losses to operate those hospitals until the divestiture plan is completed.
Ms. Sulzbach said National Medical hopes to sell its psychiatric properties in the next few months.
Analysts described yesterday's announcement as an effort to head off piecemeal write-downs or continuing charges that could be a drag on earnings.
"They took an extraordinarily conservative approach," said Margo Vignola, an analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc.
"They wrote off everything, including the kitchen sink," she said, "to make sure they wouldn't have to do it again."
In addition to the write-off on the sale itself, the company said the $287.4 million figure includes certain severance costs, legal costs, other costs stemming from the transaction and a nearly $1.2 million loss from operating the psychiatric sites in the second quarter.
Overall for the quarter, National Medical yesterday reported a net loss of $226.2 million, or $1.36 a share, compared with net income of $52.4 million, or 32 cents a share, in the year-ago quarter.
Earnings from continuing operations trailed year-earlier figures by about 20%, despite what the company said were improved profit margins and enhanced cost controls at its core acute-care hospitals.
For the six months ended Nov. 30, the company posted a net loss of nearly $270 million, or $1.61 a share, compared with net income of $103 million, or 62 cents a share, a year ago.
The latest six-month results include a $441 million loss from discontinued operations and a $60.1 million gain from accounting changes.
The year-earlier figures include a $25.4 million loss from discontinued operations.
The health-care company has been reeling under widespread charges of billing fraud and mistreatment of patients at its psychiatric facilities.
In October, it suspended dividends on common stock and added $250 million to a pretax reserve to settle pending litigation.
But those estimates don't include provisions for payments related to various state and federal investigations.
And, along with yesterday's quarterly earnings report, Chairman Jeffrey Barbakow said that the "financial impact" of the company's recent sale of its rehabilitation hospitals won't be seen until results are reported for the current quarter.
National Medical stock closed yesterday at $15.25, up 12.5 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
