The following statement, excerpted from the March issue of First Things, was authored by the Ramsey Colloquium, a group of Christian and Jewish scholars sponsored by the Institute on Religion and Public Life.
Homosexual behavior is a phenomenon with a long history, to which there have been various cultural and moral responses.
But today in our public life there is something new that demands our attention and deserves a careful moral response.
The new thing is a gay and lesbian movement that variously presents itself as an appeal for compassion, an extension of civil rights to minorities and a cultural revolution.
This movement aggressively proposes radical changes in social behavior, religion, morality and law.
As committed Christians and Jews, we share the uneasiness of most Americans with the proposals advanced by the gay and lesbian movement, and we seek to articulate some of the reasons for the largely intuitive and pre-articulate anxiety of most Americans regarding homosexuality.
While the gay and lesbian movement is indeed a new thing, its way was prepared by the so-called sexual revolution.
That revolution is motored by presuppositions that ought to be challenged.
Perhaps the key presupposition is that human health and flourishing require that sexual desire, understood as a "need," be acted upon and satisfied.
Any discipline of denial or restraint has been popularly depicted as unhealthy and dehumanizing.
We insist, however, that it is dehumanizing to define ourselves by our desires alone.
Nor does it seem plausible to suggest that what millennia of human experience have taught us to regard as self-command should now be dismissed as mere repression.
At the same time that the place of sex has been grotesquely exaggerated by the sexual revolution, it has also been trivialized.
The mysteries of human sexuality are commonly reduced to matters of recreation or taste, not unlike one's preferences in diet, dress or sport.
This peculiar mix of the exaggerated and the trivialized makes it possible for the gay and lesbian movement to demand, simultaneously, a respect for what is claimed to be most constitutively true of homosexuals and tolerance for what is, after all, simply a difference in "lifestyle."
It is important to recognize the linkages among the component parts of the sexual revolution.
Permissive abortion, widespread adultery, easy divorce, radical feminism, and the gay and lesbian movement have not by accident appeared at the same historical moment.
They have in common a declared desire for liberation from constraint -- especially constraint associated with an allegedly oppressive culture and religious tradition.
They also have in common the presupposition that the body is little more than an instrument for the fulfillment of desire, and that the fulfillment of desire is the essence of the self.
Finally, they all rest on a doctrine of the autonomous self.
We believe it is a false doctrine that leads neither to individual flourishing nor to social well-being.
Marriage and the family -- husband, wife and children, joined by public recognition and legal bond -- are the most effective institutions for the rearing of children, for the directing of sexual passion and for human flourishing in community.
At the same time, it remains true that there are legitimate and honorable forms of love other than marriage.
Indeed, one of the goods at stake in today's disputes is a long-honored tradition of friendship between men and men, women and women, women and men.
In the current climate, it becomes imperative to affirm the reality and beauty of sexually chaste relationships.
We do not accept the notion that self-command is an unhealthy form of repression on the part of single people, whether their inclination is heterosexual or homosexual.
Put differently, the choice is not limited to heterosexual marriage on the one hand and relationships involving extramarital or homogenital sex on the other.
We cannot settle the dispute about the roots -- genetic or environmental -- of homosexual orientation.
Although some scientific evidence suggests a genetic predisposition, we must still ask whether such a predisposition should be acted on or whether it should be resisted.
In a fallen creation, many quite common attitudes and behaviors must be straightforwardly designated as sin.
Although we are equal before God, we are not born equal in terms of our strengths and weaknesses, our tendencies and dispositions, our nature and nurture.
We cannot utterly change the hand we have been dealt by inheritance and family circumstances, but we are responsible for how we play that hand.
Inclination and temptation are not sinful, although they surely result from humanity's fallen condition.
Sin occurs in the joining of the will, freely and knowingly, to an act or way of life that is contrary to God's purpose.
Religious communities in particular must lovingly support all the faithful in their struggle against temptation, while at the same time insisting, precisely for the sake of the faithful, on the sinfulness of the homogenital and extramarital heterosexual behavior to which some are drawn.
Since there are good reasons to support the heterosexual norm, since it has been developed with great difficulty, and since it can be maintained only if it is cared for and supported, we cannot be indifferent to attacks upon it.
The social norms by which sexual behavior is inculcated and controlled are of urgent importance for families and for society as a whole.
Advocates of the gay and lesbian movement have the responsibility to set forth publicly their alternative proposals.
This means more than calling for liberation from established standards.
They must clarify for all of us how sexual mores are to be inculcated in the young, who are particularly vulnerable to seduction and solicitation.
Public anxiety about homosexuality is pre-eminently a concern about the vulnerabilities of the young.
This, we are persuaded, is a matter of legitimate and urgent public concern.
Gay and lesbian advocates sometimes claim that they are asking for no more than an end to discrimination, drawing an analogy with the early civil-rights movement.
The analogy is unconvincing and misleading.
Differences of race are in accord with -- not contrary to -- our nature, and such differences do not provide justification for behavior that is otherwise unacceptable.
Certain discriminations are in fact necessary within society; it is not too much to say that civilization itself depends on the making of such distinctions (between, finally, right and wrong).
In our public life, some discrimination is in order -- when, for example, in education and programs involving young people the intent is to prevent predatory behavior that can take place under the guise of supporting young people in their anxieties about their "sexual identity."
It is necessary to discriminate between relationships.
Gay and lesbian "domestic partnerships," for example, should not be socially recognized as the moral equivalent of marriage.
Marriage and the family are institutions necessary for our continued social well-being.
In an individualistic society that tends to liberation from all constraint, they are fragile institutions in need of careful and continuing support.
To endure (tolerance), to pity (compassion), to embrace (affirmation): That is the sequence of change in attitude and judgment that has been advanced by the gay and lesbian movement with notable success.
We expect that this success will encounter certain limits and that what is truly natural will reassert itself, but this may not happen before more damage is done to innumerable individuals and to our common life.
