Today one of the longest-running and most-respected management teams in broadcasting history breaks up, with the retirement of Daniel B. Burke as president and chief executive officer of Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
Mr. Burke, the hands-on partner to Chairman Thomas S. Murphy, leaves big shoes to fill -- so big, that they're apparently going to remain empty for some time.
As Capital Cities executives gather this week in Phoenix for the company's annual management meeting, all eyes are on the most likely eventual successor: Robert A. Iger, president of the ABC Television Network Group and an executive vice president of the corporation.
But Mr. Iger, who turns 43 tomorrow, has been in his current job for just one year, and the company's board isn't yet ready to turn over the reins.
During nearly four decades, Mr. Burke and Mr. Murphy built Capital Cities, which later merged with the much larger ABC, into an entertainment powerhouse led by the ABC television network.
"If you're going to be in a network, that's the network to be in," says Tom Wolzien, a media analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co.
Concern Over Management Wall Street seems to agree, pushing the stock recently to its record high of $676.50 a share.
Capital Cities/ABC shares rose $1.375 to close at $673.625 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
The only concern has been the gap between the Murphy-Burke team and the next generation of management.
Wall Street began to get nervous about the future leadership of the company a year ago, when it became apparent that Mr. Burke intended to retire on his 65th birthday, which was Feb. 4.
Mr. Murphy had relinquished the chief executive title to Mr. Burke in 1990, when Mr. Murphy turned 65.
Of the contenders, Mr. Iger, who has been at the company since 1974, was thought the most likely.
He was promoted to network chief in January 1993, after a stint as president of ABC Entertainment, and was named executive vice president in July.
In the absence of a ready internal candidate, several executives from outside the company were sounded out about the chief executive's job, people familiar with the situation say.
One of them was Robert A. Daly, chairman of Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Bros. studio, who passed.
Mr. Daly declined to comment.
The company was also exploring strategic mergers or acquisitions, with the possibility that the top job would be filled by someone from the merging company.
At one point, people close to the company say, Capital Cities talked with Viacom Inc., viewing its chief executive, Frank Biondi, as a potential successor.
Viacom, in the midst of the battle for Paramount Communications Inc., declined to comment.
Last November, with no deal in sight, Capital Cities announced that Mr. Murphy would remain as chairman and resume the chief executive title when Mr. Burke retired.
That decision had the added advantage of keeping in place an agreement with the company's largest shareholder, Warren Buffett, whose 13% stake is controlled by Messrs. Murphy and Burke as long as one of them is chief executive.
Though Mr. Murphy has never publicly crowned Mr. Iger as the heir apparent, Mr. Murphy said in a recent internal telecast to employees: "We feel that we have very able people in place right now that'll be able to take over both Dan's job and my job, the way it is right now."
The unusual situation can work, several analysts note.
"I don't think it's a near-term problem, as long as you don't lose both Messrs. Murphy and Burke at the same time," says Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. analyst Jessica Reif.
Still, many say the fast-moving media environment may overtake the long-term plan, if Cap Cities ends up negotiating a strategic deal with a company such as Turner Broadcasting System Inc., whose Chairman Ted Turner says he's on the prowl for a network.
"With the rumors of merger talks, this is a way of keeping the No. 2 slot open," says Mr. Wolzien.
In the meantime, all eyes will be on Mr. Iger.
"It's there for the heirs apparent to take, if they step up to the plate" with programming hits and improved earnings, says John Tinker, an analyst with Furman Selz Inc.
