The first interest-rate rise engineered by the Federal Reserve in almost five years isn't by itself enough to push an already strong dollar much higher this week, currency analysts believe.
But it has put the dollar squarely in the limelight and prompted speculative buying in the U.S. currency, they said.
Some of the most aggressive currency trading accounts already have rushed back in to buy the dollar, traders said.
What remains to be seen is whether long-term market players such as fixed-income fund managers will follow, fueling a sustained rally.
"The only way the dollar is going to go substantially higher {from here} is if people become convinced the Fed isn't doing just a pre-emptive strike {against inflation} but is prepared to aggressively raise rates in the near term," said Michael Faust, vice president and foreign-exchange manager at Bailard, Biehl & Kaiser in San Francisco.
Convince the field, and the dollar has a good chance at making a run at the 1.8000-mark level, Mr. Faust and other traders said.
While many currency accounts were willing to bet at that level -- which hasn't been seen since summer of 1991 -- most weren't looking for it until late in 1994.
On Friday, the central bank signaled that it was raising its target for the federal funds rate -- the rate banks charge one another on overnight loans -- to what traders believe is now 3.25% from the previous 3%.
Or, as a Fed release put it, the policy-making Federal Open Market Committee voted unanimously "to increase slightly the degree of pressure on reserve positions."
In the past, the Fed hasn't formally announced its intention to push the federal funds rate to a different level.
The U.S. currency was trading at 1.7585 marks late Friday, compared with 1.7415 late in New York Thursday.
The dollar also traded at 109.30 yen, compared with 108.14 late Thursday.
About midday Monday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.88 yen and at 1.7620 marks.
On Friday, the dollar briefly touched 1.7640 marks, a 29-month high.
But even the staunchest dollar bulls won't be willing to take the currency much higher unless there are signs that the Fed will nudge rates upward again.
"I don't think there's much more upside for the dollar based on current news," said Mike Malpede, senior currency analyst at Refco Inc., Chicago.
Factoring in interest-rate differentials, he added, "we've priced it."
There's a long line of prominent Wall Streeters who do believe that more Fed moves are forthcoming, however.
John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon Brothers Inc., said: "Certainly on the side of the Fed, this is the first installment of what is going to be a long process, attempting over time to decelerate U.S. growth" in order to maintain price stability.
But others said that in light of some continuing doubts about the strength of the recovery, more rate increases might spur a political melee distasteful Alan Greenspan, the Fed's chairman.
"As someone said to me, `I don't think Greenspan wants to spend the rest of the year in front of a congressional committee explaining rate hikes if there's still a weak labor front,'" said Steven Geovanis, managing director of foreign exchange at Merrill Lynch International Bank.
Bailard Biehl's Mr. Faust agreed, and added that such fallout would also be quite apparent at the administration level.
"There is a risk that you see more of a rift between the Treasury and the Fed," he said.
He characterized the Fed now as "proactive rather than reactive" with regard to fighting inflation.
