Club Mediterranee SA plans to double the number of beds it offers in Asia by the end of the decade and step up efforts to market its all-inclusive vacation packages to Asian consumers.
"We should be at least in the 10,000-bed range" in Asia by 2000, said Serge Trigano, the French company's chairman and chief executive officer.
Club Med's Asian expansion plans moved forward Tuesday with its signing of a formal agreement with Singapore's Straits Steamship Land Ltd. to manage a Club Med village on Bintan, an Indonesian island some 28 miles southeast of Singapore.
The 600-bed Bintan project and three other Club Med resorts already in the pipeline for Japan, China and Vietnam, respectively, will add about 2,600 beds to Club Med's existing 5,287 beds in Asia.
"Other destinations where we would love to be" include the Philippines and Korea, Mr. Trigano said in an interview here.
Club Med's current roster of Asian vacation villages includes resorts in Bali, Indonesia; Phuket, Thailand; Sahoro, Japan; and Cherating, Malaysia.
The Bintan Club Med should open in 1996, Mr. Trigano said.
A resort on Hainan island off China's southern coast, to be built by a Chinese concern, should open in 1997.
A village in Japan's Okinawan archipelago, to be built by Nippon Life Insurance Co., is expected to open in 1998.
Club Med is still lining up investors to build its first Vietnam resort and hopes to sign an agreement in May.
Despite the lack of basic infrastructure in Vietnam, "we believe we shouldn't miss this opportunity," Mr. Trigano said.
Club Med aims to open the resort in Nha Trang, northeast of Ho Chi Minh City, in 1997 or 1998.
Mr. Trigano said Club Med will rely on outside investors to speed its expansion in Asia.
World-wide, the group owns 50% of its properties.
However, future villages in Asia will be built and owned by others and managed by Club Med.
"A new village today is US$50 million to US$70 million for 300 to 350 beds," Mr. Trigano said.
"We can't afford ourselves to make this investment."
In the Asian travel market, Club Med is already relatively well-established in Japan, Australia and New Zealand.
Of the 180,300 Asian tourists last year at Club Med properties in the region, Japan accounted for about 80,000, and Australia and New Zealand for about 50,000.
About 30,000 North Americans and Europeans stayed at Club Med's Asian resorts last year.
Club Med now plans to expand its sales efforts in such markets as South Korea, which gave it 5,000 customers last year, and Taiwan and Hong Kong, which accounted for 5,000 and 10,000 customers, respectively.
"We believe we have a huge potential" in the region, Mr. Trigano said.
"In the year 2000, Asia should be 20% of our business compared with 14% now," Mr. Trigano said, measured by the number of vacationers world-wide and their nationality.
Robert Stiles, group managing director at consultant Horwath Asia Pacific in Singapore, said that "to date Club Med has been very successful in Asia and I do think there is a big opportunity to expand on that success."
However, Mr. Stiles added that the intra-Asian travel market is price-sensitive, and the potential market for international-class resorts in the short-term remains relatively limited.
A three-night package at Club Med's Phuket village costs 1,300 Singapore dollars (US$822) a person, including airfare from Singapore, during high season, and S$970 during low season.
Club Med's Asian operations and its 11,935 beds in the U.S., Mexico and the Caribbean are grouped together in Club Med Inc., a New York Stock Exchange-listed subsidiary.
The Paris-based parent company has 47,933 beds in Europe, Africa, the Middle East and South America.
