Investors decided that Washington's stepped-up interest in the tobacco industry is a drag.
Cigarette makers' stock prices fell as investors had their first chance to react to the Food and Drug Administration's antitobacco blast.
What worried Wall Street was the FDA's potentially profit-crippling suggestion that there's a legal basis for the agency to regulate cigarettes as a drug.
A chorus of analysts hailed the stocks' drop as a buying opportunity.
But their enthusiasm fell on deaf ears.
Tobacco stocks slumped for most of the day.
Philip Morris lost 2 to 56 on twice-normal volume of nearly 4.3 million shares.
RJR Nabisco Holdings slid 3/8 to 6 7/8 on almost 5.5 million shares.
Why all this pain, when practically nobody thinks the FDA is going to get authority over tobacco?
Even FDA Commissioner David Kessler suggested the agency wouldn't act without a directive from Congress.
For one thing, the FDA's stance rekindled fears about the Clinton administration's antitobacco agenda.
Some analysts said the latest tobacco controversy will make it easier for the administration to win its proposed big boost in tobacco taxes to help pay for health-care reform.
Also, some lawyers said the FDA's contention that tobacco companies manipulate the level of nicotine in cigarettes to keep people addicted could lead to a fresh round of lawsuits against cigarette makers.
At the very least, the latest turmoil has dashed investors' reviving comfort with tobacco stocks following a disruptive cigarette-price war in 1993.
A number of analysts called investors' flight from tobacco stocks overblown.
"The market severely overreacted," says Gary Black, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Co.
"This is a great buying opportunity to buy these stocks cheap.
A week from now these stocks will be higher than they are today."
Roy Burry, an analyst with Kidder Peabody & Co., dismissed talk of a possible cigarette ban as "noise.
It's something to be ignored."
But what many investors ignored were the bullish comments.
"I'm still negative on the tobacco companies," said Mike Kennedy, an analyst for IDS Financial Services Inc.
"I still have some fundamental problems" with the group.
He says the FDA report has jolted people who had grown "apathetic" about the probability of a tobacco-tax increase.
"It is still out there in front of us," he warns.
Others see the FDA statement as part of the administration's aggressive stance on tobacco issues in general.
"I'm not so sure that this isn't a part of an administration effort to keep the pressure on the industry in terms of the excise tax," says Marc I. Cohen, tobacco analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co.
"The administration has been very crafty throughout the health-care debate."
Mr. Cohen said now that the companies are facing the horrifying, if unlikely, prospect of FDA regulation, pro-tobacco legislators might choose to give ground on another front and not fight the proposed tripling of the tobacco tax so hard.
"What bothers me is, as there are fewer and fewer smokers, it gets easier politically to attack the tobacco companies," says Ronald Thomas, an analyst at ASB Capital Management, a pension-fund manager in Washington.
With the industry under intense political fire, many analysts recommend avoiding tobacco stocks.
"The industry is under attack," says S. Leigh Ferst, an analyst at Prudential Securities.
"The stocks are going to be volatile."
Until lately, litigation threats had diminished considerably after a string of victories by tobacco companies.
Now there's some fear the lawsuits will reignite if evidence emerges that companies are in fact manipulating the amount of nicotine in cigarettes, as the FDA contends.
The situation provides several new avenues of approach "and undermines some of the defenses and positions which the tobacco industry has successfully taken in the past," says Richard Daynard, head of the Tobacco Products Liability Project, a group of antitobacco lawyers that monitors tobacco litigation.
The FDA's statement that there is growing evidence that cigarette makers manipulate the level of nicotine in cigarettes "is likely to encourage plaintiffs' product-liability lawyers to reconsider tobacco litigation."
Even a strong statement by Philip Morris, the nation's largest tobacco company, failed to stem the selling.
The company said that the FDA hasn't any basis to regulate tobacco and that nothing is done in the processing of tobacco that increases the amount of nicotine in cigarettes above that found naturally in tobacco.
The nicotine controversy was sparked by an ABC News "Day One" investigation that alleges the tobacco industry has been adding nicotine to cigarettes in order to enhance the addictive quality of cigarettes.
R.J. Reynolds, the nation's second-largest tobacco company, dismissed the allegations as "ludicrous."
Bullish analysts say no matter how hostile the administration is to tobacco, it will take congressional action to impose any meaningful tax increases or changes in regulatory oversight.
With 25% of the population still smoking, such harsh actions are considered unlikely, to say the least.
Smokers are quick to point out that Prohibition didn't work and that a black market in liquor quickly developed.
Moreover, President Clinton's plan to raise the cigarette tax by 75 cents a pack, to nearly $1 a pack, is linked to his health-care reforms, a plan with an uncertain political future.
As a result, bulls like Mr. Black of Bernstein say tobacco stocks are likely to bounce back in the next day or two.
Philip Morris is now selling at below 10 times 1995 projected earnings, he said.
"Three weeks from now, we are going to look back and say there was another buying opportunity and I missed it."
