South Africa's transition to multiracial democracy appears threatened by differences over the new constitution, but the country's white and black leaders have found something to agree on: how the new South Africa should be represented on flagpoles and hailed in song.
After months of polemics, the Transitional Executive Council, a multiracial body overseeing the white government until the April 26-28 elections, has unveiled a new flag and decided the country will have two national anthems -- at least for a while.
The new Parliament could choose to reopen the issue.
The Solomonic verdict averts the possibility that the country's next president -- in all likelihood Nelson Mandela -- could be inaugurated without any anthem being played or flag fluttering.
That could have happened because while there was wide agreement that the country's old flag and anthem were too closely associated with apartheid, no one could come up with suitable replacements.
The task proved too much both for a specially set-up Commission on National Symbols and for a team of professional designers.
Their successive failures had led Frederick Brownell, South Africa's herald general -- or Mr. Flag, Seals and Coats of Arms -- to become frantic.
"Every banana republic has a flag outside its international missions," he exclaimed recently.
"What on earth are we going to do with merchant-marine vessels on the high seas?
Do we have an empty flag post at the United Nations?
Can you imagine a foreign embassy without a flag?"
To be sure, with political violence threatening the elections, a new flag and anthem hardly seem a priority.
"There are much more important issues to solve, like whether or not we have a civil war," says Anthea Jeffery of the South African Institute of Race Relations.
But the flap over a flag and an anthem underscore how divided South Africa remains.
"If we cannot agree on things as insignificant as a piece of cloth and a song, how on earth are we going to agree on things that really matter?" wrote a reader in a letter to the daily The Star.
Among the contributions that poured in when the symbols commission got to work in September, one person suggested a large black cat and small white mouse, tails entwined.
Another proposed clear plastic, so anyone could see in it what he wanted.
A pessimist recommended a skull-and-crossbones, a coffin and 30 pieces of silver on a field of black.
All but six of the 7,000 submissions were rejected -- and not even the six satisfied the commission.
One member issued a dissenting report saying one flag looked like gift wrap.
In the end, it was decided that the new flag will be dominated by a green Y laid on its side.
It's surrounded by blocks of black, red and blue, set off by thin lines of gold and white.
The Y, says Mr. Brownell, is to "give the idea of convergence, of roads joining up and flowing together."
The national anthem decision, however, risks more dissonance than convergence.
To many blacks the old anthem, Die Stem van Suid-Afrika, or The Voice of South Africa, with its references to "the creaking of ox-wagons," glorifies the Afrikaners' Great Trek that ultimately led them to power.
To many whites, the African National Congress's anthem, Nkosi Sikelel'i Afrika, or God Bless Africa, is associated with terrorism.
The commission received 120 anthem submissions and short-listed six, but agreed that "none could really pass for an anthem."
So it proposed a compromise that was upheld: both Die Stem and Nkosi Sikelel'i Afrika will be played.
Many fear that this will lead to "duelling anthems," with supporters of the two trying to outsing each other on public occasions, and think a new anthem should be found quickly.
