Campbell Soup Co.'s new motto: Never underestimate the power of marketing.
Despite initial skepticism by some marketing consultants, the Camden, N.J., food company says its massive new marketing campaign launched last fall is heating up its dormant soup business.
Some consultants were critical when Campbell traded in its well-recognized slogan, "M'm!
Good!" for the bolder, rather jarring tag line, "Never Underestimate the Power of Soup."
But after the company bombarded television viewers with the new commercials -- including one starring Olympic medalist Nancy Kerrigan -- its sales started to cook.
The campaign is "an aggressive move that was designed to have consumers reconsider soup in a new way and to think about Campbell in a new way," says Marty Thrasher, president of the company's U.S. soup division.
So far, he says, "we're moving the needle."
Early sales results look promising.
Sales of Campbell's core red-and-white label soups in supermarkets grew faster after its new campaign began, according to data gathered by Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
Dollar sales rose 5.8% in the 13 weeks ended Jan. 2, compared with 4.3% sales growth in the 52-week period ended Jan. 2.
Sales of all Campbell's soup brands, including Chunky, Healthy Request and Home Cookin', rose 4.5% to $1.72 billion in the 52 weeks.
On a unit sales basis, the decline for red-and-white soups has slowed and may have even turned around.
Campbell executives say that unit sales recently started rising.
Help From Snowstorms Of course, Campbell had a lot going for itself recently besides its new advertising pitch.
The soup company can only be grateful for this winter's many snowstorms, which called for frequent bowls of steaming soup.
And the company got a lot of mileage out of its Nancy Kerrigan endorsement.
The spotlight on the silver-medal-winning figure skater after her knee-clubbing incident helped make the Campbell ad -- in which the skater eats chicken noodle soup and elbows a hockey player out of her way -- one of the most memorable promotions during the winter Olympic season.
The company says it may feature Ms. Kerrigan in another commercial, but she won't be the focus of their campaign.
To keep the soup market bubbling, Mr. Thrasher says, Campbell will increase its ad budget for red-and-white soups this fiscal year ending July 31 by 30% to 40%.
The campaign will be the company's largest ever, he says, and will concentrate on its classic red-and-white label, making it the most promoted food product in supermarkets.
The company declines to disclose its ad spending, but industry estimates indicate that it spent more than $45 million last year for all its soup brands.
Some analysts applaud Campbell's Power of Soup ads, which end with the slogan bursting onto the screen, word by word.
"The product has become more relevant to the average 15-year-old," says John McMillin, an analyst for Prudential Securities Inc.
But Campbell's big pitch may also benefit its competitors at the company's expense, cautions Nomi Ghez, an analyst for Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Campbell's aggressive advertising helped the total soup category grow by 5.6% in the 13-week period.
Campbell's red-and-white line's market share grew slightly, but the company's total soup market share fell 1.2 percentage points to 77% during the period, with most of it going to Pet Inc.'s Progresso brand and private-label soups.
Competitors say that in a sense, they welcome Campbell's activity.
"I don't think it hurts," says Kay Carpenter, a spokeswoman for Hunt-Wesson Inc., a division of ConAgra Inc. that markets Healthy Choice's 17 soups.
"It reminds people that soup is a good selection," she says, even if it's not Campbell's.
Shane Pelletier is one consumer who pleases Campbell's competitors.
The 20-year-old student from Cherry Hill, N.J., says he has seen the Campbell ads so often that "soup is in your head all the time."
But when he approached the soup section of his local Pathmark supermarket recently, he picked up three varieties of Progresso's chicken soup, as well as three cans of Campbell's chicken flavors.
"I wanted to get all different kinds," he says.
Campbell's new campaign, created by Omnicom Group's BBDO ad agency, is an attempt to boost sales of a big but sluggish category by selling a new image to a new audience.
The company is replacing its homey ads with livelier, more entertaining spots to try to appeal to 18-to-34-year-old consumers, who don't slurp as much soup as young children and people over 55.
In one commercial, for instance, a boy seemingly turns into a muscular "Souper Hero" after eating a bowl of soup.
For Campbell, boosting sales of its core soup business is critical.
But soup is already such an institution in the American kitchen that it's hard to get people to consume more.
As many as 70% of Americans ate soup at home in the past two weeks, says Dave Jenkins, vice president at National Eating Trends, a division of NPD Group in Chicago.
Campbell's real challenge comes as the weather gets warmer.
In July, the volume of soup sold is only half that of February's.
But the food company says it's prepared with a host of new ads that are appropriate for each particular season.
Says a Campbell spokesman: "There's nobody out there who's going to be more aggressive than we are in this category."
52 weeks ended Jan. 2
