Prospects for the European Union to meet its Jan. 1 timetable for adding four members brightened as EU foreign ministers put forward a compromise formula for resolving a dispute over voting rules.
A draft deal calls for the number of votes needed to block legislation in the EU Council of Ministers to be increased to 27 from 23, to reflect an enlarged union, but it allows measures to be delayed for a "reasonable period" if 23 opposing votes are cast.
If the four new applicants -- Sweden, Finland, Norway and Austria -- join the union, the total number of votes in the council would rise to 90 from 76.
The plan must be approved by national government before it can be finalized, and the deal faces resistance from skeptical members of Britain's Conservative Party, who have insisted on freezing the so-called blocking minority at 23 votes.
Governments were asked to report their views by tomorrow , and EU ambassadors will meet in Brussels on Wednesday to try to wrap up an agreement.
Britain and Spain have sought to keep the number at 23 votes in order to preserve the ability of two large and one small nation to veto EU legislation.
Vietnam will offer foreign companies new drilling and production concessions around its most productive oil field, the state oil monopoly said.
The government will offer five-year exploration rights and 20-year production rights around the White Tiger field, off Vietnam's southern coast.
Operators must turn over 25% to 40% of their output to the government as a royalty and give 30% of the remainder to the state oil company.
A joint venture between Vietnam and the former Soviet Union began developing the White Tiger field in 1986 but lacks finances for further work.
Italy swung to a trade surplus of $19.6 billion in 1993 from a deficit of $7.64 billion a year earlier.
Italy's merchandise trade balance with the other 11 members of the European Union swung to a surplus of $563.2 million in December from a deficit of $290 million a year earlier.
The provisional figures, which weren't seasonally adjusted, show that all major sectors except energy increased their penetration of foreign markets in 1993.
Exports to EU nations rose 11% and imports fell 6.1%.
The European Union is ready to finance the construction of roads and a bridge between Bulgaria and two neighbors.
The EU has allocated $28.8 million for roads between Greece and Bulgaria and is prepared to finance a new bridge across the Danube River between Bulgaria and Romania.
The single bridge and ferry line that now links those countries is overburdened by traffic that must travel around neighboring Yugoslavia, which is under United Nations sanctions for its role in the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
China has 16 times more single men than unmarried women, raising concerns about care and housing when the "bachelor army" becomes elderly, the official China Information newspaper reported.
China has 7.4 million unmarried men between the ages of 30 and 44, while single women in that age group number fewer than half a million.
Traditional favoritism of male offspring has combined with the state's one-child policy to reduce the number of baby girls.
Ivory Coast said it rescheduled its official external debt under favorable terms.
The rescheduling by the Paris Club, a group of Western creditor countries, is designed to ease Ivory Coast's adjustment to the 50% devaluation of the CFA African franc, which was approved in January by countries in French-speaking Africa.
The Ivory Coast pact follows similar debt relief arrangements made earlier this month for Senegal and Niger.
Industrialized nations agreed to stop all dumping of toxic waste in developing countries, ending a dispute on the scope of the 1990 Basel Convention governing international movement of hazardous wastes.
The ban was approved at an international conference of the 64 states that have ratified the convention.
They previously agreed in principle that 24 wealthy nations should stop exporting toxic waste to developing countries for incineration or burial.
The new accord made such a ban effective immediately.
The bigger issue concerned waste sent to developing countries for recycling -- considered a back-door entry for hazardous wastes such as mercury, lead-acid batteries and some plastics.
Such exports will become illegal on Dec. 31, 1997.
The European Union supported the ban, with Canada, Australia and Japan following suit.
The U.S., which hasn't ratified the convention, attended the international meeting as an observer.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
A United Nations conference pressed Taiwan to stop flouting a ban on the sale of tiger bones and rhinoceros horns, but backed off threats of trade sanctions against China over the same allegations.
President Clinton is to decide this week whether to impose sanctions on the Asian nations under U.S. laws protecting animals in danger of extinction. . . .
A court in Hungary acquitted the owner of the Marxim pizza restaurant of charges its mock Communist memorabilia violated a ban on totalitarian symbols.
