In his attack on Kaiser Permanente ("High Price of Managed Care," editorial page, Jan. 18), Steven Salerno makes some generalizations that are false, distorts other figures, and sprinkles in what has to be biased testimony from a few malpractice lawyers.
First, there is nothing inappropriate about the application of Total Quality Management, using statistics, or weighing probabilities in medicine.
On the contrary, many leading hospitals are adopting TQM methods with good results.
TQM rests on the insight that far more often than not, in medical care, quality and economy go hand in hand.
The correct diagnosis, the appropriate procedure done by a proficient practitioner are best for the patient's health and pocketbook.
Mistakes are costly, leading to the need for more costly care.
Second, Mr. Salerno reports that "a record 62,700 subscribers defected from Kaiser" in 1992.
That's less than 1% of total membership, not bad for any service organization.
And some of the "defectors" probably did so because of such things as a change of residence.
Third, he describes "endless waits for appointments."
The California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS), which has more than 920,000 beneficiaries, does a Consumer Experience Survey every other year.
One question in the 1991 survey was, "What was the longest time it took you to get an appointment with a doctor for your urgent problem?"
The percentage responding "same day" was 64.7% for Kaiser North, 66.4% for Kaiser South, both much better than the average of 53.4% for all health plans.
In fact, Kaiser South was third best of 25 health plans.
Fourth, the "at-risk compensation" that amounts to a few percentage points of salary, and that is based on a pool of thousands of doctors, is too small to motivate a doctor to deny a needed test.
Its significance is mainly symbolic: that doctors should have an interest in holding down hospital costs.
Failure to order a necessary test is likely to increase hospital costs.
Fifth, cases like the unfortunate ones Mr. Salerno reports happen in all forms of medical care.
In medicine, there is much uncertainty, much need for judgment, some of which is bound to prove wrong in hindsight.
Citing a few anecdotes tells us nothing about Kaiser's batting average.
The testimony of a few malpractice attorneys -- who see only cases gone bad, and whose business is impugning health care providers -- is bound to be biased.
Stanford, Calif.
(Mr. Enthoven, a professor at Stanford University, is a consultant to Kaiser Permanente, among other clients.)
I have practiced my specialties of Pediatrics and Pediatric Nephrology at Kaiser Permanente for over 14 years.
I have never seen a patient's care put at risk because of cost.
As an example: several years ago, I cared for a newborn with a severe lung condition.
Unfortunately, the standard therapy (ventilator and oxygen) did not seem to be working.
There was a new (and very expensive) therapy available at only a few medical centers in the country.
The treatment is called ECMO (extracorporal membrane oxygenation).
The closest medical center that could provide this was more than 1,000 miles away.
When I asked my supervisors at Kaiser Permanente whether I could send the baby there, they approved, on the spot, sending the baby by private plane for the treatment.
No physician, or health care system, is above making errors in judgment.
We all fail at times, but to imply that Kaiser Permanente is run by rotating physicians who aren't careful or caring is just not true.
I am surrounded by colleagues who exemplify the highest values I associate with being a physician.
At this point in our country's struggle to find a comprehensive and caring health care policy, the 50 years' experience of Kaiser Permanente is not a bad place to start.
John K. Hurley, M.D.
Rockville, Md.
As one of the attorneys quoted and referred to in Mr. Salernos' article, I would like to emphasize that it is more often the system itself, rather than the competence of the individual HMO physicians, that compromises the quality of care received by HMO patients.
With "cost containment" as the controlling mantra for managed care, it is not surprising that HMO patients who need screening tests, diagnostic procedures and/or medical treatment unhappily find themselves at cross-purposes with the very health care providers whom they had trusted for state-of-the-art medical care.
In this tug-of-war, the patient loses.
Such "cost containment" mentality can be very dangerous to one's health.
Merel G. Nissenberg
La Jolla, Calif.
My firm recently worked with Kaiser Permanente on a pioneering quality report card.
The report card compared the clinical outcomes of Kaiser Permanente of Northern California with established norms on 102 measures of quality.
Overall, the report card shows that the organization consistently exceeded norms for clinical quality.
To cite some relevant measures, the report card found that 63.9% of breast cancers diagnosed at Kaiser Permanente were caught at the local stage, as compared with only 53% in the U.S. as a whole.
It also found a five-year breast cancer survival rate of 96.1%, compared with the nationwide norm of only 92.7%.
These and the 100 other measures included in the report card are facts, not anecdotes, and readily available to the public.
My relationship with the organization is more than that of a consultant.
Based on the quality delivered by the organization, my family and I have been happy to entrust our health care to Kaiser Permanente.
The collective experience of its members, as reflected in the report card, shows we were right to do so.
James B. Hudak
