Japan's embattled Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa sought Monday to save his political reform package by negotiating compromise with opponents.
Prospects, however, remained dim.
The ruling coalition and the opposition Liberal Democratic Party spent much of the day haggling over the ground rules for the formal committee meeting necessary to resuscitate the dying legislation.
As of Monday night, no agreement had been reached, and such a session would likely open Wednesday at the earliest.
Even if such a meeting does take place, some LDP leaders said openly it would likely fail to produce any compromise.
Mr. Hosokawa's promise to enact sweeping electoral reforms before the current Parliament session ends Saturday suffered a severe blow last week, when the upper house of Parliament voted down the package.
If he fails, he may be forced to resign or call snap elections.
The crisis has triggered fears of a debilitating political vacuum at an inopportune time.
The economy is stalled and rescue measures have been stuck while politicians fight over the anticorruption and redistricting bills.
Mr. Hosokawa is scheduled to meet President Clinton for trade talks in Washington in three weeks; his ability to deliver the expected agreements could be impaired.
Panicked investors forced the Nikkei stock index down more than 950 points Monday.
Some politicians, hoping to contain the fallout, said Mr. Hosokawa should stay in office.
"This chaos is already drawing world attention," said Koken Nosaka, a leader of the Socialist Party, the largest party in the coalition, but one that is deeply divided over the reforms.
"Further deterioration would be undesirable."
The popular Mr. Hosokawa seemed to draw continued support from many voters, despite his troubles.
Political reform "is what the people wish, so I hope he won't throw it away halfway," Mitsuaki Mizuno, a government employee, said Monday, boarding a subway.
"To step down wouldn't be right."
Sachiko Narita, a Tokyo life insurance saleswoman, concurred, saying "Hosokawa-san isn't the only one to be blamed."
Besides, she added, "whoever replaces him would make no difference."
The reform bills lost last week's vote because a large bloc of Socialists defied their leaders and voted against the package.
Now many coalition members say they are willing to amend the bills to satisfy the opposition LDP, even though the changes would risk losing even more Socialist support.
Specifically, the LDP wants to weaken the provisions limiting business donations to politicians, and to change the composition of the new electoral system in a way believed more favorable to the LDP.
Non-Socialist coalition members say any reform package, even a weakened version, would be better than none.
To strike a deal, the coalition now wants to form a committee split evenly between representatives of the upper house and the lower house.
The latter passed the bills in November.
If two-thirds of the committee members can agree on an amended version, then the bills would be sent back to the two houses, requiring majority support in both.
If the compromise overtures fail, as many analysts expect, Mr. Hosokawa has one more long-shot option: He could put the bills to another vote in the lower house.
The legislation would then need two-thirds of the votes in the lower house alone to pass.
In that case, the coalition would be counting on further splits within the LDP.
While the LDP leadership has been lukewarm on any sort of reform, a large group of party members say they want it.
Mr. Hosokawa is hoping that, by putting the issue to one final test, he can draw their support.
The LDP leadership "risks losing the LDP as a unified party if they don't cooperate" with Mr. Hosokawa, said Jesper Koll, an economist at S.G. Warburg in Tokyo and an aide to a pro-reform LDP politician.
