The economy is rocking, inflation seems to be reeling, and President Clinton is crowing.
That's politics, but it's also a reason to heed Wayne Angell as he rides into the Beltway sunset.
Mr. Clinton will miss this Reagan appointee more than he knows.
For eight years Mr. Angell has held one of those rare jobs that matter here, as a governor of the Federal Reserve.
Along the way he became the conscience of the inflation hawks who've produced the low interest rates now spurring economic growth.
They've been so successful that the Beavis & Butt-head generation has no idea that inflation drove Jimmy Carter from power (assuming it's ever heard of Jimmy Carter).
"We're showing the fruits of pursuing price-level stability," declares Mr. Angell, in a farewell interview before his term expires next month.
"We're seeing gains in labor productivity we haven't seen since the 1950s and '60s."
Those gains in turn herald real wage increases that can get presidents re-elected.
At least in economics, Bill Clinton may yet prove Woody Allen's maxim that 90% of life is just showing up.
Mr. Angell calls the reduction of "core inflation" -- to 3% today from 12% -- the Fed's main achievement since 1980.
Back in 1986 he told audiences his goal was to see 30-year home mortgages reach 7% by the end of his tenure.
"They thought that was unbelievable," the former Kansas wheat farmer recalls.
After climbing to almost 12% in 1987, mortgages hit 6.74% last October.
Of course, Clintonians attribute this decline to Dr. Bill's miracle tax potion.
Mr. Angell doesn't sip that moonshine.
Let's see, he says: The federal debt is about $4.5 trillion, and the 1993 budget claimed to cut growth in that debt by a mere $400 billion over five years.
How much does it affect the interest rate on that debt, he asks sardonically, "if the debt will grow only by $1 trillion over five years instead of $1.4 trillion?"
Not much at all.
What really affects interest rates, he adds, is "the credibility of the Federal Reserve" in promising not to inflate that debt away.
On this point Mr. Angell does give Mr. Clinton credit.
Unlike George Bush, Mr. Clinton has mostly refrained from prodding the Fed to gun the money supply.
Thus investors fear inflation less, and so are willing to accept a lower interest rate as an inflation premium.
"So there was more contribution by the present administration by what it didn't do than by what it did do," he says.
Mr. Angell has made his own Fed mark by promoting a way of setting monetary policy that looks mainly at market prices.
He calls it "price-level targeting."
This means more than looking out the rear-view mirror at last year's 2.7% inflation rate.
Instead Mr. Angell looks at indicators that warn of future inflation-commodity prices, exchange rates and especially gold.
The Kansan admits that at first these ideas "were thought of as a hare-brained scheme."
But over time other Fed governors began to notice.
Chairman Alan Greenspan in particular is known to keep a beady eye on gold.
"You don't want to put all your eggs in the commodity basket," says Fed Vice Chairman David Mullins, "but it's fair to say we all now look at a number of those things, including commodities and gold."
Just how much this Angell legacy will survive his departure is hard to read.
"I'm optimistic," Mr. Angell says.
"But I'm not as confident as I would like to be."
Perhaps this is because most of last year he flashed a warning about future inflation, yet the Fed hasn't tried to head it off by raising interest rates even a blip.
Mr. Angell thinks low oil prices may be sending better inflation signals than are warranted by other prices.
So Mr. Angell dissented four times from Fed policy last year, including a clarion call at his final meeting in late December.
Mr. Angell won't confirm this still-secret December vote, but he does say he's worried that "the 1995 price level is increasingly getting out of our control."
He offers a layman's inflation guide: If short-term rates rise no higher than 5% (from 3% now) at the peak of this economic expansion, then "that's an A grade" for the Fed.
But if his worries prove true, then interest rates could rise much higher in 1995, the worst possible time for Bill Clinton's reelection.
Another reason to worry is Mr. Angell's apparent replacement, George Perry of the Brookings Institution.
If Mr. Angell is a hawk, then Mr. Perry is a dove.
Mr. Angell watches gold, Mr. Perry scoffs at it.
Mr. Angell has been a banker and farmer, Mr. Perry is a lifetime academic.
Mr. Perry believes in the old elixir of tight fiscal policy (tax increases) offset by easier (which can become inflationary) money; this is what gave us the 1970s.
In politics it pays to be lucky, and Bill Clinton's best, blindest luck has been to inherit a conservative Federal Reserve.
The Fed's credibility, hard won since the debacle of the 1970s, has helped to blunt fears that Mr. Clinton would be another Jimmy Carter.
But the Perry choice suggests Mr. Clinton doesn't know how good he's had it.
Let's hope the other Fed governors have absorbed enough of Mr. Angell's anti-inflation character to remind the president.
