Astrid Carriere, a mother of five-year-old triplets, needed help around the house after she gave birth to her fourth child, Mathieu.
So she called her home-insurance company.
Her insurance company?
As part of the Ottawa woman's policy, the insurer, Canadian Surety Co., sent a homemaker to Ms. Carriere's house free of charge.
The homemaker washed diapers, scrubbed floors and fed the older kids for three days, giving the new mother more time to recuperate.
"It was wonderful.
We came home and the whole house was spotless," Ms. Carriere says.
The service is part of Canadian Surety's Home Assistance program, believed to be the first of its kind in North America.
Under the program, policyholders also can get babysitters sent to their homes in an emergency, or nursing care when recommended by a doctor.
Other companies also have added frills to their policies.
One insurer keeps tradespeople on hand to give telephone advice on such problems as stopping a flooding toilet.
The offbeat programs reflect a growing trend by Canadian insurance companies to win customer loyalty in the overcrowded property and casualty-insurance market.
Unlike in the U.S., where State Farm and Allstate Corp. dominate the home- and auto-insurance markets, the Canadian industry is highly fragmented, which has led to stiff price competition.
Adding to the industry's woes are plans by the country's major banks to begin selling their own insurance products following recent financial deregulation.
"The banks are going to come in with low-cost, well-trained staff and top-notch computers.
The conventional companies are all studying how to withstand the onslaught," says Ted Belton, an independent insurance-industry analyst.
The looming battle with the banks is expected to spark widespread consolidation among Canada's 220 property and casualty insurers, which write 14 billion Canadian dollars (US$10.7 billion) in new business a year.
In January, for instance, a subsidiary of Britain's Royal Insurance Holdings PLC acquired the Canadian property and casualty business of Sun Alliance & London Insurance PLC, continuing a string of recent mergers in the industry.
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce was the first of the country's big banks recently to start its own insurance subsidiary.
A key advantage over traditional insurance companies is the bank's ability to capitalize on customer loyalty by pitching its products directly to its large nationwide client base, observers say.
Canada's insurers are responding to the new competitive threat by appealing directly to their customers, hoping to generate loyalty of their own.
Currently, Canadians buy the bulk of their home and auto insurance through brokers, and thus know little about the companies issuing the policies, often not even the firms' names.
Many insurers are too small to set up their own direct-marketing teams.
But some are experimenting with new kinds of approaches to customers, such as Canadian Surety's Home Assistance program.
"There's only so far you can go to compete in selling fire and theft insurance.
We want to show people we're adding value to the policy for a very small extra charge," says Roger Long, vice president, personal insurance, at Canadian Surety, a Toronto subsidiary of Assurances Generales de France.
Mr. Long says Canadian Surety added C$10 (US$7.61) a year to the price of its policies to cover the cost of the Home Assistance program.
Ms. Carriere, the Canadian Surety policyholder, says she would use the assistance program again.
It shows that the company "may be more sensitive to the everyday needs" of its customers, she says.
Hoping to win similar loyalty from their customers, other insurers also have begun offering services that have little to do with insurance.
Zurich Canada, a unit of Switzerland's Zurich Insurance Group, has a telephone assistance line to give advice on emergency repairs around the house, such as leaky plumbing.
It also refers policyholders to selected auto mechanics and house contractors, and guarantees the work itself.
And Dominion of Canada General Insurance Co., a unit of E-L Financial Corp. of Toronto., offers customers discounts on eyeglasses and contact lenses.
"It's giving people value for their insurance dollar without having to wait for an accident to happen," says Tony Luppino, spokesman at Zurich Canada.
