Teledyne Inc. suspended its cash dividend for the first time ever, amid growing signs that the company had reached a tentative settlement of longstanding civil claims by the government totaling well over $100 million.
Teledyne's two-paragraph announcement, which came after the end of trading in New York markets, said the board took the decision yesterday evening "in order to strengthen the company's financial and competitive position."
A spokeswoman declined to provide any further details.
But lawyers familiar with the matter said they believed that the company and the Justice Department had hammered out details of a tentative settlement of pending civil claims of overcharges, fraud and improper testing involving sales of electronic relays and other hardware to the Pentagon during the 1980s.
A federal judge acting as an official intermediary in the talks has asked both sides not to discuss tentative settlement terms, one person said.
Settlement discussions have involved amounts ranging from more than $30 million to as much as $130 million, according to these lawyers.
Neither the company nor the Justice Department would comment.
The government, as previously reported, has taken over at least three federal suits filed by whistleblowers against Teledyne; and the company, hoping to resolve its nagging legal problems, hired a politically savvy Los Angeles law firm months ago to help negotiate a comprehensive settlement of such claims.
Suspension of the dividend, which was last paid in November at a quarterly rate of 20 cents, comes as a surprise even to some analysts who follow the company closely.
Last year, Teledyne's dividend payments amounted to $44.3 million.
In filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the company has said that one pending civil action alone seeks more than $90 million in damages, stemming from whistleblower allegations that the company defrauded the Pentagon by keeping two sets of books on various fixed-price contracts.
Another suit, among other things, seeks at least $41.6 million in damages for profits allegedly derived from sales of improperly inspected parts.
Company officials have indicated that they want to resolve the claims, but Teledyne's SEC filings consistently have said the company didn't have reliable estimates of potential damages.
Since 1989, Teledyne has been the focus of eight separate federal criminal investigations and at least as many civil inquiries.
Teledyne has admitted guilt in a number of instances, and already has agreed to pay as much as $45 million in fines, penalties and civil settlements.
In certain instances, the company signed plea agreements to settle criminal allegations as a way to avoid indictment and to remain eligible for new federal contracts.
But resolution of related civil claims was left for later negotiations or litigation.
