A few weeks ago, I attacked "In the Best of Families: Marriage, Pride and Madness" for its violence.
Several readers wrote in to defend the miniseries, saying that it was a true story and not just violence made up for TV.
"In the Best of Families" is a particularly unpleasant bloodfest -- the tale of a mother who flips out, abuses her kids, runs out on her husband then convinces her new lover to go on a rampage and kill off everyone in sight, from her ex-husband's parents to her own parents.
Finally, in the finale, she blows herself, her lover and her two children to bits.
A messy tale, and it's undoubtedly true.
I have it on the authority not just of CBS but also of several North Carolina readers, who affirm that the events took place not far from their own homes.
But is a true story any more or less worthy -- should it be held to a different standard -- because it's true?
An interesting question, and it cuts to the heart of the current boom in network "true crime stories" -- cuts to its heart with a rusty, jagged 10-inch blade.
Today's producers use trueness to introduce all sorts of sensationalistic twaddle onto the airwaves: women who get their kids to murder their husbands, men who kill off their entire families, psychiatrists who rape their patients while they're under sedation.
And those are just the made-for-TV movies from the past year-and-a-half.
Would these freak shows even get on the air if they weren't true?
Trueness seems to give the drama the patina of reportage -- the veneer of journalism -- that makes the gore or the sheer lack of artistry acceptable in a way it wouldn't be if it were "just" fiction.
That's what "Families" is trying to achieve when it states at the end: "In this country millions of children are currently tied up in custody battles between their parents.
The story you have just seen is an extreme example."
As if we had spent the past four hours watching an analysis of current trends, instead of two nut cases running around waving high-powered rifles.
A few years back, producers attempted to give these docudramas some larger artistic or social resonance (as in "The Burning Bed").
Not that our standards were so high 10 years ago, but they've clearly dropped.
Today, there is no act so heinous that some network won't rush onto the screen and yell "Look at this!"
Because the story really happened, everyone is absolved of the responsibility to think -- network, producers, advertisers, viewers.
So for the record: Just because something is true doesn't make it interesting.
And it doesn't necessarily even make it true.
Today's docudramas can now be "real-life," "fact-based" or, my favorite, "inspired by actual events."
There's nothing inherently evil about the docudrama genre, except when a film's only virtue is its luridness.
But with the true-crime genre, we're hitting a new low.
In the words of one reader: "So this was `based on a true story,' so what? . . .
We are all sick of this garbage -- and we won't watch it anymore."
But they probably will, unless they boycott the miniseries now being planned to retell the stories of Tonya Harding and the Menendez brothers.
Can a series called "Lorena and John Wayne" be far behind?
Dredging through the other side of the same murky waters is this week's "Tabloid Truth: The Michael Jackson Scandal" (PBS, Tuesday, 9-10 p.m. EST), a show that proves that journalists aren't necessarily any purer than movie-of-the-week producers when they sink their teeth into a really juicy tale.
Correspondent Richard Ben Cramer and producer Thomas Lennon have assembled a lively hour tracing the evolution of the "Wacko Jacko" story, from one news blurb to 100 screaming headlines about pedophilia -- "How blood in the water becomes {a} feeding frenzy . . . {how} the carnival sideshows have become the main event."
It's a journey to the seamy side of the news, complete with a rogue's gallery of con men, scoop-hounds and anyone else who'll crawl out of a hole for a few bucks.
The story began early one Sunday morning with a phone call to free-lance TV reporter Don Ray: A search warrant had been issued for Michael Jackson's Neverland Ranch.
Mr. Ray took the news to Los Angeles station KNBC, and from there it was only a matter of hours before the tabloids descended on it.
The hordes from Europe were quick out of the blocks; one Fleet Streeter talks of seeing a Paris-Match employee "pushing old people in wheelchairs out of the way to run off the plane."
"Tabloid Truth" is especially adept at showing how competition fuels the fire: "A Current Affair" doesn't want to lose out to "Hard Copy," and no one wants to be beaten by the National Enquirer.
In this high-stakes atmosphere, it's tabloid rules: The allegation of a fact is as good as the fact itself.
Says "Hard Copy's" Diane Dimond in "Tabloid Truth": "It was either going to be `superstar being falsely accused,' or it was going to be `superstar perhaps guilty of one of the most heinous crimes we know.'
Either way, I couldn't lose."
As the story unrolled, checkbook journalism was the order of the day: "Anybody who doesn't pay money, it's like the cavalry riding into machine-gun fire," says News of the World writer Stuart White.
"It's anachronistic.
Journalism cannot be done today at our level without . . . somebody getting a check."
In the end, of course, it's money that drives the whole enterprise, that has brought even the network newsmagazines down to the level of the tabloids and the Bobbitts and the Menendezes: "Seven years ago, the so-called upper echelon of television journalism laughed and sneered at our style," says Steve Dunleavy of "A Current Affair."
"They don't laugh and sneer now."
And that's another true story.
