California's giant state-employee pension system turned to the corporate world for a new top investment strategist, naming Sheryl Pressler chief investment officer effective April 1.
Ms. Pressler, who has been overseeing $8 billion in employee-benefit funds of McDonnell Douglas Corp., St. Louis, will succeed DeWitt Bowman, who is retiring from the helm of the $82 billion fund operated by the California Public Employees Retirement System.
Dale Hanson will remain as Calpers's chief executive officer.
During his five-year tenure Mr. Bowman turned Calpers, the nation's largest pension plan, into a demanding political and corporate force.
He helped increase fund assets by 73% and challenged some of the nation's largest corporations over their lackluster performance.
Ms. Pressler will be paid $175,000, about $5,000 more than her predecessor but considerably less than most managers of large private investment funds.
Calpers said Mr. Bowman will assist in the transition to Ms. Pressler, who has 13 years experience in pension management.
Besides her salary, Ms. Pressler will receive incentive compensation based up her success in achieving performance objectives established by the Calpers board.
Ms. Pressler has a Master of Business Administration degree from Washington University.
The Calpers post is one of the most prized in the world of public pension plans.
Ms. Pressler will help pioneer a novel "relationship investing" fund.
The previously proposed fund, to be managed internally, is the latest move in Calpers's shareholder activism.
Currently, Calpers's holdings in targeted companies are determined according to an investment policy of indexation, under which Calpers buys shares in companies to mimic certain stock market indexes.
Calpers is now targeting 10 companies, and its board announced Jan. 19 that it's gearing up for spring proxy fights over corporate-governance issues at three of them, Boise Cascade Corp., U.S. Shoe Corp. and Zenith Electronics Corp.
Calpers currently has about 40% of its investments in stocks and 30% in bonds.
The rest is in mortgage securities, real estate and cash equivalents.
But Calpers has occasionally taken bold bets, including ill-timed bets on real estate and international stocks several years ago.
Calpers missed out to some extent on the U.S. bull market because of its modest commitment to domestic stocks in the 1980s.
The fund's annualized total return for the five years through Sept. 30, 1993, was 12.3%.
That is below the median for public-employee pension funds of 12.4%, according to Wilshire Associates Inc., a pension consulting firm in Santa Monica, Calif.
For the 12 months through September, however, Calpers's 15% return beat the 14.2% median.
ZENITH ELECTRONICS Corp. said the California Public Employees Retirement System has just withdrawn a shareholder proposal seeking to create a "lead independent director" at Zenith after gaining "additional insight" about the company's governance.
Hence, Zenith says it shouldn't have been included in an article Wednesday as one of the companies targeted by Calpers for spring proxy fights about corporate-governance issues.
(WSJ Feb. 4, 1994)
