A federal grand jury is investigating whether Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. or its partner in a real estate investment violated bidding rules in a loan auction conducted more than a year ago by the Resolution Trust Corp.
Donaldson, the brokerage arm of Equitable Cos., provided financing for Lombard, Ill.-based Gateway Capital Advisors' winning $66.7 million bid in late 1992 for nonperforming loans on apartment buildings made by the now defunct Home Federal Savings Association of Kansas City, Mo.
DLJ then formed a partnership with Gateway that entitles it to a portion of profits from the deal.
Prior to bidding on the portfolio, which carried an original book value of $112 million, all potential buyers signed a pledge not to communicate with borrowers whose loans were included.
The RTC was aiming to prevent bidders from gaining an advantage over rivals by gathering additional financial information in an attempt to more accurately estimate the value of the soured loans.
The U.S. Justice Department is trying to determine whether Gateway or DLJ had improper discussions with Albert Ichelson Jr., a Des Moines, Iowa, real-estate syndicator with about $50 million of loans in the pool, according to three individuals familiar with the investigation.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has subpoenaed records from Gateway, DLJ and an RTC adviser on the sale.
"There was no collusion, and there was no advantage to be gained by having conversations with anyone," responded Barry Freeman, a Highland Park, Ill., lawyer representing Gateway.
"It's pathetic that there is even a grand jury investigation . . .
I would expect that the Justice Department, when they have all the facts, will determine that no such thing existed."
A spokeswoman for DLJ declined to discuss whether the firm's involvement is being investigated.
"Our role was to finance the bid made by the principal, Gateway," she said.
"We're aware of nothing that would suggest any improprieties in the bidding process."
A Resolution Trust Corp. spokesman declined to comment on the matter, other than to say that "there are a number of cases out there that are being looked at."
The Justice Department declined to comment.
Mr. Freeman complained that the investigation arose from allegations made by an individual indicted on a thrift-related matter, whom he wouldn't identify, who was "looking for a way to find favor with the government.
"All of the facts point in the opposite direction" of wrongdoing, he said.
"It's very annoying that the government would base an investigation on some irresponsible commentary by someone who's in big trouble."
Mr. Freeman argued that a bidder would have had nothing to gain by talking to Mr. Ichelson.
But at least one other bidder disagreed, noting that not long before bids were due, Mr. Ichelson placed a dozen limited partnerships that borrowed the money into Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
"If you talked to him and knew what he was going to do in the bankruptcy proceedings, it would have given you a big advantage," said one of the losing bidders.
"I remember stretching our bid as high as we could.
If we knew this guy Ichelson was going to come out of bankruptcy, we could have bid a higher amount."
Mr. Ichelson declined to comment on the matter.
