Just days after the U.S. and Japan eased trade tensions by ending a bitter fight over cellular telephones, the U.S. is again turning up the heat on Japan in the fields of civil aviation and medical equipment.
The U.S. yesterday withheld approval of Japan Airlines' application for an air route between Honolulu and the Japanese city of Sendai pending negotiations on a basket of aviation matters.
U.S. officials are also preparing an official complaint, due today , regarding plans by the Japanese Health Ministry to impose price controls on a variety of advanced medical equipment largely made by U.S. firms.
Separately, Sozaburo Okamatsu, the top trade official at Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, told reporters that Japan hopes to restart trade talks with the U.S. in April, after it releases a set of unilateral market-opening measures in late March.
Those discussions, known as the framework talks, collapsed in mid-February when Japan refused to accept U.S. demands for import targets.
Mr. Okamatsu said that while Japan still won't accept such targets, "we want to make the package salable to the U.S. government."
U.S. officials said that neither the withholding of JAL's air-route application nor the medical-equipment complaint is directly related to the framework talks.
Still, the U.S. has made no secret of its desire to keep the pressure on Japan in order to reach a broad framework agreement.
What's more, the way these two issues arose with little warning suggests that seemingly minor trade issues will continue to buffet the U.S.-Japan economic relationship until the nations reach an overarching trade agreement.
At the center of the aviation dispute are U.S. demands for more "beyond rights," or the freedom to fly on to other Asian destinations after landing in Japan.
The U.S. carriers see such rights as a key way to expand business.
The U.S. withheld JAL's application in retaliation for alleged Japanese foot-dragging on applications for these new routes by U.S. carriers, an individual familiar with the situation said.
Japan, however, says a 1952 U.S.-Japan aviation agreement gives too great an advantage to U.S. carriers, and Tokyo wants to renegotiate it.
The U.S. informed JAL of its decision just two days before the carrier planned to begin service, startling airline and Japanese government officials.
"This not only hurts the U.S. tourism industry, but it erodes trust between the two countries," said an official at Japan's Ministry of Transportation.
The U.S. reportedly intends to approve charter flights for the 275 passengers who already have tickets.
In medical equipment, the U.S. claims that Japan's Health Ministry has withheld information about pending price controls on high-tech devices such as artificial bone implants.
Those price controls, which are due April 1 as part of the Japanese health-care system, are being phased in on high-tech equipment.
Sales of such devices by U.S. companies in Japan amounted to roughly $800 million in 1993, and make up more than 20% of total U.S. medical-device sales in Japan, according to the Health Industry Manufacturers Association.
The U.S. runs a $200 million annual trade surplus with Japan in medical equipment.
The U.S. says that Japan promised to release preliminary information on the price controls in late January or early February.
The Health Ministry, however, released that information just yesterday , although it said earlier information was available to any company that came by the ministry to pick it up.
The late release "gives U.S. industry no time at all" to adjust to the new pricing regime, a U.S. official said.
The U.S. plans to react today , but officials declined to say what actions they might take.
