Precious-metals prices rose on nervousness about clashes between Serbian and U.S. jet fighters in Bosnia and general worries about a potential return of inflation to the economy.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was up $2.70 to $382.50 an ounce, while the actively traded May silver-futures contract rose 12.8 cents to $5.39 an ounce.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, meanwhile, platinum for April delivery climbed $4.30 to $397.70 an ounce.
The downing of four Serbian jets by U.S. F-16 fighters "supposedly triggered buying of gold as a `safe-haven' investment," said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
But Mr. Savaiko and other analysts said the buying probably would have occurred anyway because of liquidation of "short" positions, or wagers that gold prices would fall, amid renewed fears of increasing inflation.
The Journal of Commerce index of 18 industrial commodities, a popular barometer of inflation among economists, has been rising lately.
Yesterday, the KnightRidder Commodity Research Bureau index also rose, settling at 227.55.
Surges in the prices of commodities in general -- and especially gold -- are viewed as early indicators of inflation.
"Gold is a hedge against economic and political uncertainty," said Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man.
"There's a lot of political unrest simmering around the world, and a lot speculation about an upturn of inflation.
That gave people reason to buy precious metals."
For weeks, the price of gold has been trading in a tight $375-to-$390 range.
"If the CRB index were to shoot through 229 or 230, inflation fears would grow and lead to an advance in gold prices," Mr. Savaiko said.
"If, however, the CRB can't clear that level, it would indicate the Federal Reserve is keeping inflation concerns in check, and precious-metals prices might fall."
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Wheat prices sank amid forecasts for rain in some dry areas of the Southern Plains, where the hard red winter-wheat crop is beginning to emerge from dormancy.
In trading at the Kansas City Board of Trade, the wheat contract for March delivery slipped 1.25 cents a bushel to settle at $3.55 a bushel.
Soybean prices settled mostly lower while corn prices settled mixed.
Speculation is growing that the U.S. government might offer grain-buying credit guarantees to Mexico, which is a major importer of U.S. corn.
Bill Biedermann, vice president of research at Allendale Inc., Crystal Lake, Ill., said he expects Mexican purchases of U.S. corn to rise by about one million metric tons this year over 1993.
ENERGY: Heating-oil futures prices rose as renewed cold weather across the Midwest and the Northeast propped up prices.
Otherwise, market participants said, there was little news to move energy contracts in either direction.
Traders noted that the March heating-oil contract, which expired yesterday, was the only heating-oil contract to rise.
Thus, they questioned whether the strong price environment would last much longer, particularly as warmer weather is bound to arrive some time soon.
Natural gas prices fell despite the cold weather.
Meanwhile, crude oil and gasoline prices slid.
