Quarrels within the party of ultranationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky broke into the open yesterday, with the defection of two lawmakers from his Liberal Democratic faction in the lower house of parliament.
The two defectors, Viktor Kobelev and Alexander Pronin, said they were quitting Mr. Zhirinovsky's faction because he had become too dictatorial inside the party and too provocative generally.
In a recent speech in parliament, for example, Mr. Zhirinovsky warned that any Western nation attacking Serbs in former Yugoslavia would "be destroyed."
During Mr. Zhirinovsky's speech, the parliament's chairman ordered his microphone switched off.
Messrs. Kobelev and Pronin also said Mr. Zhirinovsky had irresponsibly distorted the Liberal Democratic Party's program of restoring Russian greatness during his recent swing through the former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Zhirinovsky answered this criticism in typically lurid fashion, saying that Messrs. Kobelev and Pronin hadn't quit the party but had been expelled, both "for activities incompatible with the status of a party member" and "for the common crimes they had committed."
Mr. Zhirinovsky didn't specify what those alleged crimes might have been.
It's too early to know whether the party rift will hurt Mr. Zhirinovsky.
He has survived infighting before.
Shortly after his party was organized, back in 1990, some of his deputies tried to expel him, complaining of the same extremism.
Mr. Zhirinovsky kicked them out instead.
The difficulty for rebels within the Liberal Democratic Party is that their main claim to fame among voters is their link to Mr. Zhirinovsky.
His name on the party ticket was the big draw for the 12 million votes that gave seats to 59 of the 64 initial members of his parliamentary faction in the 450-seat lower house.
And though Mr. Zhirinovsky's extreme tactics infuriate some of his fellow lawmakers, they appeal to millions of Russians who feel more orthodox politics these past few years has delivered mainly high inflation and crime.
The stakes here are large.
Mr. Zhirinovsky has set his sights on winning Russia's next presidential election, scheduled for 1996 (barring a highly unlikely decision by Mr. Yeltsin to exhume last September's decree that they will be held this June).
The contest right now seems to be whether the growing number of angry exiles from the Liberal Democratic Party can sink Mr. Zhirinovsky's political career before he can appeal directly to voters pondering the next presidential ballot.
Mr. Kobelev served as campaign manager for Mr. Zhirinovsky and deputy chairman of the Liberal Democratic Party, and if potentially damaging secrets exist, he is well-placed to know them.
Among recent allegations on which Mr. Kobelev might be able to shed light, for example, are rumors that Mr. Zhirinovsky's Liberal Democratic Party has received funding from fascist groups in Europe, and unsubstantiated charges by St. Petersburg Mayor Anatoly Sobchak that Mr. Zhirinovsky's party was originally a creation of the KGB.
Asked about potential splits within his party last month, Mr. Zhirinovsky said: "Under the charter of the party, I have all the powers in-between party congresses.
As soon as there is an odor, an attempt to split the party, I remove such a person immediately."
