The budget debate moves to the Senate this week after the House's approval of a $1.5 trillion fiscal blueprint that largely endorses President Clinton's vision of spending priorities for fiscal 1995.
Senate Budget Committee Chairman James Sasser (D., Tenn.), showing caution in an election year, isn't planning any significant initiatives when his committee's deliberations begin tomorrow.
As did the House, however, the Senate must find $3.1 billion in cuts beyond those proposed by President Clinton to keep discretionary spending beneath the previously set cap for the coming fiscal year.
The House budget, adopted 223-175, would leave a deficit of $175.3 billion in the year ending Sept. 30, 1995.
Though conservatives argued Democratic leaders have missed an opportunity to further drive down the deficit, the budget would hold overall discretionary spending flat at $541.1 billion.
The balance of federal outlays would be for benefit payments and interest on the debt.
"This is not a budget that can be called weak in any way," said House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.).
"There is no question now that we are at the bone."
Beneath the discretionary spending cap, the House budget would set defense spending at $270.9 billion, domestic spending at $249.2 billion, and foreign aid at $20.9 billion.
Within domestic accounts, the House budget assumes increases in the Head Start children's program, health research, job training and transportation as well as the termination of more than 100 programs and cuts in an additional 200.
The budget is a nonbinding resolution setting out budgetary goals.
Meeting those goals will require separate legislation later this year.
Democrats repeatedly reminded Republicans last week that the GOP had predicted adoption a year ago of the Clinton fiscal program would damage the economy and lead to bigger deficits.
Instead, the economy has strengthened and the deficit is at its lowest level in years.
"This year's budget builds on last year's program," said House Budget Chairman Martin Sabo (D., Minn.).
"It continues the fiscal restraint we began last year and continues to direct scarce federal resources toward the needs of the '90s."
A House Republican leadership alternative, which included a tax credit of $500 a child, failed on a 243-155 vote.
