"How do you want me to do the lights, Norm?" a bartender shouts across a smoky room to a slip of a man who's saying "check, check, check," into a microphone.
"Make them low," replies Norman Nardini.
"And sexy."
He grins and begins strumming a Fender Stratocaster.
A few minutes later, Mr. Nardini's three-man band launches into raucous rockabilly, emotional blues and basic rock.
People sipping beer at small tables sing along.
Frankie's bar in Swissvale, a neighborhood joint that draws retired steelworkers and their unemployed offspring, is Mr. Nardini's regular Sunday night gig.
Wednesday nights he performs across the Allegheny River in Blawnox, Pa.; other nights he plays wherever they'll pay him.
There's no glamour in this routine, scant money and less fame.
But this 43-year-old singer and guitarist who drives the regional club circuit in a beat-up van and his lucky black loafers is an essential part of the national music fabric, says David Fricke, music editor of Rolling Stone magazine.
"The whole aesthetic of rock and roll is based on what happens in bars and garages, not boardrooms."
Mr. Nardini belongs to a fraternity of aging musicians who formed bands in the 1960s and had subsequent brief brushes with national fame.
But they never achieved star status, and many ended up playing the same small clubs where they started.
"These guys hang in there forever and ever.
They thrive on the fact that people get enjoyment out of them.
Otherwise I'd feel sorry for them," says Boo Browning, a New Orleans-based writer who specializes in music and pop culture.
Indeed, ever since high school, Mr. Nardini has been able to focus on little else besides performing.
A stint in music school was "too slow," and no work was ever as compelling as playing in a band.
With the goal of arranging his life so he didn't need a day job, he has spent more than 25 years playing clubs from Cleveland to the Jersey Shore, with Pittsburgh as home base.
He attracts the college-age crowd with his rollicking act, but Mr. Nardini also has built a core of longtime fans who have grown older with him.
"To me, it's just pure rock and roll . . . he gets you to unwind at the end of the week and gets you ready for the next week," says Erik K. Huber of Pittsburgh, 43, who has followed Mr. Nardini since the days he bordered on a national breakthrough with a major label recording contract.
"I've been the boy-most-likely-to-succeed a couple of times," says Mr. Nardini between sets one night in the kitchen of Excuses, a Pittsburgh blues club the size of a shoebox.
The cramped kitchen, where spicy chicken wings sizzle on a big, old stove, serves as a dressing room.
"I still kind of keep a hope up.
I work constantly at it, so if I have the chance to be on stage with someone big-time, I can go out and kick a little aprof.," he says.
It takes talent, a lot of luck and some smarts to make it big.
Some musicians are quite good at sabotaging themselves at critical points in their careers.
"Characters like this have kind of a self-destructive thing in them," says guitarist Sid McGinnis, a Pittsburgh native who was in a band with Mr. Nardini in the early '70s.
The band was Borrowed Time, and its members shared a farmhouse in Kentucky -- a hippie-style rock eden during the psychedelic era.
When the group broke up, Messrs. McGinnis and Nardini headed back to Pittsburgh.
But while Mr. Nardini hung around, Mr. McGinnis eventually moved on to New York.
Today, Mr. McGinnis is a guitarist with Paul Shaffer and the CBS Orchestra, which performs on the Late Show with David Letterman, and has played with such musical greats as Bob Dylan, Peter Gabriel and David Bowie.
"Norman's more than an artist.
He's a real entertainer," says Mr. McGinnis, who catches Mr. Nardini's act every few years.
"But he could be an idiot at times.
He had the potential to go nuts on a gig and screw things up for himself with a scout."
Indeed, Mr. Nardini's life has been full of opportunities seized and missed, though he says, "I'm much less self-destructive now, and more competitive."
His career started with a guitar his parents bought him in 1962, followed by a succession of garage bands, then an "embarrassing" stint as a hotel lounge lizard clad in a black-and-white jumpsuit.
His first big break came in 1974, when a division of Atlantic Records took a liking to a Marvin Gaye song he had covered.
Mr. Nardini quickly put a band together and called it Diamond Reo.
Propelled by the record company's support, Diamond Reo toured the country, opening for such major acts as Ted Nugent, Kiss, Blue Oyster Cult, Kansas and Rush.
"We started figuring out what it was to be a real rock band instead of guys who made records," says Mr. Nardini.
But the group had no discipline.
"We started being really wild and crazy and cut ourselves out of the industry," Mr. Nardini says.
Atlantic dropped the group after about a year, fed up with their tendency to be unreliable, defiant and to party too much, according to former band members.
Buddah Records, an independent label, stepped in, but bowed out after about 18 months.
Even the band's manager quit.
Soon Diamond Reo was back in Pittsburgh, and after recording a couple of albums, broke up.
Al Nally, the manager who quit, says he encouraged Mr. Nardini to go out on his own.
"Norm isn't a great singer or great musician.
But Norm is great at what Norm does.
He has a feel.
He has personality," Mr. Nally says.
A new act, Norman Nardini and the Tigers, was successful in regional clubs and got a deal with CBS Records.
Their first album had backup vocals by an up-and-coming rocker named Jon Bon Jovi and accompaniment by David Bryan, later Bon Jovi's keyboardist.
But the albums didn't sell well, and CBS dropped the group.
Moreover, Mr. Nardini was getting tired of his own "crazy Norman act" -- the tiger-striped tux, the mock strip-tease.
"I did it so many years, I felt I was imitating myself," he says.
"I wasn't getting the commercial success, so I started wanting recognition as a song writer.
But no one ever mentioned my songs, the real me."
Mr. Nardini broke up the Tigers in 1986, experimented with country music and took guitar lessons.
Middle age was upon him, and he started worrying about financial security.
He built up a small business, renting out recording and rehearsal space in a building he owned in Swissvale, and developed a "ten-year plan."
He believes he's about halfway there, that is, "where I can play well enough, and sing well enough, and have made the inroads in the business to get someone to believe in me as a force," says Mr. Nardini, who now records on the tiny Circumstantial Records label.
In a review of Mr. Nardini's "Breakdown in Paradise," released last year, Steve Simels, pop music editor of Stereo Review, described the musician as "an improbable cross between guitarist Stevie Ray Vaughan and comedian Dennis Leary."
On stage, Mr. Simels says, Mr. Nardini is a "spectacular guitar player and unbelievable showman."
Ironically, Mr. Nardini's latest recognition has been in Germany, where he had a hit single a few years ago and toured Bavaria.
Tonight at Excuses, the steaming bar fills with Mr. Nardini's rhythm-and-blues songs punctuated by bawdy jokes and occasional whoops and hollers.
The packed house is a mixture of college kids and veteran Norman fans in their late 30s and 40s, and they are fiercely protective.
"He sometimes gets out into the audience during a song, and I watch his back for him," says Bob Albenze, 41, a bearded bear of a man who's been following Mr. Nardini for about 15 years.
"I make sure he doesn't fall and get hurt."
In the background, Mr. Nardini sings, "The older I get, the better I used to be."
