It is one regulation that small business is learning to love.
The drive in state legislatures to make companies establish workplace-safety committees is gaining more steam.
Legislation pending in Congress would apply the requirement nationwide.
And the state exemptions for small businesses are getting skimpier.
In the past, states typically let firms with fewer than 25 workers off the hook.
But Montana's new law exempts only those with fewer than six workers.
And Nebraska's applies to all enterprises.
Usually, small businesses squawk at the prospect of yet more rules to follow and paperwork to complete.
But this time, the reception is generally favorable.
The reason: The safety teams, which are generally made up of equal numbers of workers and managers, not only reduce accidents, but also lower workers' compensation costs, sometimes sharply.
The effect is particularly dramatic at small companies because most large corporations already have safety programs and committees in operation.
Jon Egge, owner of M P Plumbing Co. in Clackamas, Ore., says that his state's law -- which he helped to write -- is a "smashing success."
And indeed, Oregon's 1990 overhaul of its workers' compensation system is often cited as a model for reversing out-of-control insurance-premium increases.
The Oregon law includes a broad range of measures besides the creation of safety committees.
For example, it stipulates that any given workplace situation must be the major factor -- not just one factor -- in an injury or health problem for an employee to claim compensation.
It also includes a provision allowing medical arbiters to determine the extent of impairment from certain injuries and ailments.
Safety teams are mandatory for companies with 11 or more workers, and for all companies in high-risk industries such as logging.
The overhaul has driven workers' compensation insurance costs down markedly, according to Annette Talbott, counsel for several state Senate committees.
She says rates have fallen by an average of more than 10% a year over the past three years and are projected to decline an additional 4.3% in 1994, for an estimated saving so far of $236 million.
Mr. Egge believes that because workers and management consult closely on ways to reduce workplace hazards, the opportunities for fraud have shrunk.
"We've changed the tone of conversation at the local tavern," he says.
"Now, if you're not really injured on the job, you don't bother to make an application because you know it won't do you any good."
The Oregon law has its critics.
Shirley Benson, for example, gripes about a provision that would strip her Automatic Transmissions Specialties shop in Salem of its small-business exemption if only one of its nine employees missed a day of work because of an accident.
Even so, Ms. Benson likes the impact on her bottom line.
"My workers' comp costs have gone way down since the revamp," she says.
"When I go to trade-association meetings, people from other states are wringing their hands."
Other states are following in Oregon's footsteps.
Nebraska, for example, is implementing a law that took effect Jan. 1 requiring all companies to set up safety committees, regardless of their size.
Gary Hirsh, director of safety and labor standards at the Nebraska Department of Labor, predicts that the measure will reduce workplace accidents at small businesses and all but eliminate fines imposed by the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Up until now, workers unhappy with workplace conditions were apt to file complaints with OSHA, triggering inspections that could lead to fines, he says.
Now, however, they will be more likely to air their concerns to a fellow worker on the company's safety committee, which can then take corrective action.
"The result: no penalties, no fine," Mr. Hirsh says.
The new law also requires employers with the worst safety records to hold consultations with the state on eliminating hazards and sets deadlines for removing them, Mr. Hirsh adds.
Some Nebraska businesses like the new law, while others are taking a wait-and-see attitude.
The Nebraska Chamber of Commerce was instrumental in its passage, although the Lincoln chapter withheld its support.
Don Banzhaf, co-owner of Banzhaf Brothers Inc. in Eustis, Neb., says he thinks it is silly to have to meet with his brother and two sons to discuss safety questions they are all familiar with.
(The construction firm has only two other employees, including Mr. Banzhaf's wife.)
"It's a pain in the neck," he says.
Painful or not, other states are jumping aboard the bandwagon.
"We've seen a lot more action in the states since last year," says Jim Weidman, manager of state media relations for the National Federation of Independent Business in Washington.
The Montana legislature last year enacted a workers'-compensation reform package that requires workplace safety teams at companies with six or more workers, Mr. Weidman says.
And a new North Carolina law requires companies with 11 or more employees and a history of workplace accidents to set up safety programs, including worker-management committees, according to Patricia Pleasants, the NFIB director in that state.
Other states offer incentives for businesses to set up voluntary programs.
A new Pennsylvania law, for example, provides for 5% discounts in workers-compensation premiums for companies that establish safety plans, including worker-management committees, while a recent Florida law sets a 2% discount, NFIB directors in those states say.
And a bill approved by Virginia's legislature this year pledges state "assistance" to firms that create safety teams.
Meanwhile, the Clinton administration is supporting a bill in Congress to require companies with more than 11 employees to develop safety programs and form employee-management safety committees.
Theodore Ronca, a Long Island workers'-compensation consultant, estimates that more than 20 states have "some sort of provision for safety committees."
