Rogers Communications Inc. launched its long-awaited bid to acquire Maclean Hunter Ltd., offering 2.79 billion Canadian dollars (US$2.08 billion) for the shares of the Toronto-based cable television, broadcasting and publishing concern that it doesn't already own.
Rogers said it is offering C$17 a share in cash and one participation right for each share of Maclean Hunter.
The rights allow recipients to receive about 92% of the net proceeds from the sale of Maclean Hunter's U.S. cable-television assets in excess of C$1.5 billion.
If Rogers succeeds in acquiring Maclean Hunter, the move would consolidate its position as Canada's largest cable-television operator.
The Maclean Hunter cable systems would increase Rogers' subscribers to a third of those Canadian households with cable, from about a quarter currently.
But Rogers still has a number of hurdles to clear.
First and foremost is Maclean Hunter's response to its offer.
Because the bid is open only until March 15, it doesn't meet the criteria of a so-called "permitted bid" under the terms of Maclean Hunter's shareholder-rights plan.
To be a permitted bid, the offer must remain open for at least 120 days.
Edward S. "Ted" Rogers, president and chief executive of Rogers Communications, said he is prepared to challenge the rights plan in court, if Maclean Hunter decides to trigger the "poison pill" and allow shareholders to exercise rights to acquire new shares of the company at a 50% discount to market value, making a takeover prohibitively expensive.
Ronald Osborne, president and chief executive of Maclean Hunter, says the company is "examining all of our options."
He declined to elaborate but confirmed the company is in talks about selling some of its assets.
Maclean Hunter has been seeking a buyer for its U.S. cable assets since late last year, a process that has accelerated since Rogers disclosed its interest in Maclean Hunter two weeks ago.
But Maclean Hunter also could seek out buyers for some of its Canadian broadcasting and publishing assets, making it a much less attractive acquisition.
Analysts say there is little likelihood of a competing offer emerging for Maclean Hunter as a whole.
Canadian law restricts foreign ownership of media concerns to 20%, considerably limiting the field of prospective bidders.
"On the whole, it looks as though there's better value there for the shareholders with the Rogers bid than in selling the company off piecemeal," said Carla Larson, an analyst with Bunting Warburg Inc. in Toronto.
Moreover, Mr. Rogers told analysts at an investors' conference Friday that increased concentration in the Canadian cable-television industry is necessary to fend off competitive threats from telephone companies and U.S. direct-broadcast satellites, which are likely to give Canadians access to hundreds of channels in the near future.
"We have to have . . . a multimedia company that can compete around the world," Mr. Rogers said.
"If we're all small and timid in this country, we'll all be overwhelmed."
Mr. Rogers is adamant that C$17 a share is his top offer.
"If someone comes and bids some crazy price, they can take it," he said, noting that Maclean Hunter shares had traded at around C$12 for several years before Rogers disclosed its interest.
In Toronto Stock Exchange trading Friday, Maclean Hunter closed at C$17.375 a share, up 37.5 Canadian cents.
Rogers Class B shares jumped to C$21, up C$1, in Toronto Stock Exchange trading Friday.
They had fallen in recent days after Rogers said it might offer stock as well as cash for Maclean Hunter.
Mr. Rogers said Maclean Hunter shareholders could realize additional value from the participation rights.
But Ms. Larson put the maximum value of each right at 40 Canadian cents, adding that financing costs and capital-gains taxes could reduce net proceeds from a sale of the U.S. cable assets.
Rogers said its bid is conditional on at least two-thirds of Maclean Hunter shares being tendered and on Maclean Hunter not entering into any agreement to sell its U.S. cable-television assets.
It also needs approval from communications and antitrust regulators in both Canada and the U.S. Regulators might take a year to review the deal and could insist that Rogers dispose of some of Maclean Hunter's Canadian assets, analysts say.
Rogers said it sold C$270 million of a new class of convertible preferred shares to Mr. Rogers, in exchange for C$65.1 million in cash and the 14.9 million common shares of Maclean Hunter that Mr. Rogers already held.
Mark Heinzl contributed to this article.
