Bonnie Blair won the women's 1,000 meter speed-skating race to become the most successful U.S. woman in Olympic history.
It was her fifth gold medal and her sixth overall.
Skating in the second pair, Ms. Blair bolted to the second-best 1,000 time of her life, finishing in 1 minute, 18.74 seconds.
Germany's Anke Baier won the silver in 1:20.12 and China's Ye Qiaobo took the bronze in 1:20.22.
Ms. Blair, who will be 30 on March 18, was the oldest woman in the race.
Markus Wasmeier of Germany won his second gold medal, capturing the men's giant slalom.
The showdown between Alberto Tomba and Kjetil Andre Aamodt fizzled.
Mr. Wasmeier beat Urs Kaelin of Switzerland by 0.02 second.
Christian Mayer of Austria, the leader after the first run, ended up with bronze to earn his country's first Alpine medal of these Games.
Mr. Wasmeier's time was two minutes, 52.46 seconds.
Mr. Tomba, trying to become the first man to win Alpine medals in three straight Olympics, was 1.19 seconds back after the first run, then missed a gate on the second run.
Mr. Aamodt, a favorite in his home country finished 1.43 seconds back.
Myriam Bedard of Canada captured her second biathlon gold medal, edging Svetlana Paramygina of Belarus by 1.1 seconds in the women's 7.5-kilometer sprint.
Valentyna Tserbe of Ukraine won the bronze medal, 1.2 seconds off the pace.
Ms. Bedard completed the course in 26 minutes, 8.8 seconds.
For the men, Sergei Tchepikov of Russia combined perfect shooting with a strong finish to win the 10-kilometer sprint.
Mr. Tchepikov had a time of 28 minutes, 7 seconds.
Ricco Gross of Germany, who held a 5.8-second advantage over Mr. Tchepikov after the second and last shooting range, slipped to second, 6.0 seconds behind.
Sergei Tarasov of Russia won the bronze.
Nancy Kerrigan of the U.S. performed flawlessly and won the opening short program of the women's figure skating.
World champion Oksana Baiul of Ukraine, also skating brilliantly, finished second.
France's Surya Bonaly was third in the routine counting one-third of the overall score.
American Tonya Harding stumbled twice and was 10th.
Finland beat the U.S. 6-1 and will play Canada in the semifinals.
Canada beat the Czech Republic 3-2 in overtime.
Sweden, which beat Germany 3-0, will play Russia.
Japan will take a seemingly unbeatable 5 minute, 7 second lead over Norway into today's 30-kilometer cross-country skiing relay race.
Switzerland is third.
