If the Clinton health care plan had been in place during the past three years, I would be in a wheelchair today and well on my way to a premature demise.
Instead, today I am a reasonably healthy man.
I play basketball, ski, hike and bicycle.
While my experiences are unusual -- some might say unique -- they reveal the not-so-obvious benefits for everyone of a system characterized by free choice, extensive use of high-technology innovations, and a wealth of specialized medical training.
My travails started at age 58 with peculiar burning/cold sensations in both feet.
After routine tests, a local internist attributed the problem to an antibiotic drug reaction.
Unfortunately, even without the antibiotic, the symptoms persisted and during the next few months I experienced increasing leg weakness.
Soon I could no longer ski and would fall while walking.
It became clear that whatever was wrong was insidiously progressive.
Consultations with several neurologists were unrewarding.
Gradually my wife and I realized that most probably no single doctor would finger the cause.
So for months we sought a diagnosis more or less simultaneously from four different internists and several neurologists.
We read and studied medical literature, continued the consultations, and assembled and eliminated, one by one, a list of nearly 50 possible causes.
We and my doctors tried at first to rule out the more likely causes -- e.g. diabetes, various poisons, spinal disk problems, Lyme disease, etc.
We found most physicians were unmethodical in going down the medical fault tree.
They preferred to pursue their favorite theories.
Several, in fact, suggested my problem was emotional or that I was too old to ski.
Two different neurologists insisted I had multiple sclerosis.
While I was grateful for any diagnosis, even a faulty one, we were able to rule out MS for various reasons.
During this process I had many brain, spinal cord and body MRIs, X-rays, CT scans, etc. -- all to no avail.
After about a year, with nearly every cause on our list eliminated, a University of California-Davis internist suggested a liver CT scan.
While the liver proved to be normal, imagery revealed an unexpected and terrifyingly malignant tumor on my right kidney, which was subsequently surgically removed at UCLA two years ago.
After three months of slow and painful recovery, the original symptoms remained and we had to resume the neurological hunt.
By this time, simply walking was a challenge.
Finally, Dr. Robert Collins, chairman of the UCLA neurology department, and the eighth neurologist I had seen, succeeded in locating the problem area in the spinal cord.
Several carefully enhanced MRI studies then indicated a possible cyst in the cord.
In late March 1992 I was admitted to the Green Hospital at Scripps Institute in San Diego for spinal neurosurgery.
My neurosurgeon, Dr. Thomas Waltz, initially believed the cyst was a tumor, based on new MRIs.
During surgery, he discovered that the problem was actually an arterialized vein.
The precise location in the cord was subsequently pinpointed by a sophisticated arteriogram and the arteriovenous malformation (AVM) was then surgically corrected in yet another operation.
This rare disease, identified in 1929, is halted by a surgical technique perfected only about 10 years ago.
Virtually all the uncorrected AVM patients become wheelchair-bound.
Thus, happily, ended a frustrating 18-month medical odyssey to unravel a baffling mystery.
During that time, I had 22 direct personal physicians (not including a supporting cast of radiologists and anesthesiologists).
I underwent three major surgical operations to correct bladder cancer in the kidney and the AVM.
After these successes, several of our doctors commented that my wife's and my medical participation and persistence were an essential ingredient to the fortunate medical journey.
One measure of its pleasant ending: I skied 33 days last winter.
-- Freedom of choice is critical.
Several physicians admitted they were stumped by my case; many did not.
Obviously, no one is infallible and some doctors are more capable than others in the diagnosis or treatment of certain illnesses.
As my wife and I progressed through blind alleys and misleading diagnoses, we were forced to make our own informed judgments.
Patients must be willing and able to make choices, including selecting physicians, especially in ill-defined medical situations.
With Mr. Clinton's managed-care reform, it is unlikely that my gatekeeper general practitioner would have allowed four internists and eight neurological referrals, so my wheelchair fate would have been sealed early.
-- Medical specialists are the system's backbone.
We were fortunate in eventually finding the appropriate specialists.
The search was not easy, because all doctors are not equally gifted in all areas.
The administration's idea of mandating that half of all medical school graduates be general practitioners will significantly reduce the population of medical specialists and lessen our chances of finding the one or two appropriate specialists.
It also denies young doctors a free career choice.
Such an anti-free-market mandate may yield cost savings, but at the expense of sophisticated medicine and ultimately human lives.
-- High-tech works.
High-technology medicine was indispensable in saving my life and my legs.
Medical reformers dismiss MRI machines and other technology innovations as wasteful because of their high costs.
R&D for medical advances, as well as risk capital for expensive new medical devices, are low priority in a one-size-fits-all medical scheme.
Medical reformers' simple cost models don't count the human penalty for reduced access to high-tech tools nor perhaps the actual cost savings of noninvasive techniques.
-- The Canadian model offers no solace.
Advocates of the single-payer Canadian health care system argue that Canadians receive adequate health care.
Well, "adequate" is not good enough.
Had I resided in Canada, I would now be in a wheelchair at best because of the lengthy waits for the MRIs and CT scans I consumed in great quantities.
Canadians come to this country for serious medical treatment because their system is investment-limited.
The administration may promise us government "investment" in health care, but we all certainly understand that sooner or later tax dollars won't cover the costs of future breakthroughs.
The 23rd physician I consulted reviewed my entire case and pronounced in amazement, "You have dodged two bullets; you are a medical miracle."
My fear is that the administration's plan will so lower the quality and availability of care that medical miracles will no longer happen in the U.S.
Mr. Angeletti is a 62-year-old semi-retired aerospace and communication engineer living in Mammoth Lakes, Calif.
