The publicity materials accompanying "Excursions in the Real World" (Knopf, 201 pages, $23) trumpet the Irishman William Trevor as "probably the greatest living writer of short stories in the English language," and for once the publicity materials do not lie.
I read my first book of Trevor short stories in 1988, and within six weeks I had polished off nine of his books.
Since there were only five more Trevor books left to read at the time, and since he was already 60, I decided to ration out the rest of his oeuvre over the 30 or 40 more years I reckoned I still had coming to me.
With only a handful of truly gifted short-story writers -- Alice Munro, Mavis Gallant -- to keep us short-story buffs going, it's really important to keep a solid reserve around for old age.
The recognition Mr. Trevor has received in recent years derives from two sources: a deceptively simple turn of phrase, and an ability to portray flawed, wounded characters whose predicaments appeal to readers from very different cultures.
Though many of Mr. Trevor's best stories are set in Ireland, where he spent his youth as a Protestant among Catholics, many more are set in England, where he spent his later years as a foreigner among natives.
It is a powerful irony that Mr. Trevor has done a far better job of depicting the life of the average Briton than have such better-known writers as Iris Murdoch, Margaret Drabble and assorted people named Ian.
They -- products of the Oxford-Cambridge glittering-prizes circuit -- seem incapable of writing about anything other than the prepackaged ennui that their aging best-and-brightest chums now feel.
Mr. Trevor, a bank clerk's son lucky enough to attend Trinity College, never strays far from his knitting: the vast numbers of ordinary shopkeepers, farmers, schoolteachers, salesmen and disappointed housewives who make up the United Kingdom, and, for that matter, the world.
"Excursions in the Real World" is a collection of essays, most of them autobiographical, that Mr. Trevor wrote for publications as diverse as The New Yorker, the Daily Telegraph and the Hudson Review since 1970.
They explain how a young Protestant "born into a minority that all my life has seemed in danger of withering away" could grow up to claim the literary mantle previously worn by Oscar Wilde, James Joyce, Sean O'Casey, William B. Yeats and Samuel Beckett, none of whom he resembles.
Setting out to be a clerk like his father, he was a dud student -- "I cannot write twenty sentences on A Day in the Life of a Shoe" -- and drifted into a brief career as a copywriter for an ad agency.
He wasn't very good at that, either; his idea for a slogan to boost Canadian tourism was "Come to Canada!" when his boss was looking for something linking Canada to its glorious Nordic past.
"Take a Leif from his Book!" would have done nicely.
Often Mr. Trevor writes about modest people who quietly go about escaping the monotony of their lives.
One essay concerns a well-educated woman trapped in a marriage with a dull administrator at the school Mr. Trevor attended as a boy.
Years later, he discovers that the woman secretly liked to play the ponies, and was pretty good at it.
"Forty-three years on," he recalls, "there is a woman who, obedient to the code of things, never revealed her feelings about the humbug of so much that surrounded her, a woman who is bored by married life and family life and the pretty world of the school, who is more mysterious than anyone ever guessed."
Amid his reveries about a drab, semirural childhood in which he dreamed every day of escaping "to the paradise that was Cork," Mr. Trevor remembers a shop employee mesmerized into thinking he was a chicken by a roving French hypnotist who could not then undo the spell.
Recalling an itinerant knife-throwing act, he writes: "Afterwards, the man's wife came round with a cap for coppers.
There were only a few cuts on her, and they'd all healed long ago."
He writes affectionately of a bookish schoolmate who ends up running a car-battery franchise, but no less fondly of a mad copywriter who used to wander around the ad agency insisting that a dead cat cradled in her arms was "not entirely lifeless."
The jewel in this collection is "Field of Battle" -- essentially a post-mortem of his own parents' doomed marriage.
"What children of a marriage rarely witness is the nature of the love that brought the whole thing -- themselves included -- into being in the first place.
The marriage of parents is almost always mysterious: the sensual elements scarcely bear thinking about, the romantic past can only be guessed at, and all such curiosity invariably comes too late," he writes.
Of the war zone that his parents' marriage became, the author ruefully concludes: "They were victims of their innocence when chance threw them together and passion beguiled them, leaving them to live with a mistake and to watch their field of battle expand with each day that passed.
They gave their love to their children and were loved in return, fiercely, unwaveringly.
But not for a moment could that heal the wounds they carried to their graves."
