Sara Lee's stock is snagged on the company's hosiery business.
The Chicago-based company gets more than half its earnings from nonfood products such as Hanes underwear, Champion sweats and Kiwi shoe polish.
Lately it's been L'eggs pantyhose and other hosiery items that have caused a veritable run on the stock by investors.
But now the shares are starting to show up on a few Wall Street "buy" lists.
Admirers say the multinational maker of such name-brand goods as Hillshire Farm meats, Playtex bras, Coach leather goods and Isotoner gloves, as well as Sara Lee cakes, is tackling its problems with a resolve that promises to put the company on the mend, though it has predicted flat earnings for the current, third quarter.
The stock closed Friday at 21 5/8, up 1/8.
At a recent closed-door session in a Scottsdale, Ariz., resort, John H. Bryan, chairman and chief executive officer, delivered what one approving analyst calls "a management mea culpa."
He said "the new world order" requires that "we shall invest in vertical integration no more," according to a tape of his remarks provided by analysts.
In other words, Sara Lee increasingly will grab labor and raw goods wherever it can get the best deal -- such as China.
Sara Lee will be much more cautious about acquisitions, Mr. Bryan indicated.
For years the Street admired its ability to gobble up regional brands, but in Europe the tactic went amiss.
Sara Lee had "too many products in too many channels in too many countries without thoroughly understanding the cultural differences," one executive confessed to the analysts.
How to reform?
"We will manage for better cash flow" and put "an emphasis on low-cost production," Donald Franceschini, the executive in charge of Personal Products (including hosiery and knitwear) said in Arizona.
"We will also take a more aggressive position on spinning off marginal businesses.
It's up or out."
Sara Lee initially failed to spot a U.S. trend toward casual dress by working women, a misstep that put a big hole in its $1 billion-a-year hosiery business.
It failed to tell consumers why they should keep buying L'eggs.
Now the company will spend more on advertising, less on in-store promotion.
Innovation is coming.
"We want to make certain that our branded products offer something unique to the customer," Mr. Franceschini said, alluding to a type of pantyhose that "smoothes the figure from waist to toe."
Fewer acquisitions and restrained capital spending will leave more money to buy back stock, some bulls hope.
Les Pugh at Salomon Brothers predicts "an aggressive stock-repurchase program" in the next year or so and rates the stock a long-term "buy."
Prudential Securities' John McMillin says "free cash flow could go from $200 million to $400 million next year."
Calling Mr. Bryan's revised course "the pragmatic thing," he raised his opinion to "buy" from "hold" after the Scottsdale conference, estimating fiscal 1994 earnings at $1.48 a share, and next year's at $1.63.
He sees possible sourcing advantages over rival companies such as Fruit of the Loom as Sara Lee expands into China and other areas.
In China, executives told analysts, Sara Lee aims to begin a direct-sales operation in the year starting this July, selling socks, shoe polish and other personal items door to door.
"Sara Lee can generate double-digit annual earnings growth over the next five years," Morgan Stanley's Eric J. Larson tells clients, reiterating a long-time "buy" on the stock.
"If an investor is able to stomach the next two or three quarters, this stock is attractively priced."
Other analysts aren't so sure.
Nomi Ghez at Goldman Sachs rates Sara Lee a "market performer."
It looks cheap at less than 15 times trailing earnings, but she heard little at the conference to "make us change our expectations for this year and next . . .
The current problems affect large and geographically widespread businesses, and will therefore take some time to correct."
David Rabinowitz at Kidder Peabody rates the stock "neutral," seeing little room for an upside surprise in the current, fiscal second half.
To report even flat results for the period, he says Sara Lee will have to deliver strong gains from both its Packaged Meats/Bakery and Household/Personal Care units, which together rival Personal Products in sales.
"If the multiple falls far enough, it could meet our criteria," says James A. Miller, senior portfolio manager at Cincinnati-based Bartlett Capital Basic Value Fund.
But for now "we're finding cheaper stocks elsewhere."
