Tigers frequently kill larger animals.
Microsoft Corp. is betting that a prototype program it has code-named Tiger can perform a similar feat in one of the hottest new markets in the computer industry.
The company says Tiger, which was demonstrated recently in a locked laboratory here, can deliver computerized video and interactive multimedia programming for one-tenth the cost of rival video-server technologies being developed by such companies as International Business Machines Corp., Digital Equipment Corp., Hewlett-Packard Co., Oracle Corp. and Silicon Graphics Corp.
Tiger's trick is using personal computer hardware instead of mainframes or supercomputers.
Microsoft contends that servers of almost any size can be assembled by stringing together the "motherboards" that perform the basic numbercrunching in PCs.
When informed of Microsoft's approach, several competitors ridiculed the idea that PC hardware could provide the communications and processing power to, say, enable thousands of consumers to order up movies from home simultaneously or perform more interactive functions like electronic shopping.
They also questioned whether Microsoft's approach could produce the promised cost savings.
"The theory here is that PCs are the cheapest thing out there, but that is a corrupt theory," said James Barton, vice president and general manager of Silicon Graphics' media systems division.
"They can't do it," added Lawrence Ellison, chief executive of Oracle, which has developed media-server software that runs on a supercomputer.
"It's impossible to build a cheaper system than we have."
But many potential business users of multimedia programming won't need to reach thousands of customers simultaneously.
A small electronics-store chain, for instance, may want to own a video server that can respond to scores of customer calls each day for a video tour of its wares, rather than rent space on a huge video server owned by a telephone or cable company.
Local servers could be less expensive and give more control over updating information and charging for it, and they could work with internal networks inside hotels, shopping malls and airliners.
Microsoft isn't the only company taking the contrarian view.
Novell Inc. and a few other software companies agree that PC hardware could play a major role in small, low-cost video servers that would open up the ballyhooed information highway in myriad ways for small businesses and public institutions.
"That's a legitimate drum to beat," said Jim Long, chief executive of Starlight Networks Inc., a Mountain View, Calif., start-up plying the video-server field.
Dataquest Inc., a market research firm in San Jose, Calif., this week estimated that the video-server business will surge to $5.1 billion by 1997 from just $16 million in 1993.
Underscoring the uncertainty about the infant market, Smaby Group, a Minneapolis consulting firm, in January predicted the video-server market may reach only $1 billion by 1998.
Novell, No. 1 in network software, Starlight and others already sell software that allows PCs to serve up video to multiple computer users on corporate networks.
They are also working on solving the problems associated with adapting those products for the home -- such as how to guarantee uninterrupted service when hundreds of people want the same movie on Saturday night.
"We don't believe those problems are unsolvable," says Prem Uppaluru, director of engineering and product marketing in the Novell multimedia division.
"We believe that PC hardware will end up ultimately costing much less than the big iron."
Microsoft, which plans to spend $100 million a year on information highway opportunities, hasn't previously given out many clues about its strategy in the server market.
Company executives initially insisted that a reporter not disclose the hardware approach used by Tiger as a condition of demonstrating the program.
But they later relented.
Microsoft has an interest in countering the perception that it is lagging behind competitors in developing server products and partnerships.
"I can give you 20 reasons why our technology is better," says William Gates, Microsoft's chief executive.
In essence, Tiger is software that acts as a file system for multimedia information, including graphics and sound as well as video.
It operates in conjunction with Microsoft's Windows NT operating system and requires some advanced networking hardware in addition to a personal computer.
Tiger manages functions such as parceling out snippets of video to arrays of disk drives and reassembling them into coherent streams.
In the demonstration, PCs based on Intel Corp. 486 microprocessors were each able to deliver digitized film to dozens of TVs simultaneously.
Tiger's capacity is expected to increase sharply with faster microprocessors and improvements in the standard "bus" circuitry that handles internal communications in PCs.
As larger servers are assembled from PC boards, the technology is designed to cope with problems such as the potential failure of disk drives and other components.
"Our solution is very, very cost-effective at any scale," says Nathan Myhrvold, Microsoft's senior vice president of advanced technology.
Mr. Myhrvold wouldn't disclose how far Microsoft is from completing Tiger.
He added that the software is likely to be used in market trials this year.
Servers typically assign one stream of computerized video data to each user of a system.
Therefore, the cost per video stream helps determine how much companies need to invest to build multimedia networks, and whether they are competitive with other options, such as movie rentals.
Smaby Group estimates that most video servers now cost about $3,000 per stream of video and are heading toward about $1,500.
Some companies say they can beat that mark now.
Oracle and nCube Corp., which can run Oracle's media-server software on a parallel supercomputer composed of hundreds or thousands of processing units, say that together they can now deliver video at about $1,000 per stream.
They expect that figure to drop to between $500 and $600 by the end of the year.
Hewlett-Packard, which uses custom circuitry to transfer video at high speed, expects to deliver a video server this year for less than $1,000 per video stream, says Jim Olson, general manager in charge of H-P's video communications unit.
Microsoft's Mr. Myhrvold wouldn't give a precise video-stream cost for the company's PC-based scheme, but he estimated it will be at least "an order of magnitude" cheaper than other hardware approaches.
Silicon Graphics' Mr. Barton and other skeptics argue that personal computers aren't the only machines benefiting from plummeting prices for microprocessors and other components.
And, he says, most of the cost of any type of video server comes from disk drives and memory chips needed to store vast quantities of digitized information.
"Whether you are a PC maker or IBM or Silicon Graphics, you are paying about the same amount of money for those two things," says David Frankel, a Minneapolis technology consultant.
But Microsoft's Mr. Myhrvold says that the PC-based approach can use much less costly disk drives than larger systems.
He predicts that component costs will fall most rapidly in the high-volume PC market, lowering the price of server hardware and widening the opportunity to sell Tiger and other programs.
"We are far more flexible than any other system I'm aware of," he says.
Markus Wasmeier won Germany's first Olympic Alpine ski medal for men since 1936, beating out downhill winner Tommy Moe of the U.S. by 0.08 second in the super giant slalom.
Mr. Wasmeier's time was 1 minute, 32.53 seconds; Mr. Moe was timed in 1:32.61 while Kjetil Andre Aamodt of Norway was third in 1:32.93, adding a bronze to the silver he won in the downhill.
"Now, my happiness is complete," said Mr. Wasmeier, 30.
Mr. Moe became the first American man to win more than one Alpine skiing medal at a single Olympics.
Phil Mahre won two medals, but at different Olympics -- a gold in 1984 and a silver in 1980.
So far in these Games, neither the Swiss nor the Austrians, traditionally the two strongest nations in Alpine skiing, has won a skiing medal.
Mr. Moe joins a pair of women as America's only multimedalists in Alpine skiing.
In 1960, Penelope Pitou won silvers in the downhill and giant slalom, and Andrea Mead Lawrence won the slalom and giant slalom at the 1952 Games.
Russian Svetlana Bazhanova was the surprise winner in the women's 3,000-meter speed-skating event after favorite Gunda Niemann fell.
Ms. Niemann, the world record holder and defending Olympic champion, fell in nearly the same spot as American Dan Jansen stumbled in Monday's 500.
Ms. Niemann finished the race, crossing in 5:10.28.
Ms. Bazhanova, 21, crossed the finish line in 4:17.43, beating Austrian Emese Hunyady by 0.71 second.
Germany's Claudia Pechstein won the bronze in 4:18.34.
Todd Marchant scored with 28 seconds remaining to give the U.S. a 3-3 tie with Canada, the U.S.'s third straight tie.
Canada dropped into a first-place tie with Sweden.
Sweden clinched a quarterfinal berth by routing France, 7-1.
Sweden is 2-0-1, while France has tied the U.S. and lost to Canada.
Slovakia is 1-0-2 after beating winless Italy 10-4.
Russia's Lyubov Egorova moved within one gold medal of the Winter Olympics record as she skied to an 8.3-second victory over Manuela Di Centa of Italy in the women's 10-kilometer cross-country freestyle pursuit.
The two women also became the first triple medalists in these Games.
It was the eighth medal in as many Olympic races for Ms. Egorova, who won a silver behind Ms. Di Centa in the women's opening 15K.
Ms. Egorova, 28, had a 20-second advantage over Ms. Di Centa at the start after winning Tuesday's 5K classical-style, the first leg of the pursuit.
She completed the pursuit in a total time of 41 minutes, 38.1 seconds.
Stefania Belmondo of Italy, a freestyle expert from Italy, took the bronze.
In the men's 10-kilometer classical-style race, Bjorn Dahlie won the host country's fifth gold medal in these Games.
His countryman and rival, 1992 triple gold medalist Vegard Ulvang, finished a disappointing seventh.
Mr. Dahlie held off Kazakhstan's Vladimir Smirnov by 18.2 seconds, adding a gold to his silver in the opening 30K freestyle race.
Mr. Dahlie's time was 24 minutes, 20.1 seconds.
The bronze medal went to Marco Albarello of Italy.
Russia's Alexei Urmanov won the technical program in men's figure skating, while three favorites faltered, including former gold medalists Brian Boitano and Viktor Petrenko.
Mr. Boitano, of the U.S., and Mr. Petrenko, of Ukraine, both stumbled during their programs and dropped out of medal contention.
The reigning world champion, Canada's Kurt Browning, fell hard and was even further back.
In second place was Canadian champion Elvis Stojko, and France's Philippe Candeloro was third going into tomorrow night's free skate, worth two-thirds of the total score.
U.S. champion Scott Davis was fourth.
