Deloitte & Touche agreed to pay $312 million to settle government claims linking the giant accounting firm to a number of costly thrift failures.
The settlement, which had been expected, is the second-largest that regulators have made in their bid to hold professionals liable for thrift-related work in the 1980s.
The largest was a $400 million accord reached in November 1992 with Ernst & Young.
The so-called global agreement resolves 18 pending lawsuits against Deloitte, seeking damages in excess of $1.4 billion, and potential claims that regulators could have brought against the firm stemming from banks and thrifts that failed before last November 1.
In addition, the Office of Thrift Supervision directed Henry Forer, the now-retired national director of Deloitte's savings-andloan practice, not to perform any accounting services for thrifts for five years.
An attorney for Mr. Forer said his client agreed to seek permission from regulators before working for thrifts during that period, but didn't accept an absolute prohibition.
Deloitte also agreed to an order from the OTS that requires it to maintain certain training and supervision for partners that audit financial institutions.
The agreement removes a cloud that has been hanging over the practice of the nation's third-largest accounting firm.
"It is a fair settlement that frees us from the prospect of prolonged, costly litigation with an uncertain outcome," said J. Michael Cook, the chief executive officer of Deloitte, in a statement.
Mr. Cook added in an interview that "a very substantial part" of the settlement was covered by insurance.
The firm previously had denied any improprieties in response to the various lawsuits, and agreed to the OTS order yesterday without admitting or denying wrongdoing.
Still, the payment could be costly to Deloitte's more than 1,400 partners.
Arthur Bowman, publisher of Bowman's Accounting Report, an industry newsletter, said the settlement, after insurance deductibles, would cost each Deloitte partner about $60,000, though not all in one year.
Deloitte, the product of a merger between the former Deloitte, Haskins & Sells and Touche Ross & Co., had been charged with various acts of professional negligence, including issuing clean audit opinions for institutions that proved to be insolvent.
The firm served roughly 20% of the top 300 S&Ls in the 1980s, and some of its clients were among the most notorious institutions to fail.
Among them: Western Savings & Loan Association of Phoenix and CenTrust Bank of Miami, which added $2.4 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively, to the taxpayer-financed S&L bailout.
The OTS cited accounting breakdowns by Deloitte in the handling of audits for five institutions.
They included: Franklin Savings & Loan Association, Ottawa, Kan.; Columbia Savings & Loan Association, Beverly Hills, Calif.; City Federal Savings Bank, Piscataway, N.J.; Sun Savings & Loan Association, Parker, Colo.; and First America Savings Bank, Longmont, Colo.
Among other problems, the OTS charged that Deloitte tacitly approved of City Federal's maintaining inadequate reserves for loan losses, and Columbia Savings' overvaluing its trading portfolio, which included huge junk-bond holdings.
