If Wall Street's million-dollar bankers carp about not being paid enough, it may be because they keep close tabs on the compensation of their bosses, the brokerage-firm chairmen.
The 1993 take-home pay of top brokerage-house officials will remain top secret until corporate proxy statements are released in April.
But some clues are offered by Securities and Exchange Commission "insider" filings.
Under SEC regulations that took effect in 1992, corporate insiders have to file not only their stockholdings in their own companies, but also their options grants, and the potential wealth the options represent.
Robert Greenhill, for instance, hired in June as chairman of Smith Barney Shearson, the brokerage unit of Travelers Inc., received 1993 compensation that included options on 1,333,000 shares.
The options enable him to buy Smith Barney stock at $34.50 a share.
They vest in segments over five years, but the first tranche would yield Mr. Greenhill an immediate pretax profit, given Smith Barney's close yesterday at $39.25 a share, of $4.75 each.
As part of his 1993 compensation, PaineWebber Group Inc.
Chairman Donald Marron received options to buy 125,000 shares of company stock at $27 each, which was also yesterday's closing price.
Those options were in addition to 449,850 options he already owned that are exercisable at prices as low as $9.83 each.
Still, the value of these huge options holdings also are vulnerable to market swings.
Last Friday, as the Dow Jones Industrial Average sank 96.24 points, investors trimmed $2 to $3 a share off many brokerage-house stocks in the widespread belief that securities firms would suffer unduly in any market correction.
Though the market has recovered somewhat since then, most brokerage stocks haven't.
The shares of Merrill Lynch & Co., the nation's largest brokerage firm, slid $2.875 to $41.375 on Friday; the stock closed yesterday at $41.625.
For Merrill Lynch Chairman Daniel Tully, the value of the 261,637 shares he owns has shrunk by $654,092.50.
The value of his options (assuming each of his options for 1.5 million shares were exercised at $33.82 or below) has slid by over $4 million.
Mr. Tully declined to comment, but a company spokesman said: "Mr. Tully takes a long-term view and does not concern himself with daily or short-term fluctuations in the market."
The brokerage firm added that its stock options program applies to anyone receiving a bonus package, including vice presidents, and that options are "an integral part of our compensation program for executives.
We have no plans to discontinue their use."
Similarly, Mr. Greenhill of Smith Barney Shearson was potentially much better off last Thursday, when Travelers stock closed at $42, or $2.75 higher than yesterday.
The stock's decline results in a 6.5% reduction in his potential profit on the options he could exercise immediately.
Other brokerage firms have begun moving away from stock-option grants in recent years.
Bear Stearns Cos., for instance, eliminated its stock-option program in 1989, replacing it with a stock-purchase program.
Morgan Stanley & Co. hasn't awarded them since 1990, although Chairman Richard Fisher still holds options on 126,880 shares.
Salomon Brothers, a unit of Salomon Inc., phased them out in 1988.
Employees "didn't value them as highly as the company did," said Chairman Robert Denham, who holds no options to purchase Salomon stock.
James Cayne, Bear Stearns chairman, still holds 81,256 options, issued in or before 1989.
He also owns 3.2 million shares of Bear Stearns stock and has committed himself to buy another 450,000 shares through the firm's stock-purchase program.
The company said Mr. Cayne has dedicated 50% of his salary over the next three years to stock purchases.
Pfizer Inc. is actively pursuing an unprecedented alliance with other major drug companies that would sell a pool of prescription medicines to increasingly powerful pharmaceutical buyers.
Such an alliance would give drug companies greater negotiating leverage with institutional buyers, such as health maintenance organizations and companies that manage drug benefits for employers' health plans.
These buyers are demanding steep discounts from drug companies.
At a meeting with securities analysts yesterday, however, Pfizer Chairman William C. Steere Jr. said that putting together such a consortium is difficult, because it is hampered by "squabbling" and antitrust concerns.
Although Pfizer officials declined to identify other drug makers involved in the negotiations, Mr. Steere and Edward C. Bessey, Pfizer vice chairman, discussed the difficulty of getting together large research-based companies with "different cultural personalities" and needs.
Even so, Mr. Steere added, such an alliance "isn't out of the question."
The company, he said, is also exploring alternatives, such as acquisitions and joint ventures.
One person close to the talks said a consortium led by Glaxo Inc., a unit of Glaxo Holdings PLC, and including Pfizer and Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., among others, came close to fruition last year but fell apart over disagreements concerning which drugs to include in the marketing pool.
The companies were also put off by the prominent position Glaxo wanted to give its ulcer drug Zantac, the person said.
Pfizer and Glaxo spokesmen declined to comment; a Bristol-Myers spokesman said the company couldn't immediately comment.
"Everyone is talking to each other," said Hemant Shah, an independent analyst.
But questions of how to handle the large number of competing drugs have been a stumbling block, he added.
D. Larry Smith, an analyst at Hambrecht & Quist, said that Pfizer "can afford to sit back and evaluate its options."
At the analysts' meeting, Henry McKinnell, Pfizer's chief financial officer, said the company is comfortable with analysts' 1994 per-share earnings estimates of $4.10 to $4.25 in ongoing operations, adding that the upper end of the range "appears somewhat optimistic."
In 1993, the company earned $3.70 a share from ongoing operations.
The outlook was toward the lower end of analysts' estimates, which ranged from $4.05 to $4.50 before the meeting, according to Zack's Investment Research Inc.
Pfizer's sales and earnings growth in the first quarter will be slower than the full-year growth rate because of higher expenses, mainly in research, and adverse foreign currency translations, Dr. McKinnell said.
Pfizer's forecast appears to have caused its shares to fall.
In late trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Pfizer was quoted at $59.375, down $2.25.
Dr. McKinnell, however, said Pfizer expects "low double-digit sales growth" in ongoing operations from the 9% growth in 1993.
