Two years ago, Erwin Duchense felt compelled to make the financial sacrifice to send his son, then age 12, to a Catholic school in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Like many other low-income families in the commonwealth, the Duchenses could no longer risk Christian's safety by sending him to a violence-prone neighborhood public school, even if that meant draining their precious savings.
This school year, however, Christian's family was spared an expense they could ill afford, as Christian switched to a much safer public school.
Last year, 13-year-old Olga Rodriguez-Morales was arbitrarily assigned to a neighborhood public school unable to accommodate her special education needs.
But instead of being forced to accept the bureaucratic edict, Olga's mother was able to enroll the girl in a different public school that has precisely the program she needs.
What made outcomes such as these possible for hundreds of low-income Puerto Rican youngsters were school vouchers.
Fulfilling a campaign pledge that helped propel him to office in 1992, Puerto Rico Gov. Pedro Rossello last September signed a law creating the second school voucher program covering U.S. citizens.
Like the first voucher system in Milwaukee, Puerto Rico's is designed to expand educational opportunities for low-income youngsters.
But as part of a more comprehensive effort, the Puerto Rican program may provide a nationwide model for U.S. educational reform.
Funded with $10 million allocated from privatization of the island's telephone company, the program makes $1,500 vouchers available to children from families with annual incomes of less than $18,000 who apply for them.
This year there were enough vouchers for all who applied -- overwhelmingly from lower-income families.
In subsequent years, there will be a lottery system if the number of applicants exceeds the number of vouchers available.
Public school students may apply their vouchers toward private school tuition, the median cost of which is less than $1,700.
But whereas the Milwaukee program provides vouchers only to students transferring from public to private schools, Puerto Rico makes its vouchers transportable between public schools, and from private to public schools.
For students using them in public schools, the vouchers provide resources on top of the funds the commonwealth already provides for each pupil.
This innovation marks a milestone in educational reform: Instead of merely funneling extra money to schools with high concentrations of low-income students, the voucher gives such youngsters greater mobility while making them economically attractive to schools.
No longer able to ignore low-income kids who previously had nowhere else to go, schools now compete for them and the extra resources they bring.
Motivations vary widely for the choices made by parents.
Public school parents are attracted to different public schools' specialized educational offerings or safer environments.
Some parents are sending their children to private schools because they have stronger academic or disciplinary standards or place an emphasis on values.
Still others are leaving private for public schools now that the voucher enables them to choose outside their neighborhoods.
All schools now must take these motivations into account if they want to survive.
Already some are making necessary changes.
At Gaetan Elementary School in San Juan, for instance, the teacher-parent council plans to offer free extracurricular courses in music and art, and hopes to raise funds for computer classes.
The school's principal says that if the school attracts voucher students, the added funds will be used to purchase more books and equipment.
But competition can't work if public schools lack freedom to respond.
The main problem in Puerto Rico, even more than elsewhere, is a huge bureaucracy -- one administrator for every two teachers -- which siphons off precious education resources and is more responsive to political and special-interest pressures than parents' concerns.
So the Rossello administration has moved to decentralize and deregulate public schools.
It is downsizing the Department of Education, dispatching bureaucrats from the massive 12-story central headquarters to classroom teaching positions.
Trimming the administrative fat will save enough money to fund the choice program in future years.
And this year it has transformed 40 public schools into self-governing "community" schools, as a first step in what Education Secretary Jose Arsenio Torres calls "the grinding process of becoming free."
Mr. Torres plans to convert 200 more schools over the next year.
The new community schools are so attractive that in the first year of the choice program, more voucher students transferred from private to public schools than from public to private.
Of 1,809 vouchers awarded, 1,181 were used to transfer from one public school to another, 317 were used to move from private to public schools, and only 311 to shift from public to private schools.
These statistics debunk a prime fallacy perpetrated in California and elsewhere by the education establishment: that vouchers are the death knell for public schools.
On the contrary, public schools will survive and thrive if they offer a good product.
And competition provides an incentive to do just that.
Predictably, although parents and many teachers are happy with the changed environment, the education establishment is bitterly opposed.
The opening salvo was a strike by the teacher unions protesting the elimination of tenure protections within community schools, which are free to hire and fire their own personnel.
The strike was shut down by legal action after one day.
Particularly annoying to the antivoucher block is that, unlike the Milwaukee program, Puerto Rico's voucher can be used in religiously affiliated schools -- a feature the plaintiffs contend renders it unconstitutional.
A lawsuit filed by one of the teacher associations, supported by the American Civil Liberties Union, claims that the program involves the commonwealth "in an enterprise that promotes religious activity, doing violence in this way to the constitutional separation of Church and State."
While the lawyers battle over the program's fate, the Rossello administration is busily applying the tonic it hopes will improve a school system in which currently less than half the students graduate.
For a few thousand low-income kids who badly need a decent education, this is the first tonic that's not snake oil.
Mr. Bolick is litigation director for the Institute for Justice in Washington, D.C., which represents parents defending the Puerto Rico school choice program.
