Computer online network Prodigy Services said it added bulletin boards for users who want to use and discuss foreign languages.
Until now, Prodigy hasn't allowed customers to use foreign languages because "it wouldn't be fair to users who are expecting to see English," a spokesman said.
Prodigy said it added the service because teachers requested a forum in which students could use another language.
Prodigy has created 24 bulletin boards designed to use separate languages, including Esperanto, an invented hybrid of European languages.
Each bulletin board will be monitored by a specialist in the particular language, who will help answer users' questions (although the Esperanto post hasn't been filled).
The bulletin boards won't provide "live" conversation, but rather will exchange messages and written conversations.
Prodigy is a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co.
Since 1990, America Online Inc., Vienna, Va., has offered a forum in which users may chat electronically in selected foreign languages during specified times, including Polish, Esperanto and Russian.
H&R Block Co.'s CompuServe Information Services has offered foreign-language forums on its on-line service since 1985.
Users ponder such heady topics as the French word for "speed bumps" -- ralentisseurs.
In the Italian forum, Dante is a hot topic.
And German speakers repeatedly talk about umlauts -- the two small circles that sometimes appear over vowels -- though none of the services can show such diacritical marks, which irritates some serious linguists.
"Accents are an integral part of Romance languages," said Lorraine Kennedy, executive vice president for All Languages Services Inc., a New York translation service.
Carmen Navaro, a translator for the service, said such a marked omission of accents "would not be accepted by the Spanish-speaking people."
Prodigy's new bulletin boards serve only languages that use the Roman alphabet -- that of the English language -- thus excluding Arabic, Hebrew and Russian's Cyrillic alphabet, for instance.
Users of America Online's Russian forum overcome that by transliterating, or using corresponding Roman characters.
However, said Victor Hertz, president of Corporate Language Services: "I can't imagine how you speak Russian without Cyrillic characters.
It would be like writing English in Cyrillic characters."
