Several small business and environmental groups today will jointly recommend setting time limits on the liabilities of small companies to pay cleanup costs at toxic-waste sites.
The recommendations would cut the long period of uncertainty that small businesses now face as government regulators determine responsibility for toxic-waste site cleanups.
The groups making the proposal say they expect Congress and the Clinton administration to support it.
In a letter to President Clinton, the groups will propose giving the government strict deadlines for determining a small company's share of the cleanup costs at a site governed by the federal Superfund law.
Under the proposal, a company that contributed little to a toxic-waste site would be released from its cleanup costs if federal officials took more than 10 months to determine its share of those costs.
Currently, it can take five to seven years to determine responsibility.
The groups will give details about their recommendations today at a hearing before the House Energy and Commerce Committee's subcommittee on hazardous wastes.
The suggested safeguards would be added to Superfund reforms recently proposed by the administration and by the National Commission on Superfund, a coalition of 26 representatives from business, environmental and community groups.
The heart of those suggested reforms is a nonjudicial arbitration process that would remove Superfund disputes from the courts.
Superfund poses big problems for small companies.
Although small concerns usually contributed little to the waste sites in question, they have often become the target of lawsuits by big companies seeking to cut their cleanup costs by collecting from other businesses that used the same sites.
Defense against these so-called "third-party suits" has created heavy legal expenses for many small companies.
The unresolved liability or the cleanup have also made it harder for some to obtain credit.
The small business and environmental camps say they found common ground on the issue because both want to win reform of the Superfund law this year.
The National Federation of Independent Business, the nation's largest small-business organization, the Small Business Legislative Council and the Printing Industries of America signed the letter to Mr. Clinton, along with the Environmental Defense Fund, the Natural Resources Defense Fund and the Sierra Club.
Small business advocates and environmentalists are unlikely allies who frequently have disagreed on regulatory issues.
But the letter to the president reflects their combined interests.
"Small businesses are fully prepared to carry their share of responsibility for toxic-waste cleanup," if the government can correct problems with the current program, it says.
The letter also says the environmental community "recognizes that many small businesses face unnecessary burdens" under the current system.
"One of the keys to getting this going was that the small-business community wasn't telling us their members wanted to walk away from their cleanup responsibilities," said William Roberts, legislative director for the Environmental Defense Fund.
"This agreement leaves in place the basic structure of liability, but gets rid of a one-size-fits-all way of implementing it."
The proposals, if adopted, would "improve the system a great deal for the majority of our members," said Harriet James, the National Federation of Independent Business's lobbyist for environmental issues.
The recommendations are aimed at companies with 100 or fewer employees, but would exclude small companies found to be responsible for significant amounts of contamination at a site.
Typically, small businesses such as auto-repair shops, tire dealers, printers and dry cleaners have been affected by the Superfund law.
The groups suggest requiring federal officials to follow a specific timetable for determining the costs small companies must pay under Superfund.
Under the proposed system, small companies would pay less money if the whole process takes longer than six months.
If it takes longer than 10 months, they would pay nothing at all.
(According to the small business settlement procedures already proposed by the administration, small companies would pay their estimated cleanup costs plus a premium payment, reflecting the fact that the estimate might be too low.)
Under the recommended timetable, if the government took eight months to determine a company's liability, the small company wouldn't pay the premium.
If the process exceeds 10 months, the small company wouldn't have to pay any cleanup costs unless it is determined that the delay was beyond the control of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The groups also recommended that the government be required to consider a small company's ability to pay for part of a toxic-waste cleanup and still remain viable.
That process currently is an informal one, the groups said.
The provision would apply to companies with 20 or fewer workers and with less than $1.8 million in annual revenue.
"The idea is that a very small company shouldn't have to hire an attorney to defend itself against the federal government," said Benjamin Cooper, chief lobbyist for the Printing Industries of America.
Other recommendations the coalition sent to the president include using an arbitration process to avoid years of costly Superfund litigation; letting small companies make Superfund payments over a period of time, including interest payments; and setting up a Small Business Assistance office at EPA headquarters and in each regional office to handle Superfund problems.
Stephen Esser, chairman of Kutztown Publishing Co. in Kutztown, Pa., said the proposals, if adopted, would help him.
He spent nearly $500,000, including cleanup costs and legal fees, to settle a third-party Superfund suit, and says he has received a letter of inquiry from the EPA about another site.
The commercial printing company has 72 employees and about $6 million in annual sales.
He said the waste site his company used was a municipal dump where all the local trash was sent.
"There are a lot of businesses out there just trying to do the right thing," he said.
"But what really ticks me off, out of all the money I spent, only about $100,000 of it is supposed to go for the site's cleanup."
