Sweden's AB Volvo and French auto giant Renault SA agreed to dismantle their strategic alliance, severing ties between the companies that had once planned to merge and leaving each of them free to search for new partners.
The Volvo-Renault divorce, which will take a surprisingly big bite out of Volvo's profit this year, had been expected since rebellious Volvo shareholders shot down the proposed merger of the Swedish company's car and truck divisions with Renault late last year.
The marriage was widely viewed as the culmination of a four-year betrothal, which had been cemented by cross shareholdings in each other's vehicle businesses.
The merger plan had reflected Volvo's belief that the Swedish company is too small to absorb new-car development costs and survive as an independent auto maker.
But now, rather than a full-scale marriage with a single partner, Volvo is likely to pursue more cooperative efforts like its joint venture with Japan's Mitsubishi Motors Corp. to build midsize models at a plant in the Netherlands, industry analysts say.
Officials at Volvo have said they want to concentrate on the company's core car and truck operations and sell parts of its sprawling portfolio of stakes in other Swedish companies.
Immediately after the collapse of the merger plan, Volvo and Renault pledged to continue the alliance under its original form.
But that commitment faded because of the mass resignation of Volvo's previous board -- and its replacement by newcomers lukewarm to Renault and anxious to preserve Volvo's independence.
Dissolution of key purchasing and quality-control joint ventures in recent weeks -- plus Renault's sale this month of part of its 10% voting stake in Volvo -- suggested the final separation was just a matter of time.
The alliance will be dismantled in two steps.
The first phase will be a straight share swap: Renault's 25% stake in Volvo's car division for Volvo's 45% stake in Renault's truck division, Renault Vehicules Industriels SA.
Details of the second and final step hinge on the French government's intention to privatize state-owned Renault by the end of this year.
If the privatization proceeds on schedule, Volvo will exchange 12% of the parent Renault out of the 20% Volvo currently holds for Renault's 45% holding in Volvo's truck division.
But if the privatization isn't completed by Nov. 30, Volvo would receive an 18-month option to buy back the 45% truck-division stake for a fixed price of 4.5 billion francs ($766.9 million).
The divorce plan remains subject to approval by Volvo's board, relevant corporate entities at Renault and the French government.
But representatives of each company on the boards of the other's car and truck divisions will resign immediately, Volvo said.
Volvo has made combined net cash payments of 7.8 billion kronor ($971.9 million) to Renault under the alliance pact -- including an additional one billion francs due Renault this year as an adjustment of car-division profits since 1989.
After the divorce, Volvo will be left with an 8% stake in Renault that can be sold following privatization.
The value of that stake remains uncertain, but Volvo Chief Financial Officer Jan Engstroem played down chances that Volvo will fully cover its 7.8 billion kronor net outlay so far.
Moreover, Volvo will incur various goodwill charges as a result of unwinding the alliance.
One charge of 3.6 billion kronor, relating to the Renault holding, will be written off against this year's profit, Mr. Engstroem explained in a phone interview.
The Swedish company will write off a further 1.6 billion kronor, reflecting surplus value of the 45% of the Volvo truck division compared with the 12% Renault stake ceded by Volvo in exchange.
Despite the threat of a 5.2 billion kronor hit to 1994 pretax profit, investors appeared satisfied with the separation -- Volvo's benchmark Class B stock surged 15 kronor ($1.87), or 2.2%, to 692 kronor in heavy trading on the Stockholm Stock Exchange.
Volvo, which built its reputation on boxy cars known for safety, hasn't yet reported fourth-quarter and full-year results for 1993.
In the first half of last year, the company rebounded from years of losses to report a profit of 380 million kronor.
Analysts expect the turnaround to pick up speed this year.
The dismantling of ties with Renault will have little effect on the U.S. car market, where Volvo is a small player and Renault no longer has a presence.
Renault, which has rebounded from huge losses in the 1980s, is one of the few European auto makers to remain profitable during the recession there.
But its big-truck division, which includes Mack Truck of the U.S., is weak, and management had hoped to shore up the ailing unit by joining forces with Volvo and creating one of the world's biggest heavy-truck makers.
Mr. Engstroem emphasized that Volvo had done its best to sever ties with Renault in a fashion that wouldn't jeopardize privatization plans.
And while Volvo executives "have no more of a commitment than before from French authorities about exact timing of Renault's privatization, we have good reason to believe that it will take place" before the Nov. 30 deadline stipulated in the divorce pact, he added.
"Against the background of the merger's collapse, both sides wanted freedom to take care of their own businesses and decide whether to continue with various projects -- or not cooperate at all -- on a case-by-case basis," the Volvo executive explained.
"We're happy to get this resolved."
