The Senate, repeating what has become a familiar political ritual in the era of deficit spending, narrowly defeated a proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget.
The 63-37 vote in favor -- four short of the 67 needed for passage -- followed a week-long debate in which supporters likened large deficits to "fiscal child abuse," and opponents derided the amendment as a gimmick that would infringe on congressional prerogatives and disfigure the Constitution.
But in the end, overwhelming public approval for the idea wasn't enough to overcome the opposition of the White House, Democratic leader George Mitchell (D., Me.), and most significant of all, Appropriations Chairman Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.).
"Let us not crucify this Constitution on a cross of political expediency," declared Mr. Byrd, who wields immense power over the spending decisions Congress makes.
"We must not feed the nation this poison pill in the hopes that it will somehow force us to screw up our courage and act."
The proposal, sponsored by Sen. Paul Simon (D., Ill.), wouldn't have required any specific spending cuts or tax increases.
But it would have required Congress to balance the government's books by the year 2001 and thereafter, unless three-fifths majorities of both the House and Senate voted to permit deficit spending.
The proposal would have provided an exception for wartime.
Supporters acknowledged that the balanced-budget amendment would be an artificial and imperfect substitute for actually making the choices necessary to bring the budget into balance.
"Every time we come up against tough decisions on taxes or spending cuts, we flinch," said Sen. William Cohen (R., Maine), who reversed his earlier opposition and said he would back a balanced-budget amendment as "a last resort."
Opponents, for their part, denounced the amendment as a monument to political posturing that could slash such programs as Social Security and defense, and give legislative minorities the power to block the use of fiscal policy to shore up the economy in hard times.
"Writing this kind of straitjacket into the nation's founding charter could jeopardize our economy . . . and undermine the principle of majority rule that is at the core of our democracy," said Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.).
The debate's soaring rhetoric contrasts sharply with the nitty-gritty details of actually fashioning the government's spending plan, which was under way on the other side of the Capitol.
House Budget Committee Democrats met privately to begin searching for additional cuts in the wake of new Congressional Budget Office estimates showing that President Clinton's 1995 budget proposals would exceed spending caps set in law by some $3 billion.
Some Republican advocates of a balanced-budget amendment were already looking beyond yesterday's vote to the political uses that can be made of the issue.
Of 37 senators voting against Mr. Simon's amendment, 34 were Democrats.
"It's going to be a good defining issue," said Sen. Phil Gramm (R., Texas), head of the National Republican Senatorial Committee and a likely 1996 presidential candidate.
Notwithstanding strong support for the idea in opinion polls, the amendment's potency as a political weapon isn't clear.
Of the 34 senators who voted against the amendment in 1986, only one was subsequently defeated for re-election.
The issue may be even more difficult to wield at a time when the economy is growing steadily and the deficit is shrinking.
The deficit, which the Congressional Budget Office projects at $223 billion for the current fiscal year, is expected to drop below $170 billion by 1996, although rising health-care costs could drive it up again by the end of the decade.
Nevertheless, the amendment inspired enough fear that opponents felt they needed an alternative for which senators could vote even as they opposed Mr. Simon's version.
The alternative, offered by Sen. Harry Reid (D., Nev.) and defeated by a 78-22 vote, would have exempted Social Security from cuts and permitted deficit spending for "infrastructure" improvements.
It also could be waived during recessions.
Mr. Simon's allies denounced the Reid amendment as a "political fig leaf," but it provided enough cover to attract the votes of 17 Democrats and five Republicans.
Seven of those Democrats -- Barbara Boxer of California, Joseph Biden of Delaware, Kent Conrad of North Dakota, Russell Feingold of Wisconsin, Thomas Harkin of Iowa, Harlan Mathews of Tennessee and Mr. Reid himself -- subsequently voted against Mr. Simon's proposal.
That prevented Mr. Simon from rounding up the two-thirds majority -- 67 votes -- needed to pass a constitutional amendment.
Supporters of the balanced-budget amendment still plan to pursue the issue in the House.
Conservative Rep. Charles Stenholm (D., Texas) has gathered enough signatures to force consideration of a balanced budget amendment on the House floor in mid-March.
Mr. Stenholm hopes its passage there would force the Senate to reconsider, but Mr. Mitchell said he would "absolutely not" bring it up again this year.
