Congressional testimony by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan often triggers big waves in the bond market, but not yesterday.
Another warning by the Fed chief that short-term interest rates will, at some point, move higher caused only small ripples yesterday.
With Mr. Greenspan failing to provide bond prices with a dominant direction yesterday, speculative and technical traders took over.
At the end of trading, prices of most notes and bonds posted moderate losses, with short-term issues leading the declines.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond ended down more than 1/4 point, or more than $2.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 100 4/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, rose to 6.23% from 6.21% on Friday.
Meanwhile, the Province of Quebec surprised many in the corporate-bond market by selling $1 billion of 30-year Yankee bonds.
Yankee bonds are securities sold by foreign issuers in the U.S.
Mr. Greenspan, testifying before the Joint Economic Committee of Congress, said that the elements of economic expansion are "increasingly well entrenched" while inflation has remained contained.
He went on to warn that despite continued moderate inflation "monetary policy must not overstay accommodation," adding that real short-term interest rates are "abnormally low" and unless the economy weakens severely in the near term, "we will need to move them to a more neutral stance."
In addition, Mr. Greenspan indicated the Fed must act before inflation pressures become a problem.
According to analysts, the Fed chairman once again made it clear the next move will be to raise interest rates.
They add, however, the timing of any move is still up in the air.
"It's a question of when, not whether, they will tighten," said Joseph Liro, chief economist at S.G. Warburg.
"But it's impossible to tell exactly when they are going to say `no mas.'"
Investors, meanwhile, continued to bet that there is little reason to fear a rise in short-term rates before late March -- at the earliest.
Frank Riccardi, a senior vice president at Society Asset Management, said Mr. Greenspan's remarks merely reinforced what the market had already widely believed.
"He was just confirming what we've heard elsewhere for the last three months," Mr. Riccardi said.
"We haven't changed anything based on this."
Traders also were reluctant to get too excited by Mr. Greenspan's warnings.
The market has gotten burned too many times betting on a Fed tightening, they said.
"You're going to have to see the whites of their eyes," said Marcello Frustaci, a trader at Daiwa Securities America.
"Then you'll get the appropriate reaction."
But Robert Giordano, director of economic research at Goldman, Sachs, said elements of Greenspan's testimony raised the risk of an earlier-than-expected tightening.
In particular, Mr. Giordano pointed to statements indicating greater confidence in the strength of the economy.
"The pace of fourth-quarter growth -- although not likely to be totally sustained -- could carry on longer into the new year than has generally been assumed both at the Fed and by the market," Mr. Giordano said.
As a result, "the risk of an earlier tightening . . . has gone up."
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds initially did respond to Mr. Greenspan's comments.
Issues maturing in two years and under -- which would be most affected by a Fed tightening -- sank through midday.
Among longer issues, however, traders were encouraged by Mr. Greenspan's tough talk about inflation and pushed prices higher.
There was little follow-through buying or selling, however.
As a result, speculative and technical traders took over and sent prices gradually lower during the afternoon.
"The market just faded, with the short end getting the brunt of the selling from the Street," said the Daiwa trader.
The day's economic news had little impact on trading.
The Commerce Department reported that personal income rose 0.6% during December while personal spending rose 0.5%.
Both increases were in line with market expectations.
The Purchasing Managers' Association of Chicago reported that its index of local business activity edged down to 59.6 in January from 62.2 in December.
A reading above 50 on the Chicago purchaser's index reflects expanding manufacturing activity in the area.
The market now turns its attention to the National Association of Purchasing Management report scheduled to be released today.
Most analysts believe the association's index will slip from the 57.1 reading it posted in December.
Traders are also already looking ahead to Friday's January employment report.
Wall Street is looking for a rise in nonfarm payroll employment of about 200,000, which would follow the 183,000 gain chalked up in December.
Yesterday, the U.S. Treasury sold $25.13 billion of three-month and six-month bills at its regular weekly auction.
The three-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 2.99% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.06%.
The six-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.16% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.26%.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated Feb. 3.
The 13-week bills mature May 5, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature Aug. 4, 1994.
Canadian issuers continued to dominate the corporate-bond market yesterday, as the Province of Quebec sold $1 billion of noncallable 30-year Yankee bonds.
The Province of Quebec sold 7.125% coupon bonds at 99.485 to yield 7.167%, 0.82 percentage point above the 30-year U.S. Treasury bond.
The bonds were sold through lead manager Merrill Lynch.
Proceeds from the offering will be used for financing Quebec's 1994-95 budget.
Some syndicate officials expressed surprise that an offering that large could be brought to the market without advance notice.
However, they called Quebec's Yankee offering a "successful transaction."
"To move $1 billion worth of bonds at lunchtime on a Monday was pretty impressive," said James B. Quigley, managing director of Merrill Lynch's global debt syndicate, referring to the fact that debt markets often aren't in high gear on the first trading day of each week.
Mr. Quigley attributed the success of the offering to the dearth of long-term new issues this year.
More than 50 accounts, mainly life-insurance companies and pension funds, bought into the offering, he added.
Despite Quebec's drive toward political secession and an upcoming election in the spring, interest in Quebec's paper continues to attract investors.
"The fundamentals in Canada have been strong," said one trader of Yankee bonds.
"We've been through the political windmill so many times that it's something investors can justify because there's so much liquidity," he said.
Quebec's debentures are rated single-A1 by Moody's Investors Service and single-A-plus by Standard & Poor's.
Other Canadian provinces, such as Ontario, have come to market in recent weeks, but looked outside the U.S. market to sell debt.
"They are not choosing U.S. dollar bonds," the trader said.
Other new bond offerings yesterday came from Bell Atlantic Corp.'s Bell Atlantic-New Jersey, ANZ Banking Group Ltd. and USX Corp.
Trading in the secondary markets was light.
Prices in the investment-grade market were down slightly.
Trading in the junk-bond market was extremely light, with prices unchanged.
In another Yankee offering, ANZ Banking Group, an Australian-based bank, sold 10-year subordinated notes.
The 6.25% coupon notes were priced at 99.705 to yield 6.29% and are rated single-A2 by Moody's and single-A by S&P.
The noncallable issue was sold through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.
Municipal bonds kept their strong tone yesterday despite the Treasury bond market's slip, and they were generally unchanged to 1/4 point higher at the close.
When the day's slow dealings finished, the Reedy Creek Improvement District (Florida) 5.00% bonds due 2019 were unchanged at 96 1/2, yielding 5.23%.
The New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency's 5.25% bonds due 2014 were 1/4 higher at 99 5/8, yielding 5.23%.
Market participants are awaiting pricing of several large issues this week.
Among transactions expected today, a Bear, Stearns group will price the Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's $665 million general-purpose revenue bonds.
Also, bids will be taken for the Los Angeles Department of Water & Power's $277 million 1994 electric plant revenue and revenue refunding bonds and Gwinnett County School District (Georgia) $141.5 million improvement bonds.
"There will be fairly good demand" if the bonds are priced attractively, said a New York muni specialist.
Last week, issuance slowed, and muni prices climbed pretty steadily.
Although prices held up well this session, market participants were reluctant to read a lot into the day's price action because trading was so slow.
