The Brady Bill became the Brady Law partly on the notion that it would help keep guns out of the hands of dangerous criminals.
The five-day waiting period portion of the law went into effect Monday.
On Feb. 17, Marine Lance Corporal Rayna Ross went before a military tribunal in Quantico, Va., investigating her killing of her former lover after he broke into her apartment.
But more important, the case is an object lesson in gun control and the other side of the Brady Law.
On June 12, 1993, Ms. Ross broke off a relationship with Corporal Anthony Goree.
Mr. Goree, distraught over the breakup, began harassing her.
The harassment led to many physical assaults, including one at knifepoint and one at gunpoint, the latter having occurred in Ms. Ross's office on base.
Enough was enough, and Ms. Ross swore out a warrant for his arrest with the Prince William County, Va., police and made a formal complaint with the Marine Corps through her battalion command.
Charges were filed against Mr. Goree in both jurisdictions and a warrant was issued for his arrest by civilian authorities.
The Marines got to him first, and under the Uniform Code of Military Justice he was charged with assault with a firearm and wrongful carrying of a firearm, both imprisonable offenses.
Mr. Goree did a short stint in the Quantico brig, but at an administrative hearing was released from confinement and put on base restriction, with the stipulation that he avoid all contact with Ms. Ross.
Shortly after being put on restriction, Mr. Goree went AWOL.
He subsequently stole a car and resumed his stalking, forcing Ms. Ross to flee her apartment with her one-year-old daughter and stay with friends, often moving to a different place every night.
On June 26, Ms. Ross decided to purchase a handgun.
Fortunately for her, Prince William County has no five-day waiting period because it has an automated felon database, much like the system proposed by the National Rifle Association and much-maligned by supporters of the Brady Law.
We say fortunately because three days later, Mr. Goree entered her apartment at 3 a.m. in a black jumpsuit, after having dismantled the sliding glass door on her patio.
According to Ms. Ross, he came at her with his Marine-issue bayonet.
She shot him dead with the .380 semi-automatic handgun she had purchased just three days before.
Under the Brady Law, she would have had to wait another two days before taking possession of the gun.
The Prince William County commonwealth's attorney passed on filing charges against her, saying, "It was justifiable homicide."
Ms. Ross is now in the midst of resolving a Marine Corps inquiry into the case.
We suppose the law's defenders will say this is a rare incident or loophole.
We wonder.
People call the police all the time for protection from real threats, and invariably are told there's not much that can be done until an overt act is committed.
The fact is that if the Brady Law had been in effect in Prince William County on June 26, 1993, it certainly would have kept a gun out of the hand of Rayna Ross.
We suspect this story would have ended differently.
