South Korean President Kim Young Sam has come to China with hope that Beijing will help defuse the tension over inspection of North Korea's nuclear sites, but he is likely to be disappointed.
China is concerned about the prospect of a nuclear Korean peninsula, but it is perhaps more worried about the possible effects of sanctions against North Korea as suggested by the U.S.
Such action, China fears, could drive Pyongyang to take desperate action or its leadership to fall.
In addition, Beijing's influence over the isolated socialist regime isn't what it used to be, Chinese and other analysts say.
"After China established diplomatic ties with South Korea in 1992, its influence with North Korea became limited," says one Asian analyst based in Beijing.
While China is believed to be holding discussions with North Korean officials through its embassy in Pyongyang, it isn't pressuring them.
Chinese officials and scholars say pressure would only add to the tension, which rose after North Korea blocked an International Atomic Energy Agency team from completing an inspection of nuclear sites.
"We can tell North Korea we don't support nuclear weapons . . . but we're brother countries, we can't tell one another what to do," says Li Xiangwen, a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
It remains unclear whether Beijing would veto or abstain if a proposal to impose trade sanctions on North Korea were put before the United Nations Security Council.
Chinese officials have expressed disapproval of such a move, but have stopped short of saying China would cast a veto.
On Friday, China insisted that a U.N.-sponsored resolution on the nuclear controversy be downgraded to a statement.
A proposal for sanctions probably won't come at least until after the IAEA reports to the Security Council within a month, as stipulated by the resolution.
Some analysts believe China's stance could be influenced by its relations with the U.S., especially developments in the acrimonious, continuing discussions over whether Washington will renew its Most Favored Nation trading privileges in June.
China doesn't see the benefits, or necessity, of resorting to sanctions.
"Who is North Korea a danger to?
I just can't see it as one of Asia's biggest problems," says Mr. Li.
Echoing what Chinese officials have told Western diplomats, he adds that he believes North Korea is most likely bluffing on the nuclear-weapons issue.
"It wants to use nuclear weapons as a bargaining chip, so that it can negotiate and bargain with the U.S.," says Han Zhenshe, a director at the Chinese Academy of Social Science's Institute.
In China's view, North Korea's main goal is to secure diplomatic recognition from Washington, which would then pave the way for recognition and, more importantly, desperately needed financial assistance from Japan.
A major fear shared by China and other Asian countries is a potential collapse of the North Korean regime.
Although Pyongyang has always stressed self-reliance and imports few goods, any further economic hardships could be hard to bear for a population that is already surviving on the edge of poverty.
Besides possibly losing its old friend Kim Il Sung, North Korea's president, and one of its two socialist allies in the region, China -- like South Korea and Japan -- could face a wave of refugees if North Korea's government were to collapse.
China's influence over North Korea is mostly economic.
Its sales of oil and grain to Pyongyang account for more than 80% of the country's trade in these staples, says one analyst.
China also exports coal and light-industry products, such as garments, to North Korea, while importing raw materials and machinery from there.
Bilateral trade was $899.6 million last year.
But, China's exports to North Korea have generally slowed in recent years, as China has replaced barter trade with cash sales.
