Like volcanologists anticipating the next eruption, global money managers are trying to add up the potential fallout from a 10% or so decline in U.S. share prices.
Their advice: Stock up on Japanese shares, stick with Europe but watch out for emerging stock markets.
No one knows for sure when a U.S. "correction" will occur -- or even if one is still under way -- but many professional investors believe one is inevitable.
"The U.S. market is in a bear phase right now," contends Michael Howell, head global strategist at Baring Securities Ltd. in London.
At first, the psychological impact of a fall in the world's biggest stock market could set off declines in markets around the world.
But Mr. Howell predicts that after initially "being caught in the headlights, some markets will have the strength to jump out of the way of the bear market train."
High on his list are Japan, Germany, Britain, Holland, Ireland and Denmark, all of which should benefit from rising company earnings and falling interest rates.
Least affected by a decline in U.S. share prices will be Japan, predict most money managers.
"Japan is a pillar of stability in a sea of volatility," says John Hickling of Fidelity Investments in Boston.
"If the U.S. corrects and a lot of the speculative money is rung out of the Asian markets, the natural place for it to go is Japan: a low-expectation, good risk-reward type of environment."
The recent world-wide decline in bond prices pummeled many global stock markets.
But not Tokyo's, which rose, especially in U.S. dollar terms.
"Japan gets hit least, because it's had a very, very low correlation with the U.S.," says Nicholas Carn, chief investment officer at Draycott Partners in London.
That means it tends not to rise or fall in line with U.S. stocks.
In Japan, Fiduciary Trust Co.
International is betting on companies that stand to benefit from domestic infrastructure spending and those that are restructuring to become more competitive, says Anne M. Tatlock, the firm's president in New York.
Her holdings include optical-equipment maker Canon Inc., Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd., Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp., electric cable and wire maker Sumitomo Electric Industries Ltd. and Suzuki Motor Corp.
After Tokyo, money managers favor Europe's stock markets, which they feel still stand to benefit from lower interest rates, renewed economic growth and eventually fatter corporate profits.
Based on this logic, Allan McKenzie, an investment director at Scottish Widows Investment Management Ltd. in Edinburgh, says that 37% of his firm's dollar-denominated international portfolios are invested in continental European stock markets.
That's roughly a third more than suggested by major stock indexes.
In Europe, Margaret Lindsay, a portfolio manager at Fiduciary Trust, is mostly steering clear of big blue-chip companies, which are often the first to be sold in a shakeout.
"People tend to move money out of the large capitalization stocks because of their names, if they have to move in a hurry," she says.
"That's not, however, the basis behind our strategy."
Instead, she is drawn to Europe's smaller stock markets such as Sweden and Austria along with smaller Swiss and Dutch companies.
Two Swedish companies she likes are Svedala Industries AB, a maker of machinery used to crush stones, and Bylock & Nordsjofrakt AB, a shipping company benefiting from the export boom set off by the fall in Sweden and Finland's currencies.
Ms. Lindsay also owns Austria's Voest-Alpine Eisenbahnsysteme AG, which makes components for European high-speed train systems.
Mr. Hickling of Fidelity is chasing cyclical companies that have been cutting costs, restructuring and generally preparing for a slower growth environment.
Three British industrials he likes are Vickers PLC, British Steel PLC and Rolls-Royce PLC.
He's also high on Aktiebolaget SKF, a Swedish ball-bearing maker.
Looking to their earnings potential in 1995, Mr. Hickling is buying auto makers Volvo AB and Peugeot SA.
Other favorites are Austrian Airlines, Scandinavian Airlines System and Alitalia-Linee Aeree Italiene Spa, three airlines which have trailed some of their bigger brethren.
In chemicals, he owns Switzerland's Ciba-Geigy AG and two German companies -- Hoechst AG and Bayer AG -- partially because of the lower costs that will come from recent below-inflation wage settlements.
"Unions in Germany have seen the light: They realize that it isn't in their interest to see companies go bankrupt," says Mr. Hickling.
This year "doesn't have to be better than 1993, only less bad for many of these companies to go from big losses to roughly break-even," he says.
"And it won't be too many months until these markets look to 1995 for peak profits."
Despite their preferences, money managers stress that which overseas stock markets escape a drop in U.S. shares -- and by how much -- depends on the circumstances of the decline.
If the U.S. market "fell in one crash, you'd get a global shakeout," says Mr. McKenzie.
On the other hand, if overseas bond markets have sufficiently "decoupled" from the U.S. bond market, higher U.S. interest rates -- which might hurt U.S. stocks -- could signal buoyant U.S. growth and a stronger dollar.
Playing this theme, Michael Cowan, a principal at Morgan Stanley Asset Management in London, owns Rolls-Royce, Bayer and Swiss cement giant Holderbank Financiere Glaris Ltd.
He also likes undervalued stocks, including Dutch shipping and transport company Nedlloyd Koninklijke Groep NV and two Japanese companies: Nichido Fire & Marine Insurance Co. and electronic-component maker TDK Corp.
The place not to be when U.S. shares tumble are the world's emerging stock markets, warn many money managers.
Several, such as Hong Kong (which is considered play on Chinese stocks), would be very susceptible to a rise in U.S. interest rates, because they have monetary policies directly or indirectly tied to that of the U.S.
A U.S. stock-market decline "would probably affect the more speculative, liquidity-based, higher expectation markets in the world; those are mostly the emerging markets," says Mr. Hickling of Fidelity.
"In Hong Kong, you'd be going out of the frying pan and into the fire."
From their record highs in the first week of January, the Hong Kong and smaller Malaysian and Thai stock markets are down 25%, 23% and 29%, respectively.
Another concern is that many stock markets in southeast Asia and Latin America have become dependent on U.S. and Japan investment, which could quickly disappear and even reverse.
"Last year, we saw the China story; and U.S. investors went for Hong Kong, Malaysia and other smaller markets; and now they are going for India," says Mr. McKenzie of Scottish Widows.
"They discovered a good thing, but the buying was very indiscriminate.
I don't believe individual investors really understand what they are buying."
Because he thinks developing countries' large populations, fast growth and rising middle classes make markets in Latin America, southeast Asia and India very good long-term bets, he advises investors to use sharp corrections as a buying opportunity "to dollar-cost average."
But, Mr. McKenzie says: "My fear is if they saw a 10% or 20% fall on Wall Street, they will be panicked out."
Some non-U.S. stocks frequently recommended by international money managers
