The European Union, in a move reflecting a warming of its approach to Eastern Europe, agreed to enhanced foreign-policy ties with six countries that now enjoy "association" pacts with the EU.
Under a communique endorsed by EU foreign ministers, there will be yearly summits involving the EU president, EU Commission president and leaders of the six countries -- Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Romania.
Other consultations will include twice-yearly meetings of foreign ministers and regular lower-level meetings on security, terrorism and human rights.
In addition to the meetings, the six countries will be invited to "align themselves jointly" with EU declarations or activities in the foreign-policy field.
The step came as Poland's foreign minister said that Warsaw would announce next week its intention to apply for EU membership, which followed last week's announcement by Hungary that it would apply to the EU in April.
Those announcements were seen as boosting pressure on Norway to conclude its straggling EU membership negotiations.
Austria, Sweden and Finland recently wrapped up EU membership agreements, which still face voter referendums; Oslo doesn't want its membership bid to be lumped in with those of Eastern Europe.
The flurry of activity relating to Eastern Europe, officials say, reflects a sea change of attitude in Brussels toward the former Communist countries on the EU's doorstep, and recognition in Eastern European capitals that the union represents an important security mooring at a time of political uncertainty in Russia.
The new foreign-policy ties, moreover, could represent only a preview of EU undertakings over the next several months: The EU Commission is planning a crucial "seminar" on March 23 to hash out new initiatives on Eastern Europe, and Germany has made clear its intention to use its EU presidency in the second half of the year to push for rapid admission of eastern countries.
"There's been a recognition here that the big challenge for the union is to promote stability and security across the continent," said one commission official, "so there's a lot of thinking about what the EU can do during the phase prior to these countries' membership."
The EU has for some time been criticized as short-sighted in its relationship toward Eastern Europe: The "association" pacts negotiated over the past few years call for closer trade relations but contain only vague calls for more political cooperation.
