Hero today, goat tomorrow.
That's a familiar pattern in the mutual-fund industry.
A fund climbs to the top of the five-year or 10-year performance charts, prompting a deluge of money from new investors.
The fund's investment returns then slide into mediocrity -- or worse.
Consider the 44 Wall Street Fund, which was merged out of existence last year.
It soared 392.1% in the 1970s, making it the decade's third-best mutual-fund performer, according to Lipper Analytical Services.
But in the 1980s, it plunged to the bottom of the mutual-fund rankings, with a loss of 73.1%.
Even if a top-ranked fund continues to perform well, it may not be the right investment for you.
To avoid owning the wrong fund, here are 10 questions to ask before you buy a fund with a strong track record.
1. Is the fund's investment objective in line with my goals?
"You can buy the best-performing money-market fund or the best-performing bond fund and it isn't going to do you any good if you need growth," says Kurt Brouwer, president of Brouwer & Janachowski, a San Francisco investment adviser.
"Conversely, if you get seduced into a stock fund that suddenly drops 20% and you can't stand any loss of principal, you've obviously made a big mistake."
2. Is the fund too risky for my taste?
Before buying a top-performing stock fund, look at how it performed in periods when stock prices fell.
Don Phillips, publisher of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a Chicago newsletter, suggests checking the fund's performance in the fourth quarter of 1987 and the third quarter of 1990.
That way, he says, "you know what the worst-case scenario is.
If the loss that's been demonstrated is more than you can take, you should move on and look at other offerings."
3. Does the fund have the same investment style as a fund I already own?
Fund analysts say most stock-fund investors should own a diversified portfolio that includes large-company stock funds, small-company stock funds and foreign funds.
To ensure you don't have too much money riding on one sector of the market, you may want to ignore a well-run fund if you own another top-performing fund with a similar investment style.
"A lot of people have this illusion of diversification," says Mr. Phillips.
"But actually, they own five stock funds that have shadings of the same investment style."
4. How does the fund's record compare with that of other funds with a similar investment style?
It's important to compare apples with apples and oranges with oranges.
For instance, Putnam Health Sciences Trust returned 118.2% over the five years ended 1993, easily ahead of the 98.1% average gain for diversified U.S. stock-mutual funds.
But is the Putnam fund a good choice?
Not if you compare its record with that of other health-care funds.
The Putnam fund has had the poorest performance of the eight health-care funds that were around for the past five years.
5. Has the fund performed consistently well?
MIM Stock Appreciation Fund surged 147.8% over the past six calendar years, easily outpacing the 129.6% return for the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.
But the cornerstone of MIM's record was an astounding 77% gain in 1991.
"It's been a fine return if you were in for the whole ride," says Morningstar's Mr. Phillips.
"But if you missed calendar 1991, you got uninspired returns.
Consistency of performance is very important.
It increases the likelihood that you're going to stay on board and realize the benefits of owning that fund."
6. Were the fund's good results really because of good money management?
Fund analysts argue that a fund's strong performance is more likely to continue if it's the result of investing in a broad selection of stocks.
They say you should be leery of stock funds that do well because they are invested heavily in a single stock or industry sector.
It's not just sector funds that fall into that category.
"There's a closed-end fund called Bergstrom Capital, which has had tremendous performance," says Gerald Perritt, editor of the Mutual Fund Letter, a Chicago newsletter.
"But a third of its assets was in one stock, Amgen.
Last year, Bergstrom had poor performance.
Amgen didn't do too well either."
Analysts say you also should be wary of bond funds and money-market funds that propel themselves to the top of the performance charts by deciding to waive part or all of their annual expenses.
Before you buy those funds, make sure the fee waiver is likely to continue.
7. Is the manager responsible for the record still around?
Michael Stolper, publisher of Mutual Fund Monthly, a San Diego newsletter, currently recommends Invesco Industrial Income Fund for one of his newsletter's model portfolios.
Earlier this month, one of the Invesco fund's three co-managers, John Kaweske, was fired for allegedly trading securities for his own account without informing his employer.
Even though the fund's other two managers remain, Mr. Stolper says he's going to advise subscribers to sell the fund.
"It's just gone from a known to an unknown," he says.
"From experience, I've found that the best way to deal with that is from a distance."
8. Has the fund grown so big that its past performance is unlikely to be repeated?
Stephen Savage, editor of the Value Line Mutual Fund Survey, a New York newsletter, says size is critical with funds that buy smaller-company stocks.
He says he would be leery of small-stock funds with assets over $250 million.
But Mr. Savage reckons concerns about fund size are "overrated" when it comes to larger-company stock funds.
"Everybody's been talking about Fidelity Magellan for years," he says.
"They said Magellan was too big at $10 billion.
But the fund has now got $30 billion, and it's coming off a great year."
Considerable girth is a benefit for bond funds, he adds.
"In evaluating bond funds, expenses are the most important thing," Mr. Savage says.
"Size is nice, because you get the economies of scale."
9. Have the fund's gains come from income or capital gains?
If you're a retiree looking to tap your mutual funds for spending money, you may want to buy stock funds that make big income distributions each year.
This often is the case with equity-income funds and growth-and-income funds.
But these funds, even if they are run well, could be a lousy investment for somebody trying to hold down their tax bill.
"If you're in a taxable account, the more of the gains you get in capital gains -- and especially unrealized capital gains -- the better off you are," says Morningstar's Mr. Phillips.
"All total returns aren't equal."
10. Are the fund's fees and expenses reasonable?
If you buy a top-performing fund that turns into a dog, the pain is even more excruciating if you paid a sales commission or if the fund has high annual expenses.
You not only get lousy performance, but you also "end up eating the sales commission and the high expenses," says Mr. Brouwer, the San Francisco investment adviser.
