In its quest to squeeze savings from the health care system, the Clinton health care plan threatens to put a chokehold on the single greatest source of efficiency and productivity: medical technology.
This is shortsighted because in less than a decade, the baby-boom generation will begin entering the peak years of health care consumption.
The need for efficient, labor-saving, resource-stretching tools to handle the boomers' health care needs will be greater than ever.
But perhaps the administration already knows this and chooses to ignore it.
As a developer of medical technology, I know that the Clinton plan's impact on technology innovation will not be widely felt for about 10 years.
This is roughly the timeline for a new medical device to go through development, testing and evaluation by the Food and Drug Administration.
Health care is the one industry where, erroneously, technological advances tend to be viewed as burdens, not solutions.
But medical technology prices increased at an average annual rate of 2.9% between 1985 and 1992, vs. the 3.1% rate in the primary index of producer prices throughout the U.S. economy, according to the Health Care Technology Institute in Alexandria, Va.
This is despite the rapid rate of medical technology innovation during that period, a period that saw seismic changes in the way health care is delivered.
Development of less invasive surgical technologies, for instance, helped drive the trend toward outpatient surgery, which now constitutes nearly 60% of all hospital-based procedures.
One of the most important of these technologies, laparoscopy, was considered an exotic idea when introduced in the late 1970s for a small population of infertile couples desiring pregnancy.
Since then, spinoff technologies have made its applications widespread.
The savings that come from such innovation are often ignored.
Prior to 1989, for example, it cost about $21,000 plus six days in a hospital to have a gall bladder removed by conventional surgery.
Today, a laparoscopic procedure performed in an ambulatory surgery center can accomplish the same thing for about $6,400.
Labor costs, which account for 80% of health care spending, are the true wild card, yet they are not addressed in the reform plan.
Another wild card is over-utilization of technology that occurs at the direction of physicians, hospitals and consumers themselves.
Here the Clinton plan proposes to attack the problem by ensnaring medical technology makers in the same bureaucratic net as technology users.
This is like cooling down the pace of telecommunications innovation as a national strategy for dealing with teenagers' overuse of their parents' telephones.
If the health care system fails to fully exploit technology's leveraging capacity, the needs and demands of an aging population will either bust the nation's treasury or require unnecessary, if not politically unacceptable, rationing.
Since coming under the regulatory purview of the FDA in 1976, our industry has undergone a series of ever-tightening R&D controls and product requirements.
A three- to five-year FDA review process that was in force when my company started in 1986 is now a five- to seven-year process, which extends the full R&D cycle for many companies to 10 years or more.
As a result, costs associated with surviving the FDA new product gantlet have grown substantially higher, while potential returns have been further deferred.
The chilling effect of the administration's plans for health care spending caps can be seen by almost every leading health care analyst on Wall Street.
Their nearly unanimous evaluation is that medical technology companies are among the "big losers" in the Clinton plan.
Uncertainties over how new technologies will be assessed, how prices will be set, and how global budgets will affect new technologies over the long term have added measurably to the risk of investment.
It is fantasy for Washington to think medical technology investors have unlimited reserves of courage and patience.
A bureaucratic scheme that makes irrelevant such foundational concepts as market research, pricing strategies and product-development timelines may be just the thing to steer investors into less precarious pursuits, along such lines as oil drilling or perhaps gold prospecting.
The president's plan puts the brakes on new advances that might otherwise be there to serve aging boomers like the Clintons, at a moment when the health care system will be put to its strongest test yet.
Mr. Loarie is chairman and CEO of KeraVision, Inc., in Santa Clara, Calif.
