One of the best-selling items at bookshops here is a 1994 datebook with a big red star on the cover and inscribed with the slogan: "PT 94, Lula President."
This could indeed be the year in which the president of the leftist Workers' Party, Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, comes to power in Brazil.
If elections were held today, polls show, he would be the hands-down winner.
Such a victory probably would bring Brazil's already slow program of free-market reforms to a standstill.
There's still a way to go before buyers can write "Lula elected president" on the Nov. 15 page of their datebooks.
It's unclear whom Mr. da Silva, commonly known here as Lula, will face, and the very strength of his campaign makes it likely that a consensual, moderate, anti-Lula candidate such as Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso will emerge.
But with many Brazilian politicians discredited by corruption scandals, the country living with hyper-inflation and President Itamar Franco's government seemingly inert, Mr. da Silva has parlayed Brazil's desire for change into a commanding lead in opinion polls.
The bearded, gravelly voiced Mr. da Silva cuts an unusual figure in Brazilian politics.
As a child, he fled the impoverished Northeast on the back of a truck with his family, quit school at 11, lost a finger in a factory accident and rose to prominence as a militant union leader before narrowly losing the 1989 presidential election.
The prospect of his reaching the presidency has many in the business community here scared.
Mr. da Silva "is warming up his steam train to take us in the direction of Albania," wrote businessman Gilberto Souza Gomes Job in the daily O Globo newspaper.
Spurring their fears is the way Mr. da Silva defends an agenda that includes heavy state intervention in the economy and a confrontational attitude toward foreign banks.
Mr. da Silva is unapologetic.
"An inversion in priorities is needed in this country," he says in an interview in his Sao Paulo headquarters.
"Brazil's development model and economic policy over the past 30 years were contrary to the general interest.
They concentrated wealth.
Our priority is to end hunger, improve health and education and resume growth."
Mr. da Silva largely blames Brazil's social and economic problems on the free-market reforms introduced in 1990 by Fernando Collor de Mello, who defeated Mr. da Silva but resigned in 1992 to ward off his probable impeachment on corruption charges.
Mr. da Silva spelled out his ideas on the following points during the hourlong interview:
-- Privatization: While he admits that many of Brazil's state companies are inefficient, Mr. da Silva says he opposes privatization.
He also says "strategic sectors" such as telecommunications, oil and aviation "have to remain in state hands," though he doesn't rule out private and foreign capital entering as minority partners.
However, he says canceling privatizations that have taken place since 1990 would be "a waste of time."
-- Foreign debt: Mr. da Silva wants to persuade foreign governments to allow Brazil to suspend debt payments and use those funds to invest in research, education, agriculture and job creation.
He says debtor countries should organize themselves and turn the debt issue into "a political problem" that's negotiated among governments rather than with private banks.
President Clinton, he says "could be more sensitive to Brazilian social problems than a banker."
-- Trade liberalization: Mr. da Silva says lowering trade barriers has led to huge job losses, and he favors quotas on imports of such things as cars.
"Collor's opening of the borders did more damage than a war," he says.
"From the consumer's point of view there's no problem with opening our borders.
But from the state's point of view, we have to worry about who will create jobs here, not in Japan."
-- Economic policy: Mr. da Silva opposes shock therapy to bring down Brazil's annual inflation rate of 2,600%, and wants to reduce it gradually by creating long-term instruments for the country's internal debt.
This probably would trigger a conflict with banks, which make big profits rolling over internal debt.
He also wants strict measures against tax evaders and oligopolies that mark up prices above inflation.
Many Brazilians call Mr. da Silva's program unviable.
At a recent conference in New York, Brazilian banker Igor Cornelsen predicted "chaos" if he wins.
Noting that Mr. da Silva is popular but the ideas he defends aren't, political scientist Walder de Goes says, "I wouldn't bet $300 on Lula," predicting he will start losing ground when his rivals appear.
Even those who believe Mr. da Silva can win say he will have to moderate his ideas to garner a majority.
But to those who predict he could be like Argentine President Carlos Menem, who campaigned as a populist but enacted radical free-market reforms, Mr. Lula says he's no turncoat.
"I don't want to have one discourse to win the elections and then do the opposite," he says.
"In that case, I'd rather die on inauguration day."
