THE U.S. READIED military and diplomatic steps to punish North Korea.
Secretary of State Christopher said the U.S. plans to seek a Security Council resolution calling on North Korea to permit inspections of suspected nuclear arms facilities.
The U.S. plan apparently is to lay the groundwork for a resolution on trade sanctions, and in the meantime to persuade China to abstain in the vote.
President Clinton said there appeared to be some support in Pyongyang for allowing the inspections.
The U.S. is expected to announce the revival of joint military exercises with South Korea and is preparing to ship Patriot antimissile batteries.
Israel offered to speed up withdrawal of its troops from parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip if talks with the PLO this week lead to the revival of stalled peace negotiations, Israeli officials said.
Israeli radio said Foreign Minister Peres could meet with PLO leader Arafat this week if preliminary talks taking place in Tunisia succeed.
A U.N. relief convoy reached the Bosnian city of Maglaj, which has been cut off from food shipments since October.
The mostly Muslim city of 103,000 has been largely reduced to rubble in a nine-month siege by Bosnian Serbs.
In Sarajevo, a soccer match drew a crowd of 20,000, the largest gathering since a Serb siege began two years ago.
Zulu leaders rejected charges by a South African judicial panel that they colluded with police for years in mounting terror attacks against the African National Congress in an effort to stall political reforms.
Armed Zulus occupied a stadium yesterday to keep the ANC from campaigning in Kwazulu ahead of next month's elections.
Salvadorans voted in the first presidential elections since a 12-year civil war ended in 1992.
The elections, which also include balloting for the National Assembly, are the first in which leftist rebels who fought the government in the war are participating.
If no presidential candidate receives a majority, a runoff will be held next month.
The Rose Law Firm has decided to file an ethics complaint over undocumented expenses incurred by former Associate Attorney General Hubbell, a lawyer familiar with the firm's inquiry says.
The dispute, involving about $100,000 in expenses, led to Hubbell's resignation from the Justice Department last week.
A strong aftershock to January's earthquake struck Los Angeles, shaking the metropolitan area for about 30 seconds.
There were no reports of deaths or major damage from the aftershock, which measured 5.3 on the Richter scale.
Insurance claims from the earlier quake are now expected to total about $4 billion.
Senate Finance panel members began two days of meetings on health-care reform at a Virginia conference center, a forum intended to allow members of the key committee to outline positions before legislative work gets under way.
GOP leaders signaled they will resist requiring employers to pay to insure workers.
Two Italian journalists were killed in Mogadishu when gunmen apparently tried to hijack the truck in which they were riding.
The journalists were in the Somali capital to cover the withdrawal of the Italian troops who are part of the U.N. peacekeeping force there.
All remaining Italian and U.S. peacekeepers are scheduled to depart this week.
Cambodia's government said it captured the headquarters of the Khmer Rouge, but the guerrilla group denied it had been driven out of its Pailin base near the Thai border.
Loss of the stronghold would be a major blow to the rebels, who have lost thousands of fighters in a government push to consolidate its control following elections last year.
The leaders of Japan and China met in a sign of a warming trend between the two big Asian economies, even as the relations of each with the U.S. have hit rocky patches.
Premier Hosokawa's meetings in Beijing touched on human rights, and Japan expressed concern over China's growing military spending.
German voters handed Chancellor Kohl's governing coalition another setback in local elections in Schleswig-Holstein, further dimming his prospects for fall federal elections.
In the voting, left-wing Greens won double the number of votes they got in 1990.
