Two big legal-information providers are joining forces to create a computer service offering court decisions and documents on line while enabling lawyers to communicate with each other about legal developments.
The partnership between Mead Corp.'s Mead Data Central unit and American Lawyer Media unites the vast electronic archive of news and court decisions in Mead's Lexis and Nexis services with Counsel Connect, a database and electronicmail hookup launched last year by American Lawyer Media.
American Lawyer Media will own a majority stake in the service, to be called Lexis Counsel Connect, and will manage it, according to Steven Brill, chairman and chief executive of American Lawyer Media, New York, a partnership owned by Mr. Brill and Time Warner Inc.
The deal is expected to be announced today .
Mr. Brill described the service as a sort of "cradle-to-grave" array of information for lawyers and their clients.
"It's one place to go for legal information, ranging from as far back in an archive as you can go -- the case 50 years ago that may be on Lexis -- to six expert lawyers in an area having a discussion right now about a court decision that morning."
The service is intended to enable lawyers to move easily back and forth from Mead's archives to various Counsel Connect offerings, such as law-firm memos on current topics in the law and on-line legal discussions with experts on those topics.
In addition, the companies plan before year's end to offer a personalized newspaper that will package information about legal developments and other breaking news based on subscribers' individual interests.
Over time, the venture is likely to provide a variety of specialty services that could help corporate-law departments, said Jon Klemens, a principal in the information-services group of the law-firm consultancy Altman Weil Pensa Inc., Newtown Square, Pa.
It is a low-cost way to get "topical information . . . that law firms would otherwise have been selling to their clients on an hourly basis," Mr. Klemens said.
Mr. Brill's new Counsel Connect service will benefit from Mead's cash infusion, its nationwide marketing apparatus, and its base of more than 300,000 Lexis/Nexis subscribers.
Counsel Connect currently has about 4,500 subscribers.
The companies declined to disclose the size of Mead's interest in the venture, but a person familiar with the deal valued Mead's investment at more than $10 million.
The companies also wouldn't provide their percentage stakes in the service.
For Mead Data Central, based in Dayton, Ohio, the venture represents an opportunity to diversify its legal-information services beyond the provision of on-line research, an area that has become increasingly competitive in recent years as the technology involved has become less expensive.
Until a few years ago, Mead Data Central and its main competitor, West Publishing Co., "really were monopolies," said Mr. Klemens, the law-firm consultant.
"Now all of a sudden it's a very competitive environment in the information area."
Providing the kind of interactive services available on Counsel Connect will "extend the name Lexis and make it less of a product and more of a brand," said Rebecca Wendy Bass, vice president for Legal Information Services at Mead Data Central, which had revenue of $551 million last year.
Five leading partners from recently disbanded Shea & Gould are joining Proskauer Rose Goetz & Mendelson as partners in New York, bringing with them 15 nonpartnership attorneys and "a very substantial book of business," said Proskauer partner Allen I. Fagin.
The arriving partners are former Shea & Gould corporate department head Arnold S. Jacobs, former litigation head Leon Gold, real-estate specialist Lawrence J. Lipson, corporate lawyer Allen R. Williams and litigator Richard M. Goldstein.
The move, effective today, is the second major wave of departures since Shea & Gould, formerly one of New York's best known law firms, announced it was breaking up earlier this month.
Last week, litigators Peter C. Nager and Mary Gail Gearns, along with banking specialist Fran Jacobs and labor lawyers Vincent F. Pitta and Joe E. Gulni, joined the New York firm of Richards & O'Neil as partners.
A Tennessee woman filed a discrimination suit against the owner of a local cinema after being turned away because she was too obese to fit into a seat.
Deborah Birdwell, a 38-year-old resident of Cookeville, Tenn., who weighs 360 pounds, alleges in the suit against Carmike Cinemas Inc. that the theater violated the Americans with Disabilities Act by failing to accommodate her in a public place.
A Cookeville theater manager prohibited her from carrying her own chair into the theater to see Jurassic Park last June and the theater didn't have seats big enough to accommodate her, the suit alleges.
The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in the middle district of Tennessee, seeks unspecified damages.
John Barwick, chief financial officer of Columbus, Ga.-based Carmike, said the company has no comment on the suit.
In November, a federal circuit court of appeals in Boston ruled that people who are double the normal weight for their height suffer from a disability and are protected from discrimination by federal disability laws, regardless of whether their obesity is caused by disease.
Laura Eljaiek, program director for the National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance in Sacramento, Calif., said the case is a key test of how much access to public accommodation will be considered "reasonable" by the courts.
"We're told we don't fit into society," she says.
"Literally, we don't fit into accommodations everyone takes for granted.
This is a key issue."
Rap-music sounds such as "brrr" and "hugga hugga" may be entitled to copyright protection, a federal judge ruled.
U.S. District Judge Charles S. Haight rejected arguments that the sounds are unoriginal -- like a single drumbeat -- and therefore unprotectable under the copyright laws.
The judge said in his ruling that a showing of "virtually any independent creativity" is enough for a jury to find a work protectable.
The ruling means the rap group known as the Fat Boys can proceed with a copyright-infringement case against Miller Brewing Co., a unit of Philip Morris Cos.
The group contends that after it rebuffed Miller's offer to appear in a 1987-88 beer commercial with actor Joe Piscopo, the brewer hired similar-looking actors to sing an unauthorized copy of the Fat Boys' song "Stick'Em."
Jonathan Zavin, an attorney for the rappers, said they declined the commercial work because they didn't want to be seen as promoting alcoholic beverages to their largely under-age audience.
The rap group, which was popular in the late 1980s, no longer performs.
Mr. Zavin said Judge Haight's decision is significant because it "extends copyright law to new forms of creative music such as rap."
Howard Rubin, an attorney for Miller, said it hadn't seen the decision and declined to comment.
(Tin Pan Apple Inc. vs. Miller Brewing Co. et al., U.S. District Court, New York, 88 Civ. 4085)
Milo Geyelin, Margaret A. Jacobs and Laurie M. Grossman contributed to this article.
