Sometimes, it seems, it takes an earthquake to shake things up.
The breakdown of the freeway system here presents companies in both this region and others a signal opportunity to experiment with more decentralized ways to conduct business, such as "telecommuting."
It is not inappropriate that the Los Angeles area serve as epicenter for the latest shift in workplace realities.
Nearly a half-century ago, Southern California spawned the freeway era that encouraged an ever-widening separation between workplace and living space.
Even before the earthquake, this dependence on freeways was overstretching the region's economic lifelines.
In the Inland Empire region encompassing San Bernardino and Riverside counties, nearly 300,000 people commute daily to workplaces in Orange and Los Angeles counties.
That commute normally takes up to an hour; even without the freeway damage from the quake, it was expected to grow by at least half an hour by decade's end.
Given the location of the breaks in the freeway system, even worse commutes await travelers from other outlying bedroom suburbs, notably in the Santa Clarita and Simi valleys.
To relieve this pressure, some public policy experts have long suggested massive investment in new train and other public transit systems; yet they have, at least until now, largely ignored more flexible, less expensive and individualized alternatives.
To a large extent, the fixation on rail transportation reflects an archaic vision of an economy dominated by highly concentrated, high-rise office markets.
With over 90% of jobs located outside the central business districts in most American cities, riding the train downtown does not present a workable alternative.
Instead, solutions such as private jitney vans or telecommuting offer a far better means of getting work done while reducing stress on an already overstretched transport system.
Telecommunications and computer technologies now make it possible for many workers to do their jobs successfully without leaving their homes or by simply visiting local telecommuting centers.
This has fueled an explosion of telecommuters to more than 8.3 million Americans today from roughly four million in 1990, according to telecommunications consultancy Link Resources.
The L.A. earthquake, as well as the recent cold weather in the Northeast and Midwest that closed scores of major businesses (including the federal government in Washington), are likely to make this alternative seem all the more attractive.
Jack Nilles, the Los Angeles consultant widely credited with inventing the term "telecommuting," says at least half the work force in Southern California could telecommute at least twice a month.
He also claims that companies can save more than $8,000 a year for each midlevel employee who becomes a regular telecommuter.
Already some firms, such as ad agency Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., have experimented with this new work style; they have transformed their headquarters from a compulsory daily destination to a locale largely for necessary social and consultative functions.
Nancy Eiser is transportation program manager for the Los Angeles County government and has consulted with over 200 firms in the region.
Her experience with the county's 2,600 telecommuters should command the attention of private-sector employers, whose middle managers, she says, "have to get past the notion that you have to punch in and be there to work."
The County Assessor's office, for example, found telecommuters processed their work 64% faster than office-bound employees and that overall productivity rose 34% once telecommuting was instituted.
But productivity is not telecommuting's only benefit.
By cutting back on auto emissions, the source of 60% of the basin's smog, telecommuting could also reduce the need for the draconian steps proposed by the Environmental Protection Agency and the local pollution police, the Air Quality Management District.
The demands by AQMD bureaucrats for "ride-sharing" and other smog-abating steps have been among the key elements driving businesses out of the region.
Finally, the spread of telecommuting also holds strong social benefits.
As many as 55% of women-owned businesses operate from home; home-based enterprises and telecommuting allow people to earn incomes while spending more time with their children.
They also root workers more deeply in their communities, something that could help counter the anomie associated with commuter suburbs.
Yet despite these benefits, such innovations will likely arouse opposition from social engineers, both here in California and elsewhere, who remain enamored of the old centralist order.
They also run against the interests of local politicians, who see in a massive investment in public transit a means to provide jobs for defense workers and aerospace employers.
Another argument against the restructuring of work stems from fears that such changes could devastate the remnants of inner-city economies.
But instead of battling the future, cities like Los Angeles and New York should seek to adjust to the new economic realities.
To do this, they must relearn what natural human and cultural advantages cities can exploit for their economic development.
New York, for example, still attracts many of the uniquely skilled people critical to such industries as the arts, communications, publishing and financial services.
This kind of creative hothouse environment cannot be duplicated in the duller climes of a Plano, Texas, or Phoenix.
Much the same is true for Southern California.
In the Los Angeles area, for example, the fastest growing industries -- such as medical instruments, software, garments/textiles and foreign trade -- rely heavily on unique local factors, such as the concentration of specialized suppliers, a large design community, and abundant and often quite skilled immigrant labor.
Rather than being "engineered" by planners to be closer to the urban core, such industries remain in cities because it serves their purposes.
Los Angeles's vast film and television industry, for example, relies heavily on highly skilled, self-employed "Lone Eagles" as well as on an unparalleled agglomeration of small "craft" providers, many of whom live relatively close to the production facilities.
And even for those who do come from the outlying regions, the often odd hours of entertainment production lessen dependence on rush-hour commutes.
Such clustering is also increasingly characteristic of a host of technology industries, such as medical equipment, which probably now employs more Angelenos than aerospace.
Kingston Technologies, one of the fastest growing computer companies in the country, gets the bulk of its supplies from local, largely immigrant-based firms clustered within a few-mile radius of its northwestern Orange County headquarters.
In this manner, the restructuring of work provides a unique opportunity for cities to reinvent their role.
Oddly, in some ways, this recalls nothing so much as the Renaissance cities: centers for specialized, often home-based crafts businesses and ideal locales for the cosmopolitan exchange that cannot be duplicated in rural or small-town settings.
This may not be the highly centralized world imagined by the social engineers and urban planners, but it might point toward a workable future for the nation's hard-pressed cities.
Mr. Kotkin is a fellow at both the Center for the New West and the Pepperdine University business school.
He has been a telecommuter for nearly two decades.
