In the first complaints filed under the labor side agreement of the North American Free Trade Agreement, two unions accused General Electric Co. and Honeywell Inc. of firing Mexican employees for attempting to organize workers into labor unions.
The separate submissions were filed with the U.S. Labor Department's new National Administrative Office; the United Electrical Workers filed against GE, and the Teamsters filed against Honeywell.
Together, the submissions could set precedents for handling such cases under the complicated mechanism set up under the trade agreement to resolve cross-border labor disputes.
The unions, which represent some of the companies' U.S. workers, teamed up with the Authentic Labor Front, an independent labor federation in Mexico, to file and publicize the cases.
The labor organizations are asking for public hearings and for the fired workers to be reinstated and allowed to choose unions without reprisals.
GE, a Fairfield, Conn., service and manufacturing company, and Honeywell, a Minneapolis-based maker of controls, both denied the allegations and said they would cooperate with any inquiries from the National Administrative Office.
The first question for the National Administrative Office is whether the office, born Jan. 1 when the trade agreement took effect, can rule on cases that began last year.
Even if the office accepts one or both for review, the cases are likely to face a long bureaucratic road and an uncertain outcome.
Still, they show that despite harsh criticism of Nafta and the labor side agreement, labor unions aren't hesitant to use the procedures they create.
"We're testing the NAO and seeing if it works," said Bob Nicklas, special-projects coordinator for the Teamsters.
He acknowledged that it could take some time; his own count of the various steps in the process shows that it could take more than two years for the cases to be concluded.
Under the Nafta side agreement on labor, organizations are set up in each participating country to handle complaints over enforcement of labor laws in other countries.
The National Administrative Office has 60 days to decide whether to accept the submissions.
Ultimately, the cases could go to dispute-resolution panels.
The Teamsters allege that Honeywell fired about 20 production workers at its Chihuahua plant in November "for seeking to form an independent and free trade union," and that since then, the company has increased electronic surveillance of its workers.
A Honeywell spokeswoman said 22 workers were laid off "as part of an overall plan to downsize" the factory.
She added that one employee was fired for "performance issues."
The United Electrical Workers, meanwhile, allege that General Electric "flagrantly violated the labor and human rights of its employees" at its motor plant in Juarez.
In addition to alleged firings for union activities, the union says that workers are now forced to board or exit buses on company property so they can't receive union literature.
GE said it hasn't violated U.S. or Mexican labor laws, and that the allegations are "part of a union organizing campaign in Mexico and the UE's continued anti-Nafta efforts."
A spokesman said six of 11 fired workers were offered reinstatement after the company's management reviewed the cases, but that the workers declined.
He said GE found that local management had "sufficient evidence" that four others violated company rules, and that another case is under review.
