Special Counsel Robert Fiske's investigation of the Whitewater matter has now extended to a highflying bond dealer with ties to President Clinton.
In a recent wave of subpoenas, Mr. Fiske sought documents about Mr. Lasater and his Lasater & Co., which had a piece of the Arkansas bond business while Mr. Clinton was governor.
Mr. Clinton's relationship with Mr. Lasater was an issue in the 1992 presidential campaign.
Mr. Lasater raised money for Mr. Clinton's 1984 gubernatorial campaign and gave a job to Roger Clinton, the president's brother.
As governor of Arkansas, Mr. Clinton lobbied the state legislature for a bond deal that benefited Mr. Lasater, while the bond dealer was under investigation for trafficking in cocaine.
Mr. Lasater pleaded guilty to drug charges in 1986.
Mr. Fiske also is seeking documents involving former Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell and White House aide Patsy Thomasson, who once worked for Mr. Lasater.
P.O.M. Inc., a company owned by Mr. Hubbell's brother-in-law, is listed on Mr. Fiske's subpoenas as well.
Mr. Lasater couldn't be reached to comment, and it couldn't be determined whether he has received a subpoena from Mr. Fiske.
The special counsel has issued more than 150 subpoenas since February.
They list dozens of names and request "all documents and/or communications referring or relating" to the people listed.
Mr. Fiske declined to comment.
Ms. Thomasson, whose name also appears on Fiske subpoenas, is director of the White House Office of Administration.
She was formerly a senior executive of several of Mr. Lasater's companies and helped to run his business while he was jailed on the drug charges.
She was also one of three White House aides who went to Deputy Counsel Vince Foster's office after he committed suicide last July.
Phoenix Group Inc., an investors group once headed by Ms. Thomasson, is being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with possible insider trading in Arctic Alaska Fisheries Corp. stock in June 1992.
Shortly afterward, Arkansas-based Tyson Foods Inc. announced an agreement to acquire the company.
Phoenix Group was once called Lasater Inc. and was headed by Mr. Lasater.
Ms. Thomasson said last week that she neither traded in, nor executed an order for, the stock.
She hasn't received a subpoena from Mr. Fiske, according to White House officials.
Mr. Hubbell, whose name also appears on subpoenas issued by Mr. Fiske, is linked to several aspects of the Whitewater controversy, including conflict-of-interest allegations involving a suit he handled for the Resolution Trust Corp. while a partner in the Rose Law Firm.
The Rose firm has been trying to determine whether Mr. Hubbell inflated expenses he billed to the firm, and recently referred the matter to state disciplinary authorities.
The Little Rock firm has also been mired in a dispute with Mr. Hubbell over $1 million in expenses and unbilled time charges incurred during his unsuccessful handling of a lawsuit for P.O.M., which has become part of Mr. Fiske's inquiries.
John Nields, Mr. Hubbell's Washington lawyer, and the president of P.O.M., Seth "Skeeter" Ward, the brother-in-law of Mr. Hubbell, didn't return phone calls.
The Whitewater affair is expected to dominate a news conference that President Clinton has scheduled for 7:30 p.m. EST tonight.
The press conference is part of the administration's new strategy of being more open about the Whitewater controversy.
