SERBS BEGAN a large-scale withdrawal of weapons from hills around Sarajevo.
Convoys of Bosnian Serb artillery withdrew from positions around the capital as a deadline neared for them to pull back or be bombed by NATO forces.
The pullout reported by U.N. monitors followed a pledge by Bosnian Serb leader Karadzic to comply with NATO's Sunday deadline.
He agreed to the step during talks with Russian envoy Churkin, who said Moscow would contribute soldiers to enforce a cease-fire in the city.
U.N. commanders were told the Serbs would meet NATO's conditions within 36 hours.
Clinton said, "I hope the air strikes will not be necessary, and they will not occur if the Serbs will comply."
A former U.S. treasurer pleaded guilty to obstructing an independent counsel's probe into corruption at HUD.
Catalina Vasquez Villalpando, who served as U.S. treasurer in the Bush administration, also pleaded guilty to charges of tax evasion and not disclosing income from her former employer while she was treasurer.
The FDIC found no evidence that the Rose Law Firm, where Hillary Rodham Clinton and several administration officials were partners, violated conflict-of-interest rules in its dealings with a failed Arkansas thrift.
Separately, President Clinton repeated his assertions that the Whitewater flap will die down.
Education Secretary Riley announced that colleges and universities may use race-based scholarships to remedy past discrimination or to diversify student bodies.
The future of race-based scholarships had been in limbo since 1990, when the Bush administration first proposed that they be banned.
That order never took effect.
The FAA authorized airlines to start using military satellite signals for navigation, but several obstacles could prevent quick use of the technology.
Airlines have said that use of the military's 24 orbiting satellites could save the industry hundreds of millions of dollars by allowing them to fly more efficient routes.
Inkatha leader Buthelezi ridiculed the latest political concessions from the African National Congress as a ploy, bolstering fears that political unrest may undermine South Africa's April all-race election.
He said his Inkatha party and the KwaZulu black homeland would oppose the election "with every democratic means at our disposal."
Aristide reversed himself and agreed to meet in Washington with a group of visiting Haitian parliamentarians to discuss their plan for ending Haiti's political impasse.
The ousted president has publicly rejected the proposal, which calls for him to name a new prime minister.
The plan doesn't set a firm date for Aristide's return to power.
Mexican officials will hold peace talks with rebel negotiators Monday at an undisclosed location in the southern state of Chiapas.
The announcement by the government's peace envoy followed Wednesday's release of a former Chiapas governor who had been held hostage by the rebels.
Secretary of State Christopher has urged Syria's foreign minister to try to restrain guerrillas who fired a rocket into northern Israel from Lebanon on Wednesday, a senior Clinton administration official said.
Yesterday, guerrillas in Lebanon lobbed rockets into Israeli-occupied south Lebanon.
A Lutheran minister in Norway linked last weekend's theft of the famous Munch painting, "The Scream," to an antiabortion campaign that has been seeking publicity during the Winter Olympics.
He said the painting "would emerge again" if an anti-abortion film, "The Silent Scream," is shown on national television.
Vietnam and the U.S. moved closer to establishing diplomatic ties as Hanoi said talks would be held in both nations that would touch on the issue of human rights.
But a Vietnamese spokeswoman stressed that normalization of relations "is in no way attached to political conditions."
The U.S. rejected an Iraqi demand for the lifting of a U.N. embargo on Iraq's oil exports, saying Baghdad hadn't complied with a U.N. resolution calling for the destruction of dangerous weapons.
Died: Randy Shilts, 42, journalist and author of "And the Band Played On" and other books about AIDS, in Guerneville, Calif., of AIDS complications.
