NATO WILL WEIGH a U.S.-French proposal for ending the siege of Sarajevo.
The U.S. and France will ask the Western alliance to set an early deadline for withdrawing all heavy weapons from around Bosnia's capital, and to back it up with the threat of air strikes.
The proposal, to be unveiled today in Brussels, would give both the Bosnian Serbs and the Muslim-led government about a week to withdraw their artillery, mortars and tanks, or face allied bombing.
The Clinton administration also will offer to send a U.S. envoy to Sarajevo to help the Muslim government formulate a peace plan that could be supported by the U.S.
Bosnian Serb leader Karadzic declared that any plane attacking Serb forces would be shot down, a Belgrade news agency reported.
A military judge accused the Navy's top officer of unlawfully trying to manipulate the Tailhook probe, reviving the question of whether Adm. Kelso would be ousted.
The judge, who dismissed charges against three Navy fliers in the sex-abuse scandal, also rejected some of Kelso's testimony about what he saw at the 1991 convention.
The State Department urged exiled Haitian President Aristide to lay the groundwork for a new government by naming a prime minister.
Haiti has been without a prime minister since the previous Aristide appointee, Malval, quit in December.
Irish Prime Minister Reynolds sent a confidential letter to the IRA's political wing, Sinn Fein, urging acceptance of an Anglo-Irish peace plan for Northern Ireland.
Sinn Fein, which has refused to back the plan pending clarification from Britain, isn't expected to make a final decision until after the party's annual meeting late this month.
U.S. health officials issued new guidelines for doctors and patients that could transform treatment for an enlarged prostate, a condition that afflicts about half of men over age 50.
If the guidelines are widely followed, they would likely lead to less surgery and fewer diagnostic tests than are now performed.
A panel of scientists told lawmakers that, with few exceptions, radiation experiments conducted on humans in the 1940s and '50s appear to have involved doses that would leave no long-term health problems.
The Senate approved Clinton's education reform package, called Goals 2000, as well as the administration's school-to-work legislation.
Goals 2000, passed 71-25, creates a national framework for setting high standards in schools.
Arafat and Peres met in Cairo but Israeli and Palestinian negotiators said more talks were needed before Israel begins withdrawing from Gaza and Jericho.
After the talks between the PLO leader and Israeli foreign minister, Israel's Rabin said he expected "prolonged negotiations" before the peace accord can be implemented.
A right-wing South African group said talks with the government and the African National Congress reached a dead end.
As a result, the Freedom Alliance announced it probably would boycott an April vote.
The group includes the Inkatha party, the white separatist Afrikaner People's Front and the Bophuthatswana black homeland.
Italy's defense minister warned that the U.N. mission in Somalia risks collapse when Western troops leave at the end of March, and he called for urgent efforts to initiate talks involving rival clans.
Clinton's antidrug strategy will target "chronic, hard-core drug use" while boosting spending on treatment and prevention, according to a late draft of the plan.
In a statement accompanying the draft, the president says the emphasis on prevention doesn't signal a less aggressive role for law-enforcement authorities.
The last of the Contra rebels accepted a disarmament plan that would end decades of warfare in Nicaragua, a Catholic bishop announced.
The proposal calls for the army to withdraw from the northern mountains and for the insurgents to disarm.
Sudanese government forces bombed rebel-held villages and refugee camps in southern Sudan, witnesses said, marking the fourth raid in less than a week.
An estimated 67,000 refugees are believed to be fleeing toward Uganda ahead of a feared ground offensive by government troops.
