FED ACTION to raise interest rates still may come soon -- but when is uncertain.
Some Fed watchers thought the move was happening yesterday morning, but Fed policy makers didn't even begin their twoday meeting until after lunch.
If they don't act today, Fed bank presidents want the call to be made at another meeting, rather than give Fed chief Greenspan interim authority to make the move himself.
The next policymakers meeting is set for March 22.
The strengthening economy and a restless bond market add to pressure to raise rates for the first time in five years.
But confusion over market reaction to today's jobless rate, new Fed data showing that industry is still operating shy of capacity, and a desire to see how the first quarter is shaping up could lead the Fed to wait.
Absent from this week's meeting: departing Fed members Angell and Mullins, two backers of higher rates.
PRESSURE GROWS for more Clinton action to restore Haiti's democracy.
The Haitian military remains in charge despite U.S. predictions that sanctions would exhaust their fuel supplies by now.
New York Rep. Owens, head of the Black Caucus's Haitian task force, plans to call a conference of U.S. black leaders on the issue.
He calls U.S. actions "wimpish" and warns of a new flood of refugees.
U.S. officials claim that the policy of applying pressure shows signs of splitting Haiti's military leaders.
The U.S. and others may propose more United Nation sanctions by next week.
Under consideration: expanding the list of Haitians whose foreign assets are frozen.
But no military moves are contemplated.
The U.N. also may push for a world-wide trade embargo.
COOPER FACES new attacks as his health-care-reform plan gains momentum.
Adding to this week's Business Roundtable backing, the National Association of Manufacturers and four other business groups praise the Tennessee Democrat for working with GOP Sen. Chafee on a compromise; Cooper will address the NAM today.
And in a move sure to anger the White House, he will speak to Ross Perot's United We Stand America tomorrow in Dallas.
California Rep. Waxman tells Cooper that business groups are just "using him" to undercut Clinton's plan.
Clinton aides and congressional critics charge that Cooper's bill would mean higher taxes on the middle class.
An analysis by Citizen Action shows that more than 30% of the money Cooper raised from large donors in the second half of 1993 was from health interests.
California Democratic Rep. Stark says he would rather "throw up" than vote for Cooper's bill.
GETTING EVEN: Angered by the Business Roundtable's support of Cooper's plan over Clinton's, the White House maps new attacks against insurance companies, which it claims orchestrated the defeat.
"Those who led the fight against us know we're not happy; they'll be reminded of that from time to time," says Clinton aide Jeff Eller.
GUNS AND DRUGS: Clinton will take a high profile on both issues as Congress wraps up crime legislation.
He will propose an antigun initiative that would give publichousing developments authority to ban guns on their properties.
He also intends to detail an antidrug policy that will propose more money for treatment.
CLINTONITES SPLIT over when to introduce legislation to approve the world-trade agreement.
U.S. Trade Representative Kantor's office favors early May, soon after the pact is signed, to minimize moves to attach conditions.
But the White House hesitates for fear of slowing health reform.
POSTSCRIPT: Papers of former Fed Chairman Arthur Burns reveal a 1974 memo from Fed spokesman Joseph Coyne advising Burns to call Washington Post publisher Katharine Graham to complain about columnist Nicholas von Hoffman.
Coyne reported that then-Post business editor Hobart Rowan agreed "it would be an excellent idea."
Rowan says he doesn't remember the matter.
PEROT PLOTS strategy for putting his imprint on this year's elections.
The Texas billionaire wants to influence House races but can't endorse candidates and keep the tax-exempt status for United We Stand America.
Some Perot followers talk of running as independents.
But for Perotistas to have an impact, "they're better off telling people to vote against all incumbents," says pollster Frank Luntz.
Perot's course may become clearer today when he kicks off a meeting of his group's state leaders in Dallas.
They must decide how to divide efforts between pushing their political-reform agenda and lobbying for health-care reform.
The invitation to Rep. Cooper may set the stage for stepped-up attacks on the Clinton plan.
Perot's broader challenge is to show that he still leads a big army; backers are "splintering" as his popularity fades, pollster Luntz says.
MINOR MEMOS: The new hot-selling nesting doll in Moscow features U.S. presidents; it goes from smallest figure (John F. Kennedy) to the largest, outside doll: Hillary Rodham Clinton. . . .
Clinton political strategist James Carville plans a populist "dark ages" weekend to counter the elitist Renaissance weekend the president attends. . . .
Attendees at the spouses' counter dinner to the banquet held by the Alfalfa Club, which admitted three women this year, numbered more than 50 females and Eric Tarloff, husband of Clinton economist Laura Tyson.
