The world's largest multimedia company doesn't believe in the multimedia future.
"Multimedia is just a word, and that word is running ahead of the substance," huffs Hiroshi Yamauchi, president of video-game maker Nintendo Co.
Let others spin fancy dreams of the information highway, he says; Nintendo will "concentrate on just one point -- improving the quality of games in the current market."
Sega Enterprises Ltd. couldn't disagree more.
Nintendo's archrival believes multimedia will lead to "a tectonic shift in society," President Hayao Nakayama says.
Sega is planning cable-TV videogame channels and high-tech theme parks, with more multimedia products to come.
Mr. Nakayama says: "I don't consider Nintendo our competitor anymore."
Nintendo and Sega, the two companies that so far have done the most to create the multimedia market, are betting their futures on very different visions of what it will look like and how they can profit from it.
Their story is a parable of two seemingly similar companies, both dominant in their industry, forced to choose between radical change and the status quo as the ground starts shifting under their feet.
Up to now, the companies have followed nearly identical strategies.
While other Japanese electronics makers competed for ever-narrowing margins on hardware, Sega and Nintendo concentrated on software.
Thanks to mushrooming game sales and the stiff licensing fees both companies charge to third-party developers, the companies have made big bucks from software while selling their game computers at virtually no profit.
Sega has more than tripled its consolidated sales in just two years, while much-larger Nintendo managed 34% growth over the same period.
Both companies also have been enormously profitable.
Now, however, the cash-cow game business is drying up.
Nintendo's parent pretax profit, which excludes results from overseas subsidiaries, fell 24% in the six months ended Sept. 30 -- the first decline since 1984.
Sega, meanwhile, saw its unconsolidated sales over the same period rise just 20%, much slower than its 91% sales growth a year earlier.
Both companies blame soft sales in Europe and the Japanese currency's strength, which reduces the yen value of overseas sales denominated in other currencies.
Even so, Sega's dollar-denominated sales of video-game players have surged in the U.S. Scoring a victory over Nintendo, Sega captured two-thirds of the most crucial segment of the U.S. market for videogame players during the holiday season.
The $15 billion game market also is changing in more-fundamental ways.
New competitors have flooded in: By the end of this year, Nintendo and Sega will have to contend not just with each other but also with a resurrected Atari Corp. and consumer-electronics giants Sony Corp. and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.
Sony and Matsushita pose a special threat, because both own Hollywood studios -- an in-house source of software.
More significantly, the newcomers have started wooing third-party software houses to write games for their machines.
"The margins for Nintendo and Sega will narrow," says Joseph Osha, an analyst with Baring Securities (Japan) Ltd.
Nintendo and Sega have prepared the obvious counterattack: powerful new game machines that will offer three-dimensional motion and digitized video clips.
Nintendo, which has preferred solo work, is developing a machine code-named "Project Reality" with Silicon Graphics Inc. for release in mid-1995.
Sega, meanwhile, has turned to Hitachi Ltd. and musical-instrument maker Yamaha Corp. for help with its "Saturn" game machine, which it intends to release late this year.
Nintendo, however, has stopped there, while Sega has turned outward to find future multimedia markets.
"We want to be a leader in interactive entertainment, both in the home and outside the home," says Tom Kalinske, president of Sega's U.S. unit.
Act One opens later this year when Time Warner Inc. and Tele-Communications Inc. start test-marketing a new service called the Sega Channel in the U.S. Subscribers who buy or rent special hardware will be able to download Sonic the Hedgehog or any of 50 other Sega video games from their cable system.
The Sega Channel is much more than a way of distributing games electronically -- it's a marketing tool.
Sega intends to withhold new games from the system's ever-changing library, instead offering them only as truncated "previews" where players can play only one or two levels.
Only when the retail market for those games has been saturated will Sega release their full versions via cable.
Sega expects two million subscribers by 1996, a figure many analysts find credible.
Within a few years, Sega hopes to have gained enough experience in the cable market to pitch the Saturn as the hardware needed for tapping into future interactive cable-television systems.
Sega isn't worried about likely competitors such as General Instrument Corp. and Scientific-Atlanta Inc.
"He who gets there first has a big leg up," Mr. Kalinske says.
By the time interactive cable systems for general use are starting up, "we'll be several million users ahead of the other guys."
Act Two begins in March in Osaka when Sega opens its first "high-tech" theme park -- a cross between a traditional amusement park and the upscale video arcades Sega already runs.
"You can drive a Formula One car or ride the space shuttle" in the park's "virtual reality" attractions, Sega Executive Vice President Shoichiro Irimajiri says.
"In virtual land, you can realize your dreams."
Each park will cost as much as five billion yen to seven billion yen ($46 million to $65 million) to develop.
Sega is planning a similar, although smaller, park with Matsushita's MCA unit in Los Angeles.
Nintendo's comparatively passive strategy is particularly striking given the company's earlier attempts to capitalize on its huge installed base of game computers.
It tried an interactive television network in the late 1980s through which families could buy and sell securities or bet on horse races through their game machines.
The network stalled in Japan and never was rolled out in the U.S.
Now company executives heap scorn on Sega's plans and insist that their new game machine will usher in the multimedia future by itself.
When critics argue that the actual performance of Nintendo's new machine isn't likely to be much greater than those from its competitors, Mr. Yamauchi dismisses them as "naive" and "ignorant" of the video-game market.
He has similar words for those ready to write off Nintendo, which has a cash reserve of nearly $3 billion.
"Nintendo's movement is always very slow to outsiders -- change just takes time," he says.
"If people claim we are too slow, it just shows they're ignorant."
