Bell Atlantic Corp. asked the government for permission to provide long-distance services as part of its proposed acquisition of Tele-Communications Inc.
Bell Atlantic also reported flat earnings for the fourth quarter and reiterated that it would not cut its dividend as a result of its pending TCI transaction.
Bell Atlantic will pay $11.8 billion in stock for the lion's share of the assets of TCI and Liberty Media Corp.
But the total payments in stock could later grow to more than $20 billion, including $5 billion for TCI's stakes in cable programming channels and up to $4 billion for other TCI cable systems.
In addition, Bell Atlantic will take on $9.6 billion in existing TCI-Liberty debt.
The seven regional Bell telephone companies currently are prohibited from providing long-distance services as part of the consent decree that broke up the telephone monopoly a decade ago.
In a waiver request submitted to the Justice Department late last week, Bell Atlantic said it wants, as part of its TCI deal, to provide long-distance services outside its territory and satellite-beamed programming to customers nationwide.
Under the consent decree, the latter also are considered to be long-distance services.
In its filing, Bell Atlantic warned that the "full merger will not go forward" if it doesn't get the green light in time to meet the transaction's scheduled closing date, now set for Jan. 2, 1995.
However, John Thorne, a Bell Atlantic vice president and associate general counsel, in an interview on Friday suggested the acquisition can be accomplished without long-distance approval.
"We will do the deal, come hell or high water," Mr. Thorne said.
The Baby Bell already is busy devising detailed attack plans for invading the telephone turfs of its former siblings.
Brian Oliver, president of Bell Atlantic Enterprises Business Development, said in comments accompanying the waiver request that the Baby Bell plans to begin constructing telephone networks across the country as soon as the deal is closed with TCI, the largest U.S. cable operator.
Within 2 1/2 years, Mr. Oliver said Bell Atlantic expects to be operating full-service networks in competition with other Bells in about 30 cities outside its territory.
By the end of the decade, Mr. Oliver said Bell Atlantic would be providing competing telephone services in geographic areas with more than 40 million people outside its current territory.
Mr. Oliver indicated Bell Atlantic already has a game plan for how to invade the Chicago market, currently dominated by Ameritech Corp., the Chicago-based Baby Bell.
He said TCI's affiliate, Teleport, has facilities in the downtown area that could be used to interconnect with TCI's cable systems in the Chicago suburbs "to provide competing telephone service throughout the metropolitan area."
"We believe we can provide Chicago-area customers a better package of price and service than can" Ameritech, Mr. Oliver said.
Bell Atlantic also made an 8K filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission last week in an effort to quash rumors on Wall Street that drove its stock down.
The company said in the filing that "rumors that the company intends to cut its dividend are totally false."
Bell Atlantic added that it is "the company's intention that the final financial terms of the transaction will not differ significantly from the letter of intent."
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading, Bell Atlantic shares closed at $56, down 37.5 cents.
Earlier Friday, the Philadelphia-based regional Bell telephone company reported fourth-quarter earnings of $333.1 million, or 76 cents a share, compared with $317.3 million, or 74 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue was $3.31 billion, up about 1% from $3.27 billion a year earlier.
For the year, Bell Atlantic reported earnings of $1.4 billion, or $3.22 a share, compared with $1.34 billion, or $3.13 a share, for 1992.
The 1993 earnings reflect several one-time charges, including a noncash charge of $85 million, or 19 cents a share, for post-employment benefits.
