The dream of owning a "home place" is one shared by all young farmers.
My wife and I realized our dream in 1983 when we bought our 220 acres.
We've raised a lot of corn and soybeans, three wonderful children, and started a small side business here.
It's been a great home, but as an investment, it's been lousy.
Farmland was a good investment for a generation.
Here in northwest Missouri, land values quintupled in the 20 years from 1960 to 1980.
Then Paul Volcker put an end to the fun.
The high interest-rate policies of the Fed in the early '80s were successful in the fight against inflation; the first casualty was the inflated land values of the late '70s.
Farmland in many areas lost half its value, and the farm crisis of the early '80s was the result.
The land price inflation of the '70s had its roots inside and outside agriculture.
Demand for farm products increased because of detente and crop failures world-wide.
We endured droughts and other production problems domestically that increased commodity prices.
Most important, real interest rates were negative, credit to farmers was subsidized, and farmland was seen as the perfect inflation hedge.
After the bottom dropped out of the market and a whole generation of farmers had to seek employment elsewhere, a more sober approach to real estate valuation prevailed.
Farm incomes stabilized.
But farmland prices did not recover.
Now the factors that kept farmland prices low for a decade are beginning to change, and farm real estate may yet again become a favorite.
Last fall, however, in another obstacle to a turnaround, the Clinton administration delivered a blow to farmers in the Midwest with the announcement that public money would not be available to repair all the levees damaged by floods.
Many environmentalists applauded, with visions of a massive wetland stretching across Missouri.
By December, fewer than 10% of the several hundred damaged levees had been repaired, leaving some 480,000 acres vulnerable to future floods.
Ironically, while funds to repair levees are limited, there seems to be no limit on funds for the Wetlands Reserve Program, and many farmers with severe flood damage are signing contracts with the federal government to take their land out of production permanently.
At the same time, farmers in California last year lost a considerable portion of their irrigation water rights -- 1.25 million acre-feet of water -- as federal authorities acted to protect fish, wildlife and wetlands.
Other farmers are now able to sell water rights for uses more valuable than agriculture.
Daniel Beard, the new commissioner of the federal Bureau of Reclamation, unfortunately has signaled his willingness to listen sympathetically to plans to divert irrigation water away from farmers and toward other uses.
He says that farmers can expect to pay more for less water as more emphasis is put on the needs of cities and endangered species.
Because the Endangered Species Act protects the habitats of various listed species, farmers find that what they once considered simply a cornfield is now designated a habitat -- no longer available for farming.
In this vein, the coastal California gnatcatcher, the red-cockaded woodpecker and the desert tortoise (its 6.6 million-acre habitat could limit cattle grazing over areas in several states) are as likely to be discussed down at the local coffee shop as is the newest John Deere machinery or hybrid corn.
Now Congress is debating a bill to fund a nationwide biological survey to list all biological resources on both public and private lands.
No doubt more threatened species will be found, making less land available for production.
Farmers everywhere face more regulation as they attempt to use the technology that has so dramatically increased yields in the past.
In several watersheds where nitrates are a problem, farmers must limit their use of fertilizer.
The Clinton administration has announced a policy whereby the benefits of pesticides won't be considered during a product's approval process: Pesticides with even "negligible risk" must be withdrawn, "except in exceptional cases."
The administration also wants to ban the use of all "high risk" pesticides by the year 2000.
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt has been involved in a yearlong effort to double grazing fees on federal lands.
Couched in terms of deficit reduction, the real battle is between ranchers who would utilize public lands and environmentalists who would return the land to the wild.
If the environmentalists are successful, much of the West will no longer be used for agriculture.
Real-estate brokers and people involved in the cattle industry here in Missouri are receiving calls from Western ranchers interested in moving their operations to the Midwest, in case they lose the right to ranch as they have for over a century.
The battle is far from over.
But the direction of change is ominous.
Misguided environmental concerns will decrease the amount of land being farmed and will decrease production on the land remaining in use.
While the land price boom in the '70s was fueled by a big increase in farm exports, the export market for American farmers stumbled in the '80s, as the Common Market captured many of our customers with huge export subsidies.
But this situation may change.
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade requires a 20% drop in European subsidies, to be phased in over several years, along with a first-time-ever entry for American rice in the Japanese market.
The export picture for our agricultural products hasn't been this bright for a decade.
In addition, the Clinton administration's program calling for the use of ethanol fuel -- made primarily from corn -- in cities that are not in compliance with clean-air standards will create a huge demand for crops.
The price of gold is up, and interest rates are low.
Although inflation hedges recently have been out of style, owning farmland is still desirable.
With currently low interest rates and a possible rate of return of around 8%, farmland is in fact not a bad investment.
In the late 1800s, farmers all across America lit candles in support of a speculator who was attempting to "corner the market" in wheat and who would thereby boost their fortunes.
Today, farmers are feeling the pinch from an environmental ethos that threatens to force many out of business.
But for the few survivors, the prospects for agriculture have never been brighter.
Maybe we farmers should be lighting candles for the Sierra Club and the National Wildlife Federation.
Mr. Hurst farms and runs a flower nursery in Westboro, Mo.
