The Corner Store, a software retailer based in the rolling hills of Litchfield, Conn., isn't on a corner.
Nor is it really a store.
It's a cyberspace store, located in the electronic universe of computer on-line services.
By specializing in software products that traditional retailers hesitated to stock and by selling them through a medium the retailers had overlooked, the Corner Store and another company, Indelible Blue Inc. of Raleigh, N.C., have made millions of dollars.
Computer industry analysts say the companies' founders are at the forefront of changes that will eventually revolutionize the way software is sold.
"Our view is that over time you will see many more commercial transactions occur on-line," says William Bluestein, a research director at Forrester Research Inc., a computer consulting concern based in Cambridge, Mass.
"And we feel that will happen first with software because a lot of software users are on-line.
These are folks who already live in a digital world."
Paolo Pignatelli, owner of the Corner Store, and Katherine Ansardi and Buck Bohac, co-owners of Indelible Blue, began their ventures because of their familiarity with the needs of the inhabitants of "cyberspace" -- a term computer buffs use to describe the electronic realm of on-line computing.
Both companies specialize in selling OS/2, a computer software system designed by International Business Machines Corp., and OS/2 applications, designed by others.
OS/2, first offered in 1987 and reintroduced last year in a substantially revised version, is IBM's challenge to the market dominance of Microsoft Corp.'s Windows operating system.
(Operating systems control computers' basic housekeeping functions and often determine how other software programs look and feel to the user.)
Long dismissed as an inferior operating system, OS/2 has had strong sales over the last year.
Although still much less popular than Windows among average computer users, it is often the first choice of software developers, mathematicians, techies and others who desire an operating system more powerful than Windows.
Mr. Bohac, a graduate student in physical chemistry and an OS/2 user himself, was communicating on the Internet and Prodigy, a popular on-line service, two years ago when he discovered the frustration of other OS/2 users who couldn't find applications for the product.
Not prepared to leave the Raleigh area when he finished graduate school last year, Mr. Bohac decided to launch Indelible Blue, a catalog that would sell OS/2 and its applications.
He and his wife, Ms. Ansardi, planned an advertising campaign for the spring, but they began letting on-line users know they would be selling OS/2 by way of discussion groups on Prodigy or the Internet.
The couple, who thought they would make a decent living from the catalog, were shocked by the huge demand.
"By the time our first print ads appeared in April of last year, we were already out of our first 3,000 catalogs and had to reprint," Ms. Ansardi recalls.
"Everybody already knew about us" from the Internet and on-line services.
The couple got a boost from a June release of OS/2 that was popular and a later release of Windows NT that proved disappointing.
They did a June run of 5,000 catalogs that also disappeared quickly.
Since then, they have merely been printing product lists in runs of 10,000 to keep up with demand.
They came out with 25,000 new catalogs this month that are also moving quickly.
Ms. Ansardi says average monthly sales since last March have been about $250,000.
She adds that Indelible Blue should "easily" have revenue of between $5 million and $10 million in 1994.
Indelible Blue still uses some print ads but mostly relies on on-line word-of-mouth to generate sales.
(The cyberspace community frowns on actual on-line advertising over the Internet, usually greeting it with hostility.)
Mr. Pignatelli hasn't run a single print ad since shortly after he opened the Corner Store in 1988.
Like Indelible Blue, the Corner Store generates sales through messages and conversations transmitted online (in the Corner Store's case, mainly via CompuServe).
Mr. Pignatelli, who describes himself as "an expert on artificial intelligence," started with an actual storefront on a local corner but soon closed it.
"About 95% of our walk-in software sales were on-line," he says.
Last year, Mr. Pignatelli says he had sales of $1 million, up from about $100,000 in 1989.
He says sales skyrocketed last June after the new version of OS/2 was released and have been increasing 10% to 15% a month since then.
"My profit margin went way up because I stopped paying for advertising and just went on-line and answered people's questions when they were having problems with OS/2," says Mr. Pignatelli.
"That's how I get customers."
Computer specialists say the Corner Store and Indelible Blue have two advantages over traditional software retailers.
Because they operate in an electronic milieu, they are able to respond very quickly to demand, and they have their fingers on the pulse of their market.
They are also "the first true cyberspace stores that I'm aware of," says John Soyring, a spokesman for IBM's personal software products division based in Austin, Texas.
"We are learning a lot from them because they established these new channels."
Adds Mr. Soyring: "Cyberspace channels are growing so rapidly that I think it would be a mistake for other companies not to look closely at them."
The traditional software store won't disappear anytime soon, of course.
Many computer users still aren't comfortable using on-line services.
Analysts say it will be five to 10 years before on-line retailing dominates the software market.
Many traditional retailers are cool to the idea of on-line vending.
"It's not our nature to sell products in a direct mail or on-line environment," says Mark Dobberstein, a senior buyer for Software Etc.
Stores Inc., a large retail chain based in Edina, Minn.
Nonetheless, Mr. Pignatelli thinks traditional software retailers ignore cyberspace at their peril.
"Software consumers are very wily, and companies continually underestimate them," he says.
"The big companies will all have to pay attention to this because the software industry will end up looking like the banking industry -- every transaction will occur electronically."
