The race to define the look and feel of the personal computer is heating up.
For months, Microsoft Corp. has been teasing industry watchers with glimpses of its still-unfinished Chicago operating-system software, which for the first time unifies the company's hugely successful DOS and Windows programs.
With Chicago, Microsoft aims to finally match -- and in some aspects, leapfrog -- the ease of use and psychological appeal of Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh software.
Some analysts assert Chicago will be a blockbuster, generating $1 billion in revenue in the first 12 months of its introduction.
Though long accused of resting on its Macintosh laurels, Apple insists it will make enough improvements in its 10 year-old-operating system, the latest generation of which is called System 7, to maintain a lead over Microsoft.
Today, the company is scheduled to sketch out plans to boost Macintosh software's ability to do things automatically, such as sorting electronic mail, without sacrificing its familiar appearance.
Designed to blunt Chicago's momentum, the promised improvements won't be available in some cases until 1996.
But their disclosure now at least shows "we are not standing still," an Apple spokesman says.
Indeed, Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., is preoccupied with the threat of Chicago, some say.
The tension is so high that Apple recently dismissed an employee who had obtained an unauthorized test copy of Chicago.
Microsoft, Redmond, Wash., has distributed the copies to dozens of outsiders -- it plans a wider test release later this month -- to encourage the creation of applications that take advantage of Chicago.
But the company never intended Apple, a direct competitor, to obtain a copy so far in advance of its final release.
Microsoft only learned that the Apple employee had the copy after the worker boasted about seeing Chicago during a recent trade show, say people familiar with the situation.
Microsoft then dispatched a letter requesting the copy's return.
Apple concedes that an employee "obtained . . . an unauthorized prerelease copy" and believes it has been destroyed.
While companies have sued each other in the past over breaches of intellectual property, a spokeswoman for Microsoft said it isn't considering legal action.
"This is a moot point, a non-issue," she said.
"We can only go on good faith as to what Apple has told us."
The jockeying for position in operating systems is fierce because such software essentially defines the personality of a personal computer by dictating the way in which programs are controlled, files are stored and retrieved and the hardware pieces of a PC are held together.
Microsoft's DOS and Windows programs, while defining the personality of most PCs, for years have been derided as awkward and unimaginative.
Even the best features in Windows, which has outsold the Macintosh system 3 to 1, were widely considered to mimic the Macintosh.
While last year Microsoft triumphed in a lawsuit in which Apple charged the Windows program infringed on Apple's Macintosh copyright, many industry watchers believe the hegemony of DOS and Windows, and the minority status of the Macintosh, was an unfortunate outcome for PC buyers who struggle with hard-to-use software.
Chicago, which Microsoft is expected to begin selling early next year, should erase what was once Macintosh's diminished lead in PC system software, says David Coursey, editor of P.C. Letter, San Mateo, Calif.
The program even appears to overcome some of the annoying aspects of the Macintosh by making it easier to keep track of files and to skip from one task to another.
"Chicago does a lot of things Apple should have done years ago but didn't," says Jean-Louis Gassee, president of Be Inc., a San Jose, Calif. computer maker, and a former Apple product chief.
The biggest uncertainty about Chicago is whether delays in completion, which seem to dog every major operating system release from Microsoft, will push Chicago's completion well into 1995.
If that were to occur, Apple would "gain time to clean up its act," Mr. Gassee says.
Apple seems intent on doing so, after three years of essentially standing pat with its System 7 operating system for Macintosh.
The company plans to announce today that its operating system will eventually incorporate electronic agents, or small programs, to automatically perform such tasks as sorting electronic mail, which now has to be done manually.
These features are to first appear in Copland, a code name for the next generation of Apple's System 7 that company officials said will be introduced next year.
On that system, Guerrino De Luca, an Apple marketing vice president, said "dumb" agents will perform tasks such as mail-sorting upon the user's specific instruction.
In 1996, when Apple is scheduled to introduce the subsequent new generation, code-named Gerswhin, Mr. De Luca said, "intelligent" agents will be added that can make decisions on their own for a user's need.
These agents can, for example, book airline reservations based on a user's general preference for price and time.
Apple is a partner in a consortium called General Magic Inc. that is developing a technology called Telescript for sending intelligent agents through computer networks.
Apple also said it plans to begin shipping this year a new product called OpenDoc that is designed to make it easier for developers of software programs to make smaller, customized programs rather than one big program.
Microsoft also is working on endowing future programs with similar capabilities.
