Taken aback by the furious reaction to its latest advertising campaign, which features the blood-soaked uniform of a fallen Croat warrior, even Benetton Group SpA is wondering whether it has gone too far this time.
"I am very sorry" about the negative publicity the campaign is generating, says Luciano Benetton, the group's president.
"This is not what a corporate communications campaign should do.
It should create interest."
The Italian knitwear and clothing group has sought to arouse controversy over the past decade by putting its name to shocking photographs that highlight social and political issues of the day.
While the campaigns have often drawn criticism, Benetton's world-wide sales have soared, almost doubling since 1988 despite recession in some major markets.
But its latest focus on the murderous Yugoslav civil war -- which Benetton planned as a plea for peace -- has provoked a fierce backlash.
The campaign has triggered hostility toward Benetton in parts of Europe, where critics accuse it of cynical exploitation of war for business.
Even the poster's authenticity is now under fire.
The reaction has been fiercest in France.
In Paris, many of the Yugoslav posters have been ripped down or defaced with slogans such as "boycott Benetton" and "this is blood for money."
A government minister has even joined the fray: Lucette Michaux-Chevry, the minister responsible for humanitarian affairs, urged French people not to buy Benetton sweaters and "to pull them off people who are going to wear them."
The mother of a British soldier who was killed by a sniper in Bosnia has denounced the campaign as "very upsetting for me and my family," and the Vatican's official newspaper has described it as being tantamount to "terrorism."
Authorities in Germany and some parts of Switzerland have responded with official bans.
Moreover, Swiss and German television this week reported that the battle dress depicted isn't the uniform worn by the killed Croat soldier named by Benetton as Marinka Gagro.
The bloody T-shirt depicted in the campaign has a bullet hole in the front.
But Mr. Gagro's father told the two TV networks that his son had been killed by shrapnel in the back of his neck, and that his clothes had been buried with him.
"This is never his uniform," Mr. Gagro said.
In an interview in Paris, Mr. Benetton said the fuss over the latest campaign won't prevent the company continuing "to search for new facts and new emotions" in its advertisements.
But he admitted that the message Benetton had hoped for wasn't getting across, and added: "The next campaign will probably be different."
Responding to the TV allegations, Benetton officials said the company hadn't obtained the clothes directly from the family, but had received them from the Red Cross, together with a letter in Serbo-Croat from Mr. Gagro's father, which it also used in the ad.
Mr. Benetton said he didn't have any doubts about the authenticity of the clothes depicted and suggested Mr. Gagro's family may have been influenced by the journalists interviewing them.
The latest campaign follows one featuring people who had stamped onto their arms the initials "HIV" for the virus that causes AIDS.
That was just as hotly contested in France when it ran last fall.
One man dying of AIDS ran his own counter-ad in a French newspaper: a picture of his emaciated face above the slogan, "during the agony, the sales continue."
Whatever the misgivings, the negative publicity hasn't so far visibly dented Benetton's corporate growth.
The company's 1993 results are expected to show an increase in world-wide sales of about 10% to about 2.75 trillion lire ($1.63 billion), and Benetton officials say net income should rise by about the same as the previous year -- a whopping 13%.
Mr. Benetton acknowledged that the group had been helped by the sharp devaluation of the Italian lira, which enabled it to cut its prices abroad and bring its high labor costs in Italy down to levels closer to those of France.
"We had an enormous advantage from the devaluation," Mr. Benetton said.
Internationally, Benetton is seeking to boost its sales in the U.S., which currently account for less than 10% of revenue and where the company ran into many problems in the 1980s.
It is aiming to focus on bigger stores that stock more of its products, moving away from its traditional European formula of smaller boutiques with a limited range.
More than 20 of its 180 U.S. stores have been either enlarged or renovated to date, and Ciro Tomagnani, an analyst at Merrill Lynch in London, says the strategy already seems to be working.
After losing about $10 million in the U.S. in 1992, Benetton is expected to break even there in 1993, Mr. Tomagnani says.
The company is also moving aggressively into some developing countries, including India and China, establishing joint ventures to produce products locally with indigenous raw materials.
Mr. Benetton said he expects to sign an agreement with a local Chinese company later this month that foresees the opening of as many as 500 stores there over the next three years.
