Standard & Poor's Corp. knocked down its long-term rating outlook for Prudential Securities Inc. to negative from stable, reflecting the "vulnerability" of Prudential's franchise.
The move by the big credit-rating agency underscores the uncertainty surrounding the brokerage arm of the Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
As part of an October settlement with federal and state regulators, Prudential has set up a $330 million reparations fund for investors who were defrauded into buying limited-partnerships in the 1980s.
But that fund is open-ended, meaning that nobody knows how much Prudential eventually will be forced to pay.
"S&P is concerned that ongoing legal issues will continue to overshadow Prudential Securities' fundamental operations and undermine its long-term competitive position in the industry," said Charles Rauch, an S&P analyst.
"A long, protracted claims process would impair the firm's ability to protect its retail franchise from opportunistic competitors."
S&P's move marks a shift from its stance a few months back, when it took no rating action on Prudential in the wake of its regulatory settlement.
Though it has been six months since the settlement was announced, Prudential has only started to pay the investor claims.
Indeed, Prudential earlier this month said it plans to set aside an additional $100 million in reserves this year to cover legal costs from partnership claims.
Meanwhile, continuing disclosures and legal problems continue to dog the nation's fourth-largest brokerage firm.
"The thing that concerns us is that the legal problems they're having continue to unfold, and at this point are going on longer than we would have anticipated a few months ago," says Mark Bachmann, an S&P senior vice president.
"At this point, we're not sure we see the end to it yet."
For now, S&P affirmed the financial-programs ratings at single-A/A-1 for Prudential Securities Group, the holding company, and single-A-plus/A-1 for the Prudential Securities Inc. brokerage unit.
This move largely is symbolic; Prudential has no publicly traded debt outstanding.
Rather, the financial-programs ratings reflect the ability of a firm to meet its obligations.
A Prudential spokesman said the firm was "happy" that its financial-programs ratings were affirmed and that the firm wasn't placed on credit watch.
"We're confident that as we continue through the settlement and our basic business stays strong, we can demonstrate to S&P that the outlook for Prudential Securities is in fact positive," the spokesman said.
