Today the Senate Banking Committee will vote on Ricki Tigert as head of the FDIC, she having agreed to recuse herself from issues involving the Clintons and Whitewater.
Let us all pause to see who is running the rest of the bank regulatory apparatus.
Why, Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman, a presidential appointee as well as Georgetown friend, is running the ostensibly independent Resolution Trust Corp.
And Eugene Ludwig, another college Buddy of Bill, has been installed as Comptroller of the Currency.
Why, the FOBs are taking over financial regulation, lock, stock and barrel.
They haven't quite got the Federal Reserve yet, but they have a regulatory reform proposal that would take care of that.
The Clinton folks aren't content to relegate cronies and pals to harmless backwaters like Commerce or Postmaster General or the alter ego of a presidential Counselor.
They learned back in Arkansas that it was convenient to have a Beverly Bassett Schaffer sending "Dear Hillary" letters waving through a new capitalization plan for a financial institution.
We're glad to see that a couple of courageous Republicans are blowing the whistle.
North Carolina's Senator Lauch Faircloth, unlike some of his colleagues on Don Riegle's banking committee, isn't willing to let the matter drop with Ms. Tigert's recusal.
In the FDIC nominee's first appearance before the committee, the Senator raised the issue of how someone who says she's known the Clintons for eight years and been a Renaissance Weekend regular could convincingly head an agency with an active investigation of the Madison S&L collapse.
Ms. Tigert weasled, but later sent Senator Faircloth a recusal statement, which she said was written after consulting FDIC's ethics office.
She promised she'll recuse herself from matters "concerning President or Mrs. Clinton in their personal capacities."
While consoling Ms. Tigert on the "unfortunate fate" surrounding her nomination, Senator Faircloth is now wondering about the caveat "personal."
Does that remind you of "didn't inhale" or "no price controls?"
Sen. Faircloth now wants Ms. Tigert to "expand your recusal" from matters involving the "personal" activities of President and Mrs. Clinton to include their public activities.
More pointedly, he asks: "Will you recuse yourself from matters concerning Webster Hubbell, Vincent Foster, Dan Lasater, Frost and Company, Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, the Worthen Bank Corporation" and onward through all the financial institutions now running under the Whitewater flag?
How did we end up with an FDIC head going in recusing herself from the agency's most sensitive business?
Meanwhile, Rep. Jim Leach is wondering about Deputy Treasury Secretary/Interim RTC CEO Roger Altman.
The Congressman wrote last week also seeking recusal commitments in matters involving the RTC's investigation of Madison's collapse and relationship to Whitewater.
Mr. Leach's tone is cordial, but he thinks the inherent conflicts need to be faced:
"I have high regard for your personal integrity, but as you know, from the beginning, it has been an awkward situation to have a presidentially appointed and confirmed officer of the Treasury Department also head an independent federal agency, the RTC.
When this prospect was first suggested at the beginning of the Clinton Administration, it did not strike the Minority as overly unreasonable for a month or two given the fact that no RTC head had been selected.
"However, it has been over a year since the administration has been in office and it can only be described as structurally unseemly for a political appointee of an Executive branch department to make what are, in effect, law enforcement decisions for an independent federal agency as they may touch upon the President."
Finally, we have Mr. Ludwig, appointed by Mr. Clinton to head the comptroller's office, which regulates and examines national banks.
They attended Oxford and Yale together, and remain close.
Just how close the American Banker described in its Jan. 31 edition, reporting on a videotape taken at a Renaissance Weekend by someone from "Saturday Night Live" who was also there: "The tape featured Mr. Clinton.
But it was hard to miss Mr. Ludwig in a bright blue sweater and white shorts.
Almost every shot of the President showed the beaming comptroller at his shoulder."
So we have three Friends of Bill or Hillary calling signals, amid a blizzard of recusals, at three traditionally independent bank regulatory agencies.
Surely by now enough is known of the Clinton political mores to agree that we're past the point of simply passing all this through as of no consequence.
After the Savings and Loan scandal, BCCI, the Keating Five and now whatever Whitewater is, it ought to be at least clear that federal financial regulators should be held to a Caesar's wife standard of propriety and independence.
Instead, we get this.
We're quite used to the Clinton White House stonewalling or deriding anyone's inquiries or doubts about its behavior.
But we're glad that Senator Faircloth and Rep. Leach are persisting with their questions about the administration's appointment practices.
As we run the numbers, Renaissance Weekend plus Whitewater plus the RTC plus the Comptroller plus the FDIC plus regulatory independence does not compute.
