Classrooms with politicians as lecturers. . . .
Academic instruction aided by yoga. . . .
School doors open from dawn to dusk. . . .
Public schools run for profit.
Each of these concepts stands a fair chance of becoming reality in the state of Massachusetts.
A radical new state education law authorizes the establishment of up to 25 so-called charter schools -- public schools that receive state funding as well as some measure of autonomy from local school boards and the rules that govern conventional schools.
Charter schools already are operating in Minnesota and California, and five other states recently enacted charter-school legislation.
Advocates of such schools argue that they provide badly needed competition for existing public schools by giving anyone with a good education idea access to government funding, so long as they can attract students.
But Massachusetts' law has attracted particularly great interest among educators and potential operators because it provides greater independence from the educational establishment than elsewhere.
Unlike most other states, Massachusetts, not local school boards, will grant the charters -- reflecting a belief by state officials that the existing public-school system is incapable of making serious change.
Indeed, these officials say that the system has failed children and that parents, teachers and private companies should be given a chance to do better.
"I think it's the most exciting issue we have had in education in a long time," says Massachusetts Secretary of Education Piedad F. Robertson.
"We have been experimenting around the edges and finally we call it by a name and we have made it legal."
With applications to run the first charter schools due by Feb. 15, state officials say 33 different groups -- including Whittle Communications Inc.'s Edison Project and several other private companies -- have expressed interest in applying.
Although under the current law the first charter schools cannot open until September 1995, state officials are hoping to amend the law to allow some schools to open this fall and to eliminate the 25-school limit, but so far they have been unsuccessful.
Under the new law, public-school teachers in Massachusetts can take a two-year leave of absence to teach in charter schools.
The schools will be particularly attractive to public-school teachers "who have said, `Enough already.
We know exactly how we would run the circus,'" says Lisa Blout, the state's undersecretary of education.
As for potential operators, the Edison Project plans to propose at least one school, at first with elementary and middle-school grades but later expanding into high school, with a computer-aided curriculum including at least $3 million in technological tools.
Benno Schmidt, president of the Edison Project, says his company is talking with about a dozen Massachusetts municipalities and some local school boards about jointly applying for charters.
He says he hopes that cooperating with local boards will "galvanize support" for the school in the community.
Remediation & Educational Support Systems Inc., a closely held company in Swansea, Mass., that provides computerized educational services to schools in Puerto Rico and elsewhere, plans a new school, from kindergarten through high school, that stresses Hispanic culture and is expected to apply for a charter.
Elsewhere in the state, expected charter applicants include a consortium of six Boston arts colleges hoping to open the city's first visual and performing-arts high school.
Then there is a day-care center in Lawrence that wants to create an elementary school that would be open from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.
And a parent from Franklin plans to propose a "holistic" elementary and middle school that would "address learning with our heart, our heads, our hands."
Two public-school teachers in Chelsea want to start a school, grades seven through 12, that would stress civic values and would invite politicians into the classroom.
A group of African-American scientists and engineers wants to create an elementary and middle school that stresses math and science.
And the Swami Vivekananda International Foundation in Boston envisions a new school from kindergarten to post-high school that would combine the "best of Eastern thought and the best of Western thought," as well as yoga instruction, says Ramadheen Ramsamooj, the foundation's president.
For many of the prospective applicants, euphoria over the opportunity to create a new school is tempered by the reality of raising enough money to get it started.
While the law stipulates that charter schools will receive the same per-student aid as other public schools -- in Boston, for example, that's about $6,200 per student -- there is no provision for acquiring real estate, desks, textbooks or other start-up costs.
Dianne H. Russell, a Boston investment banker who is advising the Edison Project on low-cost financing alternatives, says she expects only applicants with the strongest proposals and "a demonstrated level of excellence in education" to succeed in obtaining funding from public or private sources.
Others, she believes, "will fall by the wayside."
State officials concede that buying, renting or leasing space is the biggest obstacle for new charter schools.
They say they may try to provide surplus state property, or find empty classrooms in public schools or colleges, or guarantee low-interest loans.
Massachusetts also is grappling with the issue of the separation of church and state.
Opponents of charter schools note that some of the schools' expected curricula and applicants appear to be religious in nature.
Careful legal review will therefore be necessary to determine an applicant's eligibility for public funding.
Among opponents to charter schools is Massachusetts' largest teachers' union.
Kathleen Kelley, president of the Massachusetts Federation of Teachers, says that because charter schools can restrict their enrollment to students who meet certain academic standards, they could end up "a set of separate, elite schools."
She adds that charter schools will drain resources from pre-existing schools.
But Dr. Robertson, the education secretary, counters that "we can't continue to fail children, which is what we're doing. . . .
This has the potential of not only delivering for children but also creating models that the rest of the public system can imitate."
-- An elementary school that would be open from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.
