Trade politics and tactical maneuvers among short-term market players will keep currency trading jumpy this week.
But the dollar's trend is bullish against both the mark and the yen, traders and analysts say.
Some dealers had expected a strong U.S. employment report Friday to prompt another tightening of monetary policy, boosting the dollar.
Though that didn't happen, few in the market question the trend toward stronger domestic growth and, eventually, higher rates.
Or toward lower European rates.
Notwithstanding the rise in European bond yields, the continent's recession is no less entrenched and its need for monetary easing no less pressing than it was late last year.
"How quickly German rates go down is not the issue," says Chester Ruben, senior foreign exchange dealer at Continental Bank in Chicago.
"Rates there are going lower, rates here are going higher, and that's all there is to it."
That rate shift, which makes dollar-denominated assets more appealing in comparison to German ones, points the dollar toward 1.75 to 1.80 marks, says Earl Johnson, foreign exchange adviser at Harris Trust & Savings Bank in Chicago.
But currency dealers won't start buying until central banks act, he says, and he doesn't expect rate changes from either the Federal Reserve Board or the Bundesbank until the end of March.
Many players also have tactical reasons for postponing dollar-buying.
Turmoil in European bond markets has left some players holding long dollar positions, taken to hedge against a rising U.S. currency, say economists and fund managers.
Players who have already sold unneeded dollars may be reluctant to leap back into the currency markets right away, especially as the end of the first quarter nears, traders add.
And traders who glean currency moves from price charts also say the dollar is due to retest the 1.6950-mark level, notes Mr. Johnson of Harris Bank.
Late Friday in New York, the dollar traded at 1.7190 marks and 105.65 yen, compared with 1.7105 marks and 103.95 yen Thursday.
About noon Monday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.68 yen and at 1.7232 marks.
Currency players are also confident about the dollar's long-term prospects against the yen, but expect the climb to be slower and bumpier than against the mark.
Over the next few weeks, they say, the dollar will be vulnerable to setbacks from every news item about escalating trade tensions between the U.S. and Japan.
The dollar's one-and-a-half-yen rise Friday was a function of aggressive intervention by the Bank of Japan, traders say.
Those gains, they say, may not withstand further turmoil on the trade front.
"What you saw Friday will go down in annals of currency trading as one of the best short squeezes ever," says David De Rosa, foreign exchange director at Swiss Bank Corp.
"But this was a special circumstance."
Not only did Japan's central bank launch repeated and vigorous attacks on the yen, he says, but it timed the move to capitalize on the critical mass of short dollar positions accumulated on news of reinstatement of the Super 301 trade measure.
The measure allows the Clinton administration to retaliate against trading partners perceived as engaging in unfair trade practices.
Although the bank's implacable defense of the 103-yen level will make yenbuyers wary this week, Swiss Bank's Mr. De Rosa says, currency players will still tend to respond to news of trade conflict by selling dollars.
"We'll go back to the old rule, that anything that smacks of trade friction should strengthen the yen, while relief should cause the dollar-yen to rise," he says.
