ELI LILLY PLANS to sell or spin off its entire medical-device business, according to people familiar with the decision.
The move to shed the nine companies with total annual sales of about $1.2 billion is the first indication of a change in course for Lilly under its new chairman, Randall Tobias.
The landscape of various medical fields would be altered by the plan, since Lilly owns the market leader or a strong No. 2 player in several areas.
Insurance companies braced for an onslaught of claims from earthquakeravaged Los Angeles that some experts said could reach $1 billion.
But the industry is expected to escape serious financial damage because of the nature of earthquake coverage, such as high premiums and deductibles.
China agreed to limit growth in its textile exports to the U.S. over three years.
U.S. Trade Representative Kantor said there was "no linkage" between the pact and other benefits, such as an extension of favored trade status, but said that it marks the beginning of a "healthier" relationship.
The U.S. is pushing Japan to agree to increase its purchases of U.S.-made auto parts by about 20% a year as the White House broadens its pressure on Japan to move on stalled trade talks.
Japan's cabinet endorsed a plan to open the nation's public-works market to foreign construction companies, in a bid to clear away one of its most nettlesome trade disputes with the U.S.
Grumman plans to close one-third of its factory space and trim about 400 jobs as part of a substantial restructuring, which includes a fourth-quarter charge of as much as $90 million.
The firm said more cuts are likely from its 8,000-member force as it faces future military-spending reductions.
A recovery in Europe appears to have begun, though it could be quite a while before business really picks up.
A European Union panel predicts 1.3% growth among its member states this year after a 0.4% contraction in 1993.
Viacom is preparing to raise its $9.3 billion bid for Paramount to stay in the contest with QVC, according to people familiar with the situation.
Woodward & Lothrop filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code.
Microware Systems landed a big multimedia-industry coup.
It designs the operating system used in the TV set-top boxes of all three suppliers named by Bell Atlantic for its aggressive rollout of interactive-TV service.
A former Prudential Securities product manager tied the firm's legal department directly to its limited-partnership scandal for the first time, people familiar with the inquiry said.
First Chicago reported a 27% increase in fourth-quarter profit, driven by strong credit-card earnings.
Dun & Bradstreet said the chairman of its A.C. Nielsen market-research unit, John C. Holt, resigned.
An Apple executive instrumental in launching a line of portable computers is leaving for Motorola, the latest in a string of high-level departures.
Alexander & Alexander's chairman quit, increasing the likelihood of an overhaul at the insurance broker.
Stocks: Volume 226,402,320 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 3870.29, up 3.09; transportation 1822.58, off 12.23; utilities 220.21, off 1.18.
Commodities: Oil $15.10 a barrel, up 32 cents.
Dow Jones futures index 142.14, off 0.51; spot index 130.41, up 0.13.
Dollar: 111.06 yen, unchanged; 1.7553 marks, up 0.0058.
