Paul Newman's star is fading -- at least among supermarket shoppers.
Not that Frank Sinatra and Phyllis George are doing much better.
Most celebrity brands are faring poorly these days.
Because of the weak economy, shoppers have become more price conscious, and celebrity products sell at premium prices.
But the poor performance of Mr. Newman's products, one of the rare celebrity food lines to succeed since its inception in 1982, may signal a more fundamental shift.
"I think we are just less impressed than we used to be," says Judith Langer, a consumer behavior expert in New York.
"There is so much price-shopping today -- people are much less willing to pay up unless they feel there is a good reason."
And deep blue eyes, it seems, aren't reason enough.
Supermarket sales of Newman's Own salad dressings, Mr. Newman's original product, declined 4.1% during the 52 weeks ended Oct. 10, compared with the same period last year, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
Sales of Newman's Own spaghetti sauces, lemonade and popcorn also declined.
The one bright spot in the line: Newman's Own All-Natural Bandito Salsa.
Frank Sinatra's and Tommy Lasorda's spaghetti sauces are also having a rocky time: The Sinatra products were licensed by a new company earlier this year, and the Lasorda products are about to get a new marketing firm.
Although both celebrities' sauces can be found on some supermarket shelves, their sales are plunging, according to Information Resources.
The heyday for celebrity brands in packaged goods was the mid-1980s, but even then they barely enjoyed their 15 minutes in the limelight.
Who remembers Gloria Vanderbilt salad dressing or Diane von Furstenberg facial tissues?
How about Bill Blass chocolates and Yves Saint Laurent cigarettes?
Many celebrity products failed simply because their quality wasn't good enough or because they were sold by tiny companies without much marketing clout.
The stream of new celebrity brands has slowed since then, but marketers haven't given up.
Newman's Own is testing pretzels on the West Coast.
And Tiny TKI Foods Inc., based in Springfield, Ill., which recently acquired the license for the Frank Sinatra line of sauces, is rolling out four new products, including a marsala sauce.
"The name gets consumers' attention," says Brenda Eden, marketing manager for the Sinatra line at TKI.
"There are thousands of items in the supermarket, and you've got about three seconds to get shoppers to take a second look."
Marketing experts say there's something to that theory.
A small company that can't afford national advertising would find it hard to get space on supermarket shelves for a new spaghetti sauce, for example.
But snag a celebrity that has some credibility to pitch the product, and it will wind up in at least a few shopping carts.
Another must: a big product category such as pasta sauce and salad dressings, with plenty of room for niche players.
"There are only a handful of candidates that are successful," says Richard Reiser, president of Cogito, a new-product development company in Tarrytown, N.Y.
"The celebrity must be a credible spokesman and the product must deliver."
Country-western entertainer Jimmy Dean made a hit with his line of breakfast sausages, which have been on the market since 1968, partly because his down-home image meshed nicely with the idea of big, hearty breakfasts.
Mr. Dean, who sold his company to Sara Lee Corp. in 1984, has also played an active role in promoting the products, appearing in commercials and on some of the packaging.
Mr. Newman struck a nerve with shoppers partly because he is liked by both men and women and the products are billed as natural.
But marketing experts also attribute the success of Newman's Own to its policy of donating its after-tax profits to charity, a strategy that makes some shoppers feel good about the items.
"People think he is a good guy, they find out it's a decent product and they know the money is going to charity," Mr. Reiser says.
"So why not buy it?"
Source: Information Resources Inc.
