Visitors from Japan, Russia, Brazil, Norway and other foreign lands have been streaming to this remote town in west Texas.
The attraction: a wireless telephone transmission system installed by GTE Corp. a year ago to provide Quitaque's local phone service, replacing an outdated mechanical switch system.
The new system doesn't make a clean break with the past.
Phones are still attached to wall jacks, so customers can't roam through town and stay connected.
But Quitaque (pronounced Kit-a-kway) offers a look at one facet of the telephone's wireless future: The system's central equipment trades wires on phone poles for antennas and transmitters, technology that could be cheaper for phone companies to install in some markets.
Quitaque's old system, installed two decades ago, was slow, unreliable and susceptible to storm outages, residents say.
The wireless system, which didn't increase their monthly fees, works better but still has some bugs.
"Your voice reverberates, so you can hear yourself talking," says Bob Myers Jr.
"And it can take five tries to get a call through.
Sometimes it just makes you angry."
GTE technicians have worked out some early glitches, such as fax-machine failures and service interruptions.
But two main problems remain: the echo Mr. Myers mentioned, and snags in data transmission over some types of modems.
"We've made improvements in both problems, but I wouldn't say they've been completely solved," says James Wakefield, a GTE supervisor.
Quitaque became a high-tech proving ground for two main reasons: GTE was planning to replace its aging phone system anyway, and its valley setting offered an ideal spot to test the wireless technology, which depends on a main antenna to transmit calls.
The wireless system is an amalgamation of things new (digital transmitters that compress signals) and old (the business-band FM radio frequencies used for years by taxi dispatchers).
In Quitaque, each home is wired to one of 20 "cluster" sites in back alleys.
The sites have one or two two-foot-long antennas that broadcast and receive calls to and from a 300-foot tower in nearby Turkey, Texas, the highest point in the area.
Each site also has a five-foot-tall cabinet holding 24 different receiving and broadcasting boxes -- each assigned to one phone line.
In outlying areas, each house has its own box and an antenna that "talks" to the Turkey tower; some of the homes were too remote to have phone service previously.
The boxes, made by Interdigital Communications of King of Prussia, Pa., convert outgoing analog phone signals to digital and then compress the data.
They also amplify signals before broadcasting them to the tower through an antenna over one of 12 frequencies GTE uses in Quitaque; each can carry four conversations.
For incoming transmission, the boxes reverse the process, translating digital signals into analog.
Security is assured, GTE says, because each box has its own security code, and anyone tuned to the frequency would pick up only an indecipherable stream of numbers.
Signal compression is necessary to conserve space on precious radio frequencies.
But it also means voice inflections are sometimes lost, GTE says.
Data transmission, too, is hampered because the system can't handle information as fast as fax machines and computers normally send it.
Warren Merrell, owner of the Venture Foods Grocery Store, had trouble sending orders to his distributor by computer until GTE switched his modem back to a wired phone circuit.
Despite the problems, GTE has placed the wireless technology in its portfolio of upgrade options.
"Taking it to other communities is a possibility," says Larry Brown, group manager of transmission standardization.
"We will go forward with more applications if the technological and economic parameters work out."
Proponents of wireless technology point to cost as its big edge.
"If we were to start over from scratch, we would use a lot of wireless," says Peter Huber, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, a New York think tank.
Wireless systems can be installed for $500 to $600 a customer, he says.
That contrasts with as much as $2,500 a customer for land-line systems and about $1,000 a customer for cellular systems, which essentially put the radio in the phone rather than in the alley and untether customers to make and take calls on the go.
But others argue that the future of local phone service is in fiber-optic cables, or the coaxial cables of cable-television systems.
In urban areas, laying cable or wire to customers is usually cost-effective, and radio frequencies are more cluttered, leading many analysts to predict only a narrow market for the type of system GTE is testing in Quitaque.
"I think we'll see limited application, in areas that are difficult or uneconomic to reach," says Larry Vanston, president of Technology Futures, a forecasting firm in Austin, Texas.
Still, Quitaque's system has sparked enough interest for O.R. Stark Jr., president of the town's First National Bank, to get some probing calls.
Officials from other phone companies, cellular companies and "some that don't even tell you who they are" call inquiring about the wireless system, he says.
"`Are you satisfied?
How's it going?'
They haven't called GTE, but they sure talk to people here."
Mr. McCartney is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Dallas bureau.
