So the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. has determined that Webb Hubbell and the Rose Law firm violated no conflict-of-interest rules when they worked both sides of the street regarding Madison Guaranty S&L of Little Rock in the 1980s.
The FDIC's eight-page opinion makes some facts clear: Rose had previously represented Madison before state securities regulators.
In doing so it had presented audits prepared by Frost & Co.
Then Rose and Mr. Hubbell signed up to represent the government in a suit against Frost over its Madison audits.
There is no record that Rose told the FDIC about its previous representation of Madison.
Mr. Hubbell and another Rose partner say they remember oral disclosures, but the FDIC personnel involved have no recollection of them.
The FDIC verdict: No conflict here.
When Rose offered the Frost audit to regulators in 1985, the FDIC opinion says, "There is no indication in the records, or based on our review, that the Firm did anything more with respect to the audit in question than take it at face value."
And "there is no evidence that the Firm had a close relationship with the S&L;" (To judge by the opinion, the Whitewater partnership between Rose partner Hillary Clinton and Madison owner James McDougal escaped the notice of the FDIC's legal eagles.)
And since in 1985 Rose represented the S&L, and in 1989 represented the conservator who took over the S&L after seizure, the interests in the two cases are not "directly adverse."
Somehow it seems to us the interests of a conservator trying to clean up a mess are pretty much adverse to the interests of the folks responsible for making the mess.
Indeed, who needs a legal opinion to explain what is clearly a conflict on its face?
Having been involved itself, Rose might have an interest in bailing out its former business associates; Rose in fact settled the suit against Frost in 1991 for $1 million, according to several reports much less than the limit of Frost's insurance.
Alternatively, Rose might have an interest in protecting itself by blaming other parties for all mistakes.
If this isn't a conflict of interest, what is?
But we guess that Arkansas rules now apply at the FDIC, even before the advent of Hillary buddy Ricki Tigert.
So it only seems fair that everyone caught up in the S&L maelstrom of the 1980s gets the benefit of these new, more forgiving Arkansas standards of ethics.
A different set of rules applied to law firms that had represented wayward S&Ls, remember, before FOBs started turning up in headlines.
Candidate Clinton proclaimed in his 1991 announcement speech that, "When the ripoff artists looted our S&Ls, the president was silent.
In a Clinton Administration, when people sell their companies and their workers and their country down the river, they'll get called on the carpet."
And indeed, word of a new, relaxed standard has spread slowly.
The day before the FDIC exonerated Rose over Madison, the Resolution Trust Corp. filed a $400 million suit against Streich Lang, a prominent Phoenix law firm that had represented Western Savings and Loan Association.
Some of its partners, the RTC alleged, personally profited from the fake sale of some of its properties.
The firm's managing director pointed out that the RTC has sued "some of the finest law firms across the country," and that the Phoenix suit "is consistent with the government litigation strategy regarding RTC takeovers."
The granddaddy of these cases concerned Kaye, Scholer, a New York firm that represented Charlie Keating's Lincoln S&L: It was coerced into a $41 million settlement in 1991 when the government froze its assets.
The Kaye, Scholer case raised interesting questions in how far a firm can go in making representations for a client the firm does not itself believe.
Regulators believe the firm lied to them, but a disciplinary committee of the New York bar has since looked into the case and found no evidence that any Kaye, Scholer partner violated ethical rules.
Yet the firm was not allowed to defend itself.
John Feerick, dean of Fordham School of Law, says the asset seizure was a "gross abuse of power."
This action, he adds, "effectively took away the ability of the law firm to defend itself and forced it into a settlement."
Now that the FDIC has cleared the Rose Firm and Webb Hubbell, we hope it plans to give Kaye, Scholer its money back.
Otherwise the lesson of the FDIC memo is that Arkansas forbearance applies only to firms that included the Associate Attorney General and the First Lady.
But the same old ferocious rules will apply to ordinary mortals.
