The value of construction contracts continued to wane for the second consecutive month, slumping 4% in December, an F.W. Dodge survey reported.
Despite the recent slump, total construction for 1993 rose by 5% to $264 billion.
This comes on top of 1992's 9% gain from 1991.
"The subdued quality of the current rebound certainly fits in well with the `slow-growth' 1990s," said Robert A. Murray, vice president of economic affairs and chief economist for F.W. Dodge, the forecasting unit of McGraw-Hill Inc.
"Hopefully the smaller initial gains we've witnessed so far will also translate into an extended recovery period."
The report said the Dodge index, which uses 1987 as a base year of 100, fell to 102 on a seasonally adjusted basis, down from November's revised reading of 106.
In 1993, the index peaked at 108 in October.
"Even with the slackening at year's end, the generally stronger performance during the second half of 1993 put the construction recovery back on track," Mr. Murray noted.
"After a lackluster first half of the year, when it appeared the upturn might be in danger of stalling out, the benefits of low mortgage rates finally came through with a surge of single-family housing.
Whether the stronger pace of recovery can continue into 1994 will depend on how well other types of construction can follow the lead of housing."
For the year, nonresidential building was essentially unchanged from the previous year but remained 18% below 1989's most recent peak in dollar volume.
Institutional building fell 2% last year, largely because of fiscal constraints on publicly funded construction for the second consecutive year.
But the commercial sector was able to push forward 3%, led by an 11% jump in stores and shopping centers.
Office building in 1993 saw its first gain since 1987, rising 3%, the report noted.
"While the current level of office construction remains dismal by any measure, at least it's no longer exerting a downward pull on the rest of the industry," Mr. Murray said.
Residential construction for the year advanced 9% as single-family housing during the second half of 1993 "re-established its role as the recovery's leading edge," the report noted.
The dollar value of single-family housing in the fourth quarter was about 20% above the levels reported in the first half.
Regionally, most of 1993's gains were reported in the South Central, which posted an 11% increase, and the South Atlantic, which climbed 8%.
The Midwest matched the national gain of 5% while the West grew a scant 1%.
The Northeast, however, reported a 1% decline.
Want to know what they really talk about at those closed-door meetings at the ultraserious Federal Reserve?
Gold, for one thing, and the fact that the U.S. government considers the basement of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, where gold bars are stored, to be a foreign country.
This can now be told because the Fed, responding to a Freedom of Information request, sent this newspaper a heavily bowdlerized transcript of the Dec. 2 meeting of its policy committee.
Most of the 66 pages are largely or entirely blank because the Fed argues that much of what it discusses is too sensitive for release.
That includes almost everything said at the meeting about the economy.
Jerry Jordan, Cleveland Fed president, did report that "the situation in my part of the country brightened considerably" since the last Fed meeting; it turned out he was talking about the weather.
"The sun came out very briefly," said Mr. Jordan.
The transcript also records that after the Fed's top international staffer, Edwin Truman, gave a routine report, Chairman Alan Greenspan asked incredulously: "Did I hear you correctly when you said that the gold exports in October appear to have come from the coffers of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York?"
It seems that some 80 central banks and other institutions store gold bars -- valued at some $120 billion -- in vaults in the New York Fed's basement.
The New York Fed "is treated as a foreign country" in Census Bureau data, Mr. Truman explained, much as embassies are treated as foreign territory.
At least one of the central bankers laughed -- or so the transcript records.
"You mean a country owns gold and has it stored in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and they ship it out, that's an export?" asked Fed governor Wayne Angell, who considers himself something of an expert on gold.
Yes, Mr. Truman explains, but government books also record it as an import so it's basically a wash.
Fed governor Edward Kelley asked then-New York Fed President Gerald Corrigan, "Does it have to get out of your vault at all in order to be considered an import and an export?"
"Well," Mr. Corrigan replied for the record, "I'm not even going to try to answer that."
