Hungary's two privatization agencies will be merged in a move to accelerate the sale of remaining state assets, according to privatization officials.
The overhaul of the State Property Agency and its sister organization, the State Asset Holding Agency, or AVRT, comes as the privatization effort enters its final phase before a general election scheduled for May.
It also occurs amid attempts by the government to spur domestic share ownership through incentives and easy credit terms.
Officials forecast that the reorganization will lead to quicker sales in the first half of the year of state companies considered to be the last of Hungary's crown jewels -- such as utilities, the oil and gas company, pharmaceutical manufacturers and several banks -- all of which are under AVRT control.
It also will allow assets from these companies to be easily moved into a soon-to-be launched Small Investors Program, which is aimed at encouraging Hungarian participation in privatization and other "people's capitalism" projects, such as share issues on the Budapest Stock Exchange.
Observers say consolidation was inevitable in light of recent legal and policy squabbles between the two agencies.
One, which involved who owns and has the right to sell the state electricity utility, called into question why two separate organizations exist.
The AVRT, which was spun off from the SPA in 1992, is responsible for partially privatizing strategic state companies and managing what remains; the SPA sells off state assets in their entirety.
Both agencies are, in fact, in the doldrums.
Except for the one spectacular $875 million sale of 30% of the telephone company late last year to a German-U.S. consortium, the AVRT has lagged behind the SPA and currently holds 162 companies valued at an estimated 1.4 trillion forints ($13.72 billion).
Yet the SPA also is facing a slowdown in hard-currency cash sales after an impressive start, largely because it is running out of hot properties.
From a total of about 2,000 companies when it began operations almost four years ago, the SPA's portfolio has dwindled to 764 firms valued at 430 billion forints.
Many are debt-ridden and need costly restructuring before buyers can be found.
