The Office of Thrift Supervision declared a moratorium on takeovers of mutual savings associations while it considers possible new rules aimed at protecting the interests of those institutions' depositors.
Although the acquiring bank and the mutual savings bank's managers may benefit from a takeover, the depositors, who own the mutual bank, could wind up with little gain, or even a drop in the value of their holdings, the Treasury Department unit said.
When the depositors' ownership in their institution is converted to shares of the acquirer, any appreciation in that stock tends to be moderate, the OTS said.
Jonathan Fiechter, OTS acting director, said his agency also will review its regulations governing conversions of mutual savings banks to stockholder-owned savings institutions, when no takeover is involved, but won't hold up acting on applications for those conversions.
Mr. Fiechter has said OTS rules for such conversions favor depositors by protecting their rights when their institution converts to a stock savings bank, but he noted that some recent transactions "have raised concerns over how well depositor interests have been served."
Those deals included a conversion plan by Green Point Savings Bank, a unit of GP Financial Corp.
Last week, the New York state banking department rebuked the savings bank, saying top executives were seeking to enrich themselves by the conversion while failing to make sure the bank was valued fairly.
The department imposed a long list of stringent conditions on the conversion plan.
Meanwhile, Mr. Fiechter said, "It is my hope that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. will move promptly to adopt a similar moratorium for thrifts under its supervision, thereby reducing the pressure on OTS-supervised thrifts to change to state charters to avoid the OTS moratorium."
The FDIC last week issued a proposed policy statement aimed at preventing windfalls by insiders when mutual savings banks under FDIC jurisdiction convert to stockholder-owned institutions.
But two of the three FDIC board members, including Mr. Fiechter, while voting for the proposal, said the plan is too weak, and advocated that the FDIC instead adopt OTS-type regulations.
The FDIC currently has no regulations covering such conversions.
Andrew Hove, acting chairman of the FDIC, told the House Financial Institutions subcommittee last week that the FDIC is considering urging or requiring, for certain thrifts that it regulates, that stock-purchase rights be issued to depositors in a conversion.
They could then sell the rights, to capture any "windfall" from capital raised in the conversion, Mr. Hove said.
All federally chartered savings and loan associations and savings banks, along with state-chartered S&Ls, are regulated by the OTS.
The FDIC oversees state-chartered savings banks, but because rules are lacking for conversions by those institutions to stock savings banks, often-weak state regulations prevail.
Many thrifts have changed their charters in recent years, becoming state-chartered banks and escaping OTS regulation.
But the OTS still regulates about 800 mutual savings institutions.
Rep. Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas), the House Banking Committee chairman, yesterday urged the OTS to consider "ways to expand the benefits of conversions to the depositors."
He said "the FDIC would do well to follow the OTS's lead" to prevent "savings bank insiders from choosing the regulator whose rules permit the insiders to get richest."
Leaders of the House and Senate banking committees have offered legislation that would restrict insider gains in the savings bank conversions.
