Call it redemption advertising: A bunch of losers -- sports figures, celebrities and even politicians who suffered well-publicized career setbacks or embarrassing incidents -- are popping up in advertising.
The commercials are usually self-deprecating and focus on the incident that set the star's career spiraling downward.
Chevy Chase, who was booted from his late-night talk show after only six weeks; Kathleen Sullivan, who was fired as cohost of "CBS This Morning"; and former Vice President Dan Quayle, who was the subject of endless ridicule, all appear in ads calling attention to their flubs.
The latest example of a loser spokesman is basketball star Chris Webber.
In an ad scheduled to start airing March 21 during a basketball game on the TBS cable network, Mr. Webber, a forward for the Golden State Warriors, pokes fun at a costly mistake he made in last year's NCAA championship game between the University of Michigan Wolverines and the North Carolina Tarheels.
Mr. Webber, then a player at Michigan, called a timeout when his team didn't have any timeouts left.
In the commercial for Logo 7 sportswear, Mr. Webber speaks one line into the camera and then walks off the set.
A befuddled director enters the frame and informs Mr. Webber he still has a lot of time left to conclude the spot.
Mr. Webber just smiles and says he isn't getting fooled by any practical joke.
Mr. Webber couldn't be reached for comment; but Tom Shine, president of Logo 7 in Indianapolis, says Mr. Webber was willing to make the commercial "because he realizes one mistake doesn't make a career.
When we presented him with the idea, he wanted to do it instantly.
There was no hesitation."
"There is no downside for us," he adds.
"We wanted to take a liability and turn it into an asset."
(Indeed, Mr. Webber's career has been redeemed.
He is a contender for the National Basketball Association's Rookie of the Year award.)
Using so-called losers in ads isn't new.
Years ago, American Express used William E. Miller, who ran as the vice presidential running mate of Sen. Barry Goldwater in 1964, asking, "Do you know me?"
But not everyone agrees that the strategy is worthwhile.
On the one hand, marketing experts say it enables some people to identify with highly paid and well-known individuals who flubbed.
But some marketing gurus question associating a product with someone perceived as ineffectual in his or her job.
"You have to assume that consumers know enough about the mistake to make the commercial meaningful," says Steven E. Permut, president of Marketing Sciences, a marketing and consulting firm in Guilford, Conn.
"These kinds of ads are weak excuses for not having a strong creative platform."
But what if you've already hired the spokesman when he blows it?
That's what happened with Frito-Lay and Mr. Chase, who suffered perhaps the most humiliating downfall with his late-night talk show on Fox, a unit of News Corp., last September.
The show and his performance were a blueprint for failure, critics said, noting that the star failed to interact effectively with his guests.
As Mr. Chase's talk show was flaming out, executives at PepsiCo's Frito-Lay unit were hatching ideas on how to use the comedian, who had appeared last August in a commercial for Doritos Tortilla Thins, in a second ad.
In the second commercial, which will run on television through this month, Mr. Chase gets canceled as an advertising spokesman by Hollywood executives wearing sunglasses and carrying charts showing his popularity plummeting.
As the ad ends, Mr. Chase is left with a single chip.
"Tough year," he says deadpan into the camera.
"Good chip."
Tod MacKenzie, vice president of advertising at Frito-Lay, concedes that the first thought that ran through the minds of Frito executives was the risk that would be associated with the commercial.
"We also didn't know whether anyone would make the connection between the talk show which was canceled in October and late January when the spot premiered in the Super Bowl."
Mr. Chase was "enthusiastic" about the concept but proceeded only after he "did a reality check with his family," says Mr. MacKenzie.
"He got validation from them and he loved doing the spot.
It was turning a negative into a positive.
It was a great way to come back after the talk show."
Carol M. Morgan, president of Strategic Directions Group, a Minneapolis-based marketing-consulting firm, says the commercial may have been effective therapy not only for Mr. Chase but for some viewers as well.
"The commercials identify with the part of us that feels we're not good enough," she says.
"It's good strategy if done without a heavy hand.
These are famous people, we know them and they screwed up in some way.
It shows no one has to be perfect."
Like Mr. Chase, Mr. Quayle also didn't hesitate to participate in an ad for Frito-Lay's Wavy Lay's potato chips.
(Mr. Quayle once encouraged a child to misspell "potato" during a school spelling bee.)
Also like Mr. Chase, Mr. Quayle asked his family whether making the spot would be a good move.
Unlike Mr. Chase, however, Mr. Quayle's commercial aired only once, during the Super Bowl.
"You do have to be careful who you pitch an idea to," says Mr. MacKenzie.
"You have to make sure the person has a thick skin and can take the joke."
Marketing experts caution further that the commercials should show an upbeat resolution.
"You don't want the product's user to be depicted as a jerk at the end of the ad," says Hal Ross, president of Mapes & Ross, a Princeton, N.J., communications-research company.
But there are exceptions to that: PepsiCola, for example, makes sure it capitalizes on the fact that Rodney Dangerfield, the comedian whose claim to fame is that he doesn't get any respect, comes off as a buffoon.
In new ads, he is shown with his bulging eyes and making his trademark gesture of grabbing his necktie while the voice of supermodel Cindy Crawford comes out of his mouth.
Mr. Permut of Marketing Sciences, for one, would rather not see Mr. Dangerfield, or any other celebrity, capitalizing on the so-called loser image.
Such spokesmen distract attention from the advertiser's message, he says, advising: "Save your money and focus on good creative strategy."
Ameritech, the Midwest Baby Bell, tapped Leo Burnett, Chicago, to create advertising for its consumer telephone services, a $40 million account previously handled by Chicago shop Tatham Euro RSCG.
Burnett, which came late to the pitch, bested the incumbent and another Chicago shop, Bayer Bess Vanderwarker.
Still in review is Ameritech's media buying business, with billings of $50 million, currently handled by Bayer Bess.
Separately, Burnett also was named the ad agency for Healthy Choice from Kellogg, a ready-to-eat cereal produced under a licensing agreement announced yesterday between Kellogg and ConAgra.
Billings couldn't be determined.
Ad Notes. . . .
REVIEW: J.M. Smucker Co., of Orrville, Ohio, said it has put into review its estimated $15 million advertising account, currently handled by the New York office of Cleveland shop Wyse Advertising.
Participants are believed to include Leo Burnett, Chicago, and Wyse.
FINALISTS: Stride Rite Corp.'s Keds unit named four finalists in the pitch for its $15 million to $20 million ad account: Arnold Fortuna Lawner & Cabot, Boston; Hill Holliday Connors Cosmopulos, Boston; Kirshenbaum & Bond, New York; and the New York office of WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather.
The incumbent, Leonard Monahan Lubars & Kelly of Providence, R.I., isn't participating.
A decision is expected in April.
SPRINT: Sprint has eliminated Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York, from its search for a second ad agency, executives said.
Backer's exit leaves three big New York agencies -- Grey Advertising, Interpublic Group's Lintas, and Wells Rich Greene BDDP -- to battle for the estimated $30 million business-to-business assignment.
Sprint said it plans to have a decision in April.
WHO'S NEWS: Darryl Lindberg was named to the new post of managing director and chief operating officer of TracyLocke, the Dallas office of Omnicom Group's DDB Needham.
Mr. Lindberg, 42 years old, previously headed the agency's operations in Sydney, Australia.
