Lawyers in several states are mounting challenges to their bar associations, complaining that the groups impinge on lawyers' freedom by pushing pro bono work or espousing political causes.
The effort has gained the most momentum in Florida, where 500 lawyers have formed an insurgent group that is seeking to take away most of the bar association's power.
"They're violating our rights as citizens," said Henry Trawick, cofounder of the group that is lobbying against the 50,600-member Florida Bar, the nation's fourth-largest bar association.
Currently, the Florida Bar regulates and disciplines lawyers under the supervision of the state Supreme Court.
The renegades, who call themselves the Attorneys' Bar Association, are seeking a state constitutional amendment that would put lawyer regulation in the hands of a state regulatory agency supervised by the legislature.
Meanwhile, lawyers in other states have taken their professional associations to task for publishing magazines and doing other work besides simply regulating attorneys.
This month, Virginia insurgents helped persuade state lawmakers to place a freeze on increases in bar dues.
In Washington state, a group of bar members are trying, so far unsuccessfully, to reduce the bar's activities.
In New Mexico, the bar is tied up in litigation over how it spends dues and reports that spending.
But only in Florida do lawyers want a different agency to regulate and discipline them.
The agency they have chosen already regulates doctors, accountants and various other professionals.
The debate is tinged with concerns over what some lawyers see as "politically correct" bar association programs.
Many lawyers, for instance, are chafing under a state Supreme Court suggestion in June that they provide 20 hours of pro bono work -- free legal assistance to the needy -- every year.
The state Supreme Court suggested that lawyers who couldn't do the work contribute $350 to a legal-aid group.
The state bar plans to ask lawyers every year whether they contributed the voluntary 20 hours or $350.
"The last time I read the U.S. Constitution, it said there was something in there about involuntary servitude, and that's exactly what we've got," said Mr. Trawick, a general civil practitioner in Sarasota who used to be active in the Florida Bar.
Some attorneys also are upset that interest earned on certain business accounts they hold -- money that formerly was absorbed by banks -- now is automatically swept into a fund for legal services for the poor.
Mr. Trawick complained that the money is parceled out by "a group of very liberal elitists."
Bar spokesman Jerry Butterfield responded that "one person's liberal cause is another person's justice in America."
Other lawyers resent having to take 30 hours of legal-education classes every three years.
Some bristle at the bar's decision to consider a specific rule about lawyer-client sex.
A few are exasperated that the state Supreme Court in 1992 ordered them to use recycled paper for court filings.
Still others resent a 1993 state Supreme Court rule barring discrimination by lawyers on the basis of "race, ethnicity, gender, religion, national origin, disability, marital status, sexual orientation, age, socioeconomic status, employment or physical characteristics."
Some say the bar disciplines lawyers too harshly; others say the opposite is true.
The Florida Bar defends its activities and argues that having lawmakers oversee lawyers would violate the Constitution's separation of powers between the judicial and legislative branches.
"The Florida Bar is very self-conscious of its socially responsible role in overseeing the legal profession," said Mr. Butterfield, the bar spokesman.
He added that the renegade attorneys should think about whether they want politicians to regulate them.
"Under these days and times, I could see legislators posturing, saying, `Let's kick lawyers in the head,'" he said.
William F. Blews, a sole practitioner in St. Petersburg and president-elect of the bar, said: "Everybody wants to just ride the range free and not have any control on them or anything else, but that's not in the best interests of society."
The proposed amendment isn't expected to get out of a state Senate committee this year, but Mr. Trawick said supporters have momentum for another try in the future.
"There's a movement around the country in our favor," he said.
"We are not the only state that is looking to go back."
Cable News Network Inc. was charged with criminal contempt of court for its 1990 broadcast of taped jailhouse telephone conversations between Manuel Noriega and his attorneys.
The complaint, filed in U.S. District Court in Miami by a special U.S. prosecutor, states that CNN, a unit of Turner Broadcasting System Inc., "knowingly and willfully" disobeyed an order by Judge William M. Hoeveler.
That order, issued in November 1990, while the deposed Panamanian ruler was awaiting trial on drug-trafficking charges, prohibited any broadcast of the tapes.
In court yesterday, attorneys for CNN pleaded not guilty at an arraignment before Judge Hoeveler.
Trial was set for July 11.
In a prepared statement issued from Turner headquarters in Atlanta, CNN said it "welcomes the opportunity for Judge Hoeveler to hear all the evidence in this matter, and believes it will not be found to have violated any of the court's orders."
Officials at CNN said the charge is only against the company, and not against any individual.
Thus, according to one attorney for CNN, the only penalty could be a fine levied by the court.
Officials in the U.S. attorney's office in Miami declined to comment.
For First Amendment experts, the special prosecutor's action came as the second major surprise in CNN's battles with the court.
The first occurred in 1990, after CNN broadcast excerpts of Mr. Noriega's conversations that had been taped by officials at a federal jail near Miami, where he was being held.
When Judge Hoeveler issued his order barring further telecasts of privileged attorney-client conversations, CNN continued the broadcasts and asked for a stay of the order from the U.S. Supreme Court.
But the high court -- in a departure from previous First Amendment decisions -- refused the network's request.
Yesterday, attorneys and legal scholars questioned whether the government would prevail in its case.
"There is a heavy assumption against prior restraint" on the news media, noted Lee Levine, a private communications lawyer in Washington.
"Even if CNN violated the order," he said, "it had a good-faith basis to do so, until the Supreme Court" refused the request for a stay.
Judge Hoeveler eventually lifted the ban on the broadcast of the tapes, noting at the time that airing the tapes wouldn't endanger Mr. Noriega's constitutional right to receive a fair trial.
Law Notes. . . .
A New York law that limits how much physicians can charge Medicare recipients was upheld by the state's highest court, the Associated Press reported.
The 6-0 decision means there will be no changes in fees for poor elderly recipients of Medicare.
The law capping fees was adopted by the state legislature in 1990 and has been enforced by the state Health Department while the court fight was going on. . . .
New York's top court also upheld the mandatory-sentencing aspect of the state's tough drug laws.
The state Court of Appeals ruled that mandatory sentences had to be imposed on defendants even if judges disagreed and even if the laws may not have done much to cut drug sales.
Glenn Ruffenach contributed to this article.
