Hewlett-Packard Co., best known for its computer printers and workstations, is posing its first serious challenge in the personal-computer market.
Last year it more than doubled its world-wide PC sales, to about 640,000 from 305,000 in 1992, according to estimates by International Data Corp., a market-research firm in Framingham, Mass.
That puts it just a nose behind mail-order star Gateway 2000 Inc., which held the No. 10 spot in market share for 1993; H-P was 17th in 1992.
Now it has proclaimed that it intends to be in the top five by next year.
"There is no company their size or larger in PC shipments that has grown as fast," says Eric Lewis, manager of PC hardware research for International Data.
While H-P is the U.S.'s second-largest computer maker in terms of revenue, its PC business was a sideshow until mid-1992.
As competitors such as Compaq Computer Corp. rapidly gained market share, H-P fumbled, offering overpriced, narrowly marketed machines.
But with PC sales growing faster than any other part of the hardware industry, H-P decided less than two years ago to go after the market with gusto, chopping prices and marketing aggressively.
"If you want to be a major computer company, you have to have a significant presence in personal computers," says Bob Frankenberg, vice president and general manager of H-P's personal-information-products group.
He notes that PCs now account for more than half of world-wide computer-hardware sales.
H-P is emerging just as other big computer makers push harder into the PC business.
"The PC is one of the only attractive sectors in terms of growth," says Philippe de Marcillac, director of world-wide PC research for Dataquest Inc., a market-research firm.
"It is also a market that is far from saturated."
Digital Equipment Corp. last year more than doubled its PC shipments, and market leader International Business Machines Corp. has boosted share through a recently started personal-computer division.
Meanwhile, H-P's prowess in PCs comes after past failures.
The company introduced a line of PCs in the early 1980s that never gained much popularity, largely because they weren't compatible with the IBM PC standard.
After switching to IBM compatibility in the mid-1980s, however, sales still languished, since H-P's prices were as much as one-third higher than those of rivals.
"The differentiation was in quality and reliability," Mr. Frankenberg says.
"Some customers did appreciate that, but not enough."
At a sales meeting in June 1992, H-P executives decided to cut prices drastically.
But that meant getting costs in line.
It closed manufacturing operations in Brazil and in Guadalajara, Mexico, and cut its PC staff 40% (most went to other divisions within the company).
"It felt a bit like jumping blindfolded off a springboard, hoping there was water in the pool," Mr. Frankenberg says.
Then the new pricing strategy received a hand from an unlikely source: Compaq.
The Houston PC maker started a price war in the summer of 1992, forcing brand-name competitors such as IBM and Apple Computer Inc. to lop prices.
At that time, H-P's high-end personal computer sold for about $8,000 and the competition's for about $5,800.
By the end of last year, the same units cost less than $2,000 each.
With the price war, prices on brand-name models fell close to those of "clone" machines made by smaller companies, sending customers rushing to buy brandname computers-including H-P's.
"Why not buy a Mercedes if you can get it for the same price as a Yugo?"
Mr. Frankenberg says.
In the flood of business last year, vendors such as IBM and Compaq couldn't keep up with demand.
H-P had earlier expanded its sales effort from smaller, niche dealers to include big outlets such as ComputerLand Corp. and MicroAge Inc.
It was thus positioned as a brand-name alternative that large dealers could recommend.
With an ample inventory, it was able to accommodate the new business.
"They got our attention and the customer's attention," says Alan Bernheimer, a vice president of Pleasanton, Calif.-based ComputerLand.
The company credits not only aggressive pricing for its PC turnaround, but also a new-product cycle that was shortened to six months from 18 months.
H-P also added features to some models, including a "coffee break" button that lets a user blank the screen -- deterring prying eyes -- without turning off the whole machine.
That feature alone, the company said, was responsible for the sale of 75,000 units to bankers, insurance companies and financial concerns.
The company said it doesn't provide a breakdown of revenue by product category, for competitive reasons.
Besides PCs, H-P makes printers, workstations and mass-storage devices.
Despite its successes, meeting its goal of becoming a top-five PC maker will be tough, because its competitors are also growing quickly.
Compaq, No. 3 worldwide in PC shipments, nearly doubled shipments in 1993, to three million from a year-earlier 1.6 million.
Apple, No. 2 behind IBM, also boosted its shipments last year by nearly one-third, to 3.6 million.
Other top-10 vendors AST Research Inc., Dell Computer Corp. and Packard Bell Electronics Inc. also grew significantly last year.
"I think the prospects for H-P are very good as it relates to its ability to deal with third-tier clones," says David Boucher, a vice president of IBM's PC unit for the Americas, "but the question will be whether they have the staying power . . . in a very tough, margin-sensitive business."
The true test for H-P, analysts say, will be when it and other PC makers finish absorbing market share from smaller competitors and turn their guns on one another.
With most leading manufacturers well-equipped to compete with one another, "market-share gains will be more difficult in the next two years," says Todd Bakar, senior technology analyst for Hambrecht & Quist.
"It's going to be a dogfight."
