Japan's biggest electronics concerns, mired in one of their worst-ever slumps for much of the past three years, may be starting to see some light at the end of the tunnel.
Of the seven largest electronics companies in Japan, three -- NEC Corp., Fujitsu Ltd. and Sony Corp. -- are expecting to reverse several years of shrinking profits with positive, if slender, gains in consolidated pretax profit in the year ending March 31.
Another big company, Toshiba Corp., said it is considering raising its earnings forecast for that period, although the company won't yet say whether positive earnings growth will result.
To many analysts, these signs suggest that Japan's battered electronics sector might finally be picking itself up after its long plunge from grace -- a fall prompted by a dearth of hit products, structural changes in the computer industry and the Japanese recession.
"To a certain extent, the worst is over," said Lee Kerk Phua, an analyst with Baring Securities (Japan) Ltd., who predicted that earnings in the sector will improve an additional 20% to 30% in the coming fiscal year.
Analysts generally credit the fact that several key product sectors -- most notably semiconductors, but also communications equipment and even the long-stagnant consumer-electronics market -- are showing signs of life as a result of cyclical recovery.
At the same time, the electronics concerns' cost-cutting measures are starting to take effect.
On Tuesday, for instance, Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. reported that consolidated pretax profit during its fiscal third period fell 3.3% to 47 billion yen ($443.6 million) from 49 billion yen in the year-earlier period, on sales that declined 6.3% to 1.764 trillion yen from 1.883 trillion.
Analysts generally hailed the results as evidence that Matsushita's cost cutting is beginning to reverse its profit slide.
Matsushita also lowered its pretax profit forecast for the year ending March 31 to 120 billion yen from its earlier projection of 150 billion yen, citing an extraordinary charge it will take to bail out NL Finance Co., a troubled financial-services subsidiary.
To be sure, the electronics-industry recovery so far is weak and could easily be derailed.
Should the yen strengthen again, for instance, earnings at these export-intensive companies would be the first casualty.
A high yen makes Japanese exports more expensive overseas, and reduces the yen-denominated value of overseas sales.
Similarly, few analysts believe that the expected rise in earnings will help the companies much in the long run unless they also deal with long-standing inefficiencies such as overstaffing and overly broad product lines.
"The only thing I'm concerned about is that these companies will get lulled into a false sense of security and won't press forward with the substantial restructuring they need," said Peter Wolff, an analyst with CS First Boston (Japan) Ltd., who added that he doesn't see any signs of overconfidence yet.
For now, however, many analysts are simply glad to see the electronics firms struggle to their feet, even if their footing is shaky.
The turnaround is most noticeable at Fujitsu and NEC, which both ran consolidated pretax losses last year, in part because of a "downsizing" trend away from expensive mainframe computers to smaller machines such as workstations and personal computers.
Both companies have benefited handsomely from a powerful upturn in the semiconductor market, as well as from demand for telecommunications equipment.
NEC and Fujitsu have also pursued effective cost-cutting programs, analysts say.
Fujitsu, for instance, said its personnel costs have started to fall as its attrition strategy starts to take effect, and added that it will end up cutting research and development spending by 10% to 15% this year as a result of consolidating research projects.
Sony and Matsushita, by contrast, may see some earnings growth as a result of replacement demand for audio products and wide-screen television sets, but still desperately need new hit products, analysts say.
Chuck Goto of S.G. Warburg (Japan) Inc., for instance, thinks that Sony next year may begin seeing some financial returns on its MiniDisc product, which plays 2.5-inch recordable compact disks.
Matsushita's main new offerings, by contrast -- a flat-screen TV and a "multimedia" game player designed by 3DO Co. -- have so far fallen flat.
Most problematic are firms like Toshiba, Hitachi Ltd. and Mitsubishi Electric Corp., whose booming heavy power equipment and semiconductor businesses have largely offset declines in computers and consumer electronics.
Analysts such as Shigeru Yoshinaka of Barclays de Zoete Wedd Research (Japan) Ltd. said the companies have grown too comfortable with the steady income they derive from building nuclear plants, and that they have put off necessary restructuring as a result.
Ford Motor Co., which has been preparing to kill its aging Aerostar minivan in August, is now studying whether to give it a new lease on life.
Sales of the rear-wheel-drive minivan hit a record pace in 1993, which puts Ford in a quandary.
The auto maker planned to discontinue Aerostar production, following the spring introduction of its new front-wheel-drive Windstar minivan.
That way, Ford could expand output of its hot-selling Explorer sport-utility vehicle to the St. Louis assembly plant.
Now, Ford says it is re-evaluating that strategy.
The trouble is that Ford can't build rear-wheel-drive Aerostars in the same assembly plant with front-wheel-drive Explorers.
Minivan sales surged in 1993, and sales of the less popular rear-wheel-drive minivans benefited.
It didn't hurt that Ford also slapped a $1,000 rebate on Aerostar last year, but it has since cut the rebate in half.
As a result, Ford sold a record 191,148 Aerostars in 1993, and sales in January jumped 68.9% over a year earlier.
However, Ford dealers are begging for more Explorers, saying they could sell more if they had them.
Explorer sales were flat with year-earlier levels.
And the Louisville, Ky., assembly plant that builds the Explorer has been working overtime to produce Explorers.
"This is one of many production-capacity studies that we're doing," a Ford spokesman said.
"As part of it, we're looking at the possibility or need to continue with production of the Aerostar.
No decision has been made."
For now, Ford is going ahead with plans to spend $400 million to reconfigure the St. Louis plant to build an additional 230,000 Explorers annually, beginning next January.
Besides Explorers, the Louisville assembly plant also builds the Ford Ranger compact pickup and the Mazda Navajo sports utility vehicle.
Theoretically, Ford could just delay expanding Explorer output.
Ford would have to find another assembly plant to expand Explorer production or spend a lot of money retooling an assembly plant to build Aerostars.
Industry analysts said Ford may not want to double Explorer capacity, and may consider expanding production of the sport-utility vehicle at other assembly plants.
Chrysler Corp. is considering expanding output of its Jeep Grand Cherokee sport-utility vehicle, and General Motors Corp. has already announced plans to boost production of its S-10 Blazer sportutility vehicles.
Rear-wheel-drive minivans aren't big sellers like their front-wheel-drive counterparts.
But they have a few enthusiasts.
The rear-wheel-drive minivans have much better towing capacity than the front-wheel-drive versions.
In addition to Ford, GM's Astro and Safari are the only other competing rear-wheel-drive minivans in that segment.
"Ford is trying to figure out how they can do both," said PaineWebber Inc.'s analyst Stephen Girsky.
"It's like leaving money on the table by taking Aerostar out.
And GM is the only one left to pick it up."
