Washington, D.C. -- In 1926, two famous men sat down to discuss the meaning of life over an incongruous dinner on a summer night in New York.
They had never met before and never would again.
Within a week, Rudolph Valentino was dead at age 31 leaving thousands of women to sob at his coffin and H.L. Mencken to reflect upon their strange encounter and the nature of fame in a story he filed away under "Odd Fish."
It's a lot livelier, perceptive and shorter than the reverential new opera "The Dream of Valentino," by the composer Dominick Argento and the librettist Charles Nolte that just premiered at the Washington Opera at the Kennedy Center.
Valentino was a sensitive, searching artist destroyed by avaricious Hollywood moguls is the unsurprising message of this high-minded tribute to the screen's first male megastar who was nevertheless paid a fortune for his suffering.
One longed for Mencken's sharp tone as this undramatic ode to self-pity puttered along with too many women and no Sage of Baltimore.
To give voice to the silent sheik is a challenge one would have thought Mr. Argento easily capable of meeting.
He's the engagingly traditional tunesmith who probed the fractured mind of Virginia Woolf in an evocative song cycle and who later, with Mr. Nolte, dreamed up the poetically surreal "Voyage of Edgar Allen Poe," which the Lyric Opera of Chicago staged so handsomely in the phantasmagorical settings of John Conklin.
But this time, with Mr. Conklin once again designing, the result is as leaden as "Poe" was light.
So much attention is spent doting on the biographical facts that the element of fantasy that lies at the heart of all opera is given little space to bloom.
"Valentino" starts promisingly enough in a spooky art deco funeral parlor where the corpse lies covered with roses and eerily lit.
"Valentino we cry, to that light in the sky" sings a plaintive, period voice on an old Victrola, the catchy tune piercing a classical Requiem.
But then the piece goes nowhere except back in time -- not the freshest concept.
The sepulchral mood only briefly lifts from the unit set to show the sainted one filming "The Sheik."
Valentino first steps to the stage as a ballroom dancer.
A lewd female has made advances and he rejects them firmly.
"I have pride, I have dignity," he announces in a credo that is not memorably melodic.
Little of the music is, never mind Mr. Argento's periodic skill in evoking the sound of the '20s, the Tin Pan Alley piano or the music hall tango.
In the resulting commotion, a motherly screenwriter, June Mathis, extricates him from the cops and feeds him.
He rewards her not with the love she yearns for, but with a cumbersome aria about Destiny (his) before falling asleep.
She sings of his olive skin, a reference so obsessive as the opera continued that I looked to see if Kiss My Face was the sponsor.
(No: the AT&T Foundation, the Lila Wallace-Readers Digest Fund, and the NEA, got this show on the road).
June takes him to Hollywood where she writes "The Sheik," and makes him famous, only to see him fall in the clutches of the crass mogul, who is maliciously trying to force stardom on the impoverished immigrant and some nutty lesbians, who want to marry him.
In Act I, Valentino ties the knot with starlet Jean Acker, who then locks him out of the bridal suite screaming it was all a mistake.
In the second and last act, he takes off for Mexico with the designer Natacha Rambova, who dumps him quickly.
Orchestrating this Sapphic seraglio is Alla Nazimova, an aging actress and violinist (and film history footnote: She once made an all-gay "Salome" flick in tribute to Oscar Wilde).
Nazimova wants to play Camille.
As he auditions in her living room, planting ardent kisses on Acker, Nazimova saws away soulfully on her fiddle.
Is this absurd or what?
But astonishingly, the scene is not played for laughs.
So enamored are Messrs. Argento and Nolte of their subject, they don't see the humor of his life.
How many lesbians were there anyway in Hollywood in Rudy's day?
One hundred thousand?
Who knows.
But how the heck did the world's most famous Latin lover end up marrying two of them?
(Rambova did later insist she was just a straight spiritualist).
Did he not know?
(Mencken thought him a bit naive).
Did he think love would find a way?
Was he himself either impotent (rumored) or homosexually inclined (also rumored) and thus happy to escape into what was called a white marriage?
What brought the distraught star to Mencken's table, asking for advice, was a Chicago Tribune editorial which facetiously suggested he should have been drowned for the good of America and its masculine men.
The writer had come upon a pink powder dispenser in a men's room and blamed its presence on the sheik.
Valentino challenged him to a duel.
"His masculine honor had been outraged," wrote Mencken.
"Unluckily for him, all this took place in the United States, where the word honor, save when it is applied to the structural integrity of women, has only comic significance."
Mencken detected in his clothes and simple eloquence a gentleman recoiling from a life he found increasingly vulgar and possibly futile.
He did not think he saw an artist and concluded that the exploding ulcer saved the star from a bitter end.
But "Valentino's" makers think otherwise, and so he sings twice of how he promised his mother to be a serious stage actor.
That is the dream of the opera's title.
More interesting dreams have been dreamed (and composed).
Mr. Argento makes his Valentino a dramatic tenor, rather overburdening Robert Brubaker whose heroic struggles finally brought him closer to the voiceless sheik than was intended.
In any other role, we might have enjoyed his thin (by opera standards) appearance, but as Valentino the tenor lacked the exotic charm that made the actor "catnip for the girls."
Those girls!
They were either hard on the ears or hard to keep apart, especially Edrie Means and Julia Anne Wolfe in the pallid roles of Jean Acker and Natacha Rambova.
Nazimova's flamboyant wardrobe designed by couturier Valentino (no relation) made it hard to ignore Joyce Castle's shrieks.
Maybe she had tacks in her nice pumps.
Two fine singers, Suzanne Murphy as the screenwriter and Julian Patrick as the mogul, managed to inject some pathos into their platitudes.
Christopher Keene appeared to preside attentively over the well-orchestrated score; Swedish director Ann-Margret Pettersson livened up the crowds and cardboard characters as much as possible.
Maybe before "The Dream of Valentino" goes to the co-producing Dallas Opera in 1995, it can be retooled into a comedy.
