Capital Cities/ABC, in a classic "if you can't lick them, join them" strategy, is forming a division to sell advertising in new or alternative media, from video screens in convenience stores to personal computers.
The division, Capital Cities/ABC New Media Sales, already has two clients: New York-based Screenvision Cinema Network, the nation's largest distributor of commercials in theaters, and Minneapolis-based American Consumer Service Network, a company that plans to place digital monitors in 5,000 convenience stores around the country later this year.
Capital Cities/ABC's aggressive move underscores the rapidly changing communications landscape.
Rather than remaining complacent, it's striving to expand its sales base beyond its broadcast-television network, radio networks and publishing divisions to include multimedia clients.
"We're diversifying to represent new media that are popping up all over the place," says John Watkins, president of both Capital Cities/ABC's national television sales and the new division.
He says part of the strategy is to sell the ABC network and a client, such as Screenvision, as a package to advertisers.
Screenvision provides advertising in a medium that is TV's direct competitor: movies.
But that doesn't daunt Mr. Watkins.
"In terms of effective advertising," he says, "nothing beats advertising on the big screens in movie theaters."
Screenvision commissioned four studies from three research companies last year to determine recall levels of commercials shown before the main feature in movie theaters.
One study of 200 people, by Fader Williams, a New York research company specializing in communications data, found that one day later 77% were able to remember what was advertised.
(The other studies showed similar results.)
"Movie theaters have great surround sound and 60-foot screens with larger-than-life images," Mr. Watkins says.
"You tend to remember those images."
Perhaps that is why McDonald's is scheduled to run its first ads in movie theaters, beginning in mid-February.
Additionally, diet Coke plans to show its new campaign from Interpublic Group's Lowe & Partners next month.
These companies join such diverse clients as American Telephone & Telegraph, Acclaim Entertainment (maker of video games), Sony Music, Eveready batteries, General Motors, Chrysler, Hasbro, Nestle, the Fox network and, yes, the ABC network, in advertising on the big screen.
It wasn't so long ago that consumers, after spending upward of $7.50 for a movie ticket, would angrily hurl catcalls if a commercial appeared on the screen.
But advertisers have gotten savvier, Mr. Watkins says.
Seldom, for example, do they run a TV commercial in movie theaters.
Instead they try for a fresh look.
Movie ads average 45 seconds in length, instead of TV's 30 seconds.
Theaters subscribing to Screenvision's services show a maximum of four minutes of commercials and a minimum of one minute.
The relationship between Capital Cities/ABC and Screenvision, which supplies commercials to 6,500 of the approximately 21,000 first-run screens in the U.S., grew out of a friendship between one of Screenvision's owners and an executive at the giant communications company.
Dennis Fogarty, Screenvision's president and chief executive officer, says he told one of Screenvision's owners that "I needed more sales power on the street," to augment his small sales force of seven employees.
The owner referred him to Capital Cities/ABC's new unit.
"I have to get the word out to more agencies and clients," Mr. Fogarty says.
"With Capital Cities/ABC, I'm able to tap into a professional sales force.
I can triple the number of sales calls I can make.
And it adds a lot of prestige to have Capital Cities/ABC selling us."
Capital Cities/ABC and Screenvision plan to target entire categories they feel are ripe for advertising in movie theaters, including fashion, fragrance and tourism.
Capital Cities/ABC is entering the business just as movie theaters are becoming more popular venues for product merchandising.
Some companies, for example, aren't merely content to put ads on the screen.
Acclaim Entertainment, Oyster Bay, N.Y., is introducing a video-game version of its popular basketball arcade game NBA Jam partly through advertising in movie theaters.
"Video games have become an entertainment medium," says Sam Goldberg, vice president of marketing at Acclaim.
"There is great synergy between video games and movie theaters.
The images we're able to portray from a video standpoint are larger than life and larger than a small TV screen can accommodate."
Acclaim is also conducting a national sweepstakes for NBA Jam that will award $65,000 worth of prizes.
Entry forms will be available at theater concession stands.
Mr. Watkins sees endless possibilities with Screenvision.
One potential scenario: A rock-music video could be used to advertise a compact disk and also to promote "In Concert," a late-night Friday series on the ABC network.
Down the road in the age of the information superhighway, there is the possibility that advertisements on personal computers will become commonplace.
Already, ads for some companies, ranging from International Business Machines to Coors beer, appear on programs available on personal computers.
Mr. Watkins hopes to pursue that business as well.
"The world is changing," says Mr. Watkins.
"Advertisers no longer buy only newspapers, magazines and television.
We have to be aggressive and we have to be first in the selling of advertising to the new media."
Griffin Bacal is in discussions with Omnicom Group's DDB Needham to form a joint venture or partnership arrangement in order to handle the overseas portion of the Hasbro account, according to officials close to the talks.
Hasbro wants to become a larger force overseas and has asked Griffin Bacal, a New York-based agency with overseas offices in London and Athens, to help with the task.
Griffin Bacal is Hasbro's lead agency, but Griffin Bacal doesn't have the capability abroad of Needham, which is also a Hasbro agency.
Needham operates 127 offices overseas, including 61 in Europe.
Details of the talks -- and of how the possible alliance would work -- couldn't be determined.
At Griffin Bacal, Tom Griffin, co-chairman and chief executive officer, and Paul Kurnit, president and chief operating officer, were traveling from Greece to New York on Friday and couldn't be reached; a Needham spokesman declined comment and a Hasbro spokesman said executives in London couldn't be reached.
Susan D. Gillette, president of the Chicago office of Omnicom Group's DDB Needham, said Friday she is "relinquishing" her role "to spend more time with her family."
She will continue with the agency part time as strategic and creative planner of the global Helene Curtis business and as consultant on other unspecified accounts.
Ms. Gillette, 43 years old, will be succeeded by Alan Pilkington, 51, executive vice president, managing director, who has also been appointed a managing partner of the agency.
Rumors surfaced on Madison Avenue in August that Ms. Gillette, who joined the agency in 1975 as a copywriter and was the creative force behind the successful "The Night Belongs to Michelob" for Anheuser-Busch, wanted to resign.
The word is she changed her mind on more than one occasion.
Ms. Gillette didn't return phone calls.
Ms. Gillette was named president of the Chicago operation in November 1990, succeeding Joel Hochberg, who became president of marketing at News Corp.'s Twentieth Century Fox studios.
Ad Notes. . . .
CUNARD: Cunard Line Ltd. selected Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide to handle its world-wide advertising, estimated at $20 million.
BSB succeeds Margeotes Fertitta & Weiss, following a three-month review that included Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, Wells Rich Greene BDDP, BSB and Margeotes.
BBDO: Omnicom Group's BBDO Worldwide named Candace Wong chairman and chief executive officer of BBDO Hong Kong and BBDO/CNUAC, the agency's venture in China, succeeding Steve Chan, who will continue as a senior consultant on the Chinese market.
ANHEUSER MEDIA: Anheuser-Busch, which learned last week that Budweiser agency D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles would be buying some media for Bud rival Miller Brewing, said it has reviewed the situation "in detail" and doesn't consider it a conflict "at this time."
D'Arcy is handling the assignment from Miller, a unit of Philip Morris, as part of a media consolidation with Kraft General Foods, another Philip Morris unit.
