For traders at JJC Specialist Corp., going out for lunch is just a memory these days.
Business is so brisk on the New York Stock Exchange that many specialists on the floor stick close to their posts at lunch time.
"It's becoming highly unfashionable to go out for lunch now," says Christopher Quick, president of JJC Specialist, a subsidiary of Quick & Reilly Group.
"There are no more lulls in the business -- it's just busy all day long."
Indeed, trading in shares on the Big Board is sizzling.
Last week, volume was the second highest in exchange history, second only to the week of the October 1987 crash.
And volume on the New York Stock Exchange has surpassed 300 million shares every day this week.
Life has been busy on the Nasdaq Stock Market and American Stock Exchange, too.
Average daily volume this year on Nasdaq is running at 317 million shares, up from about 264 million shares last year.
At the Amex, daily trading volume is averaging 19.5 million shares, up from 18.1 million shares.
In part, the heavy trading results from a seasonal surge that takes place in early January when many managers of large pension and mutual funds re-enter the market after closing out their positions near year end.
Many individuals also make their 1994 investment decisions at this time, and some of these investors are handsomely endowed with cash from year-end bonuses.
Record levels of computer-guided program trading are contributing as well.
But the jump this year goes beyond mere seasonal factors.
With ever greater numbers of household investors participating in the stock market and an expansion of derivative trading products, volume has been on a steady upswing for years.
Average daily trading volume on the Big Board last year hit a record 264.5 million shares, up drastically from the average 202.3 million the year before.
In 1984, the average daily volume was 91.2 million shares.
"This surge is the continuation of the heavy volume we had last year," says David Shulman, chief equity strategist at Salomon Brothers.
"Who knows, maybe 300 million shares a day will become normal instead of 200 million."
Analysts carefully watch the relationship between trading volume and shareprice movement for indications of the stock market's health.
For instance, few analysts welcome rising volume unless it's accompanied by rising prices.
So far, the leap in volume hasn't raised any warning flags, says A.C. Moore, portfolio manager and strategist at Argus Investment Management in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He argues that current heavy volume is mostly making up for several weeks of slower trading near the end of the year.
He adds that stock prices have been advancing for the most part during this period of increased trading.
"If this type of volume continues for two to three more weeks without a commensurate move up in prices, that would be a classic bearish signal," Mr. Moore says.
Another key consideration is the amount of money it takes to move prices in either direction, says Laszlo Birinyi of financial services firm Birinyi Associates.
A pickup in volume that fails to drive prices up or down would raise concern.
But the sharp advances and declines in recent days amid heavy trading suggests that volume is pushing prices as it should.
"What we're seeing is that the amount of money it takes to move the market is about the same as we've always seen -- it's in line with historical numbers," Mr. Birinyi says.
Swelling volume in itself can be interpreted as bullish for the stock market, contends Bernadette Murphy, director of technical analysis at money mangement firm M. Kimelman & Co.
"Market technicians have a thesis that volume leads stock prices," she says.
"So the fact that volume is improving is a positive sign."
Ms. Murphy adds that along with rising volume she'd like to see more stocks moving to new highs and a greater number of advancing issues each day compared with decliners.
She'd begin to worry if volume continues rising without further improvement in some of those other technical measures.
While Ms. Murphy doesn't rule out a downturn of 2% to 3% after the market's healthy advance in recent weeks, "if volume keeps at this rambunctious level late into the quarter, then I'd be concerned about a possible bigger correction."
The trading floor of the stock exchange isn't the only place to witness the recent rush to buy and sell shares.
Phones are ringing madly at mutual fund companies, too.
At Boston-based Fidelity Investments, Neal Litvack, executive vice president, said this month may turn out to be the company's best ever, surpassing August 1993 when $2.1 billion flowed into Fidelity's stock and bond funds.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average that month rose to record levels.
Though cash flows into Fidelity's funds generally pick up in January, Mr. Litvack suggests that this won't be a one-month uptrend.
Inquiries about Fidelity funds are at record levels, suggesting that more new money will flow into the giant mutual fund company in February and March.
What's more, many investors are transferring their retirement assets from full-service brokers and banks to Fidelity.
About 50% of the retirement transfer assets are coming out of banks, suggesting that there is still new money flowing into stocks.
Of course, lots of trading doesn't hurt the commission earnings at brokerage houses, either.
"They're making money off all the trading," says James Hanbury, an analyst at Wertheim Schroder.
But Mr. Hanbury points out that because commissions account for only about 19% of exchange member firms' revenues, it's important not to overstate the impact of stronger volume.
He adds that discount brokers benefit more than other firms because they derive more of their revenues from commissions.
Beyond commission fees, high volume translates into rising levels of margin debt that boosts the brokerage companies' interest income, Mr. Hanbury says.
"There are ancillary benefits," he says.
"But it isn't a straight line from volume to brokers' profits."
