One of the world's truly great welfare states released its annual budget this week.
Hong Kong's new spending package was chockablock with initiatives aimed at helping the people under its care achieve more comfortable, secure lives.
For instance, there was a new make-work program in the form of a corporate tax cut.
Bleeding hearts from Financial Secretary Sir Hamish MacLeod on down say the idea is to leave companies more earnings to distribute to shareholders or reinvest.
With businesses attracted by the idea of keeping more profits, they'll expand output and hire more workers.
Governmental solicitude was evident on the supply side of the labor market as well.
Some 420,000 working stiffs were dropped from Hong Kong's income-tax rolls altogether, and another one million will see their taxes chopped substantially.
These people can always be hit up later in life, after they've climbed the job ladder a bit.
Like any good members of the breed, Hong Kong's welfare engineers wouldn't let a budget go by without trying to meet some "unmet needs."
That phrase is fashionable among Western liberals with big tax-and-spend plans to promote.
In Hong Kong's case, the budget proposes a new welfare program for the elderly.
It's a tax cut too, this one aimed at families with one or more grandparents to support.
There are also new tax cuts for married or single people with dependent children.
Taken together, the changes aim to help out what Hong Kong folks call the "sandwich class."
These are young adults in transition from living under their parents' roof to having dependents of their own.
There's been talk in Hong Kong of adopting a U.S. style social security, and the colony does make public money directly available to people it considers needy.
But it doesn't treat the private sector as a mere adjunct to the government, allowed to keep whatever crumbs are left after the bureaucrats are satiated.
Work and family are promoted as the real guarantors of social welfare.
That's in healthy contrast to many Western countries at a similar stage of development.
In the U.S., the notion that the best welfare policy might be one that lightens the burden of government is derided as trickle-down economics.
Welfare is what comes to people in the form of government programs and the dole.
The segment of America's population that has been the most intensive focus of this theory has even been awarded a title.
It's now called a permanent "underclass."
Every indicator of social misery -- infant mortality, life expectancy, illiteracy, illegitimacy -- has been heading in the wrong direction ever since these folks became objects of official compassion 30 years ago.
Some will dismiss the lessons of Hong Kong's new budget by noting that the colony is running a $2 billion surplus this year.
But it's no accident that a government that piggybacks so lightly on the private sector ends up with coffers overflowing.
It's also worth noting that in newly democratizing Hong Kong, the universal complaint of the party politicians, from the pro-Beijing faction to Martin Lee's United Democrats, was that taxes weren't cut enough.
Hong Kong's economic success is internationally acclaimed.
Its politicians seem to think keeping down tax levels has something to do with that.
