Abortion-rights advocates won a big victory in the Supreme Court this week, but their legal battles aren't over.
The high court ruled that lawyers representing abortion clinics can use the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, known as RICO, against abortion foes.
The decision, says Kate Michelman, president of the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, provides a powerful weapon to oppose the "campaign of violence and terror" against abortion clinics.
But proving a national conspiracy by Operation Rescue and its allies will be difficult.
Among the hurdles is the First Amendment, a potential shield for anti-abortion activists who may have behaved illegally but not violently.
Civil disobedience could be defended as the sort of dissent that is at the heart of the constitutional right to free speech.
And even if suits filed under the racketeering law prevail, it may be difficult to collect damages from the large but loose-knit anti-abortion movement.
Enacted in 1970, RICO is quite broadly worded and in the 1980s, civil RICO suits proliferated.
The Supreme Court has repeatedly refused to narrow the statute's application, saying that's Congress's job.
Abortion-rights lawyers began using RICO in the 1980s as a response to what appeared to be coordinated efforts to force abortion clinics out of business.
Only one such suit succeeded -- a decision affirmed in 1989 by a federal appeals court.
In that case, a Philadelphia clinic was awarded $45,000 for violations of RICO and other laws after protesters associated with the Pro-Life Coalition of Southeastern Pennsylvania repeatedly invaded the facility, knocking down employees and damaging equipment.
Anti-abortion activists say the Supreme Court's RICO decision won't deter them.
The movement's lawyers predict more litigation.
"We expect a costly abuse of RICO in the courts throughout the country that will threaten all activists that oppose various businesses," says Clarke Forsythe, general counsel for Americans United for Life, a legal arm of the anti-abortion movement.
The battle against the National Organization for Women in Chicago, which led to Monday's ruling, has cost the anti-abortion movement close to $1 million, Mr. Forsythe says.
NOW is accusing anti-abortion groups of conducting a violent nationwide conspiracy to force abortion clinics to close.
In its unanimous ruling issued seven weeks after oral arguments -- a strikingly short period that included the year-end holidays -- the high court stressed that it hadn't considered the merits of NOW's allegations.
Instead, the court simply said NOW and its allies may use RICO as a basis for lawsuits.
RICO's civil components are highly potent because they allow plaintiffs to go after an organization's leaders even if they weren't at the scene of the alleged misdeeds.
And it permits damages from purported harm to be tripled.
"Our goal is exclusively to go after the high-level people in Operation Rescue and the other militant anti-abortion groups, not the foot soldiers," says Fay Clayton, NOW's lead lawyer in the trial that will now go forward in Chicago.
The Supreme Court's ruling was a procedural one: It said that to use the RICO statute, plaintiffs such as NOW don't have to prove that defendants had an "economic motive."
NOW will have to show that anti-abortion activists operated an interstate "enterprise" by means of a "pattern of racketeering activity."
That means an organization whose members or affiliates have committed two or more crimes from a list that in this case includes physical assaults, extortion, arson and bombing.
"We will now go back to the U.S. district court in Chicago and prove that the pro-life demonstrators didn't engage in any violations" of the statute, says Jay Sekulow, who helped represent anti-abortion groups before the high court.
Showing a "pattern" isn't difficult in many cases if there are multiple violent acts and intimidation, says Ms. Clayton.
But the "enterprise" is hard to prove because militant anti-abortion groups tend to be loosely organized.
Because of that, "most clinics won't be able to use RICO," she adds.
There are about a dozen pending RICO suits against abortion foes.
The decision also could encourage RICO suits against other types of protest that involve law-breaking: attacks on medical laboratories by animal-rights groups or militant demonstrations by gay-rights organizations that lead to violence.
In attempting to prove a pattern of racketeering, NOW has relied heavily on the federal Hobbs Act, which prohibits extortion and threats of physical violence that interfere with a business such as an abortion clinic.
But if threats are implied, or merely scrawled on placards, the First Amendment may bar their inclusion as a basis for a RICO suit.
Justice David Souter wrote in a concurring brief that "nothing in the court's opinion precludes a RICO defendant from raising the First Amendment in its defense in a particular case."
The concurrence, joined by Justice Anthony Kennedy, notes precedents in which states were blocked from enforcing laws banning such things as "malicious interference with business" against civil-rights activists who boycotted white merchants.
Abortion-rights proponents say their racketeering suits focus on violent or personally menacing behavior, not on boycotts, prayer, picketing or sit-ins.
But enforcing judgments of triple damages won't be easy.
Abortion-rights lawyers say they have had great difficulty collecting court judgments for vandalism or disobedience of judicial orders.
In some cases, anti-abortion groups and their leaders have pleaded insolvency or kept assets hidden, according to these lawyers.
With more money at stake in a RICO suit, the plaintiffs say they will dig harder.
Another federal law, which is likely to get congressional approval in coming months, may overshadow RICO in the abortion fight.
The bill would make it a federal crime to block women from entering or leaving abortion clinics; it also would create a new basis for civil suits.
Attorney General Janet Reno has said federal agents would enforce the bill's criminal provisions.
"It's the combination of laws and criminal enforcement that we hope will be a deterrent to fanatics," says Kathryn Kolbert of the Center for Reproductive Law & Policy.
The Internal Revenue Service agreed to pay $500,000 to a Miami trial lawyer who a court said was wrongfully imprisoned for tax evasion.
Daniel N. Heller served four months of a three-year prison sentence in 1987 before a federal appeals court released him after finding that IRS agents intimidated Mr. Heller's accountant into committing perjury at trial.
Mr. Heller subsequently sued three IRS agents; that case was nearing trial when the IRS made the unusual payment offer this week.
Because a court had ruled that the agents didn't qualify for governmental immunity from damages, it wasn't surprising that the IRS agreed to pay such a large sum, said Robert H. Hishon, cochairman of an American Bar Association committee on tax law.
The IRS had no comment on the agreement.
Mr. Heller said his wife will donate the money to charities.
Junda Woo in New York contributed to this article.
