The New York Stock Exchange announced four new listings including three initial public offerings.
The National Association of Securities Dealers announced 12 new listings including 10 initial offerings.
The American Stock Exchange began trading two initial offerings.
The Big Board began trading Amli Residential Properties Inc., Chicago, under AML, and Summit Properties Trust, Charlotte, N.C., SMT.
Both real estate investment trusts are initial public offerings.
Also, the Big Board began trading American depository shares of Istituto Mobiliare Italiano SpA, Rome, a large Italian banking group, IMI.
Western National Corp., Carmel, Ind., a life insurance company joined the exchange as an initial offering, resulting from a carve-out from Conseco Inc.
Nasdaq added the following initial offerings to its national market system: Consep Inc., Bend, Ore., a manufacturer of pest control products, CSEP; Daktronics Inc., Brookings, S.D., a manufacturer of information display systems, DAKT; Eltron International Inc., Chatsworth, Calif., a manufacturer of bar code label printers software and related accessories, ELTN; International Post Group Inc., New York, a provider of post-production services, POST; Procept Inc., Cambridge, Mass., a developer of biological-related technology, PRCT; SigmaTron International Inc., Elk Grove Village, Ill., a manufacturer of electronic components and other products, SGMA; Sonic Solutions, San Rafael, Calif., a manufacturer of digitial audio workstations, SNIC; Tatham Offshore Inc., Houston, an independent energy company, TOFF; TRISM Inc., Fort Worth, Texas, a trucking company, TRSM; and Webco Industries Inc., Sand Springs, Calif., a manufacturer of carbon steel tubing and stainless steel tubing and pipes; WBCO.
Nasdaq also began trading InterCel Inc., Lanett, Ala., a cellular telephone system operator, ICEL; and Leaseway Transportation Corp., Beachwood, Ohio, a provider of trucking and related distribution services, LSWY.
Amex began trading American Paging Inc., a unit of Telephone and Data Systems Inc., Minneapolis, a provider of one-way wireless managing services, APP, an initial offering.
The AMEX also began trading the initial offering of common shares and convertible subordinated debentures of Pacific Gulf Properties Inc., Newport Beach, Calif.; the company was organized to continue the multifamily and industrial property operations of Santa Anita Realty Enterprises Inc.
Amex and the Chicago Board Options Exchange will begin trading options on the ADR's of the following companies on Feb. 14: Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., YPF Sociedad Anonima, and Grupo Tribasa SA.
Amex and the Philadelphia Stock Exchange began trading options on Alumax Inc.; and on Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Amex's Emerging Company Marketplace began trading class A common shares of Chesapeake Biological Laboratories Inc.
The company previously traded over-the-counter.
The CBOE also began trading trading options on the ADR's of Aracruz Celulose SA, Coca-Cola Femsa SA, Consorcio G Grupo Dina.
CBOE began trading options on CenCall Communications Corp. and will begin trading options on Viacom Inc. class B on Monday Feb. 14.
