We who cover the Winter Olympics often must explain the strange and exotic sports that fill its calendar.
Short-track speed skating is such a one.
It works like this: The contestants toe a mark, and when the starter fires a gun, they go.
The first across the finish line wins.
If you must ask what's so unusual about that, you haven't been paying attention to the doings here.
Short track is the only -- I repeat, only -- pure race in these Games.
The rest are singles or pairs against the clock, or the staggered-start "pursuit" format of some cross-country skiing contests.
The too-short short-track program, totaling two individual races and a relay each for men and women, got started yesterday at Hamar Amphitheater, and the near-full-house crowd of about 6,000 -- bigger than the ones for many of the strange and exotic figure-skating events that had heretofore occupied the venue -- seemed to like it.
What's not to like?
The racers went around and around the hockey-rink-sized, 111-meter course, there were thrills and spills, and you didn't have to look to the clock or a bunch of dour-faced, numbers-brandishing judges to tell who won.
FYI, Kim Ki Hoon of South Korea did, in the men's 1,000 meters, and the South Korean team took the women's 3,000-meter relay.
The U.S. was third in that one.
Short track made its debut as an Olympic medal sport in 1992 at Albertville, but its origins go back much further; indeed, when people raced on skates in pre-Olympic times it was in packs, and that's the way most American "metric" (pairs against the clock on a 400-meter oval) speed skaters, Bonnie Blair included, were introduced to the activity as children.
Most probably would have stuck with it if it had offered sufficient competitive opportunities.
With a historical break or two, Olympic speed skating generally might have developed along pack-style lines.
The overseers of the first Winter Games in the U.S., in 1932 at Lake Placid, N.Y., prescribed the format -- then known as North American Rules -- for all of the races there.
One upshot was that Clas Thunberg of Finland, the premier speed skater of his time, withdrew in disgust from the competition.
Another was that American men won all four gold medals (women's Olympic speed skating didn't begin until 1960).
Alas, when the Games returned to Europe in 1936, the Old World went back to the Other Way.
Short track's lure for us Yanks is seen in the backgrounds of some of the principal U.S. pack skaters.
Cathy Turner of Rochester, N.Y., the gold-medal winner at 500 meters at Albertville, is a former "metric" skater.
So is Eric Flaim of Milwaukee; in fact, he won a silver medal in the form over 1,500 meters in the 1988 Games at Calgary, and still holds the U.S. men's long-track records at 1,500, 5,000 and 10,000 meters.
He also holds the world's short-track mark at 1,500.
Both describe their conversion in terms of fun.
"You have to jump over blades, make quick moves and be explosive at the right time.
It's like driving in traffic, except you're the gas," says the 31-year-old Turner, who won her '92 medal by a portion of the length of a stuck-out skate blade.
"The idea is to get to the finals and see what happens.
Any given day, anybody can take first, which keeps things interesting," says Mr. Flaim, who's 26.
As the above indicates, there's more than a little unpredictability in short track.
That's because positioning is all-important in the course's crowded confines.
The quick 'round-'n-'round, and frequent opportunities for changes of position, make it look like bicycle racing or, better yet, roller derby.
Participants reject the latter comparison.
"Rough stuff isn't permitted.
Short track is not roller derby," declares Ms. Turner.
So why aren't we convinced?
If last night's go-arounds proved anything, it's that the short-track format is no respecter of credentials.
Michael McMillen of New Zealand, the men's world record holder at 1,000 meters, was bounced in the first round, last in his four-man heat.
A couple of ex-world champs also fell there.
Mr. Flaim, the main U.S. hope, lost a second-place qualifying berth by a skate-blade's margin in a quarterfinal heat in which all four contestants broke their national records.
In one semifinal, two of the four contestants crashed on the next-to-last lap, leaving the medal-round places to their foes.
Mr. Kim, who won the race at Albertville, got the gold only after one of the four finalists, Canada's Derrick Campbell, fell going for a lead in the late going.
The relay was even wilder, with skaters plunging on and off the track at intervals not discernibly regular.
Instead of the baton handoffs of track, new relay legs start with one skater firmly pushing the butt of her successor.
The U.S. took second in the women's relay in 1992, and were third most of the way yesterday.
A bronze medal seemed secure with nine laps to go when a Canadian skater fell, but the U.S.'s Nicole Ziegelmeyer fell even worse with five laps left and whoomp, there it went, apparently.
But after the race, the apparent second-place Chinese team was disqualified for interference, and the U.S. got the bronze after all.
There may be more metal ahead.
Andrew Gabel of Northbrook, Ill., is the world's champion at 500 meters, which will be run Saturday.
Ms. Turner will defend her 500 crown tomorrow, and if anyone is qualified for the rigors of short track, she is.
A long-track dropout in 1980, she began a new career by answering an ad for a lounge singer.
She returned to skating in 1989 as an aid to self-discovery and a cure for depression.
After winning the gold at Albertville she joined the Ice Capades.
"Going fast's a pleasure after that," she says.
