Hungary's national assembly outlawed activities such as money laundering and insider trading, which hadn't been covered by law in the former command economy.
The measure responds to corruption that has swelled since Hungary began pursuing market reforms in 1989.
It also covers commercial secrets, gun smuggling, misrepresentation of goods, failure to disclose company data to authorities, and forgery.
Violators may be imprisoned as long as eight years.
But enforcement could be hindered without companion banking laws, said a specialist at the National Institute of Criminology, noting that Hungary is a popular locale for money laundering.
The government has drafted a bill for introduction this spring to require banks to identify customers in transactions of more than 2 million forints ($19,660) and to report any suspicious dealings to police.
Western Germany's gross domestic product contracted 0.5% in the fourth quarter from the third period, reversing mild growth in the first and second quarters, the central bank said.
Recession-battered employers have sought to cut costs partly by holding wage increases below the inflation rate.
But the giant IG Metall union said it rejected a new wage proposal from the Gesamtmetall employers group, and the metalworkers resumed warning strikes.
Their talks had stalled over demands for greater pay or job security.
Beijing will give Taiwan priority over other foreign investors in all sectors of the Chinese capital, which considers the island republic an extension of China's economy, the China Daily said.
The official paper said Beijing dropped a ban on Taiwan's involvement in the city's banking and finance.
But Beijing is moving to limit Taiwan's huge investment in real estate, which the newspaper said has driven prices up and led to overdevelopment.
Taiwan's approved investment in China in last year's first 10 months was $2.8 billion, compared with $247 million in all of 1992.
Western Europeans produce less than half the garbage that U.S. residents generate, the European Union's statistics agency said.
Trash per person in the 12 EU member states averages 660 pounds a year, compared with 902 pounds in Japan and 1,584 pounds in the U.S. Eurostat said recycling is increasing throughout the trade bloc.
The EU countries, with a total population of 340 million, recycle 40% of glass, cardboard and paper refuse, while the U.S., with three-fourths as many residents, recycles 30% of paper and cardboard and 20% of glass, the agency calculated.
The Spanish government will award the country's first mobile-telephone licenses this year, breaking Telefonica de Espana's monopoly, the Public Works Ministry told national legislators.
The agency has been expected to liberalize the sector, and several groups including Spanish banks and utilities have been preparing bids for the licenses.
But under European Union rules, telecommunications monopolies needn't be dismantled until 1988.
In Brussels, the EU industry chief, Martin Bangemann, said members' slow pace of liberalizing the sector is hampering development of panEuropean data-communication networks.
The 13-nation European Space Agency approved a $227 million manned space program and a $299 million Columbus module for the Freedom space station being prepared by the U.S.
The projects include a four-person transportation vehicle.
The agency, which scuttled more ambitious plans last year, said the latest decisions confirmed Europeans' resolve to participate with the U.S., Russia, Japan, Canada and other partners in developing an international space station.
Indonesian authorities arrested an official of a state-owned bank and blocked four others from leaving the country in connection with a loan to a businessman.
The government is investigating the loan by the Indonesian Development Bank, known as Bapindo, to Eddy Tansil, head of the Golden Key Group.
Members of Parliament have pressed unsuccessfully for details of the $430 million letter of credit apparently arranged for Mr. Tansil for a petrochemical plant in West Java.
The credit allegedly allowed Mr. Tansil to draw funds overseas before equipment for the plant was shipped -- an unusual feature because it lessens a bank's ability to monitor use of the money.
The loan also may have been made without adequate collateral and violated banking laws on excessive lending to individuals.
Government and Bapindo officials have told Parliament that banking secrecy law prevents them from discussing the loan, which a legislator said could cause a government loss of $614.6 million, including interest.
State banks have been widely accused of making many more potentially questionable loans.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Venezuela, where the biggest currency denomination is 1,000 bolivars ($9.18), will issue banknotes of 2,000 and 5,000 bolivars in response to rising inflation, which ran at 46% in 1993. . . .
About 10% of Rome's shops opened on the first Sunday after the Italian capital allowed commerce seven days a week.
Traditionalists complained that Sundays should be reserved for church, family and rest.
