Late last year, we flagged a dispute over college accreditation and "diversity."
The instigator is the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, which sanctifies academic programs at institutions of higher learning in California, Hawaii and Guam.
At WASC's meeting in San Francisco tomorrow, it is expected to push ahead with a standard that judges its colleges by, shall we say, the colors of their skins.
Its proposal has gone through multiple drafts, but the essence remains the promotion of preferential treatment, multiculturalism and enforced niceness to members of all protected classes of this society.
Woe be the school that's caught with a complaint against the straight white males in charge.
WASC, as one of the quasi-official regional bodies of its kind across the nation, can hold up or taint accreditation while it forces the institution to host visits by its gripe collectors.
The colleges truly vulnerable to this intimidation are the tiny, often religiously-based, liberal-arts places that dot the landscape.
In that light, it's heartening to note that the big prestige institutions of the West have bombarded WASC with requests that it call off the dogs.
Stanford President Gerhard Casper's warning was direct: The diversity standard and other intrusive measures "all raise serious questions about the future of WASC, which Stanford will be monitoring closely."
Issues addressed in the unit's manifesto are the internal business of a school, Mr. Casper wrote -- and he well knows it, as Stanford itself continues to be vexed by suggestions that it has compromised academic measures to attain a more desired mix on campus.
The presidents of Cal Tech, the University of Southern California and -- take note! -- the San Francisco Conservatory of Music have more or less seconded Mr. Casper's comments this month.
But none of this may make a difference to the isolated and entrenched board of WASC.
If it cannot be convinced, it will remain to U.S. Secretary of Education Richard Riley to put the kibosh on the plan.
So far, no word from Washington.
