American City Business Journals Inc. is "comfortable" with analysts' earnings projections of $1.05 a share for 1993, Chairman Ray Shaw said.
American City, which operates 27 local business journals and other specialty publications, reported net income of $3.9 million, or 61 cents a share, on revenue of $70.7 million in 1992.
Mr. Shaw said he also is comfortable with analysts' revenue projections for the year of about $86 million.
The year-end results, expected to be released this week, will mark the company's fourth consecutive record year, Mr. Shaw said.
He attributed the improved results to a better economy, stronger management, improved editorial products and increased recognition by advertisers of local business journals.
Mr. Shaw also said he is comfortable with analysts' fourth-quarter earnings projections of 54 cents a share.
He expects the company to report a 20% increase in fourth-quarter revenue.
The quarter and year-end figures include results from Winston Cup Scene, a tabloid newspaper targeted to stock-car fans, and San Jose Business Journal, both of which the company acquired last year.
Excluding the 1993 acquisitions, fourth-quarter revenue would be up 11%, he said.
For the fourth quarter of 1992, American City earned $2.3 million, or 58 cents a share, on revenue of $20.6 million.
Earnings in the 1993 fourth quarter were affected by a higher tax rate.
American City expects to have about $8 million in free-cash flow this year and is on the lookout for attractive acquisitions, Mr. Shaw said.
The company might buy more business journals if the markets and prices are right.
The company also has been encouraged by the reception of Winston Cup Scene and Chop Talk, a national publication devoted to the Atlanta Braves baseball team, and would entertain other opportunities in niche sports publishing, Mr. Shaw said.
In March, the company will introduce BIZ, a magazine targeted to the heads of the nation's fastest-growing small businesses.
It will be published by a new company owned equally by American City and Dow Jones & Co., New York, which publishes the domestic and international editions of The Wall Street Journal, Barron's magazine, community newspapers and other publications, newswires and electronic-information services.
Mr. Shaw said early advertiser response has been good.
American City "is looking for another year of operating-performance improvements" in 1994, Mr. Shaw said.
"We're starting out with a strong January.
"Advertising generally seems to be firming" for the newspaper industry, he added.
Most people I talk to in the industry feel a lot better this time this year than they did this time last year."
