Warnaco Group Inc. plans to acquire the lucrative underwear business of Calvin Klein Inc. in a transaction valued at close to $70 million, according to people involved in the talks.
Warnaco, an apparel manufacturer, declined comment and Calvin Klein executives could not be reached for comment late yesterday.
But the people involved in the talks said Warnaco has completed negotiations on the transaction and could announce it early next week.
Under the agreement, Warnaco would purchase the underwear business of closely held Calvin Klein.
Exact terms of the acquisition could not be learned yesterday.
Calvin Klein Underwear makes products for both men and women, and is best known for its slick black-and-white print ads featuring scantily clad male and female models.
For Warnaco, the purchase fits with Chairman and Chief Executive Linda Wachner's strategy of expanding into high-profile brands.
Warnaco is already a market leader in women's intimate apparel, such as bras and underwear which it sells under the Warner and Olga brand names.
It also sells menswear such as Hathaway shirts, Christian Dior ties, and casual wear from Puritan and Chaps by Ralph Lauren.
Cash from the purchase would allow Calvin Klein to retire its debt, primarily consisting of approximately $55 million in junk-bond debt, which the company repurchased from Hollywood figure David Geffen last summer.
Mr. Geffen, a long-time friend of the designer, Mr. Klein, had purchased the debt in 1992 and said at the time he waived repayment of the principal "for several years," to help give the designer breathing room during a difficult period.
The junk-bond debt stemmed from Calvin Klein's 1983 purchase of Puritan Fashions Inc.
Calvin Klein sold the debt to Mr. Geffen because it was having trouble meeting debt payments due to setbacks in its basic sportswear business, which in 1990 accounted for about 80% of its annual sales of about $200 million.
But people familiar with the company say its business is in much better shape now and retiring the debt will free it to make other significant moves.
