General Motors Corp.'s new partnership with a battery developer may be creating cracks in Detroit's joint effort to produce a "breakthrough" battery for electric cars.
A meeting set for yesterday of executives representing GM, Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. to discuss progress of their U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium was canceled because of questions concerning GM's linkup with Energy Conversion Devices Inc.
ECD, a tiny Troy, Mich., concern, has received $18 million of research money from the consortium.
The worry is that GM may have gotten special access to ECD technology that could nearly double an electric vehicle's meager driving range of 70 to 100 miles between charges.
GM declined to comment on the cancelled meeting, or the questions being raised elsewhere in Detroit.
"We are just basically interested in what the GM deal is and what the access to the partners is going to be," said John Wallace, the director of Ford's electric-vehicle programs.
Mr. Wallace said yesterday's meeting would have focused on ways to commercialize technologies currently on the consortium's plate.
But the meeting seemed pointless, he said, with so many open questions about the GM-ECD deal.
Although Ford and Chrysler spokesmen declined to go into further detail, an individual close to the consortium's dealings said possible issues to be addressed include whether the consortium will be entitled to a refund of some or all of the $18 million research grant to ECD.
For his part, Ford's Mr. Wallace said the dispute doesn't seem likely to lead to a breakup of the consortium.
But GM's move could prompt Ford and Chrysler to seek similar battery deals of their own.
Moreover, it isn't clear whether GM's move to link up with ECD will scuttle further talks about possible joint manufacture of an electric car by the Big Three.
Ford Chairman Alex Trotman raised that idea last month in Chicago.
Still, Stanford Ovshinsky, ECD's chairman, was surprised by industry reaction to his GM deal.
"Anyone who knows us knew I was very serious about making an alliance," he said, "and extremely serious about making an American alliance."
Last week, GM said it would help ECD manufacture and commercialize its advanced nickel-metal-hydride battery through a joint venture.
Former GM chairman Robert C. Stempel helped bring ECD and GM together.
Mr. Stempel, a consultant to GM, had joined the ECD board in January but stepped down when the joint venture was arranged.
The conflict comes at time when the consortium's progress is being closely watched by the California Air Resources Board.
The board in May is to hold a review to determine whether California rules requiring a certain number of zero-emission vehicles -- or electrics -- to be sold in 1998 is still technologically feasible.
The board's technical staff has already cited ECD's progress as a reason for optimism.
