The American College of Surgeons stunned the medical and health-policy world by endorsing a national "single-payer" health system for the U.S.
At a Capitol Hill hearing, David Murray, chairman of the college's board of regents, said his 60,000-member association has decided to support the concept of a single-payer system, in which the government would control medical fees and pay medical bills with taxpayer funds.
That a mainstream group of high-priced medical specialists would take such a position has been considered almost unimaginable, akin to the American Medical Association embracing the idea of "socialized medicine."
But Dr. Murray said a single-payer system is attractive to surgeons today because it would preserve patients' rights to choose their physicians, reduce bureaucracy more than any other health-reform proposal and best foster the autonomy of physicians to make their own medical decisions.
The White House doesn't support a single-payer system.
But it reacted with encouragement to the surgeons' stance -- partly because a single-payer plan would guarantee health coverage for all Americans.
"We're heartened that they've signed on to the president's goal of universal coverage," said Jeff Eller, a White House spokesman.
"While we believe the guarantee should be for private insurance, we share many of the goals of single-payer advocates, like universal coverage, cost control and administrative simplification.
We think that this endorsement signals that America's front-line providers agree that we have a health-care crisis and they are looking for a comprehensive solution."
The college's endorsement came after Rep. Jim McDermott (D., Wash.), the leading sponsor of a single-payer bill in Congress, made a presentation to the college of surgeon's board last week.
"I'll take the surgeons over the Roundtable anytime," Mr. McDermott said yesterday.
He was referring to the Business Roundtable's vote last week to support a market-based health-reform proposal sponsored by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.).
Under health-care reform proposals other than the single-payer plan, he added, "all the surgeons can see is the insurance companies being given immense power to interfere with the physician-patient relationship."
But while the surgeons' group said it supports the single-payer concept, it made clear that it isn't endorsing any specific bill, including Mr. McDermott's.
Mr. McDermott, who is a psychiatrist, has been trying to sell his plan to doctors by arguing that it would give them more freedom to practice their profession because it would eliminate insurers' oversight.
Among groups he has visited is the AMA and the American College of Physicians, the nation's second-largest medical group, which represents some 75,000 internists.
In the wake of the surgeons' announcement yesterday, the AMA, the largest U.S. doctors' group, blasted the single-payer concept.
The AMA's president-elect, Robert McAfee, said a single-payer system would take "medical decisions out of the hands of doctors and their patients, and give that power to faceless government bureaucrats and bottom-line-minded M.B.A.s."
Dr. McAfee, a surgeon himself, went on to assert that a single-payer system would "put a $10 calculator ahead of a stethoscope" in determining patient care.
For the past year, the 290,000-member AMA has struggled to put together a health-reform agenda that matches its members' diverse views.
The search for unity has proven increasingly difficult.
Even before the surgeons' break from AMA policy, various groups representing internists and family-practice doctors have supported major elements of the Clinton administration's reform package that the AMA doesn't like.
In an attempt to show unity, AMA officials said they intend Monday to roll out a list of medical societies that still adhere to the AMA's more conservative stance on reform.
The group hasn't backed any particular health-care bill, but it supports in general terms the idea of universal coverage and free-market competition.
Dr. McAfee predicted that "the vast majority" of the leading 60 medical societies will stay in the AMA's camp.
One of the reasons that the surgeons' decision seems so extraordinary is that surgeons surely would lose income if the government sets medical fees.
According to the AMA, the median income for surgeons in the U.S. was $244,600 in 1992.
Surgeons in Canada, which has a single-payer system, earn considerably less.
But Linn Meyer, the college's director of communications, said the government already essentially regulates medical fees through the federal Medicare program for the elderly.
Medicare reimbursement rates influence private insurance rates.
Single-payer supporters were jubilant about the surgeons' position.
"It is very significant that the most conservative bastion of medicine, the surgeons, have taken this giant step toward single-payer support," said Quentin Young, a general internist and a past president of Physicians for a National Health Program.
"I believe it's a breakthrough that will lead to its victory."
