"We're not an easy paper to fall into," New York Times publisher Arthur Ochs ("Punch") Sulzberger once remarked toward the end of his career.
"You've got to work at it."
You could say the same thing about Edwin Diamond's book "Behind the Times: Inside the New York Times" (Villard, 448 pages, $24).
Mr. Diamond makes his living as a media critic for New York Magazine, which means that he writes about what other people write, and sometimes writes about what other people have written about what other people have written.
"Behind the Times" is primarily devoted to the last 30 years in Times history, when editor A.M. ("Abe") Rosenthal and his successor Max Frankel broadened the scope of the paper by making it "light and up."
Mr. Diamond portrays Mr. Rosenthal as a fiercely territorial man who outmaneuvered more gifted rivals through "tenacity" and an ability to intuit the wishes of the Sulzberger family, which has owned the Times since 1896.
One of those wishes was to keep the Times profitable during an era when Americans were reading fewer papers and watching more TV.
Mr. Rosenthal did this by adding puffy, magazine-like sections, and placing great emphasis on food, fashion, computers, rock-and-roll and the fate of the dinosaurs.
The history of dumbing down won't come as a surprise to seasoned Times readers, nor will Mr. Diamond's rehashes of such widely discussed controversies as the Times' decision to publish the name of the young woman allegedly raped by Willie Kennedy Smith, or to treat the publication of Kitty Kelley's scurrilous book about the Reagan family as a news story.
Much of the book seems like an opportunity for Mr. Diamond to recycle well-worn material, and to supply incontrovertible evidence that employees of the Times are not an especially mirthful lot.
There are also woeful omissions: Mr. Diamond apparently isn't aware that one-fourth of the daily Times is devoted to business news, a section that has vastly improved in the past decade.
Still, there are nice flourishes.
In recounting how editorial page editor John Oakes was deposed by his own cousin Punch, and how Mr. Rosenthal himself was nudged into semi-retirement as a part-time pontificator, Mr. Diamond suggests that employees only appear to be running the ship, that all the important managerial decisions are carried out by the "Secret Hand" of the Sulzbergers.
Mr. Diamond does a good job of fleshing out Mr. Rosenthal as a ruthless practitioner of management by nasty memo.
He also provides fine examples of the paper's famous impersonality.
Notes sportswriter Dave Anderson, a 28-year veteran: "If Vincent Canby or Anna Quindlen got on this elevator with me today, I wouldn't recognize either of them."
On Ms. Quindlen, Mr. Diamond quite admirably notes that the crown princess of yuppie whiners hasn't had an original thought in years.
He also takes a shot at the Times for elevating pinhead music critic Jon Pareles to a position of power; Mr. Pareles is the addled youth who has repeatedly gone to bat for anti-Semitic, homophobic, sociopathic, sexist "gangsta" rappers as part of the newspaper's often pathetic attempt to seem cutting-edge.
Mr. Pareles is just the sort of bonehead that John Corry vainly attempted to take on during the waning days of his 31-year stint at the Times.
Mr. Corry, who started out as a copy boy, is the author of "My Times: Adventures in the News Trade" (Putnam, 248 pages, $24.95).
This is a very readable memoir by a man who, after a lifetime of exemplary work for the Times, found himself gently encouraged by Mr. Frankel to go elsewhere.
What got Mr. Corry in trouble were his blatantly right-of-center articles written when he served as the paper's first TV news critic in the mid-1980s.
Ripping into "60 Minutes" for dismantling the distinction between entertainment and journalism, Mr. Corry claims that the powers-that-be at CBS used every power available to have him muzzled.
Mr. Corry also made waves by suggesting that an ABC movie encouraging compassion toward child molesters was idiotic.
Long before his misfortunes as TV news critic, Mr. Corry had created problems for himself by crossing the flatulent James Reston -- Anna Quindlen with a pipe -- and by writing an article contending that the Polish emigre novelist Jerzy Kosinski had been the victim of a plot by Polish communists to persuade the Western press that his books had been ghostwritten, and that he himself was connected to the CIA.
Often, "My Times" reads like the memoirs of a cranky old geezer -- why don't these cub reporters drink any rotgut, and where the hell did all these women come from? -- and Mr. Corry tells us far more about his personal life than we need to know.
But he makes up for this with a bittersweet, well-written paean to an institution that no longer exists: the hard-news, no-nonsense Times.
And he comes as close as anyone has ever come to explaining why, even so, young people still become journalists instead of lawyers or upscale caterers when he says: "Each story I wrote defined me.
In a society where so many ache to be heard, a byline was better than money."
It still is.
