Arthur Levitt, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said allegations of a variety of wrongs in the municipal-bond market make "it clear to me that we need a strong enforcement presence to enhance investor confidence."
In a speech yesterday at a bond conference in New York, Mr. Levitt called for a "state-of-the-art surveillance system" to help expose corruption and abuse in the municipal-bond market.
He didn't offer any details about the surveillance system other than to say it "may be expensive."
Other such systems overseen by the agency involve extensive recordkeeping by market participants.
In addition to delivering the veiled threat of enforcement actions, Mr. Levitt reiterated the SEC's intention to shed more light on municipal-bond transactions, from the selection of underwriters to the sale of securities in the secondary market.
"When accurate information on market pricing is hard to come by, the potential for fraud and abuse is much greater," he said.
"We believe that greater transparency in the trading of the 50 most-active issues would provide publicly available pricing information on benchmark securities."
Mr. Levitt suggested that market participants consider an electronic-reporting system similar to that activated last year for the most-active junk bonds.
The SEC chairman also strongly urged municipal-bond issuers to award bond business in a competitive-bidding process rather than by negotiating with a single underwriter.
Noting that 75% of the dollar volume of long-term bond offerings are negotiated offerings, he called on issuers -- who are exempt from SEC regulation and filing requirements -- to be more mindful of the public trust.
Issuers "determine what the offering participants will be paid by controlling bond allocations and priority provisions and by capping fees," Mr. Levitt said.
"Ideally, issuers use their expanded control in the public interest.
The danger, of course, is that this control could also be used to dispense political patronage.
Today, I call on every issuer to evaluate carefully whether its actions serve a public purpose."
Separately, Mr. Levitt established a consumer-affairs advisory committee to apprise the SEC of issues affecting individual investors.
The SEC said the committee's members, as yet to be appointed, will include representatives of consumer or investor organizations, securities market participants and professionals, regulatory entities and the public.
