The U.S. and China appear close to resolving a human-rights dispute, with an agreement that will make it easier for American inspectors to visit suspected prison-labor sites in China.
The agreement, details of which are still being negotiated, would meet one of the U.S. conditions that China must satisfy to win a continuation of its Most Favored Nation trade status.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen hopes to be able to announce a satisfactory conclusion of the talks before he leaves here tomorrow.
"I'm making it clear that progress on human rights is basic to our relationship," Mr. Bentsen said after a meeting with Chinese Premier Li Peng yesterday.
Mr. Bentsen, the highest-ranking Clinton administration official to visit China, is here to improve trade and economic relations with the rapidly developing country.
The expected accord demonstrates that both Washington and Beijing are determined to expand their beneficial and profitable dealings.
Mr. Bentsen announced that the U.S. will revive the Joint Economic Committee, a forum that Washington stopped after the Chinese military suppressed a pro-democracy demonstration in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Through the committee, the U.S. will provide China with technical assistance in fiscal, monetary and other issues, while continuing discussions on investment, trade and increased U.S. access to Chinese markets.
In particular, the U.S. wants to win greater opportunities for U.S. banks and brokers in China.
Last year, President Clinton issued an executive order making the continuation of China's Most Favored Nation status, which gives it the same trade terms that most other nations have with the U.S., contingent on improvement in its human-rights record.
The two firm conditions for extending MFN beyond July 3, involve free emigration and U.S. inspections of suspected prison-labor camps.
In addition, China must show "significant progress" on such issues as the humane treatment of prisoners, releasing certain political and religious prisoners, and protecting Tibet's religious heritage.
In September, Customs Commissioner George Weise told Congress that China has granted only one in five U.S. requests to inspect suspected prison-labor facilities.
The expected agreement would allow increased access by U.S. Customs officials.
The U.S. doesn't allow the import of products made with prison labor.
Relations between the Clinton administration and China got off to a frosty start because of Mr. Clinton's focus on human rights during his presidential campaign.
In the last year or so, however, the administration has made a concerted effort to engage China on a range of issues, operating on the theory that it's easier to influence a friend than an adversary.
