For investors interested in unusual opportunities, there's no need to look further than the local movie theater.
That's because Walt Disney Co. is selling $400 million of notes whose yield will be linked to the performance of some of its films, according to officials involved in the private placement offering.
It's not the first time that Disney has sold such notes.
They offered similar securities in late 1992.
But for investors who are sick of today's low yields among most other high-rated corporate and government securities, the new offering may be an attractive bet.
Yesterday the benchmark 30-year U.S. Treasury bond yielded 6.46%, up from 6.45% on Tuesday.
The price, which moves in the opposite direction from the yield, dropped less than 1/8 point, or less than $1.25 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 97 5/32.
The Disney notes will have a minimum coupon, expected to be two percentage points below the yield of the seven-year U.S. Treasury note, according to people involved in the offering.
The seven-year Treasury note yielded 5.48% yesterday.
The coupon can increase, however, based upon the performance of the company's next series of about 20 nonanimated movies, the company official said.
Disney officials wouldn't say what the maximum coupon could be, but when Disney did a similar offering in late 1992, the top potential yield on the notes was as high as 13.5%.
The notes will be sold in London through Citibank International PLC and CS First Boston Ltd.
The notes will be tradable in U.S. and European bond markets.
The sale is expected sometime during the week of Feb 28.
The issue is expected to be rated single-A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and double-A-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
Essentially, the offering is a nifty form of movie-making risk management whereby part of the costs of films that flop would be borne by investors in the form of coupons far below prevailing interest rates.
But if the movies to be included in the deal are big successes, investors will collect coupons far above prevailing interest rates.
Since the deal will be a private placement, it is limited to large institutional investors.
Meanwhile Federal agencies and corporations sold more than $4.4 billion of bonds yesterday.
The Federal Farm Credit Banks System, which provides credit services to farmers and farm-related enterprises, sold $1.06 billion of one-year notes in its largest ever underwritten debt offering.
The deal was priced with a yield equal to one-year Treasury bills, which is 0.05 to 0.10 percentage point below traditional market levels, said James Brickley, president and chief executive officer of the Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corp.
The one-year bills were priced at par to yield 3.83%.
In the U.S. Treasury market, prices were unchanged to slightly lower.
The 10-year note, for example dropped 1/8 point to 99 25/32 to yield 5.89%, up from 5.87% on Tuesday.
In the absence of any market-moving news, prices remained within the well-defined ranges that have held for more than a week.
The session's only major economic report proved to be another in a string of reports distorted by the unseasonably harsh winter weather.
The Commerce Department reported housing starts plunged 17.6% to a 1.294 million-unit annual rate.
Analysts said other evidence, such as mortgage applications, still points to underlying strength in the housing sector.
The problem for the bond market, traders said, is that institutional investors have been unwilling to emerge from the bunkers they entered when the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates earlier this month.
And after a week of back-and-forth trading, even speculative accounts have pulled out of the fray.
Many investors are waiting on more news about inflation before making a move.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
Some of the inflation news should come today, when the government releases January's report on the consumer price index, an important measure of inflation.
Traders hope that once the CPI report is out of the way, investors will become active again.
Forecasts for the CPI center on a 0.3% increase.
In the past, traders and investors have worried about unusually large gains in the CPI during the early part of the year, due to seasonal factors.
Now they are hoping that changes to the CPI's seasonal adjustment process announced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics on Tuesday will reduce the chance of a larger-than-anticipated jump in the CPI.
"Expectations for a relatively benign inflation number have increased," said Joseph Liro, chief economist at S.G. Warburg & Co.
The risk for the market is that if the CPI comes in higher than expected, it will be viewed as even more of a problem than before, Mr. Liro added.
"If we get a number above expectations it's going to be a bigger problem than it would have been before the revisions to the seasonals," Mr. Liro said.
The only other event of note yesterday was the Treasury Department's announcement that it will sell $17 billion of two-year notes next Wednesday and $11 billion of five-year notes next Thursday.
In when-issued trading late in the session, the two-year note yielded 4.47%, and the five-year note yielded 5.38%.
The municipal bond market saw brisk new issuance that totaled about $1 billion and included issues from the Chicago School Finance Authority and the New York Local Government Assistance Corp.
However, munis barely budged in secondary trading.
The New York State Power Authority's 5.25% bonds of 2018 bonds closed unchanged at 97 3/4, to yield 5.40%.
As for the new issues, a Lehman Brothers Inc. group won the Chicago School Finance Authority's $410 million of Series 1994A bonds for school-improvement financing with a bid setting the true interest cost at 4.9476%.
Yields for reoffered bonds range from 3.90% in 1997 to 5.30% in 2009.
The bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corp. and carry triple-A ratings from Moody's and S&P.
Negotiated offerings included the New York Local Government Assistance Corp.'s $148.9 million of Series 1994A bonds, which were sold via a W.R. Lazard, Laidlaw & Mead Inc. group.
LGAC is a public-benefit corporation of New York state.
Following a repricing -- at which a number of yields were lowered 0.02 to 0.05 percentage point due to strong demand -- yields range from 3.00% in 1995 to 5.60% in 2023.
Moody's and S&P have rated the bonds single-A, while Fitch Investors Service Inc. has assigned a single-A-plus rating.
Prices of mortgage securities ended lower in thin trading.
In secondary trading, the 6.5% Government National Mortgage Association issues for March delivery ended 5/32 lower at 98 27/32.
Among other 6.5% issues for March delivery, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues and Federal National Mortgage Association issues both ended 7/32 lower at 98 30/32 and 98 24/32, respectively.
The inability of the debt markets to break out of ranges has frustrated dealers as well as customers outside the Wall Street community.
Until rates budge, no one can stake out new strategies.
Before the market stalled last week, some institutional investors had been increasing their portfolio holdings in mortgages.
But if today's report on consumer prices or some other inflation-sensitive numbers come in well below expectations, that could send rates lower.
And when rates are falling, mortgages tend to lag behind Treasurys.
Thomas D. Lauricella contributed to this article.
