Nynex Corp. tapped a 28-year insider, Ivan G. Seidenberg, to assume the new post of president and chief operating officer, making him the heir apparent for the top job when the chairman retires next year.
In selecting the 47-year-old Mr. Seidenberg, who had overseen Nynex's regional telephone companies and has extensive experience in the regulatory arena, Nynex's board all but passed over another top candidate -- Frederic V. Salerno.
Mr. Salerno, 50, is a vice chairman who has guided Nynex's unregulated businesses, trolling for new opportunities world-wide.
He was instrumental in pushing Nynex to invest $1.2 billion in Viacom Inc. for the latter's ultimately successful bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
But the Nynex deal drew some criticism on Wall Street because Nynex received little tangible commitment for joint ventures or any assurance of an influential voice in Viacom's affairs.
"The die has been cast," said Jack Grubman, an analyst at PaineWebber in New York.
Nynex's current chairman and chief executive officer, William C. Ferguson, is expected to retire next year when he reaches the age of 65; he turns 65 on Oct. 26, 1995.
The promotion of Mr. Seidenberg comes at a time when Nynex is bracing for assaults on its lucrative New York telephone market by other Baby Bells and cable companies.
At the same time, Nynex is waging a pitched campaign on the regulatory front, arguing in favor of looser regulation as it sets out plans for building interactive networks across the Northeast.
The threat to Nynex's basic business and the need for regulatory breakthroughs may have played to Mr. Seidenberg's advantage in winning the support of the board, analysts noted.
Since 1991, he has been vice chairman of Nynex's Telecommunications Group, overseeing the various regional companies that together serve 12 million customers in the Northeast.
Prior to that, Mr. Seidenberg held a succession of jobs in engineering, operations and federal regulatory matters.
He began his telecommunications career in 1966 at New York Telephone Co., which was then part of the monopoly Bell System.
Mr. Seidenberg, in an interview, said he will continue to look for new ways to eke out operating efficiencies and beef up marketing efforts that emphasize the Nynex brand name, two initiatives already under way.
"I'm almost passionate about some of the programs we have got going," he said, indicating he had no new programs to offer.
Nynex recently took a fourth-quarter charge of $1.6 billion to cut 16,800 jobs over the next three years, and yesterday it sweetened early-retirement terms to encourage managers to take part in the cutbacks.
Mr. Seidenberg, who also retains his vice chairman title, declined to say whether his new duties amount to an annointment as Nynex's next chief executive officer, saying that matter is up to the board.
Mr. Salerno will continue to oversee Nynex's strategic development under the new title of vice chairman for finance and business development, adding to his duties oversight of Nynex's chief financial officer.
Some analysts dismiss the notion that the Viacom deal might have left Mr. Salerno in bad standing with the board.
Indeed, some analysts say it may have bolstered his reputation as an aggressive deal maker, given that Viacom was ultimately successful in its tug-of-war with QVC Inc. for Paramount.
With the new appointments, "Seidenberg has a bigger piece of the business, but Salerno has a chance to make a big difference, too," said Steven R. Yanis of Kidder, Peabody & Co.
"So maybe succession is still up in the air.
In October 1995, I guess we'll know for sure."
