Tim Sebastian has been especially energetic in demonstrating the premature nature of obituaries burying the Cold War thriller.
"Last Rights" (Morrow, 270 pages, $22) is the fifth espionage novel by this former BBC correspondent, who was once himself expelled from the Soviet Union as an alleged spy.
The narrator of Mr. Sebastian's latest capable and swift-moving work of fiction is Edward Bell, a young Englishman who makes his living helping Western business types find their way in the newly opened East.
Bell's career is an outgrowth of his childhood, a youth dominated by his enigmatic Russian mother, an exiled dissident.
It was an upbringing filled with shadowy allegiances and ambiguous events.
The atmosphere of those years is resurrected by a Muscovite dubbed George, who arrives in London shortly after a failed Russian coup, bearing documents purloined from secret government archives.
When George is found dead at Bell's mother's house, and mother goes missing, Bell is catapulted into a frantic trans-European hunt for his parent, the stolen pages and the truth of his own past.
A gallery of nicely sketched cranks, spies and sentimentalists, old lovers and new allies and enemies in disguise -- enlivens a fastpaced if somewhat implausible adventure.
In the end, this brave new world order seems dangerously akin to the one it was supposed to replace.
A change of scenery is about all that Detroit police detective Sergeant "Fang" Mulheisen gets as he heads for the Big Sky Country of Montana in John A. Jackson's "Deadman" (Atlantic Monthly Press, 263 pages, $20).
It's not the fishing but a corpse that brings this series' hero out West -- the body of a Michigan hoodlum involved in a previous Mulheisen chronicle, "Hit on the House."
He lingers there, in hopes of tracking down some other Motor City fugitives.
An old Air Force buddy, now a county prosecutor, tries to get Mulheisen to move out for keeps, as part of a new regional crime-fighting task force.
The idea intrigues Mulheisen, and the region obviously appeals to Mr. Jackson, who proves as adept at describing the beauties of the West as he is at conveying the grit and grime of urban Michigan.
Not that it's all skinny-dipping and nature-loving in the mountains of Tinstar, Mont.
The violence wreaked by the out-of-town hoods makes a stark contrast with the scenic beauty.
"Deadman" ends up as a twisty tale of hit people (both genders) on the run after a mob assassination, and of the hit people sent to find them, with Mulheisen somewhere in the middle.
It's a crackerjack story, filled with quirky characters and surprising flashes of color, told with much style.
In the populous field of police detective thrillers, Mulheisen and his creator stand way out from the crowd.
There are probably more fictional private eyes than police detectives.
A writer has to work pretty hard, it would seem, to come up with an out-of-the-ordinary p.i.
But Parnell Hall succeeds in making Stanley Hastings one of a kind.
"Blackmail" (Mysterious Press, 288 pages, $19.95) is the ninth case for Hastings, the hapless former wannabe actor who spends most of his Manhattan sleuthing time "interviewing accident victims and photographing cracks in the sidewalk."
"Blackmail" documents one of Hasting's more interesting assignments.
A beautiful woman who gives her name as Smith hires Hastings to pay off an alleged blackmailer.
This simple-seeming errand becomes annoyingly complicated, with victim and tormentor both acting as if they're in some sort of play.
It turns out that they are.
But by the time Hastings knows why, he's knee-deep in bodies.
Goaded by police cronies, aided by his sharp-witted wife, Alice, Stanley eventually sorts it all out in fine comic fashion.
Except for a good deal of foulmouthed dialogue, "Blackmail" is pleasantly reminiscent of an earlier era, when detectives like Nero Wolfe and Archie Goodwin brought some humor to their chores.
That vanished time is brought back pleasantly by the reappearance of that once-popular team of upper-class amateur sleuths, Mr. and Mrs. North.
Beginning in 1940, both starred in dozens of witty books by Frances and Richard Lockridge, as well as a radio show, a TV series and a Broadway play.
In "Murder Out of Turn" (Harper-Perennial, 193 pages, $8), it is a dead body that ruins a tennis outing, while in "The Norths Meet Murder" (Harper-Perennial, 211 pages, $8), the corpse appears in an empty apartment the Norths were planning to use for a big party.
Danger and intrigue often played a role in soirees of the privileged classes 400 years ago when poets and playwrights like Christopher Marlowe supplemented their patronage income with work as free-lance spies.
It was long thought that Marlowe was stabbed to death in a meaningless brawl.
Or was he assassinated by one of the many factions swirling around Elizabeth's throne?
Just how he came to die in a house rented for parties is a story Charles Nicholls tells with such engrossing detail in "The Reckoning" (Harcourt Brace, 413 pages, $24.95) that the British Crime Writers Association awarded this piece of nonfiction a Gold Dagger.
