Thomas Williams quit his job as a high-school teacher two years ago to help fit doors, hoods and fenders in Ford Motor Co.'s assembly plant here.
The slender 43-year-old, who almost runs from van to van as he works, earned $50,000 last year, more than double his private-school salary the year before.
"I've changed my focus," he says, "from molding lives to molding products."
It wasn't long ago that the auto industry didn't want educated people in its factories.
But now, as the industry opens its doors again after years of little hiring and lots of layoffs, it is looking for a different kind of worker.
Ford and Chrysler Corp. both expect to replace nearly half their work forces over the next decade, hiring up to 75,000 workers between them, and many of these jobs will go to highly motivated, sometimes highly educated workers.
Car makers are hoping that these new workers will be quicker to learn new jobs, require less supervision and, ultimately, be more productive than the current workers.
Detroit's goal is to develop a highly skilled work force that is better suited for the brutal global competition that has confronted it since the 1980s.
Just as Ford and Chrysler have imitated the lean manufacturing techniques of the Japanese, they are now imitating the more selective employee-screening techniques used by the Japanese to staff their new U.S. and European car plants.
While General Motors Corp. continues to shrink its work force, it is using similar screening techniques to pick workers for coveted skilled-trades jobs.
Prospective workers are being tested in everything from mathematics to manual dexterity.
Chrysler has stopped, at least for now, giving preference to relatives of current workers, incurring the wrath of the United Auto Workers union.
And some labor specialists are wondering if Detroit has gone overboard in its fervent drive to upgrade its work force.
"You don't need to be a rocket scientist to assemble a car," says former UAW President Douglas Fraser.
Other manufacturers, from consumer-electronics makers to pharmaceutical concerns, are using similar employee-screening techniques to hire more-skilled manufacturing workers.
They have begun viewing new workers "as if they were a major capital-equipment investment," says David P. Jones, president of HRStrategies Inc. of Grosse Pointe, Mich., which does employee testing for companies.
The new breed of auto workers represents a different twist to the American dream.
For years, the auto industry has paid such good wages that a high-school dropout could send his children to college.
Now, job opportunities for college graduates are so tight that many are delighted to be tightening nuts on the assembly line.
Manufacturing jobs that were once viewed with disdain are seen as plums.
Stroll through Chrysler's sprawling minivan plant in Windsor, Ontario, and you will see Jeffrey Pancheshan, who has a master's degree in business administration from the University of Windsor, tightening catalytic-converter shields to the bottom of each passing minivan.
"The reason I got an education was so I could get a good job," declares Mr. Pancheshan, who worked at the plant part time while going to college.
"I feel like I've got a good job right now."
Twenty-six percent of the workers hired for a third shift at the Windsor plant in December have college degrees.
Three years ago, before the plant and union launched a remedial-education plan, close to 10% of the plant's workers, many of them immigrants, had trouble reading or writing in English.
Today's car factory is increasingly requiring a different sort of worker from the ones who built your father's Oldsmobile.
Ford and Chrysler are both slashing the number of supervisors in their factories and giving the workers some responsibility for ensuring quality, redesigning manufacturing processes and improving the products themselves.
While the car companies don't want all college grads for their new hires, they do want workers who are cheaper to train and retrain as the factory continues to evolve.
As an example, Dennis Pawley, who heads Chrysler's manufacturing operations, cites the company's new Jefferson Avenue plant in Detroit.
After Chrysler demolished an antiquated plant across the street, it spent a million hours training workers from the old plant to operate the highly automated new plant using self-directed work teams.
The training costs were high in part because many of the workers hadn't completed high school.
While the results were good, Mr. Pawley says, "if that's the way I'm going to handle my training, I'm going to go out of business."
The industry's new hiring practices have set off alarm bells in union halls on both sides of the border.
Buzz Hargrove, president of the Canadian Auto Workers union, says Ford's and Chrysler's preference for high-school graduates in his country is discriminatory and he is spoiling to challenge the practice before the Ontario Human Rights Commission.
"You're ghettoizing a whole group of workers who historically saw opportunities in the auto industry," says Mr. Hargrove, a 10th-grade dropout himself.
The UAW has a different beef with Chrysler's new hiring practices in the U.S. Stan Marshall, the union's top Chrysler negotiator, is irked that the company has stopped giving preference to family and friends of Chrysler workers.
"They are the ones that made the sacrifices for Chrysler," he says, "and this eliminates their chance of getting their son or daughter in the plant."
Thomas Gallagher, Chrysler's vice president of labor relations, says he is looking for a way to hire more relatives of workers as long as they can pass all required tests.
Beyond such concerns, some labor experts question whether the workers and ultimately the companies will be well served by the tilt to better-educated workers.
"It's very much a double-edged sword," says Harley Shaiken, a labor specialist at the University of California at Berkeley.
"You have people with high expectations that are going to clash with the discipline and often the boredom of the auto industry."
So far, that clash hasn't occurred.
At Ford's Avon Lake plant, which hired 1,200 new workers in 1992, the night shift -- primarily staffed by new workers -- has a lower absentee rate than the day shift -- primarily staffed by veterans.
Usually it's the other way around, because day work is considered more desirable.
And, unlike the 1960s and 1970s, when many new hires called it quits after a few days on the assembly line, virtually all in the current crop are sticking it out.
Arthur Johnson, who supervises Ford's employee training, attributes this partly to the tight labor market, but he also thinks Ford has done a better job of picking new workers.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Ford was always scrambling to get enough workers to keep its plants running.
Not today.
When Ford decided a year ago to increase output of medium-duty trucks in Louisville, Ky., it ran a one-day ad for new workers in the local newspaper and got 110,000 requests for applications.
The plant plans to hire no more than 1,300 new workers.
Ford gives applicants a 3 1/2-hour test.
They are tested in arithmetic, including the use of fractions and percentages; they are asked to read technical material and answer questions; they take one of several dexterity tests, such as quickly attaching washers in the right order to a pole.
And lately, Ford has begun testing groups of applicants on their ability to work together in teams, the same exercise the Japanese car makers use.
Ford then picks applicants who score roughly in the top half and who have solid work histories.
Candidates are interviewed by at least two employees, who select the most promising prospects.
They must pass a drug test.
Finally, they get a medical exam where doctors determine, among other things, if they have adequate mobility to do the job.
What is the profile of the new Ford worker?
About a third have attended college, 4% have four-year degrees.
Ninetyseven percent have high-school diplomas.
Some have completed trade school.
Many are military veterans.
Among the new workers at Avon Lake are people with years of experience in other fields.
One left a job as city manager of a small city in Ohio to join Ford.
Another quit engineering school because few of his friends were getting jobs after graduation.
The average age is 31; previously, the industry usually hired straight out of high school.
William Ward, who was hired by Avon Lake two years ago, is the son of an auto worker who didn't plan on following in his father's footsteps.
But after he received a history degree in 1989 from Bethany College in Ohio, there were no job offers.
For a while, Mr. Ward, now 28, sold BMWs, but as the economy slowed, that job disappeared.
For the next two years, he and his wife worked a series of jobs to support themselves.
They went deep into debt paying for surgery for their little girl, who was born with a clubfoot.
When his father told him of the openings at Avon Lake, "I knew what I had to do," says Mr. Ward.
Now he is planning to make a career at Ford, possibly moving into management eventually.
"Ford has been very good to me," he says.
"I really think there's a future here."
The industry's challenge will be keeping workers like Mr. Ward motivated over the long term if they can't move into management.
"Only a small number of those people will make it to supervisor jobs, and the jury is still out on how they'll adapt over the long run," says John A. Hall, Ford's vice president of labor relations.
Although many of the backbreaking jobs have been eliminated, working on the assembly line is still no picnic.
The work is often monotonous and the pace relentless.
Just like the Japanese, Ford and Chrysler are pushing for more worker involvement.
The aim is to make factories more productive, but they also hope it will help keep workers more motivated.
Todd Laliberte, who was hired by Chrysler's Windsor minivan plant in December, was impressed by management's rapid response after he reported fit problems with the taillight.
"They asked me a million questions," says Mr. Laliberte, who studied mechanical engineering at a technical school before joining Chrysler.
"It makes you feel like you have more input."
Chrysler has little choice but to listen more to its workers.
Three years ago, it had one salaried worker for every 25 hourly workers.
Now it has only one per 48 hourly workers, and the ratio is expected to go to one to 100 by the end of the decade.
"Before you change the caliber of work force you bring in, you have to change the environment they work in," preaches Mr. Pawley, Chrysler's manufacturing chief.
"You have to say to yourself, `I'm going to pull my people out and turn that assembly line over to an empowered work force.'"
He knows all too well what can happen if the reality doesn't match expectations for new workers.
From 1986 to 1988, Mr. Pawley was vice president of manufacturing for Mazda Motor Corp.'s fledging plant in Flat Rock, Mich.
Mazda made a point of hiring eager young workers and ran them through extensive exercises in teamwork and problem solving.
But after the plant actually started building cars, workers began griping about Mazda's autocratic management style.
"That work force got very disillusioned because of a lot of things I told them they would do" that didn't materialize, Mr. Pawley says.
When it came to "the major decisions on how you build an automobile, the Japanese would not let them do it."
Chrysler won't make that mistake.
But it won't return to its old way of hiring people, either, Mr. Pawley vows.
It must have a work force able to compete with Toyota Motor Corp., which has traditionally picked its Japanese assembly-line workers from the top technical-school graduates.
"The reason I'm doing this," says Mr. Pawley of Chrysler's new methods, "is to grab us a better shot at making a better automobile than Toyota."
