A $1.1 billion closed-end fund that was rescinded late last month because of an error in its prospectus got a second chance as a nearly identical fund began trading on Friday.
Analysts said the launch of a fund almost the same size as the original is a sign that investors are hungry to snap up shares of closed-end funds and that Wall Street is eager to underwrite the deals.
Global Privatization Fund Inc. began trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange with an initial offering of 70 million shares.
The $1 billion fund, which was priced Thursday at $15 a share, closed unchanged Friday on volume of 2.1 million shares.
Its manager, Alliance Capital Management LP, withdrew the fund Feb. 25 after four days of trading when an analyst noticed an error in a chart in the prospectus.
Fund experts said they were surprised to see the offering come back at nearly the same size.
They had expected the deal to offer a quarter or a third fewer shares than the orginial 74.5 million shares.
Many on Wall Street thought investors would be reluctant to jump back into the offering and that some smaller brokers would back away from selling the funds.
"I thought some people would have dropped out of the line," said Thomas Herzfeld, a closed-end fund specialist in Miami.
Some fund experts thought the fund's suspension was a sign that the closed-end country fund market had become as overheated as the markets in which they invest.
However, there were rumors on Wall Street earlier last week that the offering might even be bigger given investor interest in all types of international investing.
The new offering "reflects the attraction and appeal of that story the fund's investment objective," said Michael Porter, a closed-end fund analyst at Smith Barney Shearson.
"Despite debacles in many of these markets and a proliferation of funds, respectable-size deals are getting done.
It shows the country-fund industry is still alive and quite well."
Global Privatization Fund is the first closed-end fund in the U.S. to invest in the stocks of former state enterprises that are now private companies.
"Alliance got a concept out the door before anyone else figured it out," said Vivian Lewis, editor of Global Investing newsletter in New York, which focuses on closed-end funds and foreign stocks.
A similar-sized offering says a lot about the work that the lead underwriter, Kidder Peabody & Co., did to get the deal completed.
Underwriter's fees total $73.5 million for the current fund, compared with $78.2 million in the original offer.
"I'm impressed," Mr. Herzfeld said.
