Filmmakers from European Union countries urged a transitional period of gradually lowered subsidies that shield them from Hollywood competition.
The appeal, in a Brussels conference last week on filmmaking in Europe, came as the EU's top cultural official said the movie makers should take a more commercial approach if they want to compete with the U.S. industry and its blockbuster movies.
Some filmmakers condemned the subsidies, saying they fostered low-risk approaches and mediocre products that cheated audiences.
"European film producers seem to find it difficult to reconcile art and money," said the cultural chief, EU Commissioner Joao de Deus Pinheiro.
Audio-visual products were exempted from the world trade-liberalization accord under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to the dismay of Hollywood.
The conference came as the EU prepares a policy on the film and TV sectors, which have government help and protection-a source of conflict with the U.S.
Taiwan unveiled plans to relax control of the television sector by allowing a private network through competitive bidding.
The government also will release 29 FM radio channels, in addition to 13 it licensed last month.
The moves to free broadcasting are in line with President Lee Teng-hui's drive to broaden democracy in Taiwan.
They respond to complaints by the political opposition that it is denied access to the airwaves.
The new TV station may start operating in 1996.
Taiwan has three TV networks, one each run by the ruling Nationalist Party, the Taiwan provincial government and the military.
Crime in Moscow increased at a slower pace last year, but the number of violent crimes in the Russian capital grew significantly, news agencies in the republic said.
Reported crimes increased 4% to 82,556 from a year earlier, when the annual growth pace was five times greater.
But the number of murders soared 53% and robberies jumped 30%.
Police noted declines in property thefts and a slowing of illicit drug and weapons trafficking.
In what would be Colombia's biggest privatization, the government plans to sell its share of a company that runs the world's largest open-pit coal mine.
Colombia hopes to raise more than $1 billion for its 50% stake in Carbones de Colombia, known as Carbocol.
The other 50% is owned by the Intercor affiliate of Exxon Corp., a U.S. energy company.
Colombia mentioned Exxon as a potential buyer for the stake but said other companies world-wide have expressed interest.
In a tiff over power, the European Union Commission and national governments are wrestling over who should sign the liberalized world-trade accord in April.
The argument involves EU control in matters at the new World Trade Organization, to replace the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
One EU faction favors the commission, which represents the 12 members of the former European Community on broad issues such as tariffs.
Most of the EU states -- all are also GATT members with approval authority -- want continued shared responsibility.
But the EU charter doesn't cover some WTO issues, such as the environment and trade in services.
Stefan Kawalec, a top official at Poland's Finance Ministry was fired Friday, apparently for his role in underpricing the public offering of a state bank.
While the government press office didn't specify reasons for the dismissal, Mr. Kawalec had been criticized last week for setting the issue price of Bank Slaski SA shares too low, essentially shorting the state treasury of nearly $598 million.
In December, the issue price of the shares was set at about $23; at their stock market debut last Tuesday, the price reached $310.
Business and industry in Brazil are among the most highly taxed in the world, inhibiting economic growth and efficiency, a survey by an auditing firm found.
The excessive levies on producers hurt productivity, Ernst & Young said.
For example, Brazilian producers pay 46% in taxes on cars, compared with 8.3% in the U.S., 4.5% in Japan and 19% in France.
The country also led in other categories globally with output levies of 41% on television sets, 21% each on orange juice and shoes, and 25% on cement.
Brazil's Congress last week passed new taxes to help reduce a $22 billion budget deficit.
Because tax dodging is a big problem in Brazil, the study's authors said the government should crack down on tax cheats and widen the tax base, rather than collect more tax revenue from those already paying their legitimate share.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Coal miners in Romania ended a weeklong strike over back pay, complying with a Friday court order to return to work for at least 30 days, after which unions vowed to resume the walkout that threatened electricity supplies from coal-fired plants. . . .
About 1,000 government-approved video shops opened in Iran last week, the first legal rental service since video recordings were banned soon after the 1979 Islamic revolution.
Videos are screened for Islamic moral violations, such as displays of physical contact between men and women.
