Citing new evidence of spotted-owl declines, Clinton administration officials tightened their plan for preserving Northwest timberlands.
The newest version of the administration's forest-management plan, spelled out in an environmental impact statement prepared by six agencies, could undergo more changes before final recommendations are made to federal Judge William Dwyer in Seattle at the end of March.
But already, the document released yesterday reflected some modifications urged by environmental groups and others.
The government received 110,000 letters commenting on a draft issued last summer.
The new plan calls for less logging on federal forest lands than the earlier version.
It projects a timber harvest of 1.1 billion board feet over the next 10 years, down from the 1.2 billion board feet estimated in the earlier draft.
Either amount would be well below the logging total for the 1980s.
Since the federal government declared the spotted owl threatened in 1990, courts have put millions of acres of Northwest forest off limits to logging.
The latest version would provide added protection for a number of wildlife species, said Tom Tuckmann, director of the interagency office of forestry and economic development.
At a news conference in Portland, Ore., he said government agencies think the plan will "pass legal muster" under what is likely to be a continued onslaught of lawsuits from both environmental and timber-cutting interests.
"It's progress," said Julia Reitan, a Sierra Club timber specialist in Seattle.
"But it's not yet clear whether it's enough progress to save these ecosystems."
Some environmental groups still insist on inviolable no-cut zones in old-growth timber areas, and the plan doesn't give them that.
Andy Kerr, head of the Oregon Natural Resources Council, a Portland-based grass-roots environmental group, said, "I think litigation is likely" unless the plan is bolstered by additional forest-protection provisions.
But the plan goes too far for Mike Draper, executive secretary of the Western Council of Industrial Workers, a union of timber and other workers.
The Clinton administration plan would allow cutting of only a fourth of the timber that was historically produced, he said.
The reduction of 100 million board feet annually from the 1993 plan would mean the loss of more jobs "in a region already suffering from massive unemployment due to harvest restrictions," Mr. Draper said.
The revised plan takes account of studies of new forest areas that weren't analyzed before, showing that logging has had a greater impact on the spotted owl than had been realized, officials said.
In the eight years studied, the owl population declined an average 1.5% a year, they said.
The new plan would protect more spotted-owl habitats and owl "activity centers."
The plan also calls for expanding no-logging buffer zones along streams to protect salmon and other fish from erosion and timber debris.
Environmentalists have demanded such an expansion, but timber interests oppose it.
Charles McCoy in San Francisco contributed to this article.
