How far might Kenneth Dart, the investor and foam-cup tycoon, go to avoid paying hefty U.S. taxes on his personal income?
All the way to Belize, it seems.
According to people familiar with Mr. Dart's dealings, the secretive billionaire has forsaken his U.S. citizenship and become a citizen of Belize, the tiny Caribbean country that is known for its scuba diving -- and its status as a tax haven.
The 38-year-old Mr. Dart has long had a penchant for privacy.
But he came to the attention of Wall Street and the media in recent months by delaying a $35 billion Brazilian debt restructuring, infuriating both Brazil and a group of the world's largest commercial banks.
Mr. Dart and his family, who hold a large chunk of Brazil's debt, are also Salomon Inc.'s second-largest shareholder.
Mr. Dart has also lately been out shopping for bodyguards.
In fact, Vance International, a security company whose customers have included Imelda Marcos, Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf and Barbra Streisand, says Mr. Dart and his family have been hiring away some of the firm's best employees.
Dave P. Johnson, an executive vice president of Vance, of Oakton, Va., won't say how many employees have left Vance to work for Mr. Dart and his company.
But he acknowledges Vance is unhappy, and is in discussions with Dart Container Corp. "to work the issue through."
A spokeswoman for Mr. Dart, who is president of Dart Container, based in Sarasota, Fla., declined to comment on Mr. Dart's move to Belize or on Dart Container's dispute with Vance.
Dart Container, founded in Mason, Mich., in 1960, makes more than half of the 30 billion polystyrene cups sold annually in the U.S. Mr. Dart and his father, W.A. Dart, acknowledged in an interview late last year that better tax rates led them to relocate to Sarasota in 1989, where they operate out of an unmarked, spartan office tucked behind a sporting-goods store.
One individual with knowledge of Mr. Dart's recent move to Belize says that he was attracted to that country because it is a tax haven.
Indeed, a spokeswoman for the Embassy of Belize in Washington says that Belize doesn't tax any income generated outside of that country.
Tax experts say that Mr. Dart's move would affect only his personal income taxes, and not those of his companies here, which also include Dart Financial Corp.
People who are close to Mr. Dart say his wife and children remain in the Sarasota area.
Mr. Dart, however, has recently spent much of his time in the Cayman Islands, where the family has set up an office to manage its investments in developing-nation debt markets and other ventures.
The Darts are said to have also bought debt of Poland and Ecuador.
Mr. Dart recently set up Dart Asia Ltd., a company that will invest in China.
Tax lawyers who don't represent Mr. Dart or his companies say that beyond wanting to avoid U.S. taxes, individuals might take up citizenship elsewhere to avoid having to potentially pay judgments on lawsuits.
Mr. Dart isn't known to be facing any judgments.
However, he is being sued by his brother Thomas in both Michigan and Florida.
Thomas Dart is claiming that Ken and his father conspired to cut him out of the family fortune.
Thomas Dart seeks hundreds of millions of dollars in the suits, which are still pending.
Ken Dart and his father have said the lawsuits are without merit.
Michael Saltzman, a tax lawyer at the law firm of Baker & McKenzie, says that according to U.S. laws, an expatriate like Mr. Dart can stay in the U.S. for 31 days a year without any tax consequence.
If he spends more than 183 days here, he is considered a statutory resident and must pay U.S. taxes.
The U.S., unlike Belize and some other countries, exacts taxes on an individual's world-wide income.
If Mr. Dart spends between 31 and 183 days in the U.S., he may have to pay limited U.S. taxes.
In an interview last year, Ken Dart wouldn't elaborate on the size of the family fortune, which Thomas Dart says totals more than $3 billion.
Ken Dart repeatedly mentioned the family's concerns about security and possible kidnappings.
An individual close to Ken Dart says his security staff has grown markedly in recent months.
The security force now protects him and his family, as well as the company's offices.
"We have done some work for Dart Container in the last year in various locations," says Mr. Johnson of Vance International.
"They were a good client."
He says that Dart is no longer a client.
"We do want to maintain a good relationship with them," he said, but added that Vance is "frustrated with the circumstances surrounding" the decision by Dart to hire some of Vance's employees.
Mr. Johnson says that Mr. Dart's current security needs are "sort of a changing landscape."
He declines to elaborate.
The Darts are so security conscious that they won't let their own cup salespeople enter company plants.
In last year's interview, which was the only one he ever gave, W.A. Dart said, "We started with a policy that the only people we'd let into plants are those that needed to be there."
The company, he said, feared the theft of proprietary information about its equipment.
