Major insurance companies agreed to pay more in the Superfund overhaul in exchange for greater assurance that the plan would reduce litigation against them.
The agreement is likely to ease passage of the Clinton administration's bill to revamp the Superfund pollution-cleanup program.
The proposal was put forward by the American Insurance Association and a group of 14 companies including such big insurers as Aetna Life & Casualty Co. and Travelers Insurance, as well as such industrial giants as General Electric Co. and DuPont Co.
Key government players in the Superfund overhaul welcomed the industry move, although they didn't immediately endorse it.
The administration's bill would create a system for allocating Superfund liability and settling lawsuits between insurers and companies responsible for hazardous waste sites.
Among its most significant modifications, the industry plan would require the settlement of at least 85% of all Superfund lawsuits between insurers and their industry clients before the new program took effect.
Under the original plan, 85% was just a goal.
The proposal also would increase the risk to a polluting business that didn't settle a Superfund claim against it.
If such a company lost in court, it would have to pay as much as 50% of its insurance-company opponent's legal fees.
The administration proposal has a 20% legal-fee provision.
In exchange for these alterations, the insurance industry agreed to pay taxes of as much as $8.1 billion over 10 years to fund the settlements.
The administration had contemplated a tax of as much as $3.1 billion over five years.
Appearing at the news conference where the industry plan was unveiled were Carol Browner, head of the Environmental Protection Agency, Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D., N.J.) and Rep. Al Swift (D., Wash.).
The three said they weren't yet ready to endorse the industry plan, and the industry officials present were likewise unwilling to say they would support the whole Superfund bill if their proposed changes were made.
But both sides emphasized that they had moved significantly closer to consensus.
"The most litigious parties in the Superfund web have resolved their differences," Ms. Browner said.
Mr. Swift said he thought the proposal was likely to be "good public policy," and Mr. Lautenberg called it "a positive step forward."
Messrs. Swift and Lautenberg both said they hoped to take up the Superfund bill in the House and Senate subcommittees that they head in April.
