Sears, Roebuck & Co. hired Thomas R. Sharbaugh, a senior beer industry marketing executive, to become vice president of strategic marketing and advertising, an important new post at the retailer.
Mr. Sharbaugh, 49 years old, had been vice president-brand management at Anheuser-Busch Cos.
The St. Louis-based brewer promptly named August A. Busch IV, 29, the son of the company's chairman and chief executive officer, to succeed him.
Mr. Busch has been vice president of the Budweiser brands since 1992, reporting to Mr. Sharbaugh.
At Chicago-based Sears, Mr. Sharbaugh is expected to help chart a new advertising and marketing course, as well as spruce up some brands' images and perhaps launch others.
The task will include helping Sears enhance the image of the private label brands it sells and continuing to acquire and to promote national brand merchandise.
Among Mr. Sharbaugh's early assignments is likely to be to help Sears launch its "Stars & Stripes" brand footwear and casual clothing, which will be available this spring.
The move to Sears marks a reunion for Mr. Sharbaugh and his new boss, John H. Costello, senior executive vice president of marketing.
The two worked together more than a decade ago in Cincinnati at Procter & Gamble Co.
Though the two men knew each other, Sears said it used a search firm to find Mr. Sharbaugh, just as it had to find several other executives to fill key posts in its retail operations over the past year.
Mr. Costello, hired 11 months ago by Sears, is one of those relatively recent arrivals.
Despite the recent slippage of Anheuser's line of Budweiser beers, Mr. Sharbaugh was said to be highly regarded at the company, which had hoped to retain him.
His departure comes at a crucial time.
The company reported earlier this week that it had managed to hold its 44.3% share of the U.S. beer market last year, but it did so partly by discounting Budweiser in certain areas, by promoting sales of lower-priced beers and by introducing new products.
In apparent recognition of those difficulties, Anheuser last month shuffled its beer-marketing operation, reassigning three executives, including new directors of its Budweiser and Bud Light brands.
Mr. Sharbaugh joined Anheuser in 1981 as Budweiser group product manager.
He was named vice president of Budweiser brands in 1991, and to his most recent post the next year.
So Mr. Busch whose background includes a brewmaster's degree from a German institute, finds himself in a challenging new position.
"It's on his shoulders.
If he does make it work he'll be a hero," said PaineWebber beverage analyst Emanuel Goldman.
As head of marketing and advertising for the Budweiser brands, Mr. Busch has led the rollout of Ice Draft, Budweiser's latest product.
He also was responsible for the debut of Bud Dry, which analysts say hasn't caught on with beer drinkers as the company had hoped.
