Greg Gumbel got off to a smooth start as an Olympic TV host.
Some of his colleagues were less nimble.
Ed Bradley mostly covered the feelings beat, rather than dispense any expertise on winter sports gleaned as a part-time resident of Aspen.
At one point he remarked "it's so palpable you can feel it."
Charles Kuralt appeared several times Saturday making less sense on each occasion.
Jim Nantz and Andrea Joyce were handed the thankless task Sunday morning of hosting a sports show with hardly any sport.
So determined was CBS to save its best pictures for prime time that Mr. Nantz and Ms. Joyce could offer only the Sweden-Slovakia hockey game, lots of canned footage and a few snippets of other events.
They told viewers that American Tommy Moe had pulled a major upset by winning the men's downhill, but couldn't show it.
Strangely, sometimes they warned viewers to leave the room if they didn't want to know the results.
Other times they didn't.
About 19.6 million American homes tuned in Saturday, the largest audience ever for the start of a Winter Olympics.
CBS attracted 20.8% of TV homes, a gain of 6.3 points over the Albertville opening, according to A.C. Nielsen Co.
CBS blew away its rivals.
In major-city audiences, NBC had 7.9% followed by ABC and Fox.
The Opening Ceremonies at Albertville two years ago were so elaborate (some called them weird) that it seemed Lillehammer's would pale by comparison.
But they didn't.
From Stein Gruben's successful ski jump carrying the Olympic torch to Norway's reindeer, children and singers, the opening was a pleasant surprise.
The fashion police would have many of the national teams' clothing designers and sent some -- Belarus and Australia, for example -- directly to jail.
The Croatians, Japanese and British looked classy.
The decision to allow Tonya Harding to skate gave CBS some news to mix into the first minutes of its opening telecast.
For the rest of the evening Tonya-Nancy mentions were held to a minimum.
But on Sunday morning, CBS convened three print journalists to chew over the decision.
They were as illuminating as journalists usually are on Sunday talk shows.
Andy Mill, a World Cup ski-racing veteran and expert commentator for CBS on the alpine events, explained the prowess of unusually large Austrian downhiller Patrick Ortlieb this way: "It has to do with inertia.
As everybody knows, if you drop two rocks off the top of a building, a big one and a little one, the big one will get to the bottom first."
(Actually, Galileo's famous experiment at the Leaning Tower of Pisa proved that they will fall at the same rate.)
