Small business is sending an urgent plea to the nation's lawmakers: Restrain yourself.
As Congress gets back to business after President Clinton's State of the Union address last night, small business has set its sights on three major legislative goals for 1994.
In each case, the idea is to rein in the government by softening proposed or existing laws.
The heaviest small-business fire will be aimed at President Clinton's health-care-overhaul plan.
Most small-business groups seek to water down the proposal by eliminating mandatory employer contributions.
Congressional hearings on the issue open next week.
Small businesses are also pushing for relief from environmental regulations, notably the 1980 Superfund cleanup law and proposed new water-pollution controls.
Finally, they are battling against a move in Congress to criminalize certain workplace-safety violations.
Small-business advocates don't expect the going to be easy on any of the three fronts.
For starters, many advocates expect President Clinton to be more focused in his second year in office, and more tenacious in promoting his programs.
"When the president came in, he had to deal with a lot of legislation left over from the Bush administration," says Tom Cator, a lobbyist for several small-business groups.
"This time, we'll see a Clinton agenda."
Topping that agenda is Mr. Clinton's proposal for universal health care, which would require all employers to help pay for their workers' medical coverage.
Many small-business groups, led by the National Federation of Independent Business, strongly oppose an employer mandate.
Hearings that will open in the House Ways and Means Committee next week, and in a subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee in late February, will consider not only Mr. Clinton's bill but also proposals by others, both Democrats and Republicans.
"We think those two committees will come up with very different products," says Kim McKernan, a lobbyist for the NFIB, the largest group representing small business.
"There are also different approaches to reform between the Senate Finance and Labor committees," she adds.
"So many believe they'll just end up with incremental changes like reforming the insurance market and medical malpractice reform."
The federation is pushing for alternative proposals by Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper of Tennessee and by GOP Sen. John Chafee of Rhode Island that don't include an employer mandate.
Some small businesses, however, back the Clinton plan, which would subsidize health-coverage costs of small, low-wage employers.
Senate Small Business Committee Chairman Dale Bumpers expects the president's plan to undergo major changes, and entrepreneurs shouldn't get too fixated on what is out there now, says an aide to the Arkansas Democrat.
Sen. Bumpers's panel will hold hearings on the president's bill next month.
On environmental issues, small-business owners are pushing to eliminate their open-ended liability under the Superfund law for financing the clean-up of hazardous-waste sites used before 1980, and to speed resolution of their clean-up responsibilities.
Sen. Frank Lautenberg, a New Jersey Democrat, has scheduled hearings on Superfund reform for February.
John Satagaj, president of the Small Business Legislative Counsel that represents 100 trade groups, says the White House has sent out signals that it will consider ending retroactive liability "for the very smallest businesses."
Other small-business groups say Congress appears similarly inclined.
"The Hill understands that small business is a big factor, a big part of the problem that must be solved," says Harriet James, the NFIB's environmental-issues lobbyist.
Meanwhile, a bill to give the Environmental Protection Agency the right to toughen water-pollution-control standards for businesses is likely to draw fire from some small-business groups, such as the National Association of Metal Finishers.
Small companies object to the tougher rules proposed in the bill because they would dictate the kind of materials and manufacturing processes that companies could use, says William Sonntag, the Metal Finishers' lobbyist.
The group argues for rules that give businesses some flexibility in meeting water-quality standards.
On the labor front, small business is preparing to fight the proposed Occupational Safety and Health Reform Act, which has a chance of passing this year.
The measure would establish criminal penalties for violating some Labor Department safety rules, and would require companies to establish worker-safety committees.
"This could force small businesses to hire criminal defense attorneys; it's just more punishment instead of help for small business in creating a safer workplace," says the NFIB's Ms. McKernan.
Small-business groups also plan to oppose an attempt to get a Senate vote on striker-replacement legislation, which would prevent companies from replacing striking workers.
(The House approved a striker-replacement bill last summer.)
On other fronts, small contractors are focusing on proposed legislation to modify the way the federal government buys goods and services.
The bill, which Congress is likely to pass, is designed to help contractors get more information before and after they bid on government contracts, and to simplify the whole procurement procedure.
But the American Subcontractors Association, which represents many small government contractors, argues that some Clinton administration proposals for simplifying federal procurement could hurt small and minority-owned companies.
One of the proposals would end the requirement that major contractors submit plans for how they would use small and minority-owned companies as subcontractors.
"We're hoping Congress will listen to our concerns," says Colette Nelson, executive director of the subcontractors group.
Administration officials say a final decision hasn't been made on changing the procurement procedure.
"The administration wants to make things simpler for contracting officers and let big companies keep a bigger share of the work inhouse."
Congress also will vote on reauthorizing all of the Small Business Administration's loan programs this year.
Officials say SBA Administrator Erskine Bowles may have won support from President Clinton for a substantial increase in federal dollars committed to the agency's basic loan-guarantee program.
Congress approved funds to back about $7 billion in loans in the current fiscal 1994 year.
