Investing in biotechnology stocks sometimes requires an advanced degree in science.
If you don't understand gene therapy, cell senescense and nucleotides, it's nearly impossible to decipher a company's true prospects.
But some analysts say San Antonio's LifeQuest Medical is a different case -- its products are tangible objects that can be easily understood, and that could make it attractive for many investors.
However, the company's stock has so far been virtually ignored, namely because the medical-device maker has yet to sell anything or to record positive earnings.
"That will change," says Robert Peterson, an analyst at Hanifen Imhoff, Denver.
Their products "are very simple solutions to very serious medical conditions, and that makes them very appealing."
LifeQuest's products, which involve alternative methods of injecting medication into the bloodstream, are known as Osteoport and First-Med.
Neither has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration, a necessary step before the company can begin selling the products, but LifeQuest and analysts expect approval for both sometime this year.
If analysts are right about these products' prospects, LifeQuest could turn its first profit this year.
John R. Boettiger Sr., health-care analyst at Kemper Securities in Houston, says LifeQuest could earn as much as $1 a share for 1994 if the company gets the go-ahead from the FDA soon and begins selling Osteoport by April.
He expects a profit for the year "even if sales don't get going until late fall."
Mr. Peterson sees $9 million in revenue for 1994, and $60 million next year.
LifeQuest went public in August 1992 at $10.50 a share.
After spurting as high as $14.75, it now trades at about $9.25, barely above its low for the year.
The reason: LifeQuest is a biotech company with little to show except high hopes and red ink.
(For the nine months ended Sept. 30, LifeQuest lost $3.14 million, or 95 cents a share.)
That hasn't been a winning combination with investors in recent years, as seen by the rash of downtrodden stocks in the biotech industry.
And there's always a chance the FDA could nix the company's products, or force the company back into clinical trials.
Such an event certainly would thump the stock.
"But I wouldn't bet against FDA approval in this case," says Mr. Boettiger.
Osteoport is little more than a three-quarter-inch-long hollow screw implanted in a patient's hipbone or tibia that allows doctors to inject medication into the circulatory system through bone marrow.
The device is aimed particularly at critical-care cancer and AIDS patients whose veins are impossible to access because they have collapsed from repeated injections.
Thousands of patients die annually simply because chemotherapy, antibiotics and nutrition can't be delivered adequately through a damaged circulatory system.
Osteoport's other major benefit is that the device is ensconced beneath the skin, which all but negates the chance for infection; similar products such as venous catheters frequently lead to infections because they are exposed to the open air.
In Osteoport's clinical trials, no patients showed signs of infection.
In 1991, Popular Science magazine named the Osteoport one of the year's best achievements in science and technology.
Mr. Boettiger says the company could sell as many as 20,000 Osteoports for $400 to $500 each in the first year.
Ultimately, analysts estimate, the market for the device could exceed 500,000 units annually.
LifeQuest's other product, the FirstMed system, is a flashlight-size device that fires a needle into a patient's breastbone and injects drugs into the marrow.
Each unit is preloaded with a cartridge of medication specific to life-threatening emergencies such as cardiac arrest and drug overdose.
Where paramedics often take minutes to get medication into a patient, First-Med can puncture the skin and bone, inject its medication and retract in less than three seconds.
Analysts say that with the tens of thousands of hospital "crash carts" and ambulances in the country, along with thousands of emergency operating rooms, demand for First-Med could be in the millions.
Each unit will sell for $45 to $50.
The company expects FDA approval late this year, with sales beginning in the fourth quarter or the 1995 first quarter.
Also in the company's favor: Unlike the average biotech start-up struggling under debt because of research and development, LifeQuest has more than $10 million in the bank and no debt.
Mr. Boettiger contends that LifeQuest, once its earnings turn positive, should command an earnings multiple of 15 to 30, probably on the high side "due to the company's premium margins."
Analysts expect it will return 30% of every dollar in revenue to the bottom line.
Based on estimates of $1 in earnings for 1994, "LifeQuest is a $15 to $30 stock just waiting" for FDA approval, Mr. Boettiger says.
Western Co. of North America, a provider of onshore oil-field services, last week sank more than 22% to $11.25 after the company announced that it foresees a loss in the first quarter because of weak oil prices.
In the year-earlier quarter, the company reported net income of $2.5 million, or 14 cents a share.
Hi-Lo Automotive, Houston, surged 15% to $12.375.
The retail auto-parts chain, which was the subject of a recent column, reported that February sales at stores open at least a year increased 5.8%.
Analysts noted in a Texas Journal article in January that a sure sign of strength for Hi-Lo Automotive would be increasing same-store sales gains.
Michaels Stores gained more than 12% to $42.75, on stronger earnings.
For the fourth quarter ended Jan. 30, the Irving arts and crafts retailer posted net income of $14 million, or 75 cents a share, up from $11.1 million, or 64 cents a share, a year earlier.
The company also noted that February sales at stores open at least a year increased 13%, and that it has agreed to buy Oregon Craft & Floral Supply and California-based H&H Craft & Floral Co.
Kelley Oil dropped 17% to $7.25.
A Kemper Securities analyst downgraded the stock to "long-term buy" from "strong buy" a day after the company reported that none of the sands tested at an oil field in Terrebone Parish, La., were found to be productive.
Kelley noted that it plans additional tests for oil and gas at lower levels that have been productive in other parts of the region.
