It's the bottom of the ninth, with two out and the bases loaded.
So you turn off the TV set and sit down at the computer to find out what's really happening.
That, at least, is what Prodigy Services Co. and ESPN, the cable sports network, are hoping as the boys of summer take the diamond and on-line fans get on base.
Database, that is.
Today, the two companies are expected to announce an exclusive pact to offer ESPN's sports information over Prodigy, providing more facts and entertainment than plain old televison.
Sports news, lots of stats and even color commentary from ESPN personalities will go to bat on the new service, to be called ESPNET.
Eventually the new partners hope to build multimedia applications that will include sound within a few months -- "And the crowd roars!
Haahhhhh!" -- and full-motion video by the end of the year.
Terms of the deal weren't disclosed, but it is said to be one of the largest third-party pacts to be signed by an on-line service.
Prodigy will get a boost by having ESPN promote the service to the almost 63 million homes it reaches.
ESPN will get a cut of the subscriber fees that sports fanatics pay to go to the video screen.
For Prodigy, a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co., the deal signs up a coveted player in the sports business.
ESPN is the nation's most widely circulated cable channel and one of the most watched.
For ESPN's 80%-owner, Capital Cities/ABC Inc., the Prodigy deal offers up a new on-line partner as it explores multimedia ideas.
Until now, Prodigy has been doing business with ABC rival CBS Inc.
The new deal also represents a new and less-controlling approach for Prodigy, which has yet to turn a profit in its six-year history.
It has always exercised great control over on-line offerings, even to the point of having its own editors rewrite news stories from wire services.
But with ESPNET, as well as from the recently announced pact to put the Atlanta Journal-Constitution on-line, Prodigy is reaching out to third parties and granting them more say.
"We are growing up, which means that you look to people who do things best and you embrace them," says Scott Kurnit, executive vice president of Prodigy.
At ESPN, which also is 20%-owned by Hearst Corp., Senior Vice President Dick Glover said the new service lets the cable channel wade into the interactive age.
"At the moment, the technology is such that an on-line service is the first step," he says.
Viewers will be able to get access to the information they want, rather than to what the network broadcasts.
Currently, says Mr. Glover, "your only choice is to watch or not watch."
