Houston -- Who says life doesn't imitate art?
They had a sequel to "Joe Versus the Volcano" here Sunday afternoon, and, again, Joe won.
This Joe was quarterback Joe Montana, now of the Kansas City Chiefs.
He's the most famous footballing Joe whose middle name isn't Willie.
He's 37 years old, near-ancient for a jock, but if his body isn't quite what it was while he was leading the San Francisco 49ers to a spate of National Football League championships in the past, fast-retreating decade, his mind has not lost its cunning.
The main lesson of Joe's seasons past -- 14 of them -- is that one needn't succeed all the time to win, just once more than the other team.
"We had a lot of missed opportunities in the first half while the home-team Houston Oilers were taking a 10-0 lead, but we were just a little off, and we knew that if we kept at it we'd connect," he said after his team's 28-20 upset playoff victory put it into Sunday's American Conference title game against the Buffalo Bills.
He added, "The Oilers blitzed a lot, you know, and that left a whole field to pass into."
The author of those blitzes was stumpy Claude "Buddy" Ryan, the Oilers' defensive coordinator.
He played the volcano on Sunday.
It's a role he's used to, thanks in part to the quarterback-seeking eruptions his charges launch and in part to his own propensity for blowing his top.
He did the latter during a regular-season game a couple of weeks back, throwing a punch at Kevin Gilbride, his own team's offensive coordinator, when Gilbride's play selection displeased him.
Before that, Ryan had punctuated an, uh, interesting coaching career by taking verbal shots at head coaches he'd worked for, various other colleagues, and the owner of the team for which he was head coach.
That's why he's an assistant today, despite a professional lifetime of statements that add up to the self-drawn conclusion that he's the only man in America who really knows how to coach football.
Ryan may be right about that, but on Sunday he manfully admitted that some fellas besides the ones he oversees know how to play.
"I thought we played well enough, but a guy named Montana played pretty well, too," said he.
"He kept getting up, like he always does."
The guys on the KC defense did all right, too -- better, in fact, than Buddy's boys.
They held the Oilers to 277 net yards, 77 fewer than the Chiefs produced, and caused Houston quarterback Warren Moon to arise after sacks nine times.
Joe had to do that only twice.
And -- hey! -- Buddy also could claim some credit for the Chiefs' defensive achievements.
"When all you hear for a week is Buddy, Buddy, Buddy, and how great his guys are, it makes you ask, `How about us?'" said Joe Phillips, the large KC defensive tackle.
"I'd say that helped motivate us."
Indeed, while Montana, who was lured to the Chiefs this season for a reported yearly wage of $4 million, had a fine day, completing 22 of 38 passes for 299 yards, most agreed that a defensive series turned the tide for the winners.
It came early in the fourth quarter, when, with his team trailing 10-7, Joe tried to lob a pass to tight end Jonathan Hayes but it was intercepted by Terry Hoage at the Chiefs' 25-yard line.
A touchdown there would have made the Houston margin formidable, but on third-down-and-one, at the 16, safety Bennie Thompson sacked Moon for a 10-yard loss, and the resulting Oiler score, on an Al Del Greco field goal, kept the lead within the Chiefs' reach.
Joe quickly grabbed it, moving his team 71 yards in three plays the next time it had the ball.
The touchdown came on an 11-yard pass to J.J. Birden.
And when Chiefs pass rusher Derrick Thomas sailed in to dump poor Moon on the first play of the Oilers' next possession, causing a fumble that teammate Dan Saleaumua recovered, Montana responded with what proved to be the winning points, on an 18-yard touchdown pass to a leaping Willie Davis.
Moon pulled his team to within a point, 21-20, with an 80-yard, 10-play, all-pass drive that ended with 3:35 left in the busy fourth quarter, but Montana kept the ball from Houston by converting a third-down-and-one situation with a pass to Keith Cash, and the veteran Marcus Allen set the final score with a 21-yard TD run.
All NFL postseason games are fraught with implications, but this one was fraughter.
The Oilers have made the playoffs for seven straight years now, a current league high, but haven't reached a conference championship game in that stretch and remain one of nine teams that have never appeared in a Super Bowl.
After blowing a 35-3 lead to lose to Buffalo, 41-38, in a memorable quarterfinal match last year, Houston brought in Ryan to run its defense.
After this one, Ryan might be gone, along with sparring partner Gilbride and head coach Jack Pardee, who's spent much of the year as a fight ref.
The Houston sun may also have set on QB Moon, who is 37 like Joe but without the Super Bowl rings.
The Chiefs have one SB crown to their credit -- in 1970 -- but haven't been in an AFC title contest since.
Their coach, Marty Schottenheimer, twice led Cleveland Browns teams to that round, but lost both times.
"All this gives us is a chance to play again tomorrow," he reminded, grimly, after Sunday's fray.
Actually, it would be seven days before they play again, at probably frigid Buffalo.
They'll be underdogs there, despite the prayers of the many who don't want to see the Bills, losers in the three SBs past, qualify for No. 4.
Whoever wins that one will play the winner of the National Conference final between the defending-champ Dallas Cowboys and the 49ers.
Whoever wins that one will be favored over whoever wins the other.
But it's possible -- just possible -- that on Jan. 30 in Atlanta we'll get Joe versus his old Niner club.
It'd be tough to concoct a sequel to that.
