Vice President Takashi Iwami told a news conference that Hanwa will write off 120 billion yen ($1.09 billion) in previously unrealized losses on stock and other investments in the year ending March 31.
He also said that Mr. Kita was resigning as president.
Mr. Kita was absent from the conference; he was "feeling under the weather," according to Mr. Iwami.
Hanwa had hoped the stock market would improve enough to rescue its investments, Mr. Iwami said.
That's why the company didn't mention its looming disaster when it disclosed results for the six months ended last September.
But November's market plunge made Hanwa throw in the towel.
"We apologize for the losses we have to post," Mr. Iwami said, his head bowed as he read from a statement.
Hanwa has been the subject of rumor and press speculation for years, and by the start of this year the company's stock had fallen to about one-tenth of its 1990 all-time high of 4460 yen a share.
Late Wednesday, the Tokyo Stock Exchange announced it was launching an insider-trading investigation into Hanwa's recent share-price movements.
The stock has been oddly bullish, rising 68%, to 777 yen a share, since the beginning of the year.
Hanwa's long wait before dealing with its problems is common in Japan.
Companies resist taking painful steps such as laying off workers or declaring special losses.
Their lenders oblige.
Loans aren't considered delinquent until six months without a payment, and even then a bank may accept a token payment so the troubled debt may ride another six months.
That's one reason why Western analysts in Tokyo say that, by U.S. accounting standards, Japan's big banks have bad loans of perhaps 30 trillion yen, not the 15 trillion yen figure bankers here cite.
Though Hanwa announced a big write-off, its financial problems may not be over.
"We still have another 150 billion yen in specified stock funds," Mr. Iwami said.
"As of September, these were showing a 40% loss."
Those funds probably won't be liquidated for a few more years.
The decision to ease the losses over a long period of time, rather than taking the entire hit at once, is common among Japanese companies.
It may cost more that way, but the longer it takes, the theory runs, the more a company and its lenders can avoid the shock of a sudden default or a bankruptcy filing.
Shunting unwanted assets onto an affiliate is another move in the Japan Inc. restructuring play book.
Hanwa plans to record a loss of 47.2 billion yen in the year ending in March.
The loss would be greater, except Hanwa will earn a profit of 65 billion yen by selling land to a new subsidiary.
Hanwa officials acknowledged that the sale price may be more than the property's actual value on Japan's depressed real-estate market.
Mr. Kita is gone from Hanwa's presidency, but he will keep a hand in running the firm his family founded, as an adviser.
He also will be advising his older brother, Jiro Kita, Hanwa's temporary president.
The elder Mr. Kita will eventually be replaced by his son Shuji Kita, a recently retired official of Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
The Kita family owns 10 million shares in Hanwa, or a stake of 2.5%.
