When Luis Donaldo Colosio was assassinated last week, the world wondered whether his death reflected a reversion to more traditional -- and anti-market -- power politics.
Rumors to that effect are sweeping the capital as facts trickle in about the murderer and possible accomplices.
There was even talk that to quell dissent, the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, would replace its slain standard-bearer with someone more attune to the interests of the old guard.
That's why the PRI's decision to name 42-year-old Ernesto Zedillo as Mr. Colosio's successor comes as such a relief to markets.
(Yesterday the Mexican market closed up, with the peso unchanged.
Mexican funds in the U.S. dropped, but only when the Dow Jones Industrial Average moved downward in the late afternoon.)
Mr. Zedillo shares President Carlos Salinas's vision of a modern economy and a more federalist republic.
That fact should forestall a flight of capital feared by emerging-markets investors.
The choice of Mr. Zedillo bolsters the conclusion that Mr. Colosio's assassination will not succeed in reversing the ruling party's commitment to a more open social and economic structure.
Modernization in Mexico has developed its own momentum, and it would take a massively coordinated political plot to break that momentum.
In fact, the genius of President Salinas's plan to move Mexico from the Third World to the First World is that it is more than an economic program.
The economic policies of deregulation, privatization and individual initiative are rooted in an effort to decentralize the country's political and social structure.
That such an effort created enemies among the "dinosaurs" of the PRI was quite apparent to Mr. Colosio.
As president of the PRI, Mr. Colosio had the Herculean challenge of justifying this new federalism to a mass of party leaders who were often chosen by party officials in the capital to rule their communities with almost unlimited authority.
Mr. Colosio had trouble cutting through the old hierarchy.
"It's tough to explain all this to the grass roots," he told me in 1992.
Indeed, in some ways Mr. Zedillo understands this decentralization process better than Mr. Colosio did.
Mr. Colosio always gave the impression of acting more on orders than on political conviction.
Mr. Zedillo, by contrast, actually works from the standpoint of someone who pushed successfully for decentralization, first as minister of the office of planning and budget and then as minister of education.
A doctorate in economics from Yale as well as training at Mexico's central bank (Banco de Mexico) prepared Mr. Zedillo.
As minister of planning and budget -- a job he held from 1989 until President Salinas merged that ministry with Pedro Aspe's finance ministry in 1991 -- Mr. Zedillo helped pioneer the "Solidarity" anti-poverty program.
When asked to describe Solidarity to a group of journalists and businessmen in New York three years ago, Mr. Zedillo held the questioners rapt for about 20 minutes as he went on in Jack Kemp fashion about the need to halt poverty without creating a sense of dependency among aid recipients.
As minister of education, Mr. Zedillo made his mark by replacing radical textbooks loaded with Marxist themes with more moderate books.
Critics didn't like the credit the books assigned to market forces.
They also charged that the text praised Mr. Salinas and the old dictator Porfirio Diaz to an unseemly degree.
The noise of this discussion obscured Mr. Zedillo's biggest contribution -- applying rules of accountability to the national education system.
Prior to his tenure, Mexican teachers were promoted on the basis of seniority alone.
But after a huge struggle with the unions Mr. Zedillo was able to link performance to advancement.
Seniority now accounts for just 15% of the decision to increase salaries or offer promotions.
As for decentralization, all Mexican schools used to answer directly to the federal ministry.
Now only Mexico City schools are under federal control.
The feds also used to prohibit parents from participating in school policies.
Mr. Zedillo changed this by organizing committees comprising parents and teachers to help restructure the schools.
"There is a growing demand within Mexico for decentralization," Mr. Zedillo told me in an interview late last year, "and education will provide them with a practical example of how to actualize this desire."
But does Mr. Zedillo have the savvy, or the ruthlessness, to be president?
He has been criticized for lack of experience in electoral politics.
Some say he will have difficulty facing off with the political opposition, the National Action Party and the Democratic Revolution Party.
There is also the issue of the PRI's own disaffected members.
Yet there is a successful model that precedes Mr. Zedillo.
When Mr. Salinas was elected president, he too had relatively little experience.
But he was a quick learner in office and has headed what is arguably the most successful Mexican government in decades.
Perhaps moving your way up through the PRI hierarchy is as good a lesson in power politics as stumping on the campaign trail.
While Mr. Zedillo has an empty electoral profile, he certainly doesn't lack in "the vision thing," nor in the capacity to carry it out.
We can only pray that Mexican voters will now be free to choose the vision of their liking -- either Mr. Zedillo's or that of one of his opponents -- without the pressure of anything other than their own conscience.
Mr. Asman edits the Journal's Americas column.
