Chrysler Corp. gave its top 200 executives 1993 bonuses that amount to about 100% of their annual salary as a reward for meeting profitability, quality and customer satisfaction targets.
The bonuses are the highest the auto maker has ever paid, according to one senior executive.
Officially, Chrysler will not discuss its bonus plans, but a spokesman did say they were "generous."
About another 100 executives received bonuses in the 75% to 85% range, while lower-level employees received substantially less.
In 1992, Chrysler's five highest-paid executives received bonuses that ranged from 96% to 68% of their annual salaries.
Although 100% bonuses are high for many manufacturing enterprises, they aren't unusual in Detroit, where the highly cyclical auto business often results in years without any bonuses at all.
"There's been enough years where there's no payouts," said David Swinford, managing director of Willam M. Mercer Inc., a firm that consults on compensation matters, "that there is a lot of pressure to provide very substantial bonuses when times are good."
Indeed, General Motors Corp. hasn't paid any bonuses since 1990 and isn't paying any this year, either.
Ford Motor Co. is expected to pay executive bonuses this year, but it is likely they will be smaller than those paid at Chrysler.
Both Ford and Chrysler also pay bonuses to hourly workers as part of a profit-sharing agreement with the United Auto Workers union.
Chrysler paid an average of $4,300 to each worker.
Ford will pay an average of $1,350 in March.
GM's North American losses ruled out similar payments.
The bonuses at Chrysler come after one of the company's best years ever, excluding a special $4.7 billion charge to account for future retiree health benefits.
On a pretax operating basis, the company earned a record $3.8 billion for the year, substantially more than the goal established by the board when it set aside a pool of funds for 1993 bonuses.
Under the terms of Chrysler's bonus plans, executives are rewarded based on whether the corporation meets targets for profitability, improved vehicle quality, and customer satisfaction, as measured by surveys and warranty claims.
If only some of the goals are met, the bonus pool is reduced proportionately.
If the goals are exceeded, the pool expands to a maximum of 125% of its original size.
And for the first time, a senior executive said, the Chrysler pool reached the 125% level.
One reason for the big bonuses was that despite a recent spate of recalls, Chrysler exceeded its own vehicle quality goals and reduced its warranty claims, a senior executive said.
According to an analysis by George Hoffer, a professor of business at Virginia Commonwealth University, Ford and GM recalled about twice as many vehicles as Chrysler did, as a proportion of vehicles sold, in the first 10 months of 1993, the most recent data available.
Thomas W. Sidlik, Chrysler's vice president for quality, says internal audits show that the auto maker made substantial improvement throughout the year in its efforts to reduce its defect rates.
Separately, Chrysler says its customer satisfaction surveys show that buyers are exceptionally pleased with such stylish new vehicles as the Dodge Ram and the Dodge Intrepid.
What's more, as the only auto maker that doesn't have significant exposure to depressed markets in Japan and Europe, Chrysler is the most profitable auto maker in the world on a per-vehicle basis, analysts say.
