It was an influential group of casino-industry executives that Stephen Wynn, the chairman of Mirage Resorts Inc., assembled for a breakfast meeting at Mirage's exclusive Shadow Creek golf club in North Las Vegas.
The executives had been summoned to the meeting this past fall, several say, to discuss "important industry issues."
But Mr. Wynn -- a long-time registered Democrat and erstwhile Bill Clinton supporter -- had another agenda in mind.
Flanked by Republican National Committee Chairman Haley Barbour and John Moran, chairman of the party's finance committee, Mr. Wynn explained that he had become disenchanted with the Clinton administration's economic policies and would give a quarter of a million dollars to the GOP.
He wanted the other executives to ante up too.
William Bennett, the chief executive of Circus Circus Enterprises Inc., was fuming.
"I said, `I'll give a quarter, too, if I can get out of here right now,' " Mr. Bennett recalls.
Later, he wrote a check for 25 cents and sent it over to Mr. Wynn's office.
Mr. Bennett says it came back, stamped "Insufficient Funds."
As gambling flourishes across the country, casino interests are increasingly seeking to deal themselves into the national political scene.
At present, riverboat casinos, Las Vegas-style casinos, Indian gambling or video gaming is either operating or is authorized in 25 states, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.
Americans spend $30 billion a year on legal gambling, and with issues ranging from competition by Indian tribes to potentially tighter federal currency reporting restrictions, many industry insiders agree that they need a political presence.
But no one can quite decide just how that should be done -- or who should lead the way.
Casino executives at the Shadow Creek meeting discussed forming a Washington trade association, just as their friends in the movie business have.
The Nevada Resort Association has employed some heavyweight lobbying muscle over the years, including the Duberstein Group and Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld.
But it doesn't represent all gambling companies or even all of the major Las Vegas resorts.
Among other players, the lobbying firm Black, Manafort, Stone & Kelly, which for several years has represented the Trump Organization and the Casino Association of New Jersey, just last spring took on MGM Grand Inc. as a client.
Meanwhile, Indian tribes with an interest in gambling legislation are also using well-connected Washington lobbyists.
The Seminole tribe of Florida recently hired the Jefferson Group, the Morongo Band of Mission Indians of California has retained Winston & Strawn, and the Mashantucket Pequot tribe of Connecticut has signed on Patton, Boggs & Blow.
Beyond representation, of course, there's money.
Through the 1991-92 election cycle and the first six months of 1993, political action committees from the gambling industry gave $194,108 to Democratic candidates and $63,837 to Republicans, according to an analysis by the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics.
Beyond that, the Democrats received $165,554 in unrestricted "soft money" contributions from the industry during the 1991-92 period, while Republicans took in $160,543.
Circus Circus alone gave $54,149 to the Democrats and $35,000 to the Republicans.
Even the Mashantucket Pequot tribe has gotten into the act, sending $100,000 to the Democrats in 1992.
But those dollars pale in comparison with the sums now rolling in for the GOP.
After the Shadow Creek meeting in October, according to Federal Election Commission records, Mr. Wynn made good on his quarter-million-dollar pledge to the RNC.
Mirage Resorts' Golden Nugget casino gave $230,000; Mr. Wynn chipped in an additional $20,000 personally.
Other Shadow Creek participants also gave generously.
Frank J. Fertitta Jr., retired chairman of Palace Station Hotel-Casino, delivered a total of $250,000 to the RNC in November.
Marnell Corrao Associates, a Las Vegas construction firm that serves the casino industry, gave the RNC $80,000; its president, Anthony Marnell II, who also serves as chairman of Rio Hotel & Casino Inc., came up with $20,000 himself.
Before all is said and done, "I expect the pledges will total more than a million" dollars, says Tom Wiesner, the Republican national committeeman from Nevada and the owner of Big Dogs Hospitality Group, a chain of restaurant-casinos.
Some of the money has already found its way back to Nevada, where Democratic Sen. Richard Bryan is up for re-election this year.
In late November, the RNC transferred $50,000 to the Nevada Republican Party, FEC records indicate.
"I think they probably sent it to us as a thank-you," says Brian McKay, the state Republican party chairman who is also a registered lobbyist for Circus Circus.
Mr. Wynn says that despite the way Shadow Creek was billed, it was never meant to be an industry forum.
And he and Messrs. Fertitta and Marnell say their own contributions were spurred by personal political beliefs, not casino-related matters.
"This was just a group of guys who have common concerns," Mr. Wynn says.
Chief among his own concerns these days is President Clinton's tax increase on the wealthiest Americans.
"I resent the idea that the Clinton people have resorted to . . . populist rhetoric," says Mr. Wynn, whose base salary is $2.5 million and who in 1992 cashed in stock options for a pretax profit of $30.4 million.
Mr. Wynn also is upset about the Clinton provision curbing companies' ability to deduct executive pay above $1 million.
And he attacks the Clinton health-care plan as "misguided."
Given all the griping, Democratic Sen. Harry Reid of Nevada is convinced that the money pouring into the RNC has nothing to do with the casino industry trying to establish itself politically.
"I've heard from some people in this group that they didn't want to pay more taxes.
Period," says the senator, who once served as chairman of the Nevada Gaming Commission.
But considering the guest list at the high-powered Shadow Creek confab -- including the top executives of Hilton Hotels Corp., Caesars World Inc., Promus Cos. and International Game Technologies -- some casino executives fear that the RNC contributions will be seen as a heavy-handed attempt by the industry to play partisan politics.
Once it became evident that the Shadow Creek gathering included fund-raising, "we became quite uncomfortable, and have not responded," says Raymond C. Avansino Jr., Hilton's president.
Several other attendees say they share those sentiments.
For his part, Mr. Wynn says he never even meant for the Shadow Creek breakfast to be a fund-raiser.
He says he invited the industry's leaders to meet Mr. Barbour partly as a favor to Mr. Moran, the finance committee chairman, who is a close friend.
The $250,000 pitch, Mr. Wynn says, arose "extemporaneously."
But others think that with the industry growing so rapidly, there's nothing wrong with laying that kind of money down.
"This was no different than the people in the motion picture industry or the automobile industry getting together," says Mr. Wiesner, the GOP committeeman.
The gambling industry "ought to have a national presence."
