SO MUCH FOR airport security.
On a few hours' notice, this reporter flew to Geneva last month on Lufthansa German Airlines to cover world trade negotiations.
Flying into Frankfurt for a connection, an awful detail became obvious: My passport had expired six months earlier, in June.
The Lufthansa ticket-counter agent at Washington's National Airport hadn't noticed the expiration when she checked the passport.
Making my connection in Frankfurt, the Lufthansa agent only needed to see a boarding pass, as is procedure.
In Geneva, two passport inspectors stood guard in booths at the airport.
One seemed like a young eager-beaver.
The other didn't.
I chose the latter.
He opened the passport, checked it and, yes, waved me on.
I made it in -- but was this an indicator of airport security?
"It's amazing that you went through two checks and none of them found out," says Yisrael Boim, president of Air Security International, a Houston consulting firm.
"It is troubling because that is the only control that people have today to make sure that negative elements don't go through the country."
Privately, a Lufthansa official explains the oversight as human error but asserts passports have become "less significant" with the opening of European borders and waiving of visa rules.
Switzerland doesn't require visas for U.S. citizens, and vice versa.
The inspector's failure to challenge me, however, "was, let us say, an accident," says Roland Moser, a Swiss official in Washington.
"It seems as if he just closed both eyes."
But that doesn't mean expired passports are OK.
Richard Kenney, a U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service spokesman, says a Swiss citizen trying to enter the U.S. with an expired passport wouldn't be so lucky.
He says: "You would have been excluded."
The best advice: Check your passport before heading abroad.
THIS WAS THE dilemma: The Lufthansa ticket read Washington-Frankfurt-Geneva, with the same routing for the return.
But in Geneva, plans changed.
A one-way train ride to Prague entered the itinerary, plus the idea of stopping in London on the way back.
Could the return ticket be changed, without much cost?
Local Lufthansa ticketing agents couldn't say; their computers were down.
Check in Prague, an agent advised, noting, "It shouldn't cost much more."
Indeed, in Prague, a Lufthansa agent easily transferred the ticket to British Airways, scribbling the initials "BA" at the top.
British Airways, in turn, re-issued a ticket to Washington from Prague, via London.
The extra cost: only $109, even with this detour in Prague.
The lesson: At the passenger's request, airlines will transfer so-called excursion fares for overseas travel to each other with something referred to as voluntary endorsements.
(Involuntary endorsements happen when a passenger wants a transfer to another airline because of something like a mechanical failure or scheduling delay.)
Business travelers usually opt for these last-minute fares, which are more expensive than the advance-purchase fares popular among vacationers.
The benefit is that new routings don't cost much more, if anything.
Notes Jeff Wright, British Airways' pricing manager in the U.S.: The excursion fares don't carry route restrictions.
The coup in this situation: Frequent-flier miles from both British Airways and Lufthansa can be transferred to USAir.
IT'S A SIMPLE concept: checking your voice mail when you're away from the office.
But it's not so simple overseas, even from an otherwise technologically developed place like the Geneva Hilton hotel.
One solution: tone generators.
These electronic gizmos, about the size of a beeper, are high-tech cousins of gadgets that emerged in the 1970s.
These often came with answering machines as a way to check messages while away from the home or office.
Phones mostly used rotary lines at the time and didn't pick up tone commands as they do today.
To retrieve answering-machine messages, you put the tone generator against the receiver and key into the device the appropriate commands.
Today, most phones in the U.S. use touch-tone lines.
But that isn't so overseas.
"It's really problematic," says Joe Brancatelli, travel adviser at Travel Holiday, a monthly magazine.
"I take my black box with me when I'm traveling."
Some are programmable so users can encode them with, for example, long-distance access numbers.
One veteran user is skeptical, noting the device is sometimes a dud and doesn't send signals.
But Edsel Ector, a salesman at a Radio Shack store in downtown Washington, extols the virtues of the technology for travelers: "We just had a guy come in today who wanted to buy six of them for his office.
But we had run out of them.
For the job it does, there's nothing to compete with it."
It certainly beats punching buttons to no avail.
SOME FASHION advice for the overseas traveler: Thong sandals are the standard footwear in the weight room at the Slavia gymnasium's Fit Club Classic in Prague, where many health clubs prefer them over sneakers. . . .
An official at the Ritz in London kicked out two visitors stopping for tea at the hotel's lobby restaurant, the Palm Court.
"No jeans allowed," he said.
