In all the fuss following the arrest of top CIA agent and alleged Moscow mole Aldrich Ames, some key questions have gone unasked.
Media attention has focused on Mr. Ames's activities as CIA head of Soviet counterintelligence, where he allegedly betrayed to their deaths some 10 Soviets working for America.
But what Mr. Ames was doing after he left this post has been largely ignored.
Aldrich Ames was a key figure in the new American effort to thwart the inflow of narcotics into the U.S. and impede the corrupting influence of the drug barons.
If his work in the CIA's operations against drug trafficking was as controlled by KGB agents as his earlier service, then the explosive power of the Ames case doubles its force.
During the late 1980s, the U.S. intelligence community increasingly shifted its emphasis from classic espionage against the Cold War rival to a new role in the war against drugs and organized crime.
(Western European intelligence agencies redeployed their resource, too.)
In the happy dawn of the New World Order, George Bush thought the CIA should cooperate with its ex-rivals against common foes: organized crime, terrorism and drug trafficking.
Mr. Ames became head of the CIA's narcotics intelligence department for the Black Sea countries in 1990 after his service as counterintelligence chief for Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
Yet all the while Mr. Ames was allegedly working for his old KGB handlers.
Could one explanation for America's sorry record in the war on drugs be that its key intelligence was going to the other side?
Rumors in the 1980s about KGB or Cuban involvement in the drug trade were routinely pooh-poohed by State Department and CIA types who could not imagine that their rivals were anything other than sincere champions of another cause.
Now that the routine cynicism and corruption of the former Soviet Union is widely acknowledged, it is time to ask whether some of the cash to fund expensive KGB operations might come from the world's most lucrative milk cow -- the narco-business.
Espionage experts have expressed surprise at the amount of cash the KGB is alleged to have paid Mr. Ames, far more than in most treason-for-money cases, in which the amounts are often amazingly trivial.
Fewer questions seem to have been asked about whether the KGB was the only source of Mr. Ames's affluence.
It seems reasonable to ask whether his visits to his second wife Maria's native Colombia might have given him access to another source of income in return for information about the CIA's antinarcotics drive.
Another question suggests itself: Did Mr. Ames betray anyone to the KGB in his new posting, as he allegedly did while counterintelligence chief?
Last August, in the former Soviet republic of Georgia, the CIA's Fred Woodruff was shot dead while riding in the car of the chief of the Georgian security service.
A terrible accident was the improbable verdict.
But a week earlier, Mr. Ames had been in Georgia.
In addition to his mission to provide U.S. training to Georgian security forces, Mr. Woodruff was allegedly investigating Georgia's role as a conduit of heroin from other ex-Soviet republics to the West.
Some informed Georgians think that Mr. Woodruff had come to believe that the men Washington had sent him to cooperate with were in fact involved in the heroin shipments.
Had Mr. Woodruff reported this, Mr. Ames would have been the first man in the CIA to receive his report.
It is public knowledge in Georgia that the security forces of Eduard Shevardnadze's regime are involved in the republic's rampant drug business.
So severe has the problem become that even Mr. Shevardnadze recently felt obliged to undergo a heroin test to prove his credibility.
As an ex-KGB general-turned-reformer who returned to his native Georgia, Mr. Shevardnadze ought to be able to help the Clinton administration clear up any connection between Mr. Ames's visit to Georgia last year and the murder of CIA station chief Woodruff.
If Mr. Ames was betraying America's war on drugs to the KGB, then the Clinton administration and the West are staring into a deep and dark abyss.
The venality of Aldrich Ames contrasts sharply with the intense, if twisted, ideological treason of a Kim Philby.
How many other unhappily salaried Western intelligence officials cooperating with the ex-KGB in the war on drugs have also been tempted by the rich pickings of betrayal in the postideological age?
Mr. Almond is a London-based writer.
His paper "Still Serving Secretly: Soviet Bloc Spies Under New Masters" was recently published by the Institute for European Defence and Strategic Studies.
