Attention U.S. businessmen: Having trouble guarding your secrets?
Losing overseas contracts to foreign rivals who pay big bribes?
The CIA wants to lend you a helping hand.
There's a big job to be done, according to James Woolsey, who became director of the Central Intelligence Agency last year, and the CIA wants to do it.
Because Americans were less concerned about exports while busily waging the Cold War, "the U.S. often hasn't been particularly strict about such industrial espionage and bribery targeted against American companies in the past," Mr. Woolsey told a business group recently.
"Well, no more Mr. Nice Guy."
Michael Hershman of the Fairfax Group, a private intelligence company with corporate clients, says he welcomes "this significant change of direction for the CIA. . . .
We have to start bringing ourselves onto an equal footing" with the competition.
The U.S. spies may be looking out for themselves as well.
The collapse of the Soviet Union means the CIA, like the Defense Department and others concerned with national security, must slim down.
This intensified interest in business matters may be partly an effort to keep the slimming under control.
That could be a hard sell.
"There is no desire on this committee's part to help them cast about for new work when the need doesn't demonstrably exist," warns Michael Sheehy, chief counsel for the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, an oversight body.
But the CIA claims the need is there, though agency officials and skeptics agree there's a danger of going too far.
That's why the CIA insists it won't try, and others say the government would never permit, spying on foreign companies or stealing proprietary secrets for the direct benefit of American business.
"The legal and foreign policy ramifications of this would be counterproductive and damaging in a number of ways," Mr. Woolsey says.
The CIA has long watched other countries' spy agencies, and tried to keep track of meddling that hurts U.S. companies.
But Mr. Woolsey is pushing deeper into commercial matters -- "we will do so with special enthusiasm and relish" -- though the topic remains controversial both within the CIA and the administration as a whole.
Some experts contend that these aren't proper duties for the nation's chief intelligence bureau.
"What is CIA supposed to stand for -- the Central Intelligence Anti-Bribery Agency?," asks a skeptical former U.S. official familiar with its operations.
But agency officials say the business role can be twofold.
One task is to monitor more closely those foreign spy agencies that try to steal American business or technical secrets.
France is widely considered the most blatant transgressor, but spies from Britain, Israel, China, Japan and South Korea allegedly also are major players in this game.
"Foreign intelligence agencies generally work closely with their businessmen," says a senior CIA official.
The second task is to fight bribery and other unfair practices (strict U.S. laws inhibit American companies on the payoff front).
It would put more officers (career employees), agents (outside recruits) and other assets into the fray to gather data about practices that harm U.S. business interests.
Any useful information would be sent elsewhere for action -- to the State or Commerce departments, for example, or the local U.S. ambassador.
The agency has no plans to act directly for American business.
Just how much big-time bribery takes place is unclear; one secret U.S. tally finds fewer than 100 cases in recent years.
Yet strange things do occur.
A current example: An American company in Southeast Asia thought it had won a major government contract only to see the deadline extended at the last minute.
Then an obscure group entered an almost identical complex bid at a slightly lower price.
The U.S. ambassador has protested heatedly to his host government on grounds that secret terms were stolen for the rival's benefit; the outcome is still pending.
Businesses aren't uniformly enthusiastic about getting help and guidance from the CIA.
One agency official concedes there's historical animosity between government and business, and many executives don't want to be tainted by association with spies.
Perhaps that's why American Telephone & Telegraph Co. says: "We don't need the CIA's help in these kind of matters, thank you very much."
