When U.S. immigration legislation was being framed in the 1920s, congressional committees heard leading scientists of the day testify that greed, sloth, drunkenness and poverty were genetically rooted.
The best way to keep our population free of such undesirable traits, it was argued, was to limit the entry of the ethnic, racial and religious groups who tended to carry the culprit genes.
The result was the Immigration Law of 1926, which later made it impossible for many of the victims of the Third Reich's more activist eugenics initiatives to escape to the U.S.
Today we are better informed about how genetics works.
Indeed, teams of molecular biologists working under the Human Genome Project are now converging on a comprehensive map of the estimated 100,000 genes that constitute the blueprint for humankind.
Yet with this Holy Grail of biology seemingly within reach, we are hearing speculations that are reminiscent of the benighted '20s.
Might there not, it is suggested, be a gene for criminal behavior?
For sexual preference?
For happiness?
Will our power to manipulate DNA bring about the perfection of the human?
Or even the tomato?
This is just the sort of naivete that Robert Pollack decisively quashes in "Signs of Life: The Language and Meanings of DNA" (Houghton Mifflin, 212 pages, $19.95).
Mr. Pollack, a distinguished molecular biologist and teacher at Columbia University, sees DNA not as mere molecules amenable to the methods of physics, but as an ancient text written over the past three billion years by the hand of evolution.
The Human Genome Project, he points out, is only the first step in divining the meaning of this text.
What the vast 15-year effort will yield is a string of three billion molecular letters spelling out the "sentences" that are our genes.
Understanding these sentences, however, means learning to fathom the myriad activities of the tiny molecular machines -- proteins, that is -- whose design they encode.
Nor is the overall meaning of the human genome, of which each individual possesses a slightly different draft, simply a sum of the meanings of the genes that constitute it.
Such is the richness, depth and ambiguity of the genetic text we carry in our cells, Mr. Pollack persuasively argues, that the text's significance will never be fully disclosed.
So much for the fantasy of reducing complex human behaviors to the action of a few genes.
"Signs of Life" is not always a breeze to read.
But Mr. Pollack is lucid and logical in analyzing the social possibilities raised by our new-found power to manipulate the chemistry of heredity, which includes eugenic selection by test-tube fertilization and the control of human sexuality through molecular pharmacology.
"All these procedures," he writes, "will undoubtedly be proposed with great enthusiasm in the coming years, but once they are seen in the light of the human genome's global impenetrability, these dead ends of an old paradigm will appear as wrong, and as dangerous, as the establishment of separate culture vessels for alphas and betas in the Brave New World of Huxley or the numbering of people by tattoo on their arms in the real world of German concentration camps."
If all goes according to plan, a map of the human genome will be assembled by 2003 -- just in time for the 50th anniversary of the discovery of DNA's elegant spiral-staircase architecture.
One of the duo of scientists awarded the Nobel Prize for this earlier feat, James Watson, also headed the Human Genome Project until 1992, when he stepped down to protest the government's decision to patent some of the newly discovered gene sequences.
The other laureate, Francis Crick, has moved on to an even more ambitious quest, which he tells of in "The Astonishing Hypothesis: The Scientific Search for the Soul" (Scribners, 317 pages, $25).
Mr. Crick's avowed goal is to solve the mystery of consciousness in scientific terms.
He bases his approach on the "astonishing" -- but, to his mind, quite plausible -- hypothesis that "you, your joys and your sorrows, your memories and your ambitions, your sense of personal identity and free will, are in fact no more than the behavior of a vast assembly of nerve cells and their associated molecules."
Could two things so apparently dissimilar as a thought and neural firing really be identical?
Brushing aside this philosophical question with the insouciance of a great scientist, Mr. Crick instead takes the reader on an absorbing tour of the experimental efforts aimed at discovering how brain processes give rise to our visual consciousness.
In a somewhat playful spirit, he purports to locate the seat of our free will in a little structure called the "anterior cingulate sulcus."
Near the end of "The Astonishing Hypothesis," the always genial author concedes that there may be aspects of consciousness that lie beyond the reach of science.
Yet so stalwart is his faith in the scientific method that he urges it even on those who believe that the soul is something more than the purely material firing of neurons.
"If the members of a church really believe in life after death," he asks, "why do they not conduct sound experiments to establish it?"
Seances, perhaps?
