National Semiconductor Corp. is mounting an effort to popularize credit-card-sized devices that use codes to protect computer messages and transactions from crooks and eavesdroppers.
The semiconductor maker will unveil today a data-security technology based on a microchip that can be placed in pocket-sized cards or in other hardware.
The chip includes mathematical formulas that encrypt computer data to protect privacy, and that verify users' identities for financial transactions or to allow access to data and computer networks.
A card with the chip would plug into a personal computer and take the place of a password.
National Semiconductor, Santa Clara, Calif., intends to work with RSA Data Security Inc., a closely held maker of encryption software in Redwood City, Calif., to set new technical standards for such security token devices.
If adopted, PCs and portable communications devices might be used with tokens to allow users to protect the privacy of their electronic mail and to buy goods on their machines.
In addition, National Semiconductor hopes its security chips will be used to meter transactions, billing users for retrieving news articles from a storage disk, for example, or for calling up computerized movies from a television decoder.
"Metering and the whole concept of electronic commerce is going to be an awesomely large opportunity," said Walt Curtis, vice president of National Semiconductor's strategic business unit.
Others are likely to propose rival standards in the same field.
Encryption, a technique originally used to protect classified government data, is already being used in some fashion by nearly every major computer vendor.
Apple Computer Inc., Lotus Development Corp. and Microsoft Corp., for example, already license RSA encryption software to add data security features to software they sell.
However, tokens are less vulnerable than encryption software to unscrupulous hackers, and have long been used at secret government facilities.
National Semiconductor's chip, which can use RSA's encryption formula or a government-proposed standard called Skipjack, has an unusual design that automatically erases all data it contains if anyone tries to disassemble it or to use electronic instruments to read its contents.
The company expects to line up software companies and other partners to start selling such tokens at a retail price of around $150, compared with several hundred dollars for government-issue technology.
Another company with similar commercial plans is Semaphore Communications Corp., a Xerox Corp. data-security subsidiary that has been talking to chip makers about embedding its technology in card-type tokens.
William Ferguson, a Semaphore vice president, said he thinks National Semiconductor's technology is still too expensive, especially when one includes the price of token-reading devices that must be attached to computers.
Nevertheless, Mr. Ferguson predicts low-priced tokens will eventually become commonplace for protecting data -- after a few years of experimentation with different technologies.
"I think it's going to become the standard for due care."
