Advanced Micro Devices Inc., loosening Intel Corp.'s monopoly over a central piece in personal computers, said it will supply microchips to Compaq Computer Corp., one of Intel's biggest customers.
The deal boosts Advanced Micro, which makes microchips that are compatible with Intel's flagship 486 chip, the processor inside today's most popular PCs.
"This is a watershed agreement," said W.J. Sanders III, Advanced Micro's chief executive officer.
"We've finally gotten the endorsement of one of the big" PC makers, he said.
Intel, meanwhile, will continue as Compaq's principal supplier, with Advanced Micro serving as a hedge against supply shortages that have plagued Intel in the past.
"You never know when there's going to be a hiccup," said Kevin Bohren, a Compaq vice president.
After Advanced Micro's announcement yesterday, its shares jumped 62.5 cents to $20.625 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Intel shares sagged $1.50 to $63.625 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Advanced Micro's raid comes as challenges to Intel's reign over PC microchips are more numerous and serious than at any time since the advent of the PC more than a decade ago.
A coalition of Apple Computer Inc., International Business Machines Corp. and Motorola Inc. plans to ship PCs using a non-Intel microchip later this year.
Microsoft Corp., which sets the standard for PC software, recently released a version of its standard that for the first time works on non-Intel chips.
Advanced Micro has battled for years to gain ground on Intel, facing lawsuits and customer skepticism in the process.
Indeed, Mr. Sanders spoke to reporters yesterday during a recess of the latest trial between his company and Intel, which has repeatedly, though so far unsuccessfully, sued Advanced Micro over copycat allegations.
"This deal with Compaq removes any legitimate reason not to buy chips from us," Mr. Sanders said.
Others aren't so sure.
To start with, Compaq has pledged to satisfy just an unspecified fraction of its microchip needs through Advanced Micro.
While Mr. Sanders said that Compaq will become the company's largest customer within a year, he provided no sales forecasts.
Initially, Compaq couldn't get sufficient numbers of Intel's newest microchip, the Pentium.
"It's not a pricing issue," Mr. Bohren said.
"It's just good business to add multiple suppliers."
Most other big PC makers seem likely to remain loyal to Intel, which is their sole supplier.
Dell Computer Corp., for instance, has no immediate plans to follow Compaq's lead.
"The Intel brand carries a level of awareness that's valuable," spokesman Dean Kline said.
"We don't see any need to make any kind of change."
Yet, Mr. Sanders vowed to grab another major Intel customer before the year is out.
While Intel downplayed the threat, the company felt the sting of Compaq's partial defection.
"Obviously, I'm disappointed," said Paul Ostellini, Intel's senior vice president.
Mr. Ostellini described the deal as an isolated instance, saying Advanced Micro had "secured one big fish."
While allowing that Intel's rival might "pick up a few other customers," he said that "it remains to be seen whether Advanced Micro can deliver over time."
