The dollar surged against the mark on speculation the Federal Reserve is bracing for a rate increase, after earlier taking a drubbing on a Bundesbank decision to leave rates undisturbed.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7415 marks, up from 1.7336 marks late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 108.14 yen, up from 107.88 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4870, down from $1.4955.
About midday Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.40 yen and at 1.7423 marks.
Initially, the dollar floundered on the decision by the Bundesbank's governing board to leave its benchmark discount and Lombard rates unchanged.
The German central bank's decision was signaled early by release of data indicating the German M3 money supply had expanded at an annual rate of 8.1% in December, far above economists' expectations of a 7.2% rise and the Bundesbank's own target corridor of 4.5%-6.5%.
The dollar's decline was given further impetus by unexpectedly bearish U.S. employment statistics, showing weekly unemployment claims had spiraled upward by 59,000 to 422,000 for the week ended Jan. 29, compared with forecasts of a rise of only 31,000.
The combination of steady German interest rates and bearish U.S. economic news piloted the dollar to an intraday low of 1.7285 marks.
But the U..S. currency's slide was reversed by speculation over the Fed's decision not to intervene in the open markets, despite the fact that Fed funds were trading above the perceived target of 3%.
The federal funds rate, the rate which commercial banks charge each other for overnight loans, is the Fed's most important money-market policy tool.
In the past, the Fed has tended to intervene whenever the rate was significantly above 3%, and just prior to the usual intervention period, the rate stood at 3 1/8%.
To many traders, the lack of intervention suggested an early rate increase is likely.
They also noted that the policy-making Federal Open Markets Committee is meeting today and tomorrow to discuss interest-rate policy.
In addition, Alan Greenspan, Fed chairman, made clear earlier this week that he wants short-term interest rates to rise in a pre-emptive strike against inflation, but he left open the question as to when and how much rates will go up.
However, many traders were quick to doubt the rate-increase speculation, noting that the Fed's lack of intervention was probably a technicality.
"People were reading too much" into the Fed's inaction, said Rick Porter, vice president at Bank Brussels Lambert in New York.
Even so, the dollar shot up almost two pfennigs in two hours -- piercing a key resistance level of 1.7380 marks -- to hit an intraday high of 1.7455 marks.
"The perception was that the U.S. may come through on interest rates, where the Germans didn't," said Erik DePaul, a trader at the Royal Bank of Scotland.
But as many traders decided they had overreacted, the dollar later retreated a bit on profit-taking.
According to Mr. DePaul, traders hearkened back to the negative weekly jobless numbers, which boded badly for the far more important nonfarm payroll data due out tomorrow.
"It put a downward bias on how people will be reading the payroll number," Mr. DePaul said, noting that a weak January employment number would lessen the inflation danger and thus reduce the need for an interest-rate increase.
