Atari Corp. reported a wider fourth-quarter loss on a 67% drop in sales and warned that it won't be profitable until it cranks up shipments of its new Jaguar video game product.
But the game maker's stock rose 87.5 cents to $7.375 in American Stock Exchange trading on news that Atari got a cash infusion from Time Warner Inc., which bought $12.8 million of Atari stock, boosting its stake to 27% from 25%.
Separately, Atari said rival Nintendo of America Inc. settled a lawsuit alleging Nintendo had infringed on an Atari patent for horizontal scrolling in video games.
Terms weren't disclosed.
Nintendo of America is a unit of Nintendo Co. of Japan.
Atari's loss for the quarter was $22.6 million, or 39 cents a share, after a $12.1 million charge for writing down inventory and a $6 million restructuring charge.
In the year-earlier quarter, Atari had a loss of $21.9 million, or 38 cents a share.
Sales fell to $8.5 million from $25.5 million.
Analysts said the results were in line with expectations, given Atari's switch from selling computers in Europe to selling video games in the U.S.
The "implosion on the revenue line was not unexpected," Gruntal & Co. analyst Charles Lemonides said.
He added that the Time Warner cash infusion "was a big vote of confidence."
In a statement, Atari said it has "substantially completed" its transition to selling video games.
The game maker's future hinges largely on the success of its full-motion, graphics-intensive Jaguar games, which are now selling in San Francisco, New York and Los Angeles.
In a statement, the company said that because of increased spending to market the games "we do not expect to achieve profitability" until Jaguar ships in "substantial volume."
Atari and Nintendo contradicted each other about the outlines of Friday's patent-infringement settlement.
Atari said in a statement that Nintendo had paid cash to settle and to license Atari patents.
But Nintendo said in its own statement that it received "certain payments and patent licenses on a royalty-free basis from Atari."
An Atari spokesman replied that "Nintendo is full of it."
Atari has a similar suit pending against Sega of America Inc., a unit of Japan's Sega Enterprises Ltd.
Separately, Nintendo said it and Atari Games Corp. -- which is separate from Atari Corp. -- settled all patent litigation between them concerning alleged patent infringement and antitrust violations.
Nintendo didn't elaborate.
Atari Games Corp. is 78%-owned by Time Warner, which is also a major investor in Atari Corp.
