Insurance companies braced for an onslaught of claims from earthquake-ravaged Los Angeles that some experts said could reach $1 billion.
But the industry is expected to escape serious financial damage because of the nature of earthquake coverage.
Early estimates were that losses could climb above the $960 million in claims insurers had from the 1989 San Francisco earthquake because the affected area is more densely populated.
But whatever the total in Los Angeles, it will certainly pale beside the $16.5 billion in claims paid out on Hurricane Andrew.
Earthquake insurance in places like Southern California is so expensive that industry experts estimate that only about a quarter of California homeowners have coverage.
And for those who do, many policies carry high deductibles that help mitigate the insurance industry's losses.
Insured homeowners who lack earthquake coverage are still covered from fires and looting that result from the quake.
Many big companies in the area carry earthquake insurance, which often includes coverage for lost profits if operations are forced to shut down.
Small companies, however, tend to avoid such coverage because of the cost.
Insurance experts also expect fewer-than-usual claims from businesses because many companies were closed for the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday.
"Because the industry has insulated itself, it would have to be the sort of quake that toppled buildings before there would be major losses," said Michael Smith, a stock analyst with Lehman Brothers.
"I don't think it will be a major loss event for the industry."
The San Francisco earthquake in 1989, the costliest earthquake in U.S. history, caused $7 billion in total damages, but insurers paid only a fraction of that.
"This earthquake will be material for a few companies, but it won't be solvency-threatening," said A.M. Best Co.
Senior Vice President John Snyder.
Specific insurers say it will be days before they can estimate their losses.
"I haven't a clue at this moment," said Chubb Corp.
Vice President Jay Madigan.
"It's much too early."
Whatever the total, the earthquake is the latest in a series of events in Los Angeles to hit the insurance industry.
In October, fires that whipped through the city caused $950 million in insured losses.
The riots two years ago caused $775 million in losses.
The biggest insurers in the state are State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., with 25.7% of the California homeowners market, followed by Allstate Corp., with 15.6%.
Farmers Insurance Co., a unit of B.A.TT Industries PLC, has a 13.5% share.
Other companies with significant exposure are the California State Automobile Association, USAA Group, Allianz AG Holdings' Fireman's Fund Insurance Co., Safeco Corp., 20th Century Industries, Chubb and TIG Holdings Inc., according to A.M. Best.
Uncertainty over the quake delayed the opening of Allstate stock as traders sorted out an imbalance in orders.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Allstate closed at $28.625, down $1; Chubb closed at $77.375, down 37.5 cents, and TIG fell to $21.875, down 37.5 cents.
On the Nasdaq Stock Market, Safeco closed at $53.875, down 25 cents.
"Our biggest concern was workers compensation claims if it happened during the work hours," said Louis Paglia, senior vice president of TIG.
"We were fortunate about that."
Reinsurance, in which insurance companies buy protection for their own potential losses, will soften the blow for many insurers.
State Farm goes without reinsurance because its size makes the protection prohibitively expensive.
But other insurers generally have coverage.
Safeco, for instance, pays only 10% of its losses after the first $35 million.
If the quake had been even more severe, insurance stocks might have risen.
Commercial-insurance prices have been sliding for the past six years because of intense competition.
Analysts say devestating disaster losses might trigger a turnaround in prices as insurers seek to recover their losses.
"Anything that will destroy capital in this industry is good for prices," said John Fields, a senior portfolio manager with Delaware Management Co., an investment management firm based in Philadelphia.
But even the $16.5 billion paid in claims on Hurricane Andrew wasn't enough to turn the insurance cycle.
Prices for property catastrophe reinsurance rose sharply after the storm, and some other speciality lines firmed, but commercial-liability insurance, for instance, continued to fall.
"This will not be the kind of event that turns the cycle in itself," said Lehman Brother's Mr. Smith.
Insurance companies don't like to insure against earthquakes because, they argue, they can't spread the risks.
That's because only the homeowners most at risk -- those who live along the fault lines -- buy it.
For the past five years, California has ordered that insurers offer it as an option.
The cost for earthquake protection adds $150 to $300 a year to the annual cost of an average policy, which without earthquake protection costs about $450, according to the Insurance Information Institute.
To keep costs down, the policies feature deductibles of up to 10% on the amount covered.
A home valued at $300,000 would have to sustain $30,000 in damages before the insurer pays.
Insurance companies sent teams of adjusters into the affected areas yesterday, but their response was slowed because of damage sustained at their own facilities.
