Standard & Poor's Corp.'s "risk ratings" for bond funds had a frustrating start yesterday, as only 19 funds out of roughly 100 candidates agreed to make their new grades public.
The ratings, which attempt to gauge the future volatility of bond funds' returns, are useful for comparing funds with similar investment objectives.
They're intended to help investors spot hidden market risks among funds that otherwise look like safe bets.
For instance, among funds rated triple-A for creditworthiness, only the AIM Limited Maturity fund also carries a triple-A rating for market risk, according to S&P's list.
By contrast, the Smith Breeden Short Duration U.S. Government fund rates a double-A-plus for market risk, while the TNE Government Securities fund rates just a single-A-plus for market risk.
Unlike credit ratings, which measure the ability of bond issuers to repay debt, the market-risk ratings are supposed to gauge how well a bond fund might do under a variety of market changes, such as a swing in interest rates, or how likely it is the fund might get hit by its reliance on derivatives.
Also, liquidity and credit analysis, and even assessments of managers' performances, will be considered in the risk ratings, S&P said.
The agency will use "stress test" models to anticipate these variables.
The 19 funds that have been rated by S&P for market risk have a total of nearly $4 billion in assets.
The only active sector of the U.S. bond market yesterday was the bond futures market at the Chicago Board of Trade where prices dropped slightly.
Most other sectors of the market were closed in observance of the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday.
Bond futures contracts are agreements to buy or sell a Treasury security at a set price at a specified date.
In gauging the prospective future performance of a fund, S&P's ratings will differ from those of Morningstar Inc., the Chicago newsletter service, because the Morningstar ratings rely only on past performance.
While investors should look at past performance, they should be aware that more than half of the bond funds marketed today have been in existence less than five years, under favorable, falling interest-rate conditions, according to Sanford Bragg, S&P managing director.
S&P said it will rate funds using a lower-case letter scale ranging from triple-a, the least volatile, to triple-c, the most volatile.
The ratings will be updated every month.
Investors can receive a free copy of S&P's "Guide to Bond Fund Safety," which provides an up-to-date listing of rated funds with details of what's behind the ratings, by calling 1-800-424-FUND.
Meanwhile, the March 30-year Treasury bond future contract dropped a bit more than 1/8 point to 115 9/32 after trading between 115 8/32 and 115 17/32.
The March 10-year note future contract dropped 1/8 point to 113 7/32.
Traders at the Chicago Board of Trade and Chicago Mercantile Exchange said volume was light and activity featureless.
The bond futures market closed at 1 p.m. EST in observance of the holiday.
A rally in crude oil and gold prices were cited as contributing factors to the slight bearish tone in the interest-rate futures.
February crude oil futures rose 32 cents a barrel to $15.10, after trading between $14.78 and $15.29.
February gold futures rose $2.10 an ounce higher to $392.20.
Bond futures traders said they didn't see any reaction to the news of the Los Angeles earthquake.
Traders said they would expect to see a sell-off as insurance companies liquidate their investments in order to make payments.
In overseas trading Treasury bond prices dropped slightly.
The benchmark 30-year bond dropped nearly 1/4 point from late Friday in New York, or nearly $2.50 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 99 7/32, to yield 6.31%, up from 6.29%.
The Treasury is to announce tomorrow details of its two-year and five-year note auctions, which are set for next week.
The Treasury's weekly auction of three-month and six-month bills, usually held on Monday, will be held today because of the Martin Luther King holiday.
