In a small conference room at IBM headquarters here, Jerome B. York, the new finance chief, confronts two nervous executives from the disk-drive division and pummels them with questions.
Why, Mr. York demands, does the division split its development team between Rochester, N.Y., and San Jose, Calif.?
Why does it ship parts to a plant in Mexico, only to reship partially assembled drives back to San Jose, when transport costs are "eating us alive"?
And where is the data the executives had promised to provide on competitors?
Above all, Mr. York zeroes in on bloated inventory: Why does the division have about a billion dollars worth of unsold product sitting around, tying up cash and ripe for theft or damage?
"IBM has $8.5 billion in inventory on its balance sheet," he tells the pair in a polite Memphis drawl.
"Where I come from, that's unacceptable.
We already got people walking and chewing bubble gum at the same time around here.
But in the next year, we're going to start working on inventory."
One executive replies that the high inventory level isn't his division's fault.
He blames the personal-computer division, which waits too long to take delivery.
But Mr. York isn't mollified.
By the time he finishes with the pair, patinas of sweat glisten on their foreheads.
Less than a year ago, Jerome York worked in the world of disk brakes rather than disk drives, helping turn around Chrysler Corp. by shaving $4 billion in annual expenses.
Then, he took on the bigger challenge of repairing International Business Machines Corp.
Since coming to IBM last May, he has set reductions of $5 billion a year with already-announced moves to cut 45,000 jobs, shut myriad plants and sell off real estate over the next three years.
Now, Mr. York must whittle almost $2 billion more by focusing on the small stuff, ferreting out inefficiencies and fundamentally challenging business practices locked in decades of die-hard habits.
"There's a lot of waste in this company," IBM's new chief financial officer says.
"We're going to find it and root it out."
As he pursues this crusade, however, his chances of success are mixed.
The far-flung IBM empire is more complex, more decentralized and possibly in more trouble than Chrysler was (although Mr. York contends the auto maker was in worse shape).
Mr. York must knit together the spending practices of disparate divisions that prize their autonomy.
He can't hack away too boldly at such cherished IBM perks as employee country clubs and fetes for top salespeople, even though such frills, at a company with IBM's problems, have raised eyebrows.
He also must push to change a company once renowned for a torpid management style and time-sapping consensus decision-making.
The former auto executive, moreover, must take on all of this while being regarded as a techno-neophyte and a stranger by dozens of lifelong IBMers whom he must enlist in his effort.
Mr. York's preoccupation with costs and his lack of high-tech basics clearly rankle some current and recently departed IBMers.
Others contend, however, that only an outsider can usher in the new era of cutbacks and coldhearted reality that Big Blue requires.
There are some signs that Mr. York's focus on cutting back is catching on.
Yesterday, IBM reported fourth-quarter net income of $382 million, or 62 cents a share, its first quarterly profit in more than a year.
Even if Mr. York succeeds at imposing further cuts, however, they alone won't bring IBM back.
The new management team led by Chairman Louis V. Gerstner must develop sources of revenue to offset the decline of the mainframe business.
This point was made painfully clear yesterday, when IBM surprised investors by reporting a small revenue decline for the fourth quarter, typically its strongest.
IBM stock closed at $58.25, down 37.5 cents a share, as the New York Stock Exchange's most active issue.
On the surface, Jerome York looks like a classic IBMer: He is a slender, silverhaired 55-year-old who wears white, stiffly starched shirts beneath appropriately dark suits.
But at Big Blue, he is an executive of an entirely different color.
The son of an Army officer, he attended West Point and dreamed of serving in the Air Force.
But a gymnastics injury when he was a freshman landed him in traction for six months and kept him from serving.
So, he was graduated, earned an engineering degree from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and an M.B.A. from the University of Michigan and went to work for Ford Motor Co. and then Hertz Corp.
He joined Chrysler in 1979 and soon drew attention as a demanding workaholic, a man who more than once fainted after an all-night session fueled by coffee and nicotine.
Mr. York has been married four times (his present wife was also wife No. 2).
Impatient and easily bored, he says the only movies he can bear to sit through feature lots of bullets and Clint Eastwood; "Dirty Harry," it seems, outdraws "Age of Innocence."
In a hobby Harry himself would admire, Mr. York has owned seven motorcycles, giving up the last one only recently as his peripheral vision started to fade.
At IBM, Mr. York has won early regard as a blunt, no-nonsense manager who spices his language with so many four-letter words that some subordinates have adopted his foul-mouthed lexicon.
"If you don't deliver for Jerry," observes IBM chief strategist James Cannavino, "somebody had better be preparing for your passage into the next life."
One January morning after a heavy snowstorm created bad road conditions, Mr. York nonetheless chided his staff for trickling into the office late.
He himself was at his desk by 8 a.m. -- after attaching a snowplow to his Dodge pickup and literally plowing his way from his home in Connecticut to headquarters in Armonk.
Mr. York confronts IBM's problems just as directly.
To find out how Big Blue works and how much needs to be done, he crisscrosses the company's global operations and visits factory floors.
No detail seems too small to merit his scrutiny.
On a recent day, he headed for Austin, Texas, aboard a company Learjet (one of only seven jets left of the 13-plane fleet before he arrived; he wants to sell off a few more).
He was about to tour the plants that make a new line of PowerPC computers and workstations, two areas critical to IBM's future.
But less than an hour into his flight, he was fuming -- over envelopes.
He had opened an oversized brown envelope marked "IBM CONFIDENTIAL" and pulled out a memo that hardly seemed worth any secrecy.
"Now, there's waste for you," he said, flicking the envelope over to his executive assistant, Marie Wieck.
"I want to know how many of these we use.
If they buy any more, I'm not going to pay for them."
Easier said than done.
Eight weeks later, Ms. Wieck was still mired in bids and discussions over envelopes.
It turns out that IBM uses five security levels for envelopes -- Unclassified, Internal, Confidential, Confidential-Restricted and Registered.
She must decide whether that array can be consolidated into one reusable envelope; whether it would cost less to use envelopes that can be resealed several times before they are thrown away; or whether IBM needs any confidential envelopes.
There also is a question of size.
Ms. Wieck still hasn't obtained the large-vs.small breakdown she needs.
The potential savings?
IBM buys three million of the most commonly used "Confidential" envelopes, like the one that miffed Mr. York, at a cost of $75,000 a year; the rest combined add up to even less.
Onward to Austin, where Mr. York donned a sterilized "bunny suit" and entered the "clean room" where workers turn out glass-fiber circuit boards.
There, sounding a bit like kiddie host Mr. Rogers on a factory tour, Mr. York showed himself to be an eager student.
He watched the process keenly, asking questions about what the rollers do (they press a resin into the boards) and about why a metal plate is inserted between the copper-layered boards (it keeps them clean and drives down the heat in the baking process).
He was soon making suggestions and asking managers to justify the way they do things.
Why so much processing before the board gets to the cutter?
(It has always been done this way, he is told.)
How much scrap is thrown away at the end of the process? (10%.)
Can it be reduced?
At the end of it all, Mr. York felt confident enough to challenge plant manager Bill Amelio's assertion that in five years at the operation, putting out 10,000 circuit boards a day, not one board has been returned for defects.
"It's the best plant in the world," Mr. Amelio said proudly before the small group touring with the newcomer from Armonk.
Mr. York didn't buy it.
"Frankly, I just don't believe you," he shot back.
A numbers man, he viewed the claim as "statistically impossible" and told his hosts, "You may not be getting all the data back."
That rankled the site's top manager, Jerry Carlson, who weeks later refused to accept Mr. York's premise.
Mr. York "just doesn't understand what we've done here," Mr. Carlson said in an interview.
Later, Mr. York praised the work of the plant manager, Mr. Amelio, in a small gathering.
But he issued a warning about the plant's future.
"Making circuit cards is a business IBM doesn't have to be in, strategically," the CFO told the group.
"At some point, you'll wall out in this facility need to expand, and when you ask for $30 million to rebuild, you'll have to show us you're highly competitive."
To Mr. York, IBM has no other choice but to re-examine the basics of almost everything it does.
He likens his job to managing a family checkbook.
IBM's margins have fallen by the equivalent of $13 billion in annual operating profit, yet even in a massive restructuring, the company had cut only $3 billion in annual expenses by the time he came in.
"IBM is living way over its head," he says.
The $10 billion gap between declining profits and stubborn costs helped drive IBM into the red for two consecutive years and knock down its stock price by two-thirds.
In 1992, IBM's costs amounted to 42% of revenue, compared with 31% on average for rivals.
To right that imbalance, Mr. York has snipped away at some obviously expendable items.
Gone is the annual Christmas party for the press at the New York Plaza; savings: about $10,000.
IBM no longer rents an entire floor of the Park Tower on Madison Avenue in Manhattan, across the street from its own office tower, for product introductions; savings: $1 million.
And though it isn't easy, the outsider from Chrysler has managed to trim a bit here and there in the "recognition events" for top employees.
Now, instead of staging 11 separate gatherings for salespeople who exceed their quotas and join the "Golden Circle," IBM will hold four.
Instead of fancy five-star resorts such as the Breakers in Palm Beach, Fla., IBM salesmen this March will stay at Orlando's Buena Vista Palace.
In broader strokes, Mr. York summarily trimmed $1 billion from IBM's fat $7 billion research and development budget.
He consolidated the purchase of paper clips, pens and paper, and almost everything but manufacturing materials, saving about $5 million a year with bulk orders and fewer people.
Instead of sending out instruction manuals the size of the New York City phone book, IBM now sends instructions electronically, saving $50 million in printing costs.
Mr. York has even taken a whack at some sacred items.
IBM's unlimited beneficence to employees, present and past, is gone.
Raises were smaller last year.
Employees are contributing more to their health plans.
After last July 1, the early-retirement package was halved to a maximum of 26 weeks of pay.
Medical benefits for laid-off workers were cut to, at most, six months of coverage after leaving IBM, down from one year.
However, additional cuts may prove harder to find.
Mr. York must cope with IBM's long-held notion that it alone must provide everything from soup to nuts for its customers, putting the company in a lot of low-margin products.
He spends a lot of his time forcing feuding divisions to cooperate in his drive to eliminate redundant expenses and inefficient practices.
One example: At a budget meeting, he found that the division that makes AS/400 workstations planned to churn out 10,000 more machines than the marketing division was promising to sell.
He asked nicely that the two divisions agree on how many they would sell for the sake of consistency (and to cut down on the inventory problem).
The rival executives said it couldn't be done.
Mr. York got tougher, saying it could.
Ultimately, it was.
Mr. York also questions why IBM should make so many of the parts for its products.
It contracts out only about 50% of its manufacturing costs, compared with the auto industry's average of 70%.
"You can't manufacture every nut and bolt that goes into your hardware because somebody can do that better than you can," he says.
The IBMers he visited at the Austin plant, however, don't necessarily see it that way.
On his recent trip, Mr. York reached the assembly line for RS/6000 computers and was struck by how small it is compared with Detroit's six-mile-long production lines.
The managers in Austin are obsessive testers, running machines through seven different checks to look for bugs.
Then, when the workstations are assembled, one out of 10 is sent out for a random spot-check -- a real "lifesaver," one manager explained.
Mr. York, however, couldn't comprehend the reason for so much testing.
"It's incredible to me that with all the testing you do, you then have to check one out of 10," he told the plant team.
"And that test is a `lifesaver' because otherwise we wouldn't know?" he added pointedly.
The answer: Electronic products are delicate -- more delicate than most mechanical parts that go into cars.
After all the pieces are assembled, loaded with software and plugged into the wall, sometimes all the parts don't work together.
But Mr. York wasn't satisfied.
He told the team: "I have a problem in that everywhere I go in the company, I'm told defects are falling.
But when I look at the books, I don't see warranty costs falling."
No sooner did he finish questioning warranties than he stumbled on another quagmire.
Spotting rows of boxed-up RS/6000s waiting to be shipped out, he asked how much the plant is charged by IBM's marketing division for handling the shipments to customers.
The answer: a stiff $700 a box, for a machine that is just a little larger than a desktop PC.
"You guys are getting hosed," Mr. York countered with a chuckle.
He suggested that the plant check shipping rates at commercial carriers such as United Parcel Service to gather evidence for forcing the marketing division to reduce its charge.
Mr. Carlson, the site manager, said a task force was tackling the problem.
For years, IBM's marketing division has charged freight, duty and shipping costs by region instead of by product.
So divisions that ship fewer, higher-priced machines, such as the RS/6000, pay more per machine than, say, IBM Personal Computer Co., which ships tens of thousands more units and pays $50 each.
Later, Mr. Carlson said the review prompted IBM Marketing to halve its $700-per-box charge to $350; further dickering has cut it to $224.
That still is far higher than commercial shipping, however, which runs $90 for two-day delivery, he says; he hopes to bargain for an even-lower charge.
The night of Mr. York's visit, the Austin executives went home imbued with his tough-talking -- and profane -- style.
The wife of one ended up asking her husband why, all of a sudden, he had started making liberal use of the "f-word."
He explained: "It's Jerry's favorite word."
True to style, Mr. York was up at dawn the next morning, ready to fly to Boulder, Colo., to see IBM's software production facilities.
Plant officials zoomed him to a conference room, where a table was laid out with a silver service for coffee, fresh fruit and pastries.
(This was pretty lavish by IBM's frugal new standards; at a recent meeting at a mainframe center in New York state, managers had to pay for their own coffee and doughnuts.)
Mr. York skipped the fruit in favor of the pastries, helped himself to yet another cup of coffee and sat down for a presentation.
But the meetings went on and on.
Mr. York fidgeted as one executive, Kathy Howell, delivered a spiel about the technology for delivering software electronically.
His hints of impatience weren't noticed, and when she tried to explain a graphic detailing the cost per megabyte of zapping software over phone lines, he erupted.
"I want to get off that slide," he said sternly, cutting to the chase: "Where do you want to take this business?
Get me to the end and tell me where you want to go."
Ms. Howell, director of world-wide software packaging, then launched into a discussion of networking tools, further exasperating Mr. York, who believes IBM spends too much time on the nuts and bolts and doesn't focus enough on where it can gain a product edge.
"As a company," he told his hosts, "we're still worrying too much about whether the spaghetti inside is fiber or cable.
We need to focus on where we can add value."
Ms. Howell gave up and sat down.
"He picked on me," she said later, although she understands Mr. York's gripe: Spare him the arcane details, give him the broad strategy.
"We'll never make that mistake again," she said.
The next executive didn't fare much better as he tried to explain a new CD-ROM system that lets customers download a program from various titles without going to a computer store.
Mr. York wasn't impressed.
Ten minutes into lunch, he said he was ready to fly back to Armonk.
On the plane, Mr. York relaxed a bit, chewed some gum and sipped more coffee.
He planned to head back to headquarters and crunch some more numbers, although it was already apparent the trip hadn't yielded any particular cost-cutting breakthroughs.
But that's all right, he said: "There's no magic bullet.
It's going to be a little here and a little there."
