The dollar surged to its highest level against the mark since August 1991, as some surprisingly strong U.S. retail-sales data for December provided renewed evidence of a boisterous U.S. economy.
The dollar slipped versus the yen, however, as traders sold marks for yen and U.S. officials voiced concerns about a lack of progress in the U.S.-Japan trade talks.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7505 marks, up from 1.7337 marks late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 111.76 yen, down from 112.20 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4970, down from $1.5035.
About midday Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 111.73 yen and at 1.7500 marks.
The dollar began its climb against the mark during the Asian day, as traders dumped the German currency on word of a CBS News poll showing that support for Russian President Boris Yeltsin has plunged to 38% currently from 50% in October.
The mark often suffers on signs of political tension in Russia, because of Germany's close political and economic links to Eastern Europe.
By early North American trading, the mark sell-off had lifted the dollar to just under a key psychological level at 1.7480 marks, the highest level reached by the dollar during 1993.
And from there, the dollar took off after a bullish U.S. retail sales report persuaded traders that the U.S. economy is still racing ahead on all cylinders.
"The market had been looking to take out last year's high for some time," said Bill Bertha, a vice president at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
"The retail-sales data was a catalyst to do just that.
It just finally sprung," he added.
The U.S. Commerce Department said U.S. retail sales increased 0.8% in December, well above economists' expectations of a 0.4% gain.
As the dollar sliced through the 1993 high, it continued to climb to an intraday high of 1.7553 marks, a level unseen since Aug. 31, 1991, in the aftermath of the coup against then-Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
And the U.S. currency managed to hold above the 1.7500-marks level, despite reports of dollar sales by the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, as the dollar climbed past that level.
Fears of Bundesbank intervention have recently helped to cap the dollar's rise against the mark.
But those fears were assuaged after traders reported only relatively light intervention, which wasn't sufficient to reverse the rally.
"The dollar broke through critical levels, and evidently the Bundesbank did sell the dollar, but not with a trumpet blaring," said John McCarthy, manager of foreign exchange at ING Capital Markets Inc.
"Perhaps they came in to ensure that the rise didn't get out of hand," said Carl Amendola, vice president of Bayerische Hypotheken-und Wechsel-Bank AG in New York.
"I think they're smart enough to know they don't have enough resources to buck the entire foreign-exchange market," he said.
Meanwhile, the yen gained against both the dollar and the mark, boosted by "a tremendous amount of stop-losses" when traders long on the mark against the yen were caught off guard by the German currency's sudden decline versus the dollar, said Mellon Bank's Mr. Bertha.
The yen also was helped by more tough talk by U.S. officials riled by the slow pace of Japan-U.S. trade talks.
