Since hitting a peak of 7.7% in June 1992, the civilian unemployment rate has fallen steadily to its current level of 6.5%.
As the problem of unemployment has faded, however, concern about the quality of jobs has risen.
In particular, there is growing concern about the level of wages.
For example, Tuesday's Labor Department figures, which showed productivity rising in 1993 at a 1.7% annual rate while wages rose only 0.6%, led the Washington Post to dub this the "raise-less expansion."
And Labor Secretary Robert Reich is fond of pointing out that, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, real (inflation-adjusted) average earnings for workers on private, nonagricultural payrolls (in 1982 dollars) have fallen to $7.39 per hour in 1993 from $8.55 per hour in 1973.
Real weekly earnings (also in 1982 dollars) have fallen even more sharply, to $255 from $315 over the same period.
Unfortunately, these widely cited data tell us far less about the economic condition of American workers than is commonly believed.
The disparity between weekly and hourly wages is explained by the decline in average weekly hours, which for all private nonagricultural workers have fallen to 34.5 in 1993 from 38.7 in 1964.
Among the reasons for this reduction are a decline in actual hours worked, an increase in part-time and temporary employment, and the changing composition of industry.
Workers in the service sector, for example, tend to work fewer hours than those in manufacturing: 32.5 hours per week for service workers, compared with 41 hours for those in manufacturing in 1992.
Moreover, hours worked in services have declined over time, while those in manufacturing have held steady.
Thus, as total employment has shifted away from manufacturing toward services, the work force has shifted away from businesses where weekly hours are high to those where they are lower.
In 1953, 35% of all workers were employed in manufacturing and 58% in services.
By 1993, only 15% of workers were employed in manufacturing, while those in services accounted for 79% of the labor force.
The shift to part-time and temporary employment is generally considered to be bad for workers, since such jobs tend to pay less than comparable full-time work.
However, this is not universally the case.
Wages and benefits for many temporary workers are now equal to those in regular, full-time positions.
In fact, the vast bulk of workers in part-time jobs hold such jobs because they prefer them.
In 1992, 14.8 million workers voluntarily held part-time jobs, while 6.5 million did so only for lack of a full-time job.
Although the number of involuntary part-timers is a matter of concern, there are also a considerable number of people working full-time who would prefer to work part-time.
This is especially the case among women with children.
It is also worth mentioning that the calculation of hours worked and wages earned includes only nonsupervisory or production workers, thus excluding those in management and most salaried workers, who often work much more than 40 hours a week and have higher pay.
Also excluded are self-employed workers, who also tend to work considerably more than 40 hours a week.
Since nonsupervisory workers are a declining share of the work force and the number of self-employed workers is rising, the data on work hours are distorted.
Another problem with the data arises from people who refuse to answer questions about their income on BLS surveys.
Over one-fourth of all respondents now refuse to answer such questions.
This has forced the BLS to impute their income using various statistical techniques.
Research indicates that the resulting data tend to understate income for a large segment of the population, because people with high incomes are more likely not to report their income than those with low incomes.
Thus the wage data published by the BLS may be significantly lower than actual wages.
It is also very important to understand that the BLS data on work hours are for total hours paid, not worked.
When a worker receives additional paid vacation time, he is receiving a real increase in income in the sense that his pay for actual hours worked has increased, but this would not be reflected in the data.
Thus it is often incorrectly stated that American workers have not had any increase in leisure time for many years.
This is largely a misunderstanding of the data, confusing hours of work paid with actual hours of work.
There has, in fact, been an almost continuous decline in actual hours worked since World War II.
Not only do the data for work hours and earnings fail to account for paid vacations and holidays, they fail to account for benefits in general.
Needless to say, this is a huge gap because benefits made up 39% of total employee compensation in 1992, according to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
And benefits have been the fastest rising element of compensation for many years (see chart), largely because benefits, such as health insurance, are mainly tax-free, while the tax rate on money income has risen.
Last, it should be noted that the calculation of real wages is dependent on the quality of the inflation index used.
In the case of wages, the index generally used is the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers, a special index that differs slightly from the more widely reported CPI for all urban consumers.
Both CPIs suffer from problems that have tended to overstate the actual rate of inflation.
Among these are the inability of the indexes to fully capture improvements in quality, shifts in consumption patterns from higher-priced goods to lower-priced goods (from beef to chicken, for example) and the shift toward discount retailing.
It is widely believed that these and other factors may be causing the CPI to overstate the rate of inflation by as much as 0.6% per year.
Obviously, if the indexes used to adjust wage rates for inflation are excessively high, then real wage rates will appear to be lower than they actually are.
In conclusion, the concern about falling wages is largely a statistical illusion.
This fact is confirmed by the continuous upward rise in broader measures of income, such as real per capita gross domestic product and real median family income.
Real per capita GDP (in 1987 dollars) has risen to $19,874 in 1993 from $10,892 in 1959, while real median family income (in 1992 dollars) rose to $36,812 in 1992 from $30,661 in 1967.
Moreover, if incomes were really declining, it would quickly become apparent from the data on consumption.
In fact, by every measure consumption continues to grow year after year, giving every indication that the standard of living for the vast majority of Americans continues to rise.
In the end, aggregate wage data may not be a very good way to judge the well-being of American workers.
Not only are the data flawed, but in recent years their value has been reduced by the growing divergence of wage rates.
Whereas in the past, workers in the same line of work or in the same industry tended to be paid about the same, today there is a wide disparity among workers' wages.
In particular, those with education and skills tend to make considerably more than less-skilled, less-educated workers.
Thus many workers have seen substantial real increases in their wages, while others have had real reductions.
This is the inevitable price of moving toward automated, high-tech production and a knowledge-based economy.
It is not possible to generalize about the trend in wages without taking into account this fact.
Mr. Bartlett is a fellow at the Alexis de Tocqueville Institution in Arlington, Va.
