Tokyo stocks climbed 2.3% Monday on arbitrage-linked buying, as stock-index futures firmed because the Japanese yen retreated in currency dealings against the U.S. dollar, though volume was extremely thin.
But in London, prices fell sharply, following a severe slide in the futures market.
Frankfurt shares lost 1.5% because of soft bond and equity futures.
Madrid prices dived 2.1%, led down by the bond market.
Sydney equities sank 2% in a technical correction that left almost all leading industrial, mining and resource stocks down.
Hong Kong prices plunged 3.4% despite action to hold interest rates steady in the British colony.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 114.83, down 0.96, reflecting lower markets in all three major regions -- the Americas, Europe and Asia/Pacific.
Plantation stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 223.81, up 5.29, or 2.4%, with Industrial Oxygen of Malaysia posting an 6.2% gain in its local currency.
Mining stocks trailed, at 125.28 down 2.96, or 2.3%, with Broken Hill Proprietary of Australia sliding 3.8% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 28.21 points Friday, advanced 434.34 to 19393.94, near the day's high.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei index rose 29.10 points to close the morning session at 19423.04.
Monday's first-section volume was estimated at 220 million shares, down from 265.1 million shares in the previous session.
Advancing issues outnumbered retreating issues 661-327.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which gained 3.56 points Friday, rose 12.85 to 1569.96.
Activity was extremely sluggish because of a lack of incentives to lure investors from the sidelines.
Ahead of the Saturday meeting of finance ministers and central bankers from the Group of Seven major industrialized nations, Tokyo investors continued to postpone major moves amid uncertainty about currency developments.
The arbitrage-linked buying in afternoon dealings was prompted by a sharp retreat by the yen.
Repeated intervention by the Bank of Japan in the currency market Monday to buy dollars for yen was partly responsible for the gains in Nikkei-index futures prices, which also were helped by increasing signs that Japan could unveil further steps to deal with its huge current account surplus ahead of the G-7 meeting.
Such steps could include further promotion of imports and deregulatory measures.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index slumped 32.3 points to 3350.3, just 2.4 points above the intraday low.
The FT 30-stock index lost 21.1 points to 2585.8.
Volume was 506.3 million shares, down from 630.9 million shares in the previous session, as many players stayed out because of the U.S. market holiday, which thinned participants ranks world-wide and left many markets directionless.
The FT-SE 100 tumbled almost 30 points at the opening, as market makers tried to stall any panic selling following big drops in the U.S. stock and government bond markets after London trading closed Friday.
The 100-stock index, which marked a session high Monday of 3371.9, slid because the March stock-index futures contract stood at a big discount to the stock market.
London investors also were concerned that the U.S. could raise interest rates again soon, encouraging U.S. investors to pull out of British equities.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index, which jumped 23.25 points Friday, tumbled 32.44 to 2119.53, after enthusiasm faded following last Thursday's cut in a key German interest rate, and the soft market was pulled down by March futures dealings in government bonds.
The sell-off also resulted from broad pessimism about some German corporate prospects.
In Paris, stocks slid 1.6%, after declining throughout the day because of position liquidations timed to trading account periods and disappointment that French interest rates remained unchanged after several other European central banks lowered their key rates late last week; but stocks' moves were exaggerated by thin volume, as fund managers' ranks were thinned by French school vacations, and many investors worried about the civil war in Bosnia.
In Madrid, stocks sank 2.1%, the bourse's sharpest decline this year, on across-the-board selling prompted by a further correction in the bond market, which was unsettled by expectations of more rate increases in the U.S.; sentiment also was hurt by worries about developments in the former Yugoslavia and about a potential trade war between the U.S. and Japan.
In Brussels, prices fell broadly, as a rise in Belgian long-term interest rates added to bearish signals, such as the dollar's weakness and the U.S. rate boost, that have turned investors cautious.
In Sydney, stocks' sharp drop was linked to lower bond and equities markets abroad.
Recent buoyant economic data for Australia suggested the government might reevaluate monetary policy, though the stock market's correction was viewed as normal, with some analysts saying Australia and the U.S. don't need to increase interest rates soon.
Gold stocks fell along with the price of the metal.
In Hong Kong, shares' deep declines, in this year's lightest trading, quashed hopes that local banks' decision to hold steady on interest-rate policy would spark a bullish reaction in the recently lackluster market.
So far this year, the benchmark index has fallen 12%.
Investors had been nervous that Hong Kong would follow this month's U.S. credit-tightening move, but the Hong Kong Association of Banks left lending rates unchanged.
Yet stock sellers were characterized as unconcerned about rates.
The Hong Kong rate delay until the U.S. signals or moves on monetary policy added to anxiety about the timing for any Hong Kong rate increases.
In Singapore, prices scored late gains to end higher in slow dealings, little affected by 1993 gross domestic product data but influenced by state election results in Malaysia; in Kuala Lumpur, shares ended steady, as a resurgence in speculative activity offset softness in blue chips.
In Manila, shares fell in light dealings, as sentiment was damped by weakness in overseas exchanges.
In Taipei, the market logged its sixth drop in seven sessions; blue chips were losers as many investors bided their time and held positions, awaiting a Taiwan central bank opening of the bourse to more foreign funds and loosening the money supply.
In Wellington, stocks gave up 1.8%, because of weaker world bourses late last week and a rise in New Zealand debt-market yields, as well as the U.S. holiday Monday.
But in Seoul, stocks gained, boosted by growing optimism that the South Korean government may provide the market with some positive factors this week.
In Mexico City, prices dropped sharply in light trading as the government reported weak 1993 economic growth of just 0.4%, when 1.1% was expected, and rebels were talking tough ahead of a meeting with government officials.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
Source: Morgan Stanley Capital Intl.
