For a visitor returning after many years, it's like old times.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, an economics minister, hailed as a savior striding across the pampas, turned to free trade and the exchange rate to slay inflation and restructure industry.
The savior then was a lean patrician, Jose Antonio Martinez de Hoz.
Using a crawling peg called la tablita, devaluation was preset to crawl so slowly against the dollar that the peso became overvalued.
Foreign capital washed in, fortunes were made in speculative ventures, and Argentines traveled the world like modern conquistadors.
Today the country again is on an economic roll, boosted by foreign capital, an open economy and a strong -- and many say overvalued -- currency.
And behind the current boom is another economic superstar: the intellectually imperious street-fighter, Economics Minister Domingo Cavallo.
Mr. Cavallo's hot temper is such that recently he publicly chastised some of Argentina's most powerful business leaders as "sock suckers" for allegedly playing up to him at a dinner.
Still, like his predecessor, Mr. Cavallo is held in awe.
Of course, there are substantial differences.
The peso under Mr. Martinez de Hoz was not freely convertible as today; fiscal reform was undermined by a weapons-buying spree, and privatization of money-draining state enterprises was a pipe dream.
Nevertheless, there is a critical similarity: Once again the Argentine economy is locked in a race with time to improve productivity before a devaluation becomes necessary.
What is undeniable is the extraordinary success of Mr. Cavallo's revolutionary supply-side experiment.
For the past three years, Argentina has averaged economic growth of 8% a year -- second only to China -- and achieved a monetary stability that took Mexico eight years to accomplish, and Chile 17 years.
Behind such numbers lie the world's most sweeping privatization program, tax incentives, trade openings and, most important, a radical monetary stroke called "convertibility."
Every peso in circulation is backed by a U.S. dollar in reserves (which do include a small percentage of government bonds) and can be exchanged freely at a rate, frozen by law, of 1 to 1.
Rampant currency speculation stopped dead in its tracks, choking inflation and restoring value to the currency.
But the billions of dollars flooding the country as a result are a mixed blessing.
That cushion has allowed Argentines to forestall the critical reforms and incentives needed to improve productivity.
The private sector must be restructured to become internationally competitive, an admittedly politically explosive process that will entail increased bankruptcies, unemployment and social suffering.
However, Argentina must use its new capital and monetary stability to build up productive capacity.
This would also help Argentina become a candidate to join the North American Free Trade Agreement, as President Carlos Menem so passionately desires.
In this regard, the convertibility law has its drawbacks.
Consumer price inflation, though low today, still has totaled more than 50% since the freezing of the exchange rate three years ago.
As a result, the peso is clearly overvalued.
Buenos Aires is much more expensive in dollars than New York, and cheap imports are helping drive a growing number of companies and farms into bankruptcy.
Unemployment, historically negligible, has shot up to more than 10% today.
Real wages have fallen.
By freezing the exchange rate, Mr. Cavallo has removed a common mechanism of adjustment that governments use to make their exports more competitive on world markets.
He is thus forcing exporters to rely on their own improvements in productivity -- or what he calls "the real determinants of competitiveness" -- if they are to survive.
The challenge is daunting.
Argentine labor costs remain by far the highest in Latin America, and its labor laws remain among the most rigid found anywhere.
Despite increased imports of capital goods, many companies are so antiquated that the government estimates that two-thirds of those in the food sector alone should fold or merge.
And domestic savings and investment are still too low for a country seeking to take off.
In sum, exports are shackled by a high exchange rate, high costs and low internal investment: a triple whammy.
So while imports have nearly quadrupled since 1990, exports have been relatively flat.
That meant a $3.5 billion trade deficit last year and a current accounts deficit of nearly $9 billion -- both of which are widening.
The flood of foreign capital -- an estimated $16.5 billion last year -- will not plug the gap forever.
Foreign capital in the end demands growth, or its very real prospect.
Yet the two major sources of growth over the past three years -- credit and consumption -- have just about run their course.
There are some encouraging signs.
International grain prices are up, as is industrial activity in sectors such as automobiles, household appliances and cement.
Newly approved private pension plans eventually will help increase investment, while some minor tax cuts are cutting costs.
But that is not enough.
The government must tackle labor reform, which the executive and legislative branches have been putting off since August.
It must also address true government reform.
Not only has government spending gone up, but much of it is still siphoned off by corruption and inefficiency with little remaining for such legitimate needs as safety nets, education and reform of the judicial system.
Perhaps most important is the need to regain a national consciousness of thrift, hard work and shared sacrifice lost through years of economic insecurity and broken promises.
The fear is that, without greatly improved productivity, pressure will grow sooner or later for peso devaluation.
A devaluation would undermine an emerging long-term bond market -- such as a recent $1 billion global issue of Argentine bonds -- and create domestic chaos.
According to a study by the Argentine Institute of Financial Executives, more than 60% of private company debt is in dollars.
Little of that is hedged.
There is a precedent.
The economy appeared on the verge of turning the corner in 1981 when changes in the ruling junta forced Mr. Martinez de Hoz out, setting off the unraveling of "la tablita."
The government frantically stepped in with a series of exchange rate guarantees for companies indebted in dollars, but the economy collapsed.
The last of those guarantees was signed by the president of the the central bank in the summer of 1982.
His name?
Domingo Cavallo.
Mr. Schumacher, who covered South America for the New York Times, is an adviser to Dow Jones & Co.
