The Socialist government has turned up the heat and ordered a criminal investigation into the 1992 sale of Greek cement maker AGET Heracles SA to a consortium led by a subsidiary of Italy's Ferruzzi SpA.
Socialist Justice Minister George Kouvelakis has requested that the investigation be opened amid allegations of possible fraud and bribery involving the sale of the company for $225 million to a consortium formed by Italy's construction giant Calcestruzzi SpA and the Greek National Bank.
At the time of the sale, the then-Conservative government hailed the transaction as the nation's biggest privatization success story.
But more than a year ago, parliament began to take a closer look at the deal amid allegations of bribes and bid rigging as well as opposition claims that Conservative Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis had sold Heracles at a very low price.
That probe was dropped when parliament was dissolved.
Mr. Mitsotakis has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing and said the price that was settled on was higher than other offers.
The Socialists, who regained power in October, have said they plan to renationalize the company, but so far haven't given any details about how or when they plan to do so.
Meanwhile, Calcestruzzi and its parent company, Ferruzzi, have been entangled in Italy's widespread corruption scandals involving large kickbacks paid to political parties.
In addition, Italian magistrates are looking into the Heracles sale to determine whether political figures were bribed.
Authorities in Athens expect that their criminal probe will be aided by the Italian investigation.
Mr. Kouvelakis said the Greek government had no choice but to order its investigation as new allegations over the sale come to light every day.
The justice minister said Nikos Georgiades, Heracles's president before the company was sold, admitted to court authorities that he was paid a commission of $12 million to act as a middleman in the sale.
"It is a very large commission payment, and we have to investigate whether this money was used for bribes," Mr. Kouvelakis said.
Mr. Georgiades couldn't be reached for comment.
If any evidence involving political figures arises in the criminal investigation, the case will go back to parliament, which can launch its own probe and prosecute deputies and former ministers.
Former Conservative Economy Ministers Stephanos Manos and Efthymios Christodoulou as well as Mr. Mitsotakis were all involved in the sale at one stage or another.
Mr. Manos and Mr. Christodoulou have also denied any wrongdoing.
One of those involved with the sale, former National Bank Governor Mihalis Vranopoulos, was shot and killed in Athens last month.
The extreme leftist guerilla group "November 17" claimed responsibility for the murder, blaming Mr. Vranopoulos for being one of the key figures in the scandal.
Since losing power in October, Mr. Mitsotakis has been the target of a series of allegations by the Socialist government.
A 20-member parliamentary committee was formed last week to investigate his alleged involvement in illegal wiretapping, while a public prosecutor is investigating his private antiquities collection to determine its origin.
