Suppose you're starting out to invest in the market for the first time.
You want to be safe, but you'd also like to make a little money.
You've always heard that bonds were the safe thing to buy, but you've also heard that stocks always -- repeat, always -- pay a better return than bonds.
So, how about stocks?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average, you've heard, is made up of high-grade stocks, the sort of securities that experienced investors call "blue chips."
So what can you get on blue chips?
Consulting The Wall Street Journal, you find that the average dividend yield on industrial average stocks is less than 3%.
That's pretty disappointing.
The Journal has clued you in to the fact that bonds yield more than twice that.
Even Treasury bonds, about the safest investment around, yield twice what DJIA stocks do.
Well, not to worry.
The key word is return, not yield.
If you buy a $1,000 Treasury bond, it will still be worth just $1,000 when you cash it in.
If you invest $1,000 in blue-chip stocks, the stocks may be worth a good deal more when you sell them.
If you bought an average DJIA stock a year ago, it would now be worth nearly 20% more than you paid for it.
Your dividend yield may be piddling, but the total return on your investment has been a healthy 20%-plus.
It's obvious that many people have been buying stocks in the past year, pushing the Industrial Average up to one new high after another.
The rise was interrupted by reaction to the Federal Reserve's increase in the federal funds rate, but most analysts expect it to resume.
Some of the stock-buyers surely have been hoping that the blue-chip companies soon will raise their dividends, making the dividend yield more attractive.
Some investors aren't exactly comfortable with the idea that they will have to sell their stock at just the right time to get the best possible return.
This could spur a binge of profit-taking, which would send prices tumbling.
This has been one of the longest bull markets since World War II, and some analysts think it may be about time for a "correction."
Declining stock prices at some point could spur a love for bonds.
In a National Bureau of Economic Research working paper, two Cornell University economists, Shlomo Benartzi and Richard Thaler, note that since 1926 the average inflation-adjusted rate of return on stocks has been 7%, compared with less than 1% for Treasury bills, one of the least risky of assets.
But the stock market has had lots of ups and downs in the past 68 years.
Part of the reason for the huge disparity between stocks and debt issues is that companies must persuade investors to take risks by offering the lure of a higher return.
In the past year, the rapid rise of the market has eased this problem for corporations.
The Cornell economists comment, "Empirical estimates of loss aversion are typically in the neighborhood of 2, meaning the disutility of giving something up is twice as great as the utility of acquiring it."
But loss aversion isn't the only factor at work.
According to the authors, a lot depends on how often the investor examines his portfolio.
How nervous is he?
Mentally, or with paper and pencil, does he examine his holdings every week?
Every month?
Every year?
Every decade?
The frequency of these examinations helps to determine how much risk the investor will accept.
If he is strictly a buy-and-hold investor, he may look the purchase over pretty carefully before he makes it.
But then he may put the certificate away and not even think of it for years.
However, if he is the sort who flips to the market pages every morning and carefully checks how his stocks are doing, any unusual volatility is likely to trigger a call to his broker.
The authors conduct a variety of exercises to determine how often an investor must examine his portfolio if he is to be indifferent about whether to buy stocks or bonds.
They conclude that the investor who examines his holdings about once a year wouldn't care whether he had stocks or bonds.
Ideally, they suggest, he will hold about 50% of each.
The authors call the combination of loss aversion and a tendency to examine portfolios frequently "myopic loss aversion."
If dividend yields stay low and investors read the financial pages a little more frequently, there's likely to be a lot of that going around.
