Prudential Securities Inc. was sanctioned by an arbitration panel for "egregiously improper" behavior in defending itself in a case brought by its former risk-arbitrage chief.
The sanction, by a panel of the National Association of Securities Dealers, was unusual.
Arbitration panels typically don't spell out the reasons for their decisions.
But Prudential Securities had destroyed some documents and failed to produce others in the case, people familiar with the matter say.
The panel imposed the sanction, which requires Prudential to pay $250,000 in attorneys' fees, in a five-page opinion.
An additional sanction of $1,000 was "for failure to comply with this panel's order of production of documents to claimant," the opinion said.
The sanctions were part of a $960,000 award to the former risk-arbitrage chief.
Prudential declined to comment.
It's not the first time the brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America has been criticized for withholding documents.
Last year, a New York state court threatened Prudential with fines for refusing to disclose a confidential report prepared by a law firm counseling the brokerage house in an energy-partnership case.
The NASD sanction suggests that Prudential continues to use hardball legal tactics in arbitration cases.
State securities regulators have warned Prudential not to strong-arm investors in arbitrations over limited-partnership disputes.
The sanction "indicates that this was a serious and comprehensive violation of NASD rules with regard to conduct" in arbitrations, said Jeffrey Liddle, a New York attorney specializing in employment disputes involving brokerage firms.
The case was brought by Guy Wyser-Pratte, who was Prudential's risk-arbitrage chief for 19 years.
Mr. Wyser-Pratte, one of Wall Street's best-known arbitragers, left Prudential in December 1990 when the firm abruptly pulled out of the risk-arbitrage business.
In papers filed with arbitrators, he argued that Prudential violated an oral employment agreement that was to have been extended automatically each year unless canceled in writing by Nov. 30.
He says his contract had been renewed automatically for 1991.
He also alleged that Prudential violated the employment contract by slashing the amount of capital in his group to $25 million from $375 million, according to the papers filed with arbitrators.
Mr. Wyser-Pratte, who now runs his own arbitrage firm, was traveling and couldn't be reached for comment.
The decision, handed down in late December, was only recently made public.
Mr. Wyser-Pratte had asked for damages of more than $10 million.
The panel, without comment, awarded him damages and attorney fees totaling $960,000.
"We're pleased that Guy's word was upheld, and that Prudential was ordered to honor its contract with him," said Michael J. Dell, his attorney in New York.
Prudential argued that it wasn't aware of any employment agreement, written or oral, with Mr. Wyser-Pratte.
In papers filed with arbitrators, Prudential said Mr. Wyser-Pratte's employment contract was terminated in November 1985 and not "renewed, revised or extended."
The company says he continued to work until 1990 without a contract.
Among the Prudential executives who testified against Mr. Wyser-Pratte in the case were George L. Ball, former chairman and chief executive of Prudential, people familiar with the case said.
Mr. Ball couldn't be reached to comment.
Prudential also argued that the risk-arbitrage department had losses of $70 million in 1990, and that it shut down the operation as part of a larger cutback in merchant banking.
For his part, Mr. Wyser-Pratte said his arbitrage group generated net profits totaling $202 million from 1968 to 1989, according to papers filed with arbitrators.
The rest of the firm had net losses of $133 million during that time, he said.
