Northrop Corp. launched a hostile $2.04 billion bid to acquire Grumman Corp., in an attempt to torpedo Grumman's agreement to be acquired by Martin Marietta Corp. for $1.93 billion.
The surprise Northrop bid creates a rare takeover battle for a major defense contractor.
But Northrop, which has failed in three separate aerospace-acquisition attempts in the past two years, faced a stark choice in the rapidly consolidating defense industry: Buy or be bought.
So just three days after Grumman seemed wed to another suitor, Northrop said it will top Martin Marietta's offer by $5 a share and launch a $60-a-share cash tender offer for Grumman on Monday.
An angry Martin Marrietta blasted the Northrop "attack," and vowed an "appropriate" response.
Takeover-stock traders smelled blood.
Northrop's announcement came shortly before the market closed.
In after-hours trading in the so-called third market, Grumman shares surged more than $8, trading as high as $63 a share.
Traders clearly saw the Northrop offer as the start of a wide-open bidding war, with the winner having to ante up more than either company is offering now.
The move by Northrop, best known now as the builder of the costly B-2 stealth bomber, is unusually aggressive for the company and its cautious chairman, Kent Kresa.
But Northrop was angered at being locked out of takeover negotiations by Grumman after quietly courting the company for a year, and then ignored by Grumman after it proposed a cash acquisition for at least $50 a share two weeks ago.
That was the latest defeat for Northrop, which has lost out in bidding for the tactical-aircraft unit of General Dynamics Corp. and the Federal Systems unit of International Business Machines Corp., and was turned down by McDonnell Douglas Corp. after vigorously pursuing a purchase of that company's missiles division.
With the defense industry consolidating into a few giant contractors, Northrop was under increasing pressure to acquire a well-matched target or to sell itself off in pieces or in toto to a powerful ally while it's still healthy.
Grumman, which made its name as builder of the Navy F-14 Tomcat fighter, has been steadily shrinking since that program ended.
Long-term prospects as a stand-alone contractor seemed bleak, and the company started investigating strategic alternatives, although it had been saying it wasn't seeking to be acquired.
"This is the right move for Northrop, and it makes tremendous sense for us, for our shareholders, for this industry," Mr. Kresa said in an interview.
Not if Martin Marietta can help it.
In a harshly worded statement, a clearly surprised Norman Augustine, chairman of the Bethesda, Md., aerospace-electronics concern, said his company was "deeply disappointed that Northrop has chosen to launch a hostile attack that seeks to disrupt" his company's agreement with Grumman.
He said Northrop's action "degrades the entire character of the rational consolidation" of the defense industry and that Martin Marietta will respond to Northrop "in an appropriate manner at the appropriate time."
A spokesman for Grumman, based in Bethpage, N.Y., said only, "We are studying" the Northrop offer.
The chairmen of Grumman and Martin Marietta are longtime friends, who negotiated their acquisition agreement under Northrop's nose in just a month.
The Northrop bid marks the second high-profile bidding war on Wall Street in six months, following the $10 billion battle for Paramount Communications Inc.
It's another sign that the hostile, contested takeover business is returning to life after three years of inactivity.
Traders were ecstatic.
"This hasn't happened in such a long time -- a real corporate buyer, an all-cash buyer, coming in" to challenge an announced friendly takeover, said one trader.
"And it happened so quickly."
The Northrop offer is conditioned on receiving federal antitrust clearance.
Also, it wasn't clear if the Pentagon would try to exert any pressure if Northrop's offer spurs an expensive bidding war for Grumman.
Such a fight, showing the defense contractors as well-heeled enough for a big takeover battle, might make it harder to push more fund allocations past defense-budget cutters in Congress.
"I don't think we'd wade into it" unless industrial capacity would somehow diminish as a result of the merger, said one politically savvy Navy officer.
Northrop said it had financing commitments of $2.8 billion from Chase Manhattan Bank and Chemical Bank for its offer.
At year end it had debt of just $160 million.
Stock traders were quick to note that the bank credit line appears to leave room for a bid well over $70 a share, and Northrop executives implied they might be willing to go higher than $60, encouraging traders in a conference call to "read the tea leaves."
Northrop is being advised by Salomon Brothers.
Traders hadn't expected Northrop to come back with a higher bid, partly because they interpreted a standstill agreement it had signed during its earlier talks with Grumman as barring it from making an offer.
Northrop executives said that once the Martin Marietta offer was announced, they considered that Grumman was for sale.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading, which continues after the Big Board closes, Grumman shares rose $6.75 a share, or 12.3%, to $61.75.
Shares of Northrop closed up 50 cents, or 1.2%, at $41.125 in New York Stock Exchange trading, and moved up another 12.5 cents a share after hours.
Martin Marietta rose 50 cents, or 1.1%, to $46.50, but wasn't active after the Big Board closed.
Ironically, an earlier fight among defense contractors was the hostile 1981 bid by electronics maker Bendix Corp. for Martin Marietta.
The battle, which made famous the "Pac-Man" defense in which each company tries to gobble up the other, was extremely disruptive in the industry.
Yet it was credited in the end with making Martin Marietta a leaner, more focused company that was able to enter the 1990s in an acquisition mode.
Northrop was critical of the Martin Marietta-Grumman deal, especially a "lock-up" agreement under which Grumman agreed to pay Martin Marietta $50 million if another party outbid it.
Northrop called the agreement "improper and illegal."
One trader pointed out that in the Paramount battle, the Delaware Supreme Court criticized Paramount's board for making a deal with Viacom Inc. that limited its rights to consider a higher offer.
One of the judges said that contract improperly limited Paramount from exercising its duty to obtain the best deal for shareholders.
In a letter to Grumman Chairman Renso L. Caporali, Mr. Kresa said, "Grumman's stockholder interests were not well served" by the company's agreement to be acquired by Martin Marietta.
Mr. Kresa said that Northrop and Grumman had conducted "detailed discussions . . . exploring organizational fit, a review of key management personnel and a shared strategic vision, which continued in earnest in late 1993 and into 1994."
But the chairman expressed anger at not being on a "level playing field" with Martin Marietta.
Mr. Kresa noted that, according to documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Grumman representatives as early as Feb. 16 "asked Martin Marietta but not us to submit their highest and best offer."
The documents note that Martin Marietta had demanded exclusivity in negotiations.
Jerry Cantwell, an analyst for Lionheart Research, said it is unlikely that Martin Marietta's Mr. Augustine "will just say OK and walk away."
He said that while the Northrop offer seems to make financial sense, there's a risk for the potential acquirer.
"You don't want to see them get in an all-out bidding war."
In contrast to comments earlier this week from Mr. Caporali, who said the tough defense-budget environment isn't a time to get "all wrapped up in sentimentality," Mr. Kresa seemed to emphasize the importance of history in Northrop's offer.
He said he considered Northrop-Grumman Corp., as he proposed to name it, a "robust business entity for the new era."
He said the $5-a-share premium that Northrop is offering, over a Martin Marietta bid that many analysts had considered already high-end, represents "our own analysis of the strategic fit of the operations."
He added, "We don't see any antitrust problems at all."
Mr. Kresa called an acquisition of Grumman "slightly accretive to Northrop earnings in the first year," but offering sharper increases in succeeding years.
"This is a good deal for Northrop shareholders as evaluated."
Besides the B-2, Northrop makes 40% of the F/A-18 fighter for the Navy and fuselages for Boeing Co.'s 747 jumbo jet.
Northrop also builds radar jammers for fighter jets.
But it has had problems building a stealthy cruise missile called Tssam that has racked up $603 million in losses.
In each of three key product areas -- military aircraft, airplane subassemblies and defense electronics -- the two companies would have an extraordinary fit, Mr. Kresa said.
He added that Northrop is especially attracted by Grumman's experience in engineering Navy aircraft.
Grumman builds the Navy's E2-C Hawkeye airborne command plane.
Randall Smith in New York contributed to this article.
