A second key reformer is close to resigning from the Russian government, raising serious questions about Moscow's commitment to pursuing radical free-market reforms.
Boris Fyodorov, minister of finance and perhaps Russia's most effective reform strategist, said Tuesday that he won't stay on as finance minister in the new cabinet that Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin now is assembling, according to Russian press reports.
Since his resignation wasn't formally submitted or accepted there is a chance for a last-minute reversal.
But Mr. Fyodorov has set conditions for remaining in the cabinet that Mr. Chernomyrdin isn't likely to meet, including the firing of Russia's Central Bank chairman.
Indeed, the finance minister's resignation was widely viewed as a done deal in the halls of parliament.
If he does bow out, it would be an even more damaging blow to Russia's reform drive than Vice Premier Yegor Gaidar's resignation, announced Sunday.
Mr. Gaidar, the architect of Russia's free-market changes, had seen his authority eclipsed in recent months.
But Mr. Fyodorov had been more active, openly fighting to cut Russia's budget deficit, slash dubious subsidies to state industries and control inflation.
"Gaidar was more of a decorative figure," said Grigory Yavlinsky, a reformist economist and parliamentarian who has long been a critic of Mr. Gaidar.
"But Fyodorov was really trying to build a wall against inflation."
"This means a big step backward for reforms," said Viktor Davydkin, a liberal member of parliament from Voronezh.
If the cabinet lineup adds up to a setback for reform, the victor may be Prime Minister Chernomyrdin, a go-slow technocrat who succeeded Mr. Gaidar as premier a year ago.
Mr. Chernomyrdin, apparently with President Boris Yeltsin's backing, is setting a more gradual course for Russia's reforms, which neither Mr. Gaidar nor Mr. Fyodorov are prepared to support.
Some people even see the beginning of the "Chernomyrdin era" of Russian politics.
The jowly former head of the state gas monopoly is thought to be gunning for Mr. Yeltsin's job when the president's term expires two years from now.
"Chernomyrdin must be very happy," said Pavel Bunich, a centrist economist.
"Now he can refer to the policy as `Chernomyrdin's reforms.'"
But that responsibility also carries a risk.
No policy, including Mr. Chernomyrdin's slow-reform approach, is likely to ease Russia's economic slump anytime soon.
If Russians become further disillusioned, Mr. Chernomyrdin might have to pay with his job.
Mr. Yeltsin's role in the cabinet shuffle is something of a mystery.
He accepted Mr. Gaidar's resignation without much of a fight.
It isn't clear where he stands on Mr. Fyodorov.
The president met with Mr. Chernomyrdin for much of yesterday to hash out the final composition of the new cabinet, but no announcement was made.
"Yeltsin believes that Chernomyrdin has a magic recipe for keeping things stable," says Mikhail Poltoranin, a parliamentary deputy and a close ally of Mr. Yeltsin.
"Yeltsin is distancing himself from the democratic movement and reformers."
The anti-Yeltsin camp, not surprisingly, cheered the departures.
Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the ultranationalist who rose to prominence in last month's parliamentary elections, crowed to journalists that two of the four ministers he has publicly opposed were gone.
"Now if we get rid of Chubais and Kozyrev, we'll have a very good government," he said.
Anatoly Chubais is frowned upon by the Zhirnovsky camp because he is the privatization chief; Russian nationalists view Andrei Kozyrev, Russia's foreign minister, as too pro-West.
If Mr. Fyodorov does go, Mr. Chubais will be the only prominent reformer left in the Russian cabinet.
He has decided to remain in the government to continue efforts to speed the privatization of state industries, but it isn't clear how effective he would be working in near isolation.
Word of the resignations sent shock waves through Russia's financial markets.
After several months of relative stability, the ruble has fallen precipitously against the dollar for two straight days.
In trading on the official Moscow interbank exchange yesterday, the ruble fell to 1,504 to the dollar from 1,402 Monday.
On Friday it closed at 1,356.
Adding to the financial jitters are signs that inflation is spinning out of control.
Russia brought inflation down to 12% a month in December from 30% a month earlier last year.
But with the government continuing to hand out cheap credits to its weak industrial and agricultural sectors, fears of hyperinflation have returned.
Mr. Yavlinsky, the economist, estimates that the inflation rate already is back up to about 1% a day.
Messrs. Gaidar and Fyodorov are expected to remain active in politics, perhaps as vocal critics of Mr. Yeltsin's government.
Both are members of parliament in the State Duma, Russia's new lower house.
When Mr. Gaidar resigned, he told reporters, "I cannot be in the government and in opposition to it at the same time."
Mr. Fyodorov, for his part, dropped out of public view yesterday.
On Monday, he announced conditions for staying in the cabinet, including the ouster of Central Bank Chairman Viktor Gerashchenko and a conservative vice premier, Alexander Zaveryukha.
The prime minister has refused to fire them, adding to speculation that Mr. Fyodorov would resign.
While U.S. officials expressed concern about the reformers' thinning ranks, they were perhaps more shaken by remarks made by Foreign Minister Kozyrev suggesting that some Russian troops should remain in the Baltic republics.
President Clinton has pressed Moscow to get its troops out of the Baltics this year.
And U.S. officials believed they'd made considerable progress on the issue during last week's summit meeting.
The "comments are certainly at odds with statements signed by President Yeltsin in Moscow and certainly at odds with things that we've been told by high officials of the Russian government in our meetings in Moscow and prior to Moscow," State Department Spokesman Mike McCurry said.
Another senior official suggested that Mr. Kozyrev, a favorite target of Russian nationalists, "might be playing politics.
But if so, we're not happy about it."
