Turner Broadcasting System Inc. said fourth-quarter earnings fell 68%, reflecting increased costs in its entertainment operations and a one-time charge.
The cable-programming company said net income in the quarter dropped to $9.5 million, or four cents a share, from $29.7 million, or 11 cents a share, a year earlier.
Excluding a charge in the just-completed quarter for early retirement of debt, as well as a one-time tax benefit in the 1992 quarter, operating profit rose to $14.1 million, or five cents a share, from $10.7 million, or four cents a share.
Fourth-quarter revenue edged down to $535 million from $538.5 million.
While the results were slightly below some analysts' expectations, investors appeared to be anything but discouraged.
In composite trading yesterday on the American Stock Exchange, the company's Class A shares closed at $23, up $1, or 4.5%, while its Class B shares closed at $23.375, up $1, also up 4.5%.
"The core businesses are in good shape," said John S. Reidy, an analyst for Smith Barney.
"But all these entertainment companies are battling to get their networks into foreign markets as quickly as possible.
It does take time and money to get people to pay attention to these things over there."
Indeed, operating results in Turner's entertainment segment -- which includes cable networks TBS, TNT and the Cartoon Network -- were hurt by about $9 million in start-up costs associated with the European launch of TNT and the Cartoon Network.
The company also reported $15 million in costs related to the theatrical release of the movie "Gettysburg," as well as increases in overall selling and administrative costs.
In all, the division's operating profits fell 65% in the fourth quarter to $18.6 million from year-earlier levels.
By contrast, Turner's news division, which includes the Cable News Network, reported a 24% jump in operating profit to $60.4 million.
The segment benefited from increases in both advertising and subscription revenue.
Mr. Reidy at Smith Barney said he doesn't expect sharp earnings increases at Turner this year, as the company continues to expand and consolidates its recent acquisitions, New Line Cinema Corp. and Castle Rock Entertainment.
"People should be prepared for a year of building, as opposed to a year of earnings-per-share expansion," he said.
