The Securities and Exchange Commission charged Goldman, Sachs & Co. with violating securities law in connection with a series of prearranged Treasury securities trades designed to defer taxes.
In its action yesterday, the SEC censured Goldman Sachs and fined it $250,000.
The civil penalties were based on record-keeping violations found after Oct. 15, 1990, the effective date of a law authorizing the SEC to levy civil penalties.
Goldman Sachs was ordered to cease and desist from future violations and to institute internal procedures within 90 days designed to assure compliance with the law.
Goldman Sachs settled the SEC's complaint without admitting or denying the allegations.
A statement by the firm's management committee said the company cooperated fully with the SEC's investigation and that the internal controls ordered by the agency are being implemented.
The SEC alleged that Goldman Sachs broke record-keeping rules by falsely recording 15 trades in the 1980s as bona fide transactions in which the ownership of securities changed hands, when in fact no change in ownership occurred.
It also charged the firm with books-and-records violations unrelated to the so-called tax trades, which were aimed at showing losses for tax purposes.
According to an SEC administrative complaint filed yesterday, the agency charged Goldman Sachs with failing to properly supervise those responsible for the trades.
No individuals were named in the complaint, and no further SEC action is expected in the case.
Spokesmen for Goldman Sachs and Salomon Brothers Inc., with whom Goldman Sachs conducted some of the trades, both declined to comment on whether they have had any contact with the Internal Revenue Service regarding their tax trades.
The IRS also declined to comment.
The alleged violations triggering the $250,000 penalty weren't related to the supposed tax trades, but instead flowed from what the SEC depicted as slipshod record-keeping practices in Goldman's government securities operations after enactment of the civil-penalties law.
"In the past and as recently as August 1991, Goldman government-securities traders and sales representatives did not make records of customer orders they received," the agency said.
The SEC said the prearranged nature of the tax trades eliminated market risk.
It said Goldman was able to realize losses totaling $36.6 million from these trades, which allowed the firm to defer certain tax obligations.
Joseph Goldstein, an associate SEC enforcement director, said that trading for tax-motivated purposes can be quite legitimate.
What isn't legitimate, he said, is to record trades as bona fide, at-risk transactions when that isn't the case.
