Trizec Corp., after hitting an impasse in restructuring talks with senior creditors, said it is negotiating with an outside party to invest 600 million Canadian dollars (US$438 million) of fresh capital in the company.
The real-estate concern, which is attempting to restructure C$1.9 billion of debt, said it obtained a Canadian court order that blocks creditors from forcing repayment of their loans while the company negotiates with the unidentified potential investor.
Trizec said it sought the court order, which remains in effect until the end of the month, after holders of its senior debentures demanded repayment of their debt over the weekend.
The potential investment, which Trizec said is "down to final negotiations," would allow the company to sweeten its current restructuring proposal.
Under the current plan, senior debenture holders, who are owed C$1.2 billion, would get a 49% equity stake in the company, a level that the creditor group considers too low.
Trizec said part of the C$600 million investment would be used to offer some cash to the senior creditors.
The rest of the investment would be used to strengthen the company's capital base.
Trizec said it received inquiries from "a number of sophisticated investors" interested in acquiring an equity stake in the company.
Trizec owns the Hahn Co. of San Diego, which owns and develops regional shopping malls.
Trizec also has interests in prime office properties in the U.S. and Canada.
The company is controlled by Toronto financiers Peter and Edward Bronfman.
However, the family's ownership stake would drop to just 7% under Trizec's current restructuring plan.
News of the potential investment gave a lift to the price of the senior debentures on secondary markets.
BDS Securities, a New York distressed-security trading concern, said the debentures were quoted yesterday afternoon at 88 cents on the dollar, up about four cents from Friday.
At the beginning of the year the debentures traded for about 70 cents on the dollar.
