The government's employment report for February shows that the momentum of the U.S. economy is slowing from last year's sizzling pace, partly because of bad weather.
But barring more bad weather, economic forecasters said the economy still seems to be expanding at a healthy 3% annual rate or better in the first quarter.
Superficially, the news from the Labor Department on Friday was impressive: Employers added 217,000 workers in February, more than any month since July.
The unemployment rate edged down to 6.5% of the work force from 6.7% in January.
"Employment rebounded from January's weather-related weakness, although the impact of this winter's severe weather was still apparent in several industries," Katharine Abraham, commissioner of labor statistics, said.
But the government also revised estimates of job growth in the two previous months; it now says that employers reduced payrolls by 2,000 in January rather than adding 62,000 as reported previously.
Employers added an average of 148,000 workers in each of the past three months, less than the average of 170,000 for 1993.
And the total number of hours worked last month fell 1.3%, suggesting that the output of the nation's factories and personal income were weak in February.
But economists said that probably reflects bad weather, rather than a worrisome trend.
Other economic indicators, particularly retail sales, auto and truck sales and orders for factory goods, continue to be strong.
And in an upbeat report, the Commerce Department said its index of leading economic indicators rose an additional 0.3% in January, the sixth straight monthly increase; it rose 0.7% in December.
The major contributor to the increase was a pickup in consumer expectations; only building permits and claims for unemployment benefits were negative.
The employment report didn't alter the current assessment of the economy among private economists, administration officials or financial markets.
"The economy is fine, and on track for 3% to 3.5% current-quarter growth," said Paul McCulley of UBS Securities Inc. in New York.
Although most economists predict a strong increase in employment in March, Merrill Lynch & Co. economist Bruce Steinberg said, "Most of the growth in the first quarter will be from higher productivity" -- that is, by businesses increasing production without much new hiring.
The bond market, apparently surprised by the increase in payrolls, reacted negatively to the employment report at first, but it quickly settled down after details became clear.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond ended unchanged Friday at 6.83%.
With so many mixed signals, Wall Street analysts differed on when the Federal Reserve is likely to raise short-term interest rates again.
But with longterm rates continuing to climb, there is growing pressure on the Fed to squelch inflationary expectations by raising interest rates.
Reserve Board member John LaWare, speaking in Dallas on Friday, said, "I don't see any current signs that inflation is growing as a problem."
He added that there's "quite a bit of slack in the job market" and that he doesn't see the sort of shortages in materials or commodities "that would reflect an alarming pressure on prices at this stage of the game."
The Labor Department report provided further evidence that inflation isn't a problem now.
Average hourly earnings for production and nonsupervisory workers rose only 0.2% and January's increase was revised down to 0.5% from 0.8%.
Hourly earnings have climbed at a 3.1% annual pace over the past six months.
"Not only is current inflation extremely modest, but the fundamentals that explain future inflation -- wage patterns, productivity, import prices and energy prices, for example -- all remain well-behaved," said Laura Tyson, the chief White House economist.
The Labor Department said employment declined in industries that tend to be sensitive to the weather; construction and eating and drinking places lost jobs for the second month in a row.
Manufacturing employment rose a slight 12,000 in February, the fifth consecutive increase.
But hours worked in factories were off a sharp 0.7%, probably because of the bad weather.
Hiring in service industries was strong with employment at temporary-help agencies rebounding after a small dip in January.
One of every five jobs added in the private sector in the past year has been at a temporary-help agency.
Ms. Abraham, the labor-statistics commissioner, cautioned that the decline in the jobless rate may be exaggerated because the bureau has altered the method for measuring unemployment but is still using seasonal-adjustment factors based on the old method.
Under the old method, the bureau estimates the unemployment rate would have been 6.4% in February, essentially the same as in January, but well below year-earlier levels, she said.
In all, the government counted 8.5 million people as out of work and looking for jobs in February.
Of those, 1.7 million had been out of work for six months or more, roughly the same as in January after adjusting for usual seasonal fluctuations.
"Those are the people who are really hurting," said James Medoff, a Harvard University labor economist.
An additional 500,000 said they wanted a job but have given up looking because they believe their efforts will be futile.
And 4.6 million said they are working part time but would prefer full-time work.
Among the 11 largest states, California continues to have the highest unemployment rate, at 9% in February.
Pennsylvania's was the lowest, at 5.1%.
All the figures are adjusted to eliminate usual seasonal fluctuations.
Arthur Buckler in Dallas contributed to this article.
Here are the net contributions of the components of the Commerce Department's index of leading indicators.
After various adjustments, they produced a 0.3% increase in the index for January and a 0.7% increase for December.
The ratio of coincident to lagging indicators was 1.16, up from 1.15 in the previous month.
Here are excerpts from the Labor Department's employment report.
The figures are seasonally adjusted.
