"I take more interest than many authors in the physical book," John Updike said from the passenger seat.
On this day, Mr. Updike's "interest" was taking him to Scranton, Pa., in a rented Pontiac Bonneville.
We were on a field trip to Haddon Craftsmen, the book manufacturer that has made Mr. Updike's books since 1969, to watch his new novel, "Brazil" -- an interracial love story with a strange twist -- roll off the production line.
The road trip had the feel of an Updike story.
In fact, the author has devoted much ink to his fascination with print.
"The papery self-magnification and immortality of printed reproduction . . . was central to my artistic impulse," he declared in his memoir, "Self-Consciousness." ". . .
The idea of writing a novel came even later and presented itself to me, and still does, as making a book."
But until now, he had never seen one of his books being made.
Mr. Updike was dressed for the big day like an Ivy League professor, in a trilby hat, tweed jacket and a green wool scarf with a piece of price tag still stapled to it.
He grew up in Pennsylvania, in the small town of Shillington outside Reading, and seemed tickled to be returning to his old turf.
When he wasn't delivering a running commentary on the scenery ("This is a mirthless highway"), he recalled the seductive allure of Hintz's, a Reading stationery store where "the romance of office equipment -- paper -- got to me," and his early dream of becoming a cartoonist.
"My mother kept all these things, souvenirs of my boyhood print infatuation.
I found them when she died," he said.
"I was trying to become a New Yorker cartoonist, and there were books telling you how to do it, rubber stamps that you'd use to stamp your drawings, roughs and actual inked drawings."
He struck out with The New Yorker, but the Chatterbox, his high-school newspaper, published his drawings and stories.
Later on, as a copy boy for the Reading Eagle, he was fascinated by the workings of the Linotype machine.
"I would see them turning words into metal," he said.
"It was a romantic type of industrialization: the tall machine, the clatter of the matrices falling into it, men with green eye shades sitting there . . ."
He gave his most famous creation, Rabbit Angstrom, a job as a linotyper in Brewer, Pa., in "Rabbit Redux," the second novel in his "Rabbit" tetralogy.
Although linotyping becomes obsolete during the course of that novel -- and Rabbit loses his job -- all four "Rabbit" books, including the 1990 "Rabbit at Rest," were set by Linotype.
The gesture wasn't lost on Mr. Updike, who is famous in the Knopf production department for fussing over the look of his books.
You may not be able to judge an Updike book by its cover, but you can spot one in a minute: It's usually about 5 1/4 inches wide by 8 inches high (with some variations), and has silver and gold foil stamping on the spine.
The text is set in Janson type.
That's the design that was created for Mr. Updike's first novel, "The Poorhouse Fair" (1959), and he has stuck to it ever since.
For one thing, changing it would spoil the aesthetics of his home library.
"I have my books naked, naked spines lined up," he explained.
The titles are all stamped at the same height on the spines (except for the slimmer books of poetry, which are stamped lengthwise), and form a neat line across his bookshelf.
"It was quite exquisite when there were five.
Now there are about 40," he sighed.
Haddon Craftsmen, which was recently acquired by printing giant R.R. Donnelley & Sons Co., is one of the oldest book manufacturers in the country.
The bindery is in a 1901 factory building with wood floors, high ceilings and a stained-glass window showing "Science Instructing Industry."
Over a serve-yourself lunch of chicken and pasta salad, a group of Haddon craftspeople presented Mr. Updike with a pen stand made of Pennsylvania coal and an oversize coal belt buckle -- "for your leisure time."
Then Don Vispi, a beefy guy in a starched white shirt who looked as if he might have been a character in the "Rabbit" series but is in fact Haddon's senior vice president, explained what goes into making an Updike book.
"We burst through the spine.
It's called burst-binding.
See that, John?" said Mr. Vispi, showing off a ream of coverless pages, which are punctured, or "burst" in about seven places along the spine to admit the glue that binds them together.
He encouraged Mr. Updike to ask his workers questions: "They know all your books -- they've done them all."
Then it was onto the noisy factory floor, where a machine was binding signatures -- the term for gathered pages -- slicking the spines with viscid white primer glue and ferrying them over glowing gasheat dryers.
A set of metal choppers trimmed the bound pages to the appropriate length, and sent them on to a man with a spray gun loaded with yellow-green vegetable dye.
Mr. Updike watched as the man spritzed the tops of copy after copy of "Brazil" with the dye, topstaining the pages.
Then his eye wandered to the shelves filled with spools of headbands -- cloth ribbons used to line a book's binding.
Updike books don't have headbands.
"Everybody here gets headbands but you," said Tracy Cabanis, Knopf's senior production manager.
"I don't mind headbands.
I think they're nice," he said, a little longingly.
"I always thought it saved money."
Too late now.
Copies of "Brazil" were already being fitted into their yellow cloth cases, or covers, without headbands.
Stacks of empty yellow cases almost as tall as Mr. Updike himself waited down in the factory basement.
A machine was impressing the cases with the Knopf borzoi colophon and stamping them with the title and author's name in gold and silver foil, transferred from shiny ribbons as gaudy as Christmas wrap.
"I can have this, really?"
Mr. Updike asked, as a worker handed him a newly stamped case.
Back upstairs, still clutching the empty case and a fragment of used gold stamping foil, he watched as "Brazil" texts were married to their yellow cases with glue.
Then the books were passed on to a gizmo that flipped the covers open with spatulalike tongs and slipped the jackets on.
A conveyor belt bore the finished books to two workers, who were bundling them into cartons.
Mr. Updike picked up a copy of "Brazil" from the belt: It was as warm as a freshly laid egg.
"It seems a lot of trouble, doesn't it?" he murmured, looking faintly appalled at the sight of scores of his books being churned out like Fig Newtons.
As if that weren't enough, a young woman from the county commissioners' office arrived bearing a plaque and the news that today had been proclaimed John Updike Day in Lackawanna County.
"I've never had a day before," he said.
"Do I get free drinks in all the bars?"
No, but he did get to sign two stacks of brand-new copies of "Brazil," for various Haddon and Donnelley executives, a task he greeted with the same unflappable good humor he had shown all day.
But when Mr. Updike got back in the Pontiac -- lugging his coal belt buckle, his pen stand, his empty case, his used foil ribbon, his John Updike Day plaque and his own copy of "Brazil" -- it was clear that the romance of book making had been somewhat tarnished by his encounter with the real thing.
"It's slightly mind-annihilating, isn't it?" he said, as we began the three-hour drive back to New York.
He paused.
"It's faintly appalling to see your efforts multiplying -- not just one jacket shining, but oodles and oodles."
And he was having second thoughts about the color of his cases.
"It did seem a poisonous yellow," he murmured to Ms. Cabanis.
A few days later, when we spoke on the phone, Mr. Updike was feeling better about his cases.
"The yellow, which I was amazed and kind of disgusted by, looks good in the row," he said, referring to the row of Updike books in his bookcase.
Flipping the freshly minted book open, however, made him turn green.
"I've found a typo," he said.
