The House approved a bill to permit banks to operate nationwide branch networks, as opposition to the legislation continued to soften.
By a voice vote, the House approved an interstate-banking measure that had been stalled for years.
The proposal could substantially change the face of U.S. banking, producing what its proponents describe as a stronger, geographically diverse system that would better withstand the effects of credit crunches.
Rep. Bill McCollum (R., Fla.), ranking minority member of the House Financial Institutions subcommittee, called the bill "one of the most significant pieces of legislation" he has seen.
The bill would let banks, over three years, create national networks, but they could move into new states only through acquisitions.
"It's about time we did this -- it is long overdue," said Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.).
It will allow more banks to compete with each other, while also boosting banks' competitive muscle in international markets, he added.
The House Banking Committee approved the measure by a 50-1 vote two weeks ago, and the Senate Banking Committee unanimously cleared similar legislation late last month.
Some of the momentum for the proposal has been generated by Comptroller of the Currency actions approving certain regional bank expansions in recent months, and other banks are likely to seek similar green lights.
Democratic Reps. Joseph Kennedy of Massachusetts and Kweisi Mfume of Maryland spoke against the bill, saying it doesn't provide enough borrowing opportunity for low-income people and minorities.
Rep. Steve Neal (D., N.C.), chairman of the financial-institutions subcommittee, promised he would consider those concerns at a later time.
But even Mr. Kennedy acknowledged, "It is time for interstate banking to happen."
The bill "is the best compromise that we have seen in several years," on consumer and other issues, added Rep. Marge Roukema (R., N.J.).
Rep. Douglas Bereuter (R., Neb.), said he was concerned that the bill offers "an opportunity for too many resources to be drained from some rural areas," but said he was pleased that states can opt against permitting banks to branch out of their own states into others.
Rep. James Leach (R., Iowa), said interstate banks tend to have "skinnier" capital levels than community banks and are less willing to make "risk-oriented loans."
Mr. Leach, the ranking minority member of the House Banking Committee, said that bank regulators will have to be sure that interstate expansions don't lead to shakier banks or to industrial and commercial loans "being given a back seat."
But he added, "With some reluctance, I'm being brought along."
