It may have taken an earthquake, but the disaster that befell this city 11 days ago has galvanized its new mayor, multi-millionaire lawyer and investor Richard Riordan, reversing a lackluster first six months in office.
For the first time, the mayor seems to be heeding his own campaign rhetoric, that a big city can be run like a big business, with an efficient chief executive at the helm.
The mayor, 63 years old, was elected in June with a promise to restructure the city's government and economy.
He now faces the even more daunting task of rebuilding physical sections of Los Angeles itself.
Fresh in the city's memory is the performance under fire of another mayor, Tom Bradley, the stiff and dour sharecropper's son and former cop who held on to City Hall for 20 years.
When riots erupted here in April 1992, the harsh glare of local and national media found him wanting.
Now, another wrenching of the city has thrust Mr. Riordan into the spotlight as both petitioner and cheerleader.
His role in guiding the city's reconstruction will define his mayoralty.
"Whether true or not, it's the voters' perception that the mayor should be in charge, and, if he isn't, he's got a very real political problem," says Sherry Bebitch Jeffe, senior associate at the Center for Politics and Economics at the Claremont Graduate Center.
The mayor, a Republican who maintains such close ties with Democrats that he has jogged with President Clinton, has won praise for his early handling of the quake's devastation.
Transportation Secretary Federico Pena, who has been working closely with him, compliments the mayor for "bringing a very business-like perspective to things as well as an ability to stimulate people."
Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry Cisneros says, "This is the best-organized and best-executed emergency response that we have seen."
Until the shock of the quake, which measured 6.6 on the Richter scale, emanated from the densely populated Northridge area of Los Angeles, Mr. Riordan, a trim man with thinning gray hair and an estimated $100 million fortune, seemed to have a surfeit of political problems.
Since his inauguration, Mr. Riordan has turned in "a very mixed performance," says Larry L. Berg, professor of political science at the University of Southern California and director of the Jesse Unruh Institute of Politics.
Little about Mr. Riordan seems to have inspired commentators or the public before the quake.
A resident of Los Angeles's affluent west side elected with heavy support from the mostly middle-class San Fernando Valley, the area hit hardest by the earthquake, Mr. Riordan had pledged a "management revolution at City Hall."
He had shown flashes of promise in his first months by wooing a city council long estranged under his predecessor, and with a victory against airlines in a highly publicized landing-fees dispute at Los Angeles airport.
But ongoing goofs have made his promised revolution look more like a Woody Allen skit.
There have been clumsy, mostly forced departures of five top officials.
The mayor's penchant for off-color jokes became embarrassingly public.
An effort to withhold $40 million from city workers' pension funds drew jeers.
And, in a graceless moment during last fall's destructive wildfires, Mr. Riordan announced that, thankfully, few of the charred structures were within city limits.
"Dumb!" says Prof. Berg.
Mr. Riordan, however, seems to have been shaken awake by the earthquake.
"This is an issue that plays to his strength, a tangible, nuts and bolts disaster," says Raphael Sonenshein, a professor of political science at California State University.
William Ouchi, management professor, author of the popular business book "Theory Z" and now an adviser to the mayor, says Mr. Riordan's crisis management experience has been honed in part by doing financial deals.
"In effect, he has been coordinating lots of people under pressure in complex situations for years."
In recent days, Mr. Riordan has emerged as an unorthodox practitioner of the art of politics, hopping blithely over red tape and across partisan divides.
He is given to straight talk with the likes of President Clinton and California Gov. Pete Wilson, to sudden car phone calls to city officials to get things done immediately and to showing his impatience with cautious bureaucrats.
The mayor values informal consultation.
"Mr. Riordan is much more of a hands-on guy" than Mayor Bradley, says Irwin Baker, a reporter who has covered city hall for more than two decades for the Los Angeles Times.
City council members have been surprised to find the mayor occasionally buttonholing bureaucrats and chatting with passersby in the corriders of City Hall.
The restless Mr. Riordan often travels the streets of Los Angeles in his raspberry-colored Ford Explorer, linked by phone to his office.
Decisions are made on the fly.
When he saw thousands of newly homeless Angelenos take to parks after the quake, Mr. Riordan told an aide to call makers of plastic sheeting and ask them to donate a quantity to help the shelter effort.
Good instincts, perhaps, but city officials already had ordered the plastic at commercial prices.
During a walk near the epicenter of the quake, Mr. Riordan listened as a resident complains that poor planning allowed a buried pipeline full of crude oil to run in front of an elementary school.
The mayor turns to a nearby work crew and is told that the line, which burst into flames after the quake, was installed in 1925, long before the school.
Chatting some more, Mr. Riordan nods as another neighbor suggests residents and school officials be told where pipelines are buried.
"We'll get it done," he says, as an aide makes a note.
Largely unhampered by the caution and alliances of many long-time politicians, the mayor reaches agreements swiftly, sometimes letting credit or apparent victory go to the other side.
"The most important thing right now I think is to not let turf battles get in the way," he says.
"I don't worry about getting credit.
If I do a good job, people will know."
High on Mr. Riordan's agenda has been a behind-the-scenes campaign to encourage state transportation officials to speed up vital freeway repairs.
In a quiet evening phone conversation with Gov. Wilson, Mr. Riordan notes that planners are talking about a painfully long year or more to make badly needed repairs.
Within a day, state engineers start talking about swifter action.
Possible shortcuts include contracting with private engineering firms for work usually done within the state bureaucracy.
Privatization was a centerpiece of Mr. Riordan's campaign with his proposal that the operation of the city's airport be leased out.
Mr. Riordan returns the governor's favor.
When he learns that Gov. Wilson hasn't been invited to meet President Clinton at the airport during his trip to Los Angeles after the quake, a surprised mayor puts the governor on hold and makes arrangements to get him invited.
"I don't see any reason to rile the governor," he tells an aide.
The mayor doesn't shy away from cozy relationships with Democrats.
In the past, he has contributed substantially to both parties.
He has worked swiftly to forge a close relationship with Secretary Pena, a former mayor himself.
Though political meals often take on the trappings of state banquets, Mr. Riordan, who is separated from his second wife, likes the informal approach.
Last week, Mr. Pena was invited over for dinner with Mr. Riordan and his steady companion, Nancy Daly, the estranged wife of Warner Bros. chairman Bob Daly.
"Just the three of us; it was very pleasant," Mr. Riordan says.
The mayor seems impatient with the conventional mechanics of government planning.
When three dozen transportation agency representatives gather to discuss city's plight, Mr. Riordan listens for a while, then swiftly ticks off his list of priorities.
There should be a daily meeting, he suggests.
"But we don't want a dog and pony show like this."
"The fact that he's bored with the minutiae of government comes through very clearly," Ms. Bebitch Jeffe says.
Still, Mr. Riordan and his staff swiftly assembled a plan to minimize traffic jams, encouraging the use of carpools and public transportation systems.
Typical of Riordan efforts, the plans expand in practical ways on existing programs.
Some who have watched Mr. Riordan for years grant his strength in short-term attention to detail but question his longer-term skills in handling diffuse issues of social change and economic miasma.
"He tends to do poorly in situations that aren't clear-cut," says Prof. Sonenshein.
And Mr. Riordan still needs to convince important black and Latino interests in the city that he can do something for them.
But solving the city's deep economic and racial problems has been put on hold.
Walking into a crowded encampment soon after the quake, the mayor seems more like a real father than a city father to the scared residents, many of them recent immigrants from quake-prone Central America.
He listens patiently to conversations in fractured English.
Then, while talking to one woman about her problems, he pulls a cellular phone from his pocket and calls his office.
People are pushing everywhere, but Mr. Riordan holds his ground.
In a calm voice, he relays a list of items that are anything but mundane to these people.
The mayor says he wants batteries, flashlights, and blankets delivered to the camp, pronto.
Oh, and one other thing.
"Diapers?" he asks the woman in front of him.
"Diapers," he repeats into the phone, as the woman nods.
