President Clinton's senior advisers agreed there wasn't any need to alter U.S. policy toward China, but said the administration must stop sending mixed signals to Beijing.
"There was a discussion of the need to be very disciplined in articulating the policy," said a U.S. official.
The official stressed "the need to be very disciplined and focused on following through on the president's order" under which China would lose its favorable trading status with the U.S. if it hasn't made overall significant progress on human rights by June.
That message has been partly obscured in recent months by mixed signals from the administration.
In his recent trip to China, Secretary of State Warren Christopher underscored the need for China to make progress in the seven areas outlined in the executive order signed by Mr. Clinton last spring.
At the same time, however, some economic officials have been traveling to Beijing to improve economic ties between the U.S. and the world's fastest-growing economy.
The president didn't attend yesterday's meeting, which was held at the White House.
The administration has been trying since last September to broaden its relations with China, by emphasizing economic, trade and military ties as well as the need for Beijing to meet human rights standards.
But there has been a struggle within the administration over whether economics or human rights should predominate.
As a result, the overall policy has lacked credibility in Beijing, where China's rulers doubt that Mr. Clinton would be willing to pull the plug on the potentially lucrative business relationship.
While officials at last evening's meeting called for more discipline in articulating the China policy, the president's advisers also discussed some options for modifying future policy once the June deadline is passed.
Economics officials, such as Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, believe unilateral economic sanctions don't work.
Nevertheless, "There was no discussion of modifying the executive order, no discussion of modifying the way the administration makes policy on China," said the U.S. official.
