BMW agreed to pay $1.2 billion for 80% control of British auto maker Rover Cars, in a coup that would nearly double the German luxury-car maker's sales and vault it into the lucrative U.S. market for sport utility vehicles with the venerable Land Rover name.
British Aerospace PLC, Rover's parent, accepted a last-minute offer from Bayerische Motoren Werke AG on Saturday, after Honda Motor Co. of Japan passed up a chance to buy the 80% of Rover Cars it doesn't already own.
Honda holds its 20% stake through a four-year-old cross-shareholding alliance that includes extensive manufacturing and product sharing between the companies.
The Rover alliance also gave Honda a valuable foothold in the heavily protected European market.
Honda officials were clearly miffed by the BMW agreement, which is subject to approval by British Aerospace shareholders.
In a statement, Honda said "the decision by British Aerospace to sell its shares in Rover to BMW negates the long-term efforts between Honda and Rover to establish a firm future for Rover as a British company with its own brand identity."
Honda also left open the possibility that it will pull back from product-sharing deals with Rover should BMW gain control.
BMW officials expressed their hope that Honda's agreements with Rover will continue "in every respect."
But BMW executives couldn't resist crowing, either.
"This is different from the normal takeover," a triumphant Chairman Bernd Pitschetsrieder said during a London news conference.
In this case, he said, "two plus two is five."
BMW and Rover certainly are two of the healthier players in a European market suffering its worst contraction since World War II.
Unlike archrival Mercedes-Benz AG, BMW made it through 1993 without bleeding red ink.
Rover was the only European car maker to increase overall sales as it scrambled back from losses to break even in 1993.
For BMW, the deal also offers another opportunity to upstage the Daimler-Benz AG unit, which BMW surpassed last year in world-wide sales for the first time.
With Rover, BMW could immediately have three sport utility vehicles to sell in the U.S., ranging in price from $50,000 Range Rovers to a new model, the Discovery, expected to make its debut in April at prices below $30,000.
The Discovery, in particular, could grab sales from the segment's volume-leaders, Ford Motor Co.'s Explorer and Chrysler Corp.'s Grand Cherokee.
Mercedes-Benz isn't expected to sell its first sports utility vehicle in the U.S. until 1997, when its $300 million plant in Tuscaloosa, Ala., begins producing them.
"We are on the fast track into this segment," said Helmut Panke, chairman and chief executive officer of BMW's U.S. unit.
Land Rover gives BMW instant brand recognition and a U.S. distribution network that had its best year ever last year, selling 4,907 vehicles, and now plans to expand its product offerings and sales outlets.
Rover's 84 U.S. dealers are revamping to become "Land Rover Centres" that will highlight the company's expertise in four-wheel drive vehicles.
Mr. Panke said BMW's 350 U.S. dealerships could offer Land Rover vehicles, but the company will first consult its dealers before adopting that strategy.
In Europe, BMW stands to gain as well.
That's because Rover is strong in market niches and countries where BMW is weak, and vice versa.
A combined BMW-Rover could offer a full range of vehicles from tiny subcompacts like Rover's Mini to BMW's large luxury models to the Land Rover and Range Rover trucks -- all with no additional research and development expenditures.
That gives BMW a huge time jump on Mercedes, which is trying to enter many of these same niches through developing products on its own.
Moreover, Rover and BMW could cut purchasing and production costs by sharing those activities and spreading costs over larger sales volumes.
Rover sold about 442,000 vehicles world-wide last year.
BMW world-wide sales totaled 534,000 in 1993, including 78,010 cars in the U.S. Together, BMW predicted the two companies could sell more than one million vehicles a year.
Shares in both BMW and British Aerospace rose on the news.
In Frankfurt, BMW jumped 56.50 marks, or 8.3%, to 739.50 ($32.43 to $424.51) at the end of floor trading.
In London, British Aerospace jumped 57 pence, or 13%, to 499 (85 cents to $7.46).
Not everyone in the financial community is as sanguine.
Shortly after the deal was announced, Standard & Poor's put the A-1 ratings for commercial paper sold by BMW and BMW US Capital Corp. on CreditWatch with negative implications.
At the same time, S&P put British Aerospace's single-A-minus senior debt rating and its A-2 commercial paper rating on CreditWatch with positive implications.
British Aerospace paid $250 million for its stake in Rover Cars in 1988.
The company said proceeds from the cash sale to BMW will be used to reduce debt and "enhance" earnings.
The Rover sale marks the passing of Britain's last high-volume car maker into foreign ownership.
Honda's hesitation to take majority control of Rover when British Aerospace offered it may have stemmed from Honda's fear of getting caught in a nationalistic backlash, British Aerospace officials said.
The company made clear to Honda that it wanted to leave the car-making business entirely, so it could focus on "core" defense and aerospace businesses.
On Aug. 12, British Aerospace got a free hand to shop its Rover stake around, when a pledge it had made to the British government to hold Rover shares for at least five years expired on that date.
Late last week, with Honda still balking, BMW swept in with its offer to buy British Aerospace's 100% ownership of Rover Group Holdings Ltd.
Rover Group Holdings in turn owns 80% of Rover Cars, which in addition to Land Rover owns such well-loved British names as Triumph, MG, Morris Minor and Austin Mini.
