The sales of the fathers can distress the children.
That fact of life is dawning on many entrepreneurs who sold out during the 1980s takeover binge and who are now confronting an unexpected twist: Their offspring yearn to buy back the family business.
One fourth of the children of family-business owners who sold their companies in the 1980s have tried -- with mixed results -- to regain the companies, according to a 1993 survey of more than 400 such individuals by Prince & Associates, a Stratford, Conn., market-research and consulting firm.
Though these offspring often had expected to inherit their family's business, many ultimately favored its sale, the Prince survey found; only later did they fully appreciate what they had lost.
"They didn't understand how powerfully their identities were tied to the company," says Richard Narva, a principal of Genus Resources Inc., a Boston family business-consulting firm.
"It represented their heritage and legacy, not just a pile of assets."
Nostalgia isn't the only reason grown children often want the business back.
Many feel that their intimate knowledge of the company means they could run it better than the new owners.
Others seek to fulfill ambitions thwarted elsewhere.
A look at three of these individuals follows.
For Todd Holson, a photo-album company founded by his grandfather in 1943 "was my life."
He joined Holson Co. as a teenager when the Wilton, Conn., concern was owned by his father, Sheldon, and his uncle, Melvin Holson.
"I grew up with the business," remembers Todd Holson, now 33 years old.
"I swept floors and worked after school, Saturdays and vacations."
Todd Holson completed a college business degree and started working full-time at the family business in 1983, holding a variety of manufacturing, marketing and administrative positions during the next few years.
"I learned the business inside out," he says.
"I always thought one day I would be running the company."
But in 1987, the family sold the business, which then had about $25 million in annual sales, to Bain Capital Inc., a Boston investment firm, for more than $10 million.
"We reached a stage in our lives when we were looking to do other things," says Melvin Holson, now 68 years old.
"The time had come to move on."
Selling to outsiders seemed the only option, he adds, because third-generation family members such as his nephew "were at least five to 10 years away from being able to take the reins of the company."
Todd Holson worked for the new owners for two years as a marketing director before giving up hope of ever becoming president.
In 1988, he took a marketing job elsewhere.
But only eight months later, he was involved with Holson again -- by buying a neglected division that sold album-page replacements and albums unavailable in stores.
The younger Mr. Holson saw untapped potential in the unit.
By taking over the replacement-part functions for companies in other industries, he says he has increased the business's annual sales "to several million dollars from a couple hundred thousand."
But there was another important reason for acquiring the division: his grandmother Annette Holson, then 89 years old.
Mrs. Holson, who had helped keep Holson's books for 45 years, was the last family member still working full time at the company, her grandson says.
By buying the division and transferring her there, he made certain that she could continue to work as long as she wished.
Todd Holson says he employed his grandmother as an accountant until three months before her death last year.
"I have no doubt the work kept her going," he says.
"That's something I'm very proud of."
Douglas Leeds was asked by new owners to run the New York advertising agency sold by his father in 1989.
He accepted the offer.
Yet three years later, he also found himself trying to buy the business back.
Mr. Leeds's father, Richard, and Chester Thomson founded Thomson-Leeds Co. in 1957.
The younger Mr. Leeds, now 47, says he joined the point-of-purchase agency 20 years later "under the impression that this someday would be my business."
That notion changed when Ogilvy & Mather, a big New York ad agency, bought the company for $18 million in stock.
"There was dissent between the partners, and the easiest way to settle it was to sell the company," says Mr. Leeds's 72-year-old father.
His son says he dropped plans to use his share of the proceeds to start his own firm when Ogilvy offered him the presidency of its new division plus some of the unit's profits.
"I thought, `Maybe this is a fantastic opportunity to own a smaller piece of a bigger pie,'" he says.
But less than a year later, Ogilvy & Mather's parent, Ogilvy Group Inc., was acquired by WPP Group PLC, the giant British advertising concern.
Cost cutting and a declining advertising market transformed the familial environment into a bureaucratic nightmare, the Leedses say.
For instance, shortly after WPP took over, the younger Mr. Leeds hired a receptionist to replace one who had quit.
Even though he paid the new employee $2,000 less a year, he says, a senior Ogilvy executive summoned him and, in a humiliating moment, reprimanded him for violating a hiring freeze.
Kenneth Roman, then Ogilvy's chairman, concedes that working conditions at Thomson-Leeds deteriorated after WPP took over.
Mr. Leeds's company "didn't get any of the benefits of being part of Ogilvy but got all of the penalties of the sacrifices we made."
The senior Mr. Leeds, who then worked one day a week under a five-year consulting contract, says, "I knew Douglas had the ability to get out if he wanted to."
He adds, "But he had great pride in the company's name and reputation."
Rather than abandon the business, Douglas Leeds began trying to buy it back in late 1990.
In early 1992, he says, he did buy it for $5 million in cash and notes -- less than a third of what Ogilvy had paid.
The younger Mr. Leeds says he has more than doubled the agency's annual revenue to $25 million in 1993.
His father now works with him two days a week, handling certain legal and administrative chores.
"It can be very lonely running your own business," Douglas Leeds says.
"I needed someone I could bounce ideas off of -- somebody with experience."
Last year, Jody Vitale twice approached the buyers of Perfect Fit Industries Inc. about regaining a stake in the home-furnishings maker that his father, Joseph, had run for 30 years.
The Monroe, N.C., company, which the younger Mr. Vitale joined in 1985 and expected to run someday, was sold in 1989 for more than $50 million.
"We got an offer we couldn't refuse" from Vestar Capital Partners Inc., a New York investment firm, recalls Mr. Vitale, now 35 years old.
Yet four years later, Mr. Vitale proposed merging Perfect Fit with a small company that he and his brother had acquired.
He says Vestar rejected their offer.
When he learned last fall that Vestar planned to sell Perfect Fit to another suitor, he inquired in vain about buying an interest.
James Kelley, a Vestar managing director, says discussions went nowhere because he didn't think the Vitales had the resources to acquire Perfect Fit.
Mr. Vitale says returning the company to family ownership would have made economic sense and also would have "meant a lot to me psychologically."
He adds: "I know the company and its customers.
A lot of people in the factory knew me when I was born.
It would have been nice to be a part of that again."
