The German cabinet approved building a high-speed magnetic railroad between Hamburg and Berlin, with service to begin by the year 2005.
The $5.2 billion project could involve 10,000 jobs, boosting the economy and leading to a technological edge for sales of the system abroad.
The Transrapid train will travel on a magnetically generated air cushion at up to 270 miles per hour, making the 185-mile journey in less than an hour vs. 3 1/2 hours on regular trains.
The prototype was developed by Magnetschnellbahn Berlin-Hamburg AG, a consortium of Thyssen Industrie AG, Siemens AG and AEG AG that holds patents on the system.
Though contracts will be awarded through public bidding, consortium members expect several billion marks of orders.
Under the cabinet financing plan, the German government will pay for track-system costs of $3.28 billion, while operating-company borrowing could total $1.93 billion for building the trains.
The cabinet action requires parliamentary approval.
Opponents anticipate cost overruns and technical problems, and favor spending instead to improve the unprofitable Deutsche Bahn rail system.
The Delhi High Court cleared the way for action to allow foreign publications in India.
It rejected petitions to stop the government from liberalizing a four-decade-old ban on entry by foreign newspapers.
Since India in 1991 introduced reforms to open up its socialist-oriented economy, foreign media have sought to enter the thriving market, either on their own or through joint ventures.
Air France agreed to sell its 19.1% stake in troubled Czechoslovak Airline to Konsolidacni Bank, aviation officials in Prague said.
A price wasn't set for the shares, which the French flag carrier bought for $30 million in 1992.
Air France declined to comment.
The buyer is a Czech government institution that helps state companies in transition.
The Czech government has been unhappy with Air France's role in restructuring the airline, which had a record $40.2 million loss last year, and it may seek a new foreign partner.
The value of foreign investment proposals approved by the Australian government in the fiscal year ended last June 30 jumped 52% to $17.11 billion from $11.27 billion a year earlier.
In its annual report, the Foreign Investment Review Board said the number of projects increased 21% to 3,602 from 2,981.
Manufacturing deals showed the greatest growth.
U.S. proposals that won approval more than doubled in value to $2.78 billion from $1.35 billion.
Russia's Gazprom natural-gas monopoly threatened to cut off supplies to Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova starting today, unless they pay for gas already received.
The three former Soviet republics owe Russia hundreds of billions of rubles for energy, and Gazprom has threatened to interrupt their supplies and has reduced shipments in efforts to get payments.
Gazprom's main export pipeline to Europe runs through Ukraine, which the ITAR-Tass news agency said has been siphoning off gas meant for Western customers.
Turkmenistan, also a major gas supplier, cut Ukraine off on Feb. 20.
Offering a chance to meet the fabled Loch Ness Monster up close, a Scottish company next month will start running submarine trips at $105 a person to look for the creature, the Inverness Tourist Board said.
But the view from the specially adapted research submarine, even with its powerful headlights, is likely to be murky in the lake, the deepest body of water in Britain.
Hunts for the Loch Ness Monster began in 1933 after a reported sighting of a 30-foot-long beast with two humps, a snakelike head and flippers.
The monster's existence has never been proved.
Now that Finland and Sweden have agreed to join the European Union and Norway could follow suit, they each must persuade voters to approve the pacts.
Austria's pact may go more easily.
Opinion polls in the past year have shown that none of the Nordic countries has mustered a majority in favor of joining the 12-nation trade bloc.
For Norway, the issue of EU nations' access to its fishing grounds is a huge obstacle.
In 1972, Norway rejected EU membership; now, opponents dominate 42% to 28%.
The timing of each referendum could be crucial.
Norwegian opponents want balloting on the same day in all three countries, so one can't influence another.
Swedish proponents want Finland to go first, because voter ratification there seem most likely as a way to help heal its economy; Finns back EU membership 41%-27%.
Sweden's entire economic plan for the past three years has been linked to preparing for EU entry.
Sweden may combine its referendum with Sept. 18 parliamentary elections that would make the EU vote binding.
Opponents now lead 42%-35%.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Russia and Uzbekistan signed cooperation agreements on economic and foreign policies and military matters. . . .
Switzerland's new legislation to combat organized crime may take effect July 1, granting authorities broader powers to confiscate assets and allowing the financial sector to report suspicious assets without violating professional secrecy.
