Meteorologists have dismissed all the usual suspects.
This has been the harshest winter in the U.S. in more than a decade.
Yesterday's storms dumped more than a foot of snow in states from California to New York, and meteorologists are wondering why.
The old explanations for aberrant weather don't work this year: The ash spewed into the atmosphere by the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo has mostly dissipated.
And El Nino -- an unusual, migrating warm spot in the Pacific Ocean -- has cooled off.
"There really isn't anything to blame this time," says Brad Rippey, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service.
"We should realize that what is happening is within the realm of normalcy if you consider climate variation."
In other words, weather is supposed to be wacky.
Forecasters do know one thing.
The jet stream -- a high-speed river of air some 20,000 feet aloft -- has jumped its banks.
Most winters, the jet stream travels roughly west to east across the nation's midsection.
Since mid-December, however, the jet stream has detoured into Alaska, moving frigid air south through Canada into the nation's Northern Plains.
In this configuration, the jet stream has caused pockets of unusually warm weather in the Pacific Northwest while creating a pipeline for arctic cold in the heartland.
The records are piling up.
So far, a dozen U.S. cities have recorded their coldest day for any date in history.
States in the Northeast have had their third coldest January -- which is usually the coldest month of the year -- in about a century.
The temperatures last month in Chicago, New York City and Minneapolis averaged 5 degrees, 6 degrees and 7 degrees below normal, respectively.
The alignment of the jet stream is also pulling ocean moisture over the Northeast.
And the unusually cold temperatures mean more snow and less rain.
Parkersburg, W. Va., for example, was buried by 40 inches of snow in January -- more than it received during the past two winters combined.
Most meteorologists agree that ocean temperatures and volcanoes affect the climate.
But the weather -- like the economy -- is so chaotic that there is lots of room for experts to make a living arguing over how things change, and when.
"Get 10 meteorologists together and they'll all have different opinions about what caused the weather and how to forecast it," says Charles Notis, a meteorologist and co-owner of Freese-Notis Weather of Des Moines, Iowa.
And even though meteorologists can't pinpoint a cause, they persist in pressing their own theories.
Some El Nino watchers, for example, say the recent cooling of the patch of water signals a higher risk of summer drought in the Midwest.
Sun watchers are gearing up for the arrival of a period of low solar activity, which they call a "double sunspot minimum," in a couple of years.
They try to correlate weather patterns on Earth with the sun.
The recent spate of weird weather has given grist to volcano watchers, who theorize that the debris pumped into the atmosphere by catastrophic eruptions can deflect enough of the sun's heat to cause a shifting of the jet stream.
The eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, for example, was followed by an unusually cool summer in 1992, and then a wet summer, in the U.S.
The jet stream plaguing the U.S. this winter is also unusually persistent.
But most meteorologists say the ash from Mount Pinatubo probably isn't to blame anymore.
"We've seen the climate altered for a couple years," says Peter Leavitt, chief executive officer of Weather Services Corp., Bedford, Mass.
"Now it has to find its way back."
So when will the weather return to something approaching normal?
The heavy rains and mudslides in California this week may signal a changing course for the jet stream.
By next week, meteorologists say, temperatures could reach the 40s in the northeastern United States.
But nobody is ready to predict an end to the unusual weather just yet.
