Stock market investors got a severe case of the jitters last week.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average shot higher in early trading on several days, only to plummet later in those sessions.
Although the industrial average ended the week just marginally lower and barely more than 2% below its all-time high, some analysts are now proclaiming that the long-awaited stock-market correction has arrived.
The culprit for the market's downturn, these analysts say, is the recent rise in both short and long-term interest rates and fears that further increases are coming.
More sanguine forecasters argue, however, that given the health of the economy and the low starting point for the rise in rates, a full-blown correction isn't yet in the cards.
And certainly the bull market remains intact, they contend.
Among the pessimists, Joseph McAlinden, market strategist at Dillon Read, says the latest market declines reflect investors' realization that interest rates have been rising for three months and will continue to climb.
"I've been saying for some time that I expect a 15% correction on the Dow from its high," says Mr. McAlinden.
"You never really know when these things begin, but at this point the evidence is pretty overwhelming we're into it."
Mr. McAlinden notes that long-term interest rates hit their low in October and have been climbing ever since.
He says that inflation tends to hit its low roughly about four months after long rates, suggesting that last week's reassuring report on consumer prices may have been the low for inflation.
With inflation rising, according to Mr. McAlinden's scenario, interest rates will climb, too, roiling the stock market.
He sees the correction lasting until the 1994 fourth quarter.
"Stocks are even more vulnerable to the prospect of rising rates because the stock market's climb has been driven for so long by falling rates," he says.
Gail Dudack, market strategist at S.G. Warburg, is predicting a 10% decline in stock prices.
She has been lowering her holdings of stock slightly since late December and now has 10% of her portfolio in cash.
Last week's stock market performance only confirmed her view that the correction is under way.
"Everybody has been talking about us being in the best of all worlds and so much of that has been factored into the market," she says.
"That has left investors wide open for disappointment."
Ms. Dudack argues that cash coming into the market isn't likely to remain at the high levels of recent years.
As cash infusions into stocks moderate, there will be less fuel to drive prices higher.
"The public has more stocks as a percentage of their portfolios than they've had in 20 years and that cycle is maturing," she says.
A.C. Moore, portfolio manager and strategist at Argus Investment Management in Santa Barbara, Calif., sees a downturn of smaller proportions, amounting to no more than a 6% decline from the Dow's high.
Mr. Moore sees evidence of the decline in several technical indicators, among them the poor ratio of stocks hitting new highs to those falling to new lows.
He remains upbeat about the overall trend in stock prices, partly because of the interest-rate environment.
He is less worried than many analysts that the stock market will crack because of further boosts in short-term interest rates.
"The Federal Reserve has been more stimulative over the last several years than it has ever been since World War II," Mr. Moore says.
"So there's a lot of room for the Fed to increase rates without threatening the attractiveness of common stocks."
It may be premature to proclaim the start of a stock market correction, says Joseph Battipaglia, chief investment strategist at Gruntal & Co.
He contends that as long as short-term interest rates rise gradually the market can continue to climb.
But another Fed rate boost following closely on the last would further rattle the stock market, he says.
"The question is whether or not the Fed moves again soon," he asserts.
"If it's sooner rather than later, that suggests the Fed has uncovered some inflation problem that it's trying to correct."
But Mr. Battipaglia believes the inflation worries are overdone.
Indeed, even with the concerns on Friday, gold and oil prices fell, suggesting inflation may not be the bogeyman pessimists fear.
Mr. Battipaglia expects stock prices to resume their upward trend, with the Dow industrials breaking through the 4000 level this year.
"Our strategy is to remain invested," he says.
"This bull market is not over."
The current stock market jitters are nothing more than the usual experience after a Fed rate increase and nothing to worry about, says Don Hays, director of investment strategy at Wheat, First Securities/Butcher & Singer in Richmond, Va.
Mr. Hays argues that it was expected that after the rate increase most analysts would begin predicting higher inflation, higher interest rates and a sharp correction.
"All this has encouraged my enthusiasm for stocks, not diminished it," Mr. Hays says.
"Within the next week or two the stock market will get back on a persistent uptrend based on improving earnings."
Mr. Hays dismisses the doomsayers announcing the start of a correction.
"This isn't a correction; it's a pause maybe," he says.
"When you have monetary conditions like this you never have a correction of more than 4% and this is barely 2%."
Edward Yardeni, chief economist at C.J. Lawrence, urges investors to keep their eye on the economic fundamentals.
He says the sterling consumer price report last week combined with the recovery's continued strength add up to a strong positive environment for stocks.
"This, too, will pass -- the fundamentals will eventually win out," Mr. Yardeni adds.
"In the long term, I'm still very bullish.
The Dow will be going over 4000 within months and moving higher from there."
Plunging bond prices knocked stock prices lower for the second day.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled 35.18 points to 3887.46, its lowest close since the 96-point plunge on Feb. 4.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index lost 2.65 to 467.69 and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index fell 1.51 to 259.87.
The Nasdaq Composite Index slipped 1.39 to 788.85.
The American Stock Exchange Market Value Index dropped 3.51 to 470.95.
Volume on the Big Board fell to 289.3 million shares from 338.9 million Thursday.
Declining issues outnumbered advancers by 1,411 to 706.
For the week, the industrial average slipped seven points, or 0.2%, and the S&P fell 2.49, or 0.5%.
But the Nasdaq composite jumped 7.46, or nearly 1%.
World-wide, stock prices fell Friday in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 0.37 to 115.79.
The sell-off in bonds left long-term interest rates at their highest levels since July 1993.
The Treasury's 30-year bond fell more than a point to yield 6.62%.
The Dow Jones Utilities Average, which is regarded as a leading indicator for interest rates and therefore the stock and bond markets, sank 3.56, or 1.68%, to 208.54, its lowest level since April 1992.
Ventritex plunged 10 1/4, or 28%, to 26 3/4 on Nasdaq.
Analysts at Robertson Stephens and Furman Selz removed "buy" ratings from the stock amid concern about a visit to the company by officials of the Food and Drug Administration.
The nature of the visit wasn't reported.
A spokesman for the agency wouldn't comment.
Spokesmen for the Sunnyvale, Calif., medical device manufacturer couldn't be reached.
Media Vision skidded 7 5/8 to 35 1/4 on Nasdaq even though the company said its earnings jumped to 53 cents a share in the fourth quarter from 18 cents a year ago on a 188% revenue gain.
Analysts said some investors were expecting even stronger results.
A rise in inventories at the multimedia products maker also was cited.
Two giant new closed-end mutual funds were among the most-active Big Board issues, both finishing at their initial offering price of $15 a share.
The two, which will both invest in foreign securities, have a total combined market value of more than $1.6 billion.
Global Privatization Fund, which will invest around the world in businesses being sold by governments, had an offering of 74.5 million shares.
Morgan Stanley India Investment Fund, which will buy shares of companies based in that country, had a 35.7 million-share offering.
Inland Steel shed 1 3/4 to 33 3/8 after C.J. Lawrence Deutsche Bank Securities cut a rating on the company's stock to "hold" from "buy."
The securities company cited concerns that discounting by foreign steel companies could hurt U.S. producers.
Xerox fell 1 5/8 to 98 5/8 after losing 2 1/2 Thursday.
Several analysts attributed the selling to profit-taking on the stock of the office products company.
The stock hit a 52-week high earlier last week.
American depositary receipts of Mexican companies fell in tandem with prices on that country's stock market.
Telefonos de Mexico was down 2 1/4 to 71 3/8.
Paramount Communications dropped 1 1/4 to 75, Blockbuster Entertainment rose 7/8 to 24 1/2 and Viacom's Class B shares lost 1 1/4 to 25 3/4 on the Amex.
The Wall Street Journal reported that holders of Blockbuster are angry about the declining value of Viacom stock, which they will receive in the companies' planned merger.
Viacom shares have fallen since the company won a bidding war for Paramount.
Semiconductor stocks rose for the third time in four sessions.
Motorola added 5/8 to 103 3/4, while Intel added 1/4 to 66 3/4 on Nasdaq.
The companies were named as the microchip market's leaders in a survey released Friday morning by Dataquest, a market research firm.
Texas Instruments rose 2 3/4 to 79 1/4, while Micron Technology added 4 1/8 to 65 5/8 on hopes for stronger prices for dynamic random access memory chips, according to one analyst.
