Researchers reported new evidence that a drug used for epilepsy seizures also offers significant relief for the stormy mood-swings of manic depression.
The epilepsy drug, Abbott Laboratories's Depakote, brought patients down from episodes of mania just as effectively as the widely used drug, lithium, the study concluded.
In some cases, Depakote also caused fewer side effects than lithium in the study's patients.
The study stirred excitement among doctors and patient groups, who said it could help offer the nation's 2.5 million manic-depression patients a badly needed alternative to lithium.
About a third of manic-depressives aren't helped by lithium, or develop intolerable side effects such as vomiting and diarrhea.
Abbott said it will use the new study to bolster its October 1992 application for federal regulatory approval to market Depakote as a manic-depression treatment.
Psychiatrists have been using Depakote, and related forms of a compound called valproic acid, to treat manic depression for several years although the drug has never been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for that use.
"From a public-health perspective, it's also important to have these large studies because without them we run the risk of having these kind of treatments not covered by insurance," said Frederick Goodwin, a manic-depression authority and director of the National Institute of Mental Health.
Lithium, made by numerous companies, currently is the only drug formally approved to treat manic depression.
Another epilepsy drug, Ciba-Geigy Corp.'s Tegretol, hasn't received FDA approval for manic depression, but is also widely used for the disorder as an alternative to lithium.
The new study, published in this week's Journal of the American Medical Association, examined 179 hospital patients with acute episodes of mania.
The patients were treated with Depakote, lithium or a placebo.
The results: 48% of Depakote patients showed a significant improvement, compared with 49% of lithium patients and 25% of placebo patients.
"By almost any yardstick, both were . . . twice as beneficial as `the tincture of time,' " said Charles Bowden, the University of Texas psychiatrist who led the study.
The results also showed that in certain side effects, Depakote took a milder toll than lithium.
Some 14% of Depakote patients experienced upset stomach, compared with 25% of lithium patients.
And 22% of Depakote patients were troubled with headaches, compared with 39% of lithium patients.
To be sure, Depakote is a potent drug with potentially serious side effects.
Susan Dime-Meenan, executive director of the National Depressive and Manic-Depressive Association, said she began taking the drug for her manic depression six years ago after she stopped tolerating lithium.
Her hair fell out, she gained 40 pounds and developed a hand tremor.
But those symptoms eventually went away, and today she effuses about the drug.
Though it still gives her occasional stomach pain and diarrhea, it has "made a tremendous difference" by smoothing out her wild swings to manic highs, she said.
Dr. Bowden and several of the study's other authors own stock in Abbott or have received payments from the drug company for talks or consulting.
Abbott helped fund the study and publicize its results.
