The Securities and Exchange Commission is examining personal trading records of Fidelity Investments' portfolio managers to determine whether they profited from trading in advance of big mutual-fund transactions.
According to people familiar with the SEC's inquiries, the commission's interest has been spurred by Fidelity's recent statements that it tightened its trading rules in November and has taken disciplinary action against some employees.
In addition, former Fidelity employees say three portfolio managers came under scrutiny internally in late 1993 for aggressive trading in their personal accounts that raised ethical issues.
Fidelity declined to comment on whether the SEC had made any inquiries.
But it said it would cooperate fully with any inquiry from the agency.
People with knowledge of the SEC's inquiries say the commission wants to determine whether these or any other employees profited by "front running" -- buying shares in advance of big fund orders, then selling them after the funds' buying lifts the share price.
The SEC investigation was first reported by the Washington Post.
In the past few days, the SEC has requested trading records from the big, Boston-based mutual-fund concern, which has more than $260 billion under management.
SEC rules require that portfolio managers report all personal securities transactions to their employers quarterly, and Fidelity dictates such reporting monthly.
The commission's inquiries of Fidelity are preliminary, and are part of a rising concern about fund managers' personal trading.
Last week, Invesco Funds Group fired star manager John Kaweske for his alleged failure to tell his employers about his trading.
Fidelity has no rule against its portfolio managers holding the same stocks owned by the funds they manage, but its ethics code forbids personal buying that takes place with knowledge that a Fidelity fund is about to buy.
According to Fidelity's house rules, fund managers may buy a stock purchased by a Fidelity fund five days after the fund buys.
Some Fidelity insiders say that the firm has become concerned about the personal trading of some younger fund managers.
They say the personal trading under question didn't appear to overtly violate Fidelity's code of ethics, but may have violated its spirit.
Such house rules are designed not just to maintain compliance with securities laws, but to ensure that employees don't take advantage of their positions and that fund shareholders aren't harmed financially by any personal dealings by mutual-fund employees.
Former Fidelity employees say personal stock trading by some Fidelity fund managers is considerable and has grown during the bull market, sometimes totaling hundreds of transactions a year.
The size and complexity of these trades has also grown, according to recent Fidelity departures.
"Fidelity is responding to the increasingly active trading of some of the young Turks over there," said one ex-Fidelity fund manager in Boston.
"There is way more action over there now than there was 10 years ago."
Fidelity in the past has had serious problems with a fund manager's personal dealings.
In July 1993, the U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the conviction of Patricia Ostrander, a former Fidelity Investments fund manager, for accepting an illegal gratuity from Michael Milken in return for steering business to Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
Robert McGough contributed to this article.
