As every foreign exchange trader knows, many things happen in the market that haven't been willed by anyone.
There was no overt sign that Washington aided the dollar's plunge against the yen Monday by that old game of talking the dollar down.
But clearly the administration was nonchalant.
When White House economic adviser Laura Tyson assured everyone that the nose dive wouldn't touch off inflation, traders assumed that Bill Clinton was not at all displeased by the event.
This administration seems to think, as with so many issues, that it can be coy about exchange-rate manipulation and get away with it.
Commerce Secretary Ron Brown insists "there is no deliberate effort" to drive up the yen, but it'd be a OK if it happened.
Amid this cuteness, the National Economic Council's Bowman Cutter, in an interview with the Dow Jones wire service yesterday, tried to knock down stories circulating in the Japanese media that the administration was now into manipulating the dollar-yen relationship.
He noted that any such call gets made by Lloyd Bentsen and President Clinton.
Reassurances notwithstanding, we think this administration will have to live with a lot of suspicion in the markets about its penchant for driving policy with clever rhetoric.
Besides, the markets have been along for this ride before.
In 1987 the U.S. managed to touch off a Wall Street crash by talking the dollar down, in that case to punish the Germans for their sins.
The circumstances are different this time, but it is only fair to warn Mr. Clinton that money games are dangerous.
Trying to bring another nation to heel through competitive devaluation can work too well, damaging both parties to the struggle.
It's not in the interest of the U.S. to further damage the fragile Japanese financial sector.
The effect of jacking up the yen further would be to reduce the cash flow, in yen, of Japanese corporations, which are struggling for profits.
Given the hits their balance sheets already have taken from the vicious deflation in Japanese stocks and real estate, a further jab is most unhelpful, and maybe dangerous.
Japan's economy is in severe straits because deflation has exposed the fundamental weakness of the Japan Inc. model.
The intricate cross-investments of banks, securities firms and industrial corporations have meant that when one big enterprise's balance sheet is hit, all are.
When many are hit at once by something as broad and severe as Japan's asset deflation, there are enormous financial stresses.
Japan's economic policy masterminds have been, in essence, improvising to keep the banking industry afloat.
Among the measures designed to pump up stocks have been purchases by the postal savings system and curbs on new stock issues, neither of which is an especially healthy cure.
The yen rise hits just when banks are trying to clean up their balance sheets by selling some of their troubled overseas investments, particularly their weaker loans in Europe.
The upshot of a yen boost is that these sales yield less in yen than they would have a week ago.
The uncertain health of Japanese banks is not improved by having their reduced loan recoveries further diminished by foreign-exchange losses.
It is significant that American Treasury bonds didn't respond well to the rise in the yen.
One factor of course is a fear of the inflation that Ms. Tyson is so unconcerned about.
But it should never be forgotten that the bond market is global and any setbacks for the financial sector of a big player like Japan is not good news for bonds anywhere.
Perhaps it is too much to ask that American politicians, or for that matter the present cast of White House economic advisers, should understand what unforeseen fallout might arise from what to them are merely exercises in hardball politics.
Nor should anyone doubt this administration's interventionist instincts.
"We are resolute" about opening up Japan, Secretary Brown said yesterday on the occasion of a press briefing for the U.S.-brokered $6 billion aircraft purchase by the Saudis.
Hailed as a trade victory for Mr. Clinton's "national export strategy," the deal is being guaranteed by the Export-Import Bank.
Sen. Patty Murray revealed last August that Mr. Clinton had personally intervened with King Fahd to do the deal, and yesterday the President said, "When I think it's appropriate and potentially helpful, I don't mind asking for the business."
We suppose whacking around Japan's economy during its greatest post-war political transition is just another day at the office for these folks.
But unpleasant things can often and unexpectedly happen when politicians play around with something as fundamental as money and markets.
The dollar-yen relationship is a particularly sensitive one for the global financial markets at this moment.
We urge Mr. Clinton and his economic advisers not to get too cute about the dollar decline.
Markets have a way of punishing glib thinking.
