A world away from here, in Washington, D.C., political impresario John P. Sears once helped put a former actor named Ronald Reagan into the White House.
Now he wants to do something more audacious: build a state-of-the-art steel mill here, get U.S. investors to finance it and the Czech government to back it -- while keeping majority ownership for himself and his partners.
"It is not just for us that we do this, but for you, the whole country," Mr. Sears tells three dozen guests sipping champagne and wine at a reception he is throwing in a centuries-old former convent here.
Later, he confides, "I sell hope."
In the short history of capitalism in Eastern Europe, few projects are as bigor as unusual -- as that which Mr. Sears is proposing to construct some 300 miles from Prague in smog-enshrouded Ostrava, home of a massive but outdated steel complex owned by the Czech government.
Does it make sense to build a new steel mill at a cost of as much as $950 million at a time when the rest of Europe is closing steel plants because of overcapacity and the European Union is screaming about cheap imports from the East?
Mr. Sears claims that his project could generate net income of as much as $106.7 million a year.
And his backers aren't slouches.
Among his entourage are representatives from investment bank Dillon, Read & Co., law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, contractors Brown & Root, big Japanese steel producer NKK Corp., Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co. and steel-trading firm Tokyo Boeki Ltd.
But many others are skeptical, wondering why a supposedly attractive project needs a government guarantee.
Just now, in fact, the Czech government is being forced through its guarantees to pay $18.7 million for planes that Czechoslovak Airlines contracted to lease but now can't afford.
Bankers at the European Bank for Reconstruction & Development who know of Mr. Sears's project say they don't like commercial projects that need government guarantees.
Mr. Sears, once called America's shrewdest political campaign manager, concedes that at the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade, "I was accused first of being a fool and secondly, of trying to rob the place."
But the ministry now says it is evaluating the project and calls it "an interesting idea" that it "is seriously engaged in."
The fact that the 53-year-old lobbyist has gotten this far is a testimony to the value of connections and the seduction of deal-making in emerging markets.
For economies in transition, it raises important questions about how much government financial support should be given to projects that are essentially private.
"Everybody has a project in Eastern Europe," says Denis Bovin, vice chairman of Bear, Stearns & Co. in New York.
"There are a thousand of these things going on.
Only a small percentage will see the light of day."
Mr. Sears is proposing to build the first big "minimill" in all of Europe -- East or West.
Minimills aren't necessarily small; they just use scrap instead of iron ore to make finished products.
Mr. Sears sees handsome profits, particularly for himself and his Washington law partner, South African Joel Hoppenstein.
Mr. Sears and several partners would own 65% of the minimill while putting up virtually no money, besides expenses.
The 35%-owner, Nova Hut, a huge, profitable steel firm the Czech government owns through its National Property Fund, would provide $100 million in working capital as well as the land and labor.
The total cost, estimated between $650 million and $950 million, would be financed through a leasing structure using Czech government-backed debt sold through Dillon Read in the U.S.
"I'm putting up very little," says Mr. Sears, who notes he has spent time and energy.
"It was my idea."
The financing, in fact, is a big motivation for the project.
Czech-government-backed debt is very hot now among investors.
Anita Molino, a Dillon Read senior vice president working on the project, says her clients are used to buying government-backed debt.
Chain-smoking Marlboros, Mr. Sears says he first visited then-Czechoslovakia in the 1960s before he became an intimate of U.S. political figures and ran the presidential campaigns of Richard Nixon and then Ronald Reagan.
In 1991, Mr. Sears brought an old friend from Japan, a steel marketing man named Takeshi Ue, managing director of Tokyo Boeki Development Ltd., which is distantly related to Tokyo Boeki Ltd., one of Japan's smaller trading companies.
Inspired by Czech government officials who came to Japan soliciting investment, they hatched a plan to make low-cost, high-quality steel for export.
In Ostrava, Nova Hut general manager Svatopluk Velkoborsky, 62, wanted to update the 50-year-old mill, the youngest of three ancient steel complexes not far from the Polish border, which desperately need new technology and restructuring.
But Mr. Sears and Mr. Ue initially offered equipment, not money.
Even now, Mr. Velkoborsky sounds slightly incredulous.
"We have several newspaper stories about Mr. Sears," he says, laying them out on a table in his office, "but we are not really sure he is the same one."
For financing, Mr. Sears turned to a businessman he had met recently, Richard W. Fischer of Dick Fischer Development, Seattle and Anchorage.
Mr. Fischer had built U.S. government projects with "lease-purchase" financing raised by Dillon Read.
Such transactions involve a private developer building a project with government-secured debt and leasing it to a government.
But Dillon Read hasn't any offices in Eastern Europe and never has done a transaction in the region.
Mr. Fischer never has built a steel plant.
"But I've built lots of other things," he says.
There's another problem: Japan has a tacit agreement not to add steel capacity to Europe.
"We take the position that this is not a new mill, it's a replacement mill," says Mr. Sears.
The written proposal for the plant envisions exports to the U.S., Asia and the Middle East.
But ultimately, Mr. Ue says, Western Europe is the target.
The Czechs worry how exporting cheap steel will affect their chances for European Union membership.
A year ago, in fact, the EU slapped them with tariff quotas.
But Mr. Ue dismisses these fears.
Over time, he says, "economics wins over politics."
Mr. Sears says the trade ministry has promised a decision on the minimill deal by Saturday.
