Does she or doesn't she?
Chances are excellent that she does -- at home.
Sales of at-home hair color are rising, driven in part by youth-obsessed baby boomers.
"This is a generation of people who are accustomed to looking as good as they can possibly look," says Mary Atherton, editor of Modern Salon magazine.
Alcira Esparragoza is one such person.
A 40-year-old employee of a New York financial-services company, she colors her brown hair a "natural reddish blond" every few weeks, because "it just makes your life better," she says.
To Ms. Esparragoza, revealing gray hair is simply unacceptable.
Hair-color sales in supermarkets, drugstores and mass-merchandise outlets rose 14.4% in the year ended Nov. 14, according to Information Resources Inc., a Chicago-based research firm.
And demographics indicate the trend will continue.
The number of women in their 40s will rise by 27% in the next decade, reaching 22.4 million in 2003, according to the Census Bureau.
Sales for men's products are rising, too, although they still represent only 8% of the market, according to Information Resources.
Personal-care companies are riding the trend by aggressively promoting a stream of semipermanent products, like Clairol's Glints Conditioning Color Enhancer, that come in a single bottle and wash away after six shampoos.
L'Oreal, the hair-care division of Cosmair Inc., introduced Casting last spring, a product that covers gray but wears away after six weeks.
But aren't contemporary women supposed to be embracing "the natural look"?
Yes, but their definition of "natural" has changed, says Lillian Maresch, who researches attitudes of baby boomers at Generation Insights, a marketing consulting firm in Tonka Bay, Minn.
The new products allow women to appear to slow, rather than arrest, the aging process.
Women are "looking to perhaps minimize without totally obliterating the signs of gray," Ms. Maresch says.
That allows them to feel they're "aging gracefully," she adds.
These days, the trick to a hair color's success is how little it does, says Joe Campinell, senior vice president and general manager of L'Oreal.
"It may not necessarily do as much as you want it to, but it never does more than you want it to," he says.
And that, he believes, has encouraged more timid consumers to try the product.
The popularity of Casting helped boost L'Oreal's sales of hair-coloring products by 21.8% to $252.5 million last year, posting higher growth than Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.'s Clairol, the market leader, according to Information Resources.
Madeline Solano, 25, says her heart beats faster every time she gets ready to use the permanent ash brown that she says matches her complexion.
"I never leave the stuff on for more than 10 minutes," she says, even though the directions recommend 25.
Manufacturers say even old-style permanent color today is less messy and smelly -- and more natural looking -- than it used to be.
Subtle results, they say, can be achieved by choosing the perfect match from among as many as 40 shades, with such names as Natural Honeycomb or Extra Light Beige Blonde, in a product line.
Still, application can be daunting.
After mixing liquids from two different bottles, the formula is applied to dry hair and lathered like shampoo.
Industry observers say the general interest in coloring hair is helping salons, too.
But some individual salon owners disagree.
Joseph Cione, who owns a chain of hair salons in New York, says he suspects some former clients now head straight for the drugstore.
At about $5 a bottle, at-home kits are much cheaper than a salon treatment, which can cost up to $125.
After noticing a 10% drop in the number of customers requesting hair coloring, Mr. Cione says he decided to mail his customers coupons discounting by $10 his $55 hair-coloring fee.
To be safe, marketers aren't just counting on baby boomers for growth.
Another promising target for hair-color manufacturers is younger women like Ms. Solano.
If consumers start using hair coloring before they go gray, "they'll realize that using a hair coloring isn't such a big deal," says L'Oreal's Mr. Campinell.
Clairol, which until now has focused mainly on products that conceal gray, hopes to capture women in their teens and 20s with Glints, which it launched last summer.
The coloring product washes out after six to eight shampoos.
"It's like using hair color almost as a cosmetic," says Rusty Pierce, Clairol's vice president of consumer marketing.
The fashion world is embracing the artificial, too.
Clairol notes that many designers at a recent fashion show in New York colored their models' hair.
Blond is the color of the moment, but Linda Wells, editor of Allure fashion magazine, predicts a revival of "frosted" hair, a particularly artificial style popular in the 1970s featuring alternating strands of dark and light hair.
Duriron Co., citing strong shipments and earnings, said it expects to significantly exceed analysts' profit estimates for the fourth quarter.
Analysts' estimates for the quarter ranged from 35 cents to 40 cents with a consensus of 37 cents.
The Dayton, Ohio, company said its "manufacturing and shipping volumes" from its North American operations, "combined with effective control of costs and assets," enabled Duriron to capitalize on the investments made in manufacturing.
The company plans to release its 1993 results on Feb. 10.
For the year-ago fourth quarter, the company earned $526,000, or four cents a share, including a restructuring charge of $3.8 million, or 30 cents a share.
Duriron makes corrosive-resistant equipment, pumps, valves and other fluid-handling equipment.
