Your Feb. 8 editorial on President Clinton's fiscal 1995 budget contained an inappropriate and highly misleading reference to the Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) program.
You used a single, isolated investment to smear one of the most effective programs the government runs in partnership with the private sector.
The fact is that the SBIC program has been a winner for U.S. taxpayers and small growth companies.
Using a combination of private and government-guaranteed funds, SBICs have made more than $10 billion of venture capital investments in 90,000 small start-up companies, created hundreds of thousands of new jobs, and generated billions in new tax revenues for federal and state treasuries.
New taxes produced by just several outstanding SBIC investments, such as Apple Computer, Cray Research and Intel, far exceed the government's total expenditures for the program.
The fact is that the increase in matching funds for SBICs will go primarily to a totally redesigned and improved investment program.
This new program will give small-growth funds access to billions of private-sector dollars, while creating a higher rate of new jobs and increased tax revenues.
In addition, this program has the unique feature of the federal government participating in the profits earned by SBICs.
Yes, there have been isolated abuses.
But the facts are that SBA uncovered the abuse in the Arkansas case and took legal action to close down this investment company months before Whitewater ever emerged as a political issue.
Your use of this single case to denigrate the whole SBIC program was not an example of objective reporting.
If anyone was guilty of "hieroglyphic obfuscation" and failure to deal with the facts, it was you.
The objectives of the president's "investment" agenda are to create new jobs and rebuild the economy.
Most of this burden will be shouldered by America's entrepreneurs and emerging small-growth companies.
In this context, it simply makes good business sense for the president to increase the government's investment in the SBIC program.
Peter F. McNeish
Alexandria, Va.
