The Tokyo stock market's locomotive is on a siding, but it isn't off the rails.
Bullish foreigners, who have been the key players in the Tokyo market's 9% rally this year, are hanging back after Friday's disastrous failed trade talks between the U.S. and Japan.
The Japanese market is taking a near-term pummeling, with selling led by Japanese banks, companies and individuals.
The Nikkei 225-stock index Tuesday plunged 484.65 points, or 2.5%, to 18974.60.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei rose 167.31 points to close the morning session at 19141.91.
Tuesday's estimated volume was 380 million shares, up from 290.8 million shares on Monday.
Losers overwhelmed gainers, 1,028-84.
The Nikkei has fallen 5% this week.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues dropped 26.64 points, or 1.7%, to 1555.34.
The sellers said the Japanese currency's rise to 102 yen to the U.S. dollar raises concern about a hoped-for recovery.
Japan depends on exports, and a strong yen makes Japanese goods more expensive overseas.
Hopes of a recovery have been a primary reason for foreign purchases of roughly $15 billion of Japanese stocks this year.
"If we're looking at the yen hovering between 100 and 105, we have to call into question our earnings recovery," said Paul Manson, a fund manager with Kleinwort Benson Investment Management in Japan.
The foreigners are down, but not out.
Mark Fawcett, a fund manager at Indosuez Gartmore Asset Management (Japan) Ltd., was among Tuesday's buyers.
"Days like this are made for investors," he said.
"People are unloading stocks unthinkingly."
He was mostly picking up small-capitalization Japanese stocks such as I.O. Data Device, a memory-board maker with little overseas exposure.
Most overseas investors don't believe an all-out trade war with the U.S. is likely.
Moreover, the yen's strength -- up 6% in the past few days -- has been a boon for dollar-based investors.
And if the currency market calms down, these investors said, foreign buyers will be back.
"The dollar-yen concerns are overdone," said John Alkire, president of Morgan Stanley Asset Management Japan.
Japanese stocks, he said, "are still the most attractive asset class of 1994.
But they're going to be marked by a high volatility."
The volatility is already here for well-known exporters, some of the stocks that foreign investors like best.
While the Nikkei fell 2.5% Tuesday, Hitachi Electronics closed at 870 yen ($8.48) a share, down 4.4% on the day, while computer maker NEC finished at 985 yen, also off 4.4%.
Mr. Alkire of Morgan Stanley believes the Nikkei will move "between 17000 and 20000 until the end of March, with no incentives to buy," and then rise after that, based on Japanese economic growth.
Indeed, several factors are likely to keep overseas investors in the Japanese market.
For one, the rise in the yen gives them currency gains that so far outweigh the losses from stocks.
But that gain vanishes if the yen stops rising but stocks keep falling.
More important, many of the U.S. investors coming into Japan's market are first-time buyers, looking for added gains on the big profits they have made in other markets.
They consider Japan overdue for the same rises they have seen on other world markets, and have been hungry to get in.
If the market stabilizes, that could be their buy sign.
Certainly, there is reason to think the yen will stop strengthening.
With U.S. interest rates rising, and Japanese rates likely to fall, it may be hard for the U.S. to hold the yen at higher levels.
"No one believes the dollar-yen rate is sustainable at 102 to the dollar," Indosuez's Mr. Fawcett said.
"The currency market can go on runs, particularly when loudmouth politicians sound off, but it's against the fundamentals."
London shares closed at the day's peaks, after turning sharply higher in late trading.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.18, down 0.74, reflecting lower Asia/Pacific and European markets and higher American markets.
Entertainment stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 167.44, up 2.26, or 1.4%, with Thorn EMI of Britain posting a 2% gain in its local currency.
Fishing stocks trailed at 75.06, down 3.11, or 4%, with Unicord of Thailand sliding 4.6% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index climbed 29.7 points to 3393.2, up from the intraday low of 3367.0.
The FT 30-stock index gained 20.1 points to 2606.8.
Volume was 712.6 million shares, compared with 626.5 million shares a day earlier.
The market was spurred higher by a rally in the futures market and a strong start on Wall Street, as well as some optimism about a cut in Britain's base lending rate in the next six weeks.
Further strength was sapped by caution ahead of a corporate earnings floodgate to open next week and by economic data coming this week.
Yesterday, the market was in positive territory for the entire session, scarcely stirred by economic news that showed British retailers' January sales rose moderately but at the slowest pace for the past 12 months, and that industrial production in December fell from November but rose from a year earlier.
In Frankfurt, stock prices closed mixed, amid extremely light trading because of Carnival celebrations in some areas of Germany.
The DAX 30-stock index slipped 0.39 point to 2115.62, recovering from a low of 2097.54.
Of the DAX issues, 15 rose and 15 fell.
Participants were reassured by the index's ability to resist downward pressure from lower bond prices and a falling dollar in currency dealings, as well as expectations that Germany won't cut interest rates this week.
In Paris, stocks scored a late rise, rebounding from Monday's steep decline with a boost from Wall Street's stronger opening, and overcoming pressure from futures-related selling.
In Zurich, equities firmed, as some investors took advantage of the recent correction-a 6.4% drop this month-to cover short, or oversold, positions and pick up bargains.
In Stockholm, prices advanced broadly on improved volume because of heavy demand from institutional buyers, on positive Swedish corporate news and anticipation of strong earnings reports.
In Hong Kong, prices edged up, after a rebound in the session's final few minutes.
Stocks spent most of the day with losses, down 1.8% at one point, amid low turnover blamed on mixed sentiment about prospects.
Technical factors, such as perceived support points on the main index, strongly influenced activity.
The market, which plunged Monday, was pressured from the opening by Monday's weakness of Hong Kong stocks that also trade in London.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
