Rogers Communications Inc. has agreed to a large-scale swap of cable-television assets with another Canadian cable concern if its 2.79 billion Canadian dollar (US$2.06 billion) offer to acquire Maclean Hunter Ltd. is successful.
Rogers said it reached an agreement with Shaw Communications Inc. to swap assets now owned by it and by Maclean Hunter in western Canada and northern Ontario for Shaw's operations in southern Ontario.
The move would give Rogers a virtual monopoly of Canada's most densely populated region, southwestern Ontario, including the city of Toronto.
"The overwhelming rationale for this transaction is cable boundary rationalization," said Edward Rogers, president and chief executive of Rogers.
"It makes sense to have cable holdings more clustered."
Analysts valued the asset swap at more than C$1 billion, ascribing a multiple of about C$1,000 per cable subscriber to the proposed transaction.
Under the terms of the agreement, Shaw would pay Rogers a yet-to-be-determined amount in cash for the 140,000 subscribers it would add to its customer base as a result of the transaction.
In the short term, the agreement deals another blow to Maclean Hunter by eliminating Shaw as a possible rival bidder for the company as a whole or as an interested bidder for the cable-television operations.
As reported, Maclean Hunter has dismissed Rogers's unsolicited offer as "inadequate", and is seeking alternatives to present to shareholders.
James Shaw, president and chief executive of Edmonton, Alberta-based Shaw Communications, said that he had been approached by Maclean Hunter and its advisers.
"While it's very enticing to see 700,000 cable susbscribers go up for sale, and I think we could have raised the money, I wasn't comfortable loading the company up with debt to do that kind of transaction," he said.
Maclean Hunter, which also has printing and publishing operations, is working on a range of detailed proposals to present to shareholders by early this week.
Robert Furse, chief financial officer of Maclean Hunter, said that the company is studying a number of options, including soliciting alternative bids for the whole company and asset sales.
Maclean Hunter's shares continue to trade below the C$17 a share offer by Rogers.
In Toronto Stock Exchange trading Friday, the shares closed at C$16.50 a share, down 12.5 Canadian cents.
