Paul Rush blames it all on a grandmotherly spy and the missing piece of audio tape.
As he crossed the bleak West Texas plains to research oil-lease sites one day in late 1991, Mr. Rush was listening to an audio tape of a Dorothy Gilman spy novel that he had borrowed from a library.
But three-fourths of the way through the book, he discovered that the last tape was broken.
Frustration turned to entrepreneurial insight.
In November 1992, Mr. Rush opened Earful of Books, which rents and sells audio books only, in Austin, Texas.
Now, 15 months later, Mr. Rush owns three stores in two cities and plans to open three more by September.
And, like many audiobook stores, Earful of Books carefully inspects tapes before they're rented out.
Some retailers and publishers believe audio books -- for decades considered a minor category, of interest only to the blind and available mostly through libraries and mail order -- may be poised for a mass-market breakthrough.
Retail sales hit about $1.2 billion last year, according to a publishers survey, from $250 million five years ago.
(Rental figures aren't available.)
"The rule of thumb for sales used to be that you couldn't go beyond 10% of hardback sales, with a ceiling of about 70,000 copies," says Patricia Johnson, publisher of Random House Audio Books.
"It didn't matter if the book was a two-million-seller -- you couldn't go beyond that."
But recently, Random House's audio version of Michael Crichton's "Jurassic Park" sold 175,000 copies, Simon & Schuster says it sold 288,000 copies of Rush Limbaugh's "The Way Things Ought to Be" and Random House says such titles as Tom Peters's "Thriving on Chaos" are reaching 25% or more of hardback sales.
"That's a clear indicator the market is expanding," says Ms. Johnson.
Major book publishers helped by releasing audio versions at the same time as hardcovers to take advantage of the books' marketing campaigns.
Bantam Doubleday Dell Audio released 32,000 audio copies of Jonathan Kellerman's newly published "Bad Love" simultaneously with its first printing of 256,000.
And within the past two years, audio-book distributors persuaded mass merchandisers such as Target, Kmart Inc. and warehouse clubs to carry audio versions of bestsellers, convincing them that sales volume would justify the effort.
There are now some 120 audio-book specialty stores compared with about 25 a year ago, according to the Audio Publishers Association.
Mr. Rush's Earful of Books stores each carry about 7,000 audio titles, half of them abridged, sold at the 100% markup standard in the industry.
Abridgements can sell for between $10 and $24; unabridged titles for between $30 and $80.
Rentals account for about half the revenue.
"We carry everything a good bookstore would carry, only on tape," says Mr. Rush.
He advertises heavily, especially on radio talk shows, and says marketing accounts for a significant portion of the $300,000 to $350,000 it costs to open a store.
Tapes typically last 25 to 30 rentals -- fewer in the summer, when customers are apt to leave them in hot cars.
Audio books appeal to both hardcore readers who don't have time to read books and to nonreaders who see them as secondary entertainment.
"Audio books are one form of entertainment best used while doing something else," says Jenny Frost, publisher of Bantam Doubleday Dell Audio.
Rich Shelton, an Army reserve captain, absently listens to J.R.R. Tolkien's "Lord of the Rings" as he works on his computer; Dee Whittlesey, a physician, starts her day by playing motivational tapes as she dresses; and Heidi Williams, a homemaker tired of television, relaxes with personal-growth tapes after putting her four-year-old daughter to bed.
As the market for audio books expands, audio bookstore entrepreneurs believe fans of audio books will become frustrated with mass merchandisers' limited selection, which is typically fewer than a tenth of the 3,000 to 7,000 titles offered by audio bookstores.
Bookselling competitors point out that audio bookstores represent less than 5% of the audio-book market and question whether audio books have enough massmarket appeal.
They point out that only 17% of U.S. households bought or listened to an audio book last year, according to a publishers survey.
And Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. bailed out of an audio-book experiment at its video stores last year after lackluster results.
Mr. Rush sees a limited market: well-educated, high-income people who are voracious readers and live in cities with poor public transportation.
"That's why we're very selective about the markets we go into," he says.
But Ms. Frost sees a large potential market among nonreaders.
"Only 6% of the country goes into bookstores on a regular basis," she says.
"If people who don't generally read books find audio books something they want on a regular basis, there's a huge potential consumer base out there."
And Terry Lipelt, a vice president for Rezound International Inc. of Minneapolis, says his company is succeeding in the mass market.
Rezound, which rents primarily abridged books at low prices, has placed counters in 2,000 video stores, groceries, gas stations, convenience stores and other outlets in the past two years.
"We're going after the customer who's seeking a relatively short span of entertainment," he says.
Audio stores will get little help from book publishers, who do very little promotion, says Ed Richards, owner of Bestseller Audio Books of Scottsdale, Ariz.
He and others see growth in the rental market.
Both unabridged books -- running to 10 tapes or more -- and abridgements can often be rented for $1 or less a day.
Audio bookstores may face their toughest challenge from book/music/video superstores, like the ones operated by Barnes & Noble Inc. and Kmart's Borders Inc. division.
Both offer 2,000 to 3,000 audio titles.
Barnes & Noble, like some audio bookstores, lets customers sample top titles in two-minute segments with cliffhanger endings.
Borders is revamping its audio division to provide more titles and more prominent display.
But both say they won't enter the rental market.
Entrepreneurs such as Mr. Rush are hurrying to establish themselves.
"We want to be the largest audio-book seller and renter in our territory, so that if we get a national competitor we can compete -- or be on their acquisition list," he says.
Others, such as Robin K. Smith, coowner of Bookears Inc. in Atlanta, aren't worried about alternative rental competition.
"It's not like Blockbuster where you just ring it up -- you have to be able to talk about books all day long," says Ms. Smith.
"Now that we're into it and can see what it takes, we don't see them as a threat."
