The attention of the foreign exchange markets will remain focused on the yen this week as word is awaited on a fiscal stimulus package expected to be unveiled in Japan on Tuesday.
Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and Liberal Democratic Party head Yohei Kono last week reached a tentative compromise on political reform, setting the stage for Mr. Hosokawa to unveil a stimulus package and budget plans for the fiscal year that begins April 1.
About midday Monday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 109.92 yen and at 1.7442 marks.
Japan's trade surplus has been a continuing source of irritation with major trade partners in the European Union and the U.S.
In December, it grew more than 15% with the U.S.
Pressure for the enactment of a stimulus package has been strong as it is widely regarded as a necessary precondition to putting more money into the hands of Japanese consumers so they can buy U.S. goods and other exports, thus narrowing the trade deficit.
"My expectation is that the dollar will be stable to modestly stronger, principally because long-term interest rates in the U.S. will back up," said Hugh Johnson, chief economist with First Albany Corp.
Profit-taking can be expected in the bond markets, he said.
However, Mr. Johnson said he also expects Japanese long-term interest rates to increase following the unveiling of a stimulus package.
"The real issue is capital flows.
The appeal of yen-denominated bonds will improve and this will attract more capital flows to Japan," Mr. Johnson said.
"The trend for the dollar against the yen will probably be lower, but not dramatically lower" due to troubled trade negotiations, said Kevin Flanagan, economist with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
Mr. Hosokawa and Mr. Kono reached a tentative 11th-hour compromise Friday on key political reforms.
Coming only hours before a Saturday deadline, when the legislative session ended, the agreement appears to have staved off the immediate threat of Mr. Hosokawa's government collapsing.
"My guess is things are being sorted out and we're headed toward a stimulus plan to help the Japanese economy," First Albany's Mr. Johnson said.
"The real issue is whether long-term interest rates will rise more in Japan than here," Mr. Johnson said.
Absent a fiscal stimulus package -- now seen as possible in light of Mr. Hosokawa's political reform program -- there would have been considerable pressure on the Bank of Japan to ease monetary policy.
"This compromise means they can proceed with budget and stimulus talks," said Sandy Batten, senior economist with Citibank.
"It defers fears the U.S. will play hardball in trade talks."
The two countries are conducting "framework" trade negotiations aimed at having the Japanese open their markets to more exports.
However, Dean Witter Reynolds' Mr. Flanagan cautioned against placing much hope on trade talks.
"We're looking for managed targets and they're completely against that idea," he said.
"Right now, we're not seeing much progress at all."
With little ground gained during the trade talks and before Mr. Hosokawa's meeting with President Clinton on Feb. 11, "the feeling is the administration will use a higher yen as a bargaining chip," Mr. Flanagan said.
"The yen fallout effect, that's what's going to be the main theme this week," said Marc Hendricks, economist and research director at Swiss Bank Corp. in London.
"Something may be settled on a stimulus package," he added.
Mr. Hendricks said strong U.S. economic data already have been factored into the market.
Scheduled for release this week is the crucial January non-farm payrolls report as well as the National Association of Purchasing Management's composite index.
Also slated for release are new-home sales, factory orders, personal income and construction spending.
The monthly automobile sales figure, set for release Thursday, will take on more importance as it will be the first time in decades the number has been released without 10-day sales periods being reported earlier.
European currencies are expected to remain in narrow trading ranges throughout the week, economists say.
"There won't be much change in the European currencies against the dollar, perhaps the dollar will gain more strength," Mr. Flanagan said.
The U.S. currently is poised to raise interest rates, whereas most continental countries are seeking to ease monetary policy, he added.
