Time is money, even in the Senate, and the champions of the filibuster are devoting millions to save minutes of cooling their heels along the Capitol subway.
For $18 million in taxpayer money, they're building a high-tech, Disney-era "people mover" for very important people.
That figure translates into about $1.5 million for every 100 yards.
The thousands of tourists who venture down into the Capitol basement can hitch a ride as well, but the driving force behind the project is the need to speed senators to the Capitol from their newest office building, about a quarter-mile away.
As the new rail line and cars have begun to go into place this winter, the very grandeur of the scheme is beginning to provoke amusement -- and some embarrassment.
It doesn't help that the cost-per-route mile exceeds some conventional light-rail systems built by the government -- nor that the Clinton administration chose this year to cut federal operating subsidies for urban-transit systems.
And then there is the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports, which has paid for brochures that celebrate walking as "an exercise for all ages" and "the slower, surer way to fitness."
The pamphlet also notes that walking "doesn't cost anything."
The current Senate subway system, about 35 years old, faces repair costs of its own, and sorely needs replacement, according to the Capitol Architect's office, whose surveys suggest that more than a half-million people ride the trains each year.
With new requirements to make the Capitol more accessible to the handicapped, improvements were inevitable.
Sen. Harry Reid (D., Nev.), who has had to carry the project as chairman of the legislative appropriations subcommittee, says: "It's not the Senate's subway, it's the public's subway."
Nonetheless, the expenditure is driven by the fact that half the senators today operate from the Hart Office Building.
In 1984, within years of the building's opening -- and long before the recent disability legislation -- a consulting-firm contract went out to evaluate the subway.
And the scheduled completion this summer caps a decade of prodding by Hart senators with influence on the Rules and Appropriations Committees.
Hart senators often complain of delays in getting to the floor on busy days of voting.
The current shuttle back-and-forth to the Capitol takes about five minutes or more; while this delay is nothing to your average subway rider, it can seem an eternity for a senator who has just missed a ride.
The Dirksen building, which houses another 36 office suites and currently is served by its own rail line, will become part of the new loop.
The new electric, computer-controlled system will feature four trains with three cars each, following one another at one-minute intervals.
With each train able to seat 25 passengers, two alone would be enough to transport all the Hart senators in a few minutes; in another two minutes, aides could follow in time to advise their members on how to vote.
Allowing 1.7 minutes for travel time at today's speed of 17 miles an hour, everyone could be back to Hart before the 15-minute roll call ends.
What will happen when the Senate isn't voting -- and the trains keep going around -- is less clear.
But the architect's office says cars can be pulled out of service when not needed, or when senators choose to walk.
The distances aren't long: from Hart to the Capitol is about 1,657 feet.
The distance from Dirksen to the Capitol is just 1,108 feet.
The bulk of the project is covered by a $15.8 million contract with Transportation Group Inc., a Florida subsidiary of Bombardier Inc., the Canadian company that builds water jet-skis and snowmobiles, as well as corporate jets and transit cars.
The monorail technology, dubbed WEDway (for Walt E. Disney), owes its name and roots to experiences at Disney World.
Transportation Group, which did work for Disney, also likens the system to one it built for the Houston Intercontinental Airport.
The narrow Capitol tunnel, and the need to maintain service while installing the new system, have limited competition and added to costs.
But when measured against today's high-capacity, airport systems, the company insists the Senate scheme is "extremely cost-effective."
