Even as aftershocks continue to rumble through Southern California, homeowners are beginning to grapple with the financial consequences of yesterday's damaging earthquake.
And if the experiences of Midwest flood victims last summer and homeowners ravaged by Hurricane Andrew in 1992 are any guide, the process of filing insurance claims is likely to be a long, complicated process.
Only about 25% of California homeowners have earthquake insurance, but that doesn't mean victims of the quake without this special coverage have no hope of getting money to repair serious damage.
Fire damage and water damage -- though caused by the earthquake -- will be covered under homeowners' insurance policies, says David Hurst, public relations superintendent for State Farm Insurance Cos.
Structural damage to a home caused by an earthquake isn't covered by homeowners' insurance policies.
Still, insurance professionals say homeowners should call their insurance agent to report their damage, and shouldn't worry now whether they have earthquake insurance.
Making the right moves early can hasten the process of collecting a claim and improve your chances of coming out whole after a disaster.
Many homeowners haven't purchased earthquake insurance because it's expensive and has a high, 10% deductible, says Sean Mooney, a spokesman for the Insurance Information Institute, in New York.
(It costs about $300 a year for earthquake insurance that would cover $200,000 of replacement costs.
With the deductible, a homeowner would need damage exceeding $20,000 to collect anything.)
State Farm, California's largest earthquake insurer, has declared a 30-day moratorium in writing earthquake-insurance policies in an area covering a 100-mile radius of the epicenter in the San Fernando Valley.
Other companies are expected to do the same.
After a homeowner reports the damage to an agent, there's still plenty to do.
Don't expect a claims representative to show up at your home soon unless you have severe damage.
The reason: Claims agents typically visit the most seriously damaged homes first and work their way down.
It's a good idea to go ahead and make temporary repairs that will protect your property, like patching up a roof or covering an exposed wall, insurance pros say.
Don't wait to see if you're covered but keep your receipts for materials you buy.
Then, gather family members and friends and prepare a complete inventory of the damage to your home and possessions.
Do all you can to document the losses.
If you have a videocamera, walk around the home shooting tape of the damage, describing it as you walk.
If you were farsighted enough to document the contents of your home in a previous videotape, you'll have great before-and-after footage to show your insurance-claims adjuster.
Otherwise, take still photos and make lists of damaged items.
If your home was destroyed by fire, as many San Fernando Valley homes were in yesterday's earthquake, make an inventory by visualizing the contents room by room.
One victim of the 1991 Oakland, Calif., fire said the key was making the inventory right after the disaster and then repeating it three weeks later.
He said he and his wife were able to remember 80% to 85% of their belongings.
The biggest hassles with insurance companies over the Oakland fire centered on documentation of the cost of antiques, paintings and other expensive items that were difficult to value.
So begin collecting canceled checks, invoices and receipts or other papers that will prove the value of the destroyed items or structures on your property.
When the insurance-claims adjuster arrives, take the time to explain your losses fully.
Susan Ross, a Miami resident who was a victim of Hurricane Andrew in 1992, says it was important to describe to her adjuster water damage that was hidden behind a couch.
One lesson, she says she learned: "Don't assume your adjuster is a mind reader."
Keep good notes of your discussions with the adjuster, writing down who said what, where and when, keeping a good chronology.
If you show you are paying attention, pros say your chances of getting a good settlement go way up.
It's a good idea to confirm everything in writing and send important documents to the insurer via certified mail with return receipt requested.
As for repairs and rebuilding, be on the alert for rip-offs.
Get estimates from licensed, reputable contractors.
Many insurance companies allow the homeowner to come up with estimates from three contractors to do repairs.
Finally, persist with your claim until you are satisfied.
Janet Taylor, a loan officer for a San Francisco credit union, says she went through 14 different adjusters in 14 months after the Loma Prieta, Calif., earthquake in 1989.
Her insurance company originally offered her $11,000, but she finally got $89,000 after she hired her own structural engineer.
California State Insurance Commissioner John Garamendi told reporters he doesn't expect the same claim problems from yesterday's quake.
"We've learned a lot from Loma Prieta," he said.
Homeowners with questions can call the California insurance hotline at 800-927-4357 (927-HELP).
The Insurance Information Institute also offers a hotline for claims questions at 800-942-4242.
Earthquake victims can speed an insurance settlement and increase the amount recovered by following these steps.
-- CALL YOUR INSURANCE AGENT Let your insurance company know that you've suffered damage and where you can be reached.
-- MAKE TEMPORARY REPAIRS Protect your home from further damage by making necessary emergency repairs.
Keep receipts.
Take photos of damaged areas.
-- PREPARE A DETAILED INVENTORY Make a list of all damaged or destroyed personal property, including the age of the items, their cost at the time of purchase and their estimated replacement cost today.
-- COLLECT YOUR RECORDS Gather canceled checks, invoices, receipts or other papers that will show the value of destroyed property.
If you made photos or home videos that document your belongings, have them ready.
-- TAKE NOTES Keep good notes of your discussions with the insurance adjuster.
-- AVOID REPAIR RIP-OFFS Hire licensed, reputable contractors to provide repair estimates and do the work.
