Alcan Aluminium Ltd., reacting to the world-wide aluminum glut, said it temporarily will cut about 9% of its production capacity, reducing annual output by 156,000 metric tons.
The move comes as U.S. and Western European governments continue to press Russia to curb aluminum exports.
The latest round of multilateral talks is to take place in Brussels next week.
Alcan's move follows cutbacks during the past several months by other companies, including Aluminum Co. of America and Reynolds Metals Co.
But global inventories have continued to mount, as producers in the former Soviet Union flood world markets.
The situation "has reached crisis levels," an Alcan spokesman said.
"It's time for us to act."
Alcan had resisted cutting capacity since 1992.
The Montreal-based company closed 102,000 metric tons (112,200 short tons) of capacity in 1991 and 1992.
Together with those cutbacks, Alcan's latest reduction in primary aluminum output will lower its operating rate to 85% of capacity.
Charles Bradford, an analyst with UBS Securities in New York, said Alcan's move "seems like an act of good faith" toward Russia.
But he questioned the timing, noting that Alcan appears to be showing its hand before the Russians make commitments.
Amy P. Gassman of Goldman Sachs said it could also be argued that because the Russians don't want to appear to be making all the cutbacks, "given the social implications" of such measures, the Alcan decision will bolster chances for an agreement in Brussels.
But she warned that an accord could prove "very difficult to implement," given the need for hard currency in Russia.
An Alcan spokesman said the company's decision isn't linked to the Brussels talks.
Of Alcan's production cuts, 60,000 metric tons will come from its plant in Sebree, Ky.; 70,000 from Canadian plants; and the rest from U.K. and Brazilian operations.
The measures should be implemented within two months, Alcan said.
As many as 300 employees are expected to be laid off.
Alcan said costs associated with the closures probably will be reflected in the company's first-quarter results; it didn't estimate the amount of such costs.
For the nine months ended Sept. 30, Alcan had a loss of $68 million, or 37 cents a share, compared with a loss of $56 million, or 31 cents a share, a year earlier.
Alcan shares rose 12.5 cents apiece to closed at $22.25 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
