Betting that there will be huge demand for informational television shows in the so-called 500-channel TV universe of the future, powerful Creative Artists Agency Inc. said it plans to develop such programming through a joint venture with N.S. Bienstock Inc., an agency that represents TV journalists.
Michael Ovitz, chairman of Creative Artists, predicted in an interview that nonfiction programming -- including informational and other reality-based TV shows -- will be "critically important to every distribution system."
Such programming is usually far less expensive to produce than most entertainment programming.
Mr. Ovitz and Richard Leibner, a principal at N.S. Bienstock, described the venture as "a natural fit."
Creative Artists represents scores of television producers, writers and directors -- people who will be looking to create informational programs.
N.S. Bienstock, on the other hand, represents more than 300 television journalists, many of whom would be called upon to host the programs.
N.S. Beinstock, which has been led for the past 25 years by Mr. Leibner and his wife, Carole Cooper, counts among its clients Dan Rather, Diane Sawyer, Maria Shriver and Mike Wallace.
But it also represents many local TV news personalities as well as journalists who host syndicated news and information programs.
"This alliance will help the clients at both agencies to take advantage of programming opportunities created by the changes in the television world," Mr. Leibner said.
The executives pointed to the increasing stable of prime-time network news programs -- shows such as "20/20," "Dateline" and "60 Minutes" -- as an indicator that similar programs will be needed to fill the program schedules of new networks.
Mr. Ovitz said ideas for programs could come from almost any department at Creative Artists.
A new nonfiction book, for example, could be the basis for an informational-TV program, he said.
He said that the agency struck the deal "for our TV client base," but added that it would take any ideas offered by clients in its film division.
This is a major "growth area for our clientele," Mr. Ovitz added.
Unlike other major talent agencies such as William Morris Agency or International Creative Management, Creative Artists doesn't have a news division per se.
But the joint venture effectively puts it into that business, expanding once again beyond its core talent management services.
A couple of years ago it got into the advertising business, hiring creative executives who helped develop commercials for Coca-Cola Co.
It also is active in exploring business opportunities in multimedia.
