Workers in the IG Metall union voted to strike Monday in the German state of Lower Saxony, brushing aside government warnings that an escalating labor conflict could jeopardize economic recovery.
With western German industry showing signs of stabilizing, the union's plan to follow up warning strikes with an initially narrow walkout could limit economic pain, yet keep pressure on employers.
IG Metall, which represents 3.6 million automotive, engineering and electrical workers, said 92% of its members in Lower Saxony voted for the full-scale strike, to start with walkouts by 10,000 workers.
National contract talks broke down last month when the Gesamtmetall employers group insisted on a wage freeze, fewer vacation benefits and workweek changes.
The union wants a 6% wage boost and compensatory pay for shorter workweeks.
German unemployment, now 4 million, could top 4.4 million this year as uncompetitive industry continues to streamline operations and cut staff to reduce costs.
Honduras will privatize Empresa Hondurena de Telecomunicaciones, the military-run telephone company known as Hondutel.
The Finance Ministry, valuing Hondutel at $750 million, blamed the armed forces for "administrative corruption, shameless robbery and inefficiency" at the firm, which has 4,000 employees.
The military took over Hondutel in 1963 under martial rule that lasted until 1981.
Military brass retain political clout in the democratic government but don't oppose Hondutel's sell-off.
The military also controls insurers, a bank, gun stores, realty firms, a bus maker, farms, radio stations and the country's biggest funeral home.
The Greek government approved 13 big public-works projects, including a new airport for Athens, with construction to get under way by year end.
Total costs were estimated at $8.1 billion, mostly to be paid by Greece and the European Union.
Some of the work will be joint efforts with private companies.
The $2.18 billion airport in the Athens suburb of Spata will have capacity to serve 16 million passengers a year.
Other projects include a $1.59 billion highway across northern Greece.
Russia's Gazprom monopoly began cutting off natural gas to Ukraine and Belarus, demanding payments of arrears to restart the flow.
Gazprom said Ukraine has run up a bill of $708.8 million and Belarus $295.3 million.
The utility dropped a threat to stop supplying Moldova, which started paying its debt.
Meanwhile, Ukraine denied Russian allegations that it had siphoned gas from Gazprom's pipeline destined for Western Europe.
A Philippine senator introduced legislation to disband the film censors board, accusing it of incompetence and violation of constitutionally protected free speech after it ordered scenes cut from the movie "Schindler's List."
Director Steven Spielberg's representatives pulled the movie, nominated for an Academy Award in the U.S., from Philippine theaters to protest the censors' cuts of nude and sex scenes.
The movie recounts how a World War II businessman saved Jews from Nazi gas chambers.
The board's chief censor said, "I don't care about artistry," declaring the offending scenes "immoral and not within the culture of Filipinos."
Baroness Thatcher, the former British prime minister, proposed a link between North America and Europe to create "free trade across the Atlantic."
The influential Lady Thatcher's suggestion at a London conference on world trade, co-sponsored by The Wall Street Journal Europe, echoes unsuccessful U.S. legislative efforts and sentiments of U.S. unions for a European trade bridge.
But the European Union said an accord with the U.S. isn't a top priority.
The 12-nation bloc is negotiating trade deals with the Baltics and in East and Central Europe.
A "wealth wall" is dividing Western Europe from former East bloc states, Lady Thatcher said, declaring the solution was "trade, rather than aid."
She supported moves to integrate China and Russia into international trading circles.
Lady Thatcher also faulted U.S. efforts to pry open Japan's markets and favored freeing them "from regulation and interference."
She predicted Japan would create its own "sphere of influence" in fast-growing Asia to rival the EU and the North American trade zone.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
A one-day strike in Bolivia shut down commerce and transit in three regions and disrupted air service in La Paz.
Civic groups demanded government improvements in health care, education and roads. . . .
When the tunnel under the English Channel between Britain and France starts service, perhaps in the spring, each of the 38 train engines will be named after an opera or opera singer.
The first engine got its moniker: Luciano Pavarotti.
