Dutch publisher Verenigde Nederlandse Uitgeversbedrijven BV agreed to buy BPI Communications L.P., the publisher of Adweek, Billboard and 17 other specialty magazines, for $220 million.
BPI, based in New York, is one-third owned by New York Times Co.
The venture capital firm Boston Ventures and BPI management own the other two-thirds.
New York Times said it expects to receive $55 million when the transaction is completed.
The company acquired its interest in BPI as part of its acquisition last year of Affiliated Publications Inc., publisher of the Boston Globe.
A New York Times spokeswoman said the decision to sell its BPI interest didn't reflect some bigger strategy.
"It was the majority holder's main decision," she said.
Closely held BPI said it is profitable, with 1993 revenue of $130 million and 800 employees.
The company declined to estimate profits.
VNU wants "a platform to expand in the U.S.," said Jerry Hobbs, BPI's chief executive.
"BPI is going to be their platform."
Mr. Hobbs added that BPI's management team will remain in place.
In addition to its specialty publications, BPI operates a media monitoring service and a specialty book publisher.
The BPI acquisition will nearly double VNU's U.S. presence.
VNU has U.S. revenue of about $155 million from financial data publishing and marketing information services.
VNU's Disclosure Inc. collects and publishes financial data on New York and American Stock Exchange companies.
VNU also owns Claritas Corp., a database marketing research company, and operates Competitive Media Reporting, a joint venture with Arbitron Co. that tracks advertising spending.
Lout Scholvinck, VNU director of general affairs, said VNU is running out of room to grow in the Netherlands.
"Opportunities are very seldom and very rare," he said.
"We want to internationalize our activities from Holland abroad."
BPI's specialized publishing and information services fit well with VNU's U.S. activities, he said.
With world-wide revenue of $1.2 billion, VNU is a leading publisher in the Netherlands.
It publishes women's magazines and regional newspapers in the Netherlands and Belgium, and business and consumer periodicals in several other European countries.
The company also has interests in several commercial television stations in Europe.
