The mean-spirited title you gave to my recent Jan. 26 editorial page article on crime policy -- "Let 'em Rot" -- disgusted me, distorted my message and dishonored you.
As I wrote, the American people are morally and intellectually right about the need to incarcerate chronic criminals, adult and juvenile.
Millions of serious crimes are committed each year by criminals who should have been kept behind bars.
President Clinton is right to endorse life terms for thrice-convicted violent felons; now let him keep faith with the people on crime and other issues.
My populist plea to lock up violent and repeat criminals is one thing.
But your reactionary roar to "let 'em rot" is quite another.
Your title implies a lack of concern about conditions of confinement, and an irreligious vengefulness toward criminals, young and old, that I, like most Americans, do not share.
Every survey shows that most Americans want prisons to be neither country clubs nor hellholes.
Prisoners deserve decent living conditions and should be provided with every opportunity -- drug treatment, education, vocational training -- for self-betterment.
In "Governing Prisons" (1987), "Courts and Corrections" (1990) and "No Escape" (1991), I explored ways of making our country's penal institutions, including high-security prisons for long-term prisoners and lifers, more safe, humane and cost-effective.
Likewise, most Americans do not want to throw the key away on youthful offenders.
Studies by myself and others show that while '60s-style "prevention" programs don't work, many government programs can and do make a positive difference in the lives of juveniles who have been in trouble with the law.
For them, the watchword is rehabilitation, not "rot."
Your self-titillating title reminded me that, when it comes to crime policy, liberal elites have too long denied the public's legitimate demand for protection and justice, but conservative elites have too often dishonored its Judeo-Christian capacity for compassion and mercy.
John J. DiIulio Jr.
Princeton, N.J.
