The dollar hit a three-week high vs. the yen yesterday, fueled by optimism over a trade agreement that gives the U.S. newfound access to Japan's cellular-phone market.
The mark, meanwhile, drew strength against almost every currency except the dollar, as traders shrugged off a regional election defeat Sunday of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's ruling party.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.6900 marks, up from 1.6825 marks late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 106.10 yen, up from 105 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4960, down from $1.5005.
The dollar also traded at 1.4360 Swiss francs, up from 1.4215 francs late Friday.
About noon Tuesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 106.18 yen and at 1.6905 marks.
The U.S. and Japan reached an agreement Saturday in the long-festering dispute over Motorola Inc.'s access to Japan's cellular-phone market.
The accord was touted by Walter Mondale, U.S. ambassador to Japan, as a model for revitalizing the collapsed bilateral trade talks.
The failure of the U.S. and Japan to reach a trade agreement last month sent the dollar spiraling to near a post-World War II low against the yen.
Any sign of progress in U.S.-Japan trade is seen by the market as alleviating U.S. pressure for a strong yen as a tool to address Japan's mountainous trade surplus.
"There is a perception that trade tensions are receding which, in turn, would lead to a stronger dollar and a weaker yen," said Bernd Becker, assistant vice president at Bank Julius Baer & Co. in New York.
The dollar rose to an intraday high of 106.45 yen in midafternoon trading, its highest level since Feb. 23, when it hit 106.55 yen.
The dollar pushed through key resistance at 105.80 yen and then again at 106.10 yen, where dollar-sell orders by Japanese exporters were seen putting a cap on additional dollar rises.
"Once the sell orders were out of the market, the dollar kept moving up and more stop-loss orders were hit," Mr. Becker said.
Stop-loss orders are placed by participants who want to buy back dollars to cancel out oversold positions as the dollar rises.
The dollar then retreated somewhat on profit-taking, Mr. Becker said.
The mark, meanwhile, rose against most European currencies as traders reevaluated the results of an election defeat by Germany's ruling party as being less harmful to the mark than anticipated.
As they scurried to get out of short-mark positions, the Swiss franc, in particular, suffered.
Chancellor Kohl's Christian Democratic Union won 36% of the vote on Sunday in state parliamentary elections in Lower Saxony, down from 42% in 1990.
But traders said things could have been worse.
"The market was very short on marks on expectations that the outcome of the elections would be very negative for Kohl," said David DeRosa, director of foreign-exchange trading at Swiss Bank Corp. in New York.
The defeat proved less detrimental to Kohl's re-election prospects than previously thought, and that led to a scramble by large hedge funds to sell Swiss francs and buy marks, Mr. DeRosa added.
