THE BOOK LANDS on your desk with a thud, and that's the point.
It's called "A Directory of Political and Religious Prisoners Detained in China and Tibet," and is published by Asia Watch, a human-rights watchdog group.
The book contains the stories of some 1,700 people known or believed to have been imprisoned by the Chinese government because of their views.
The book is at once an illustration of why the U.S. has been right to bore in on human rights in China -- and proof that the approach America has been taking isn't working.
Even as Secretary of State Warren Christopher heads to China next week to press the current policy, some Clintonites quietly hope to transform that policy.
They're right; it's time to give another approach a try.
U.S. policy has been both blunt and unsatisfying.
Congress insists that China receive most favored nation trading status -- a misnomer meaning it gets the same trade status as virtually every other nation -- only if it improves its human-rights performance.
In practice, this means an angry debate every spring as the deadline for renewing MFN status approaches, grudging Chinese improvements in some areas, a renewal of trade status for another year, and bitterness all around.
Change is needed, not because the Chinese have made significant human-rights advances, but for the opposite reason: The situation is improving only marginally despite U.S. pressure.
ASIA WATCH'S new report graphically demonstrates that point.
Case studies of political prisoners pour out: Gao Yu, a former deputy editor of the newspaper Economics Weekly, arrested two days before she was to leave for a fellowship at the Columbia School of Journalism and charged with "illegally providing state secrets to people outside the borders"; Bishop Fan Xueyan, an 85-year-old underground Catholic bishop who died in custody, his head bruised and both legs apparently dislocated below the knee; Chen Wei, a former university student who has been detained four times since 1989.
If the proof of a policy is in the pudding, the current policy doesn't taste very good.
The problem may simply be that neither the Bush nor the Clinton administrations has been willing to pull the trigger on the big U.S. weapon, the revocation of China's trade privileges.
But as a practical political matter, the chances of the U.S. doing that have grown slimmer as more U.S. jobs depend on trade with China.
And as a policy matter, those willing to explode trade relations with China now have to worry about potentially serious fallout: What if an embittered China stops cooperating in the effort to head off North Korean development of a nuclear weapon, an issue with profound humanitarian implications all its own?
So a quiet debate is building inside the Clinton administration.
Officials say some, including Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, have begun to push for a strategy of getting past this year's MFN deadline of June 1, and then breaking out of the current straight jacket.
Of course, there's no guarantee the administration can even get past this spring's debate, as Secretary Christopher cautioned in congressional testimony yesterday.
President Clinton has to be able to certify that China has fulfilled earlier promises to open up its prison labor system and has made "significant progress" on human rights.
BUT LET'S ASSUME China does enough to meet those conditions.
Here's a modest proposal on how the dialogue about human rights might then be revamped:
Adopt a new approach paralleling the model developed in the Reagan administration and honed in the Bush administration for handling human-rights complaints with the Soviet Union.
U.S.-Soviet relations were divided into a series of five "baskets" of issues, one of which was exclusively a human-rights basket.
(The others were arms control, bilateral issues, regional issues and transnational issues.)
Each of those baskets, it was understood, would be considered every time the two nations sat down together for any substantial discussion.
Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev understood he couldn't escape a confrontation on human rights at every major meeting.
Human rights was linked to everything else on the agenda, but not to any one thing in particular.
Policy makers worried about human rights didn't have to choose between launching a frontal attack -- full rupture of trade relations -- or doing nothing.
Instead, they could strike selectively.
This, of course, is easier to say than to do.
Chinese leaders, who don't exactly regard the Soviet Union as a good role model, would have to acknowledge that human rights is an integral part of their relationship with the U.S.
In the U.S., human-rights groups would have to be convinced that linking human rights to everything wouldn't be the same as linking it to nothing.
Still, alternatives are needed to replace today's increasingly sterile debate.
