Tele-Communications Inc. is negotiating to join a group of major record companies led by Time Warner Inc. and Sony Corp., which plans to launch a music video channel rivaling Viacom Inc.'s MTV Networks, according to those familiar with the talks.
The negotiations between TCI and the major record companies call into question an agreement that the cable giant announced in September with Bertelsmann Music Group, a unit of German music and publishing giant Bertelsmann AG.
The two companies emphasized at the time that their channel would be a hybrid music-video, home shopping cable channel.
A TCI spokesman said that its agreement in principle with Bertelsmann "is still alive," but noted that a contract has not been signed.
He acknowledged, however, that TCI has expressed interest in participating in the Time Warner-Sony venture.
Bertelsmann Music Group expressed more optimism, with a spokeswoman saying, "We're moving ahead with our business plan for our music cable channel with TCI and hope to launch by the end of the year."
She declined further comment.
Industry observers noted that it is characteristic of TCI to negotiate simultaneously with a number of companies in competing ventures in the interest of getting the best deal.
Moreover, TCI may be reluctant to associate itself in a new music channel with only one record producer at a time when a team of four music companies is planning a similar venture.
The Time Warner-Sony group includes EMI Music, PolyGram Holding Inc., and Ticketmaster Corp.
In late January, those partners disclosed plans to create an advertiser-supported, 24-hour video music channel to be carried on cable systems in the U.S. and Puerto Rico by late 1994.
The proposed new channel will be modeled after Viva, a music network launched last December in Germany by the same group of music companies that reaches 90% of that country's cable households.
EMI Music is a unit of Thorn EMI PLC; PolyGram is 75% owned by Philips NV.
When the Warner-Sony channel was announced, the partners said they wanted to link up with a major cable operator.
Time Warner operates the second-largest cable company with 7.1 million subscribers.
TCI is the nation's largest cable company with 10.4 million subscribers.
According to those familiar with the situation, TCI chief John Malone met recently with Robert Morgado, chairman of Time Warner's Warner Music Group, to negotiate the terms of TCI's participation.
A spokeswoman for Warner Music Group confirmed that there have been recent discussions with TCI, but added that an agreement hasn't been concluded.
She noted that there have been talks with other cable companies as well, including Time Warner Cable.
Observers questioned whether TCI would be willing to invest in two music channels in a market that is dominated by MTV and VH-1 and that has attracted a host of smaller players.
MTV reaches 57 million U.S. homes while VH-1 reaches 47 million.
Any challenge to such an entrenched position would require a massive marketing effort and an investment of millions of dollars in start-up costs.
However, during recent years, record industry executives said they have been frustrated with MTV's narrow play list and their inability to get exposure for new acts.
Music videos are playing an increasingly important role in the marketing of new groups.
