Morgan Stanley Group Inc. tentatively agreed to buy a second skyscraper near Times Square for its own use, making it one of the biggest investors in Manhattan real estate in recent years.
A bank group led by Citicorp agreed to sell the 34-story building, thought to have cost more than $150 million to build, for about $90 million, according to two people familiar with the agreement.
The building, which was completed in 1990 but remains 70% empty, is Midtown Manhattan's largest remaining legacy to the overbuilding of the late 1980s.
Morgan Stanley's decision comes just seven months after its $176 million purchase of a 42-story building one block away to use as its headquarters.
The current deal to buy the 580,000-square-foot tower at Seventh Avenue and 49th Street is a further vote of confidence in Manhattan.
In 1992, the company was on the verge of moving its headquarters to Stanford, Conn.
The deal also is a testament to the firm's growth.
Last year, while rolling up record profits, the firm expanded from 7,400 to 8,400 employees world-wide.
The new headquarters, to which the firm won't move for at least a year, is at least 200,000 square feet too small to accommodate it, even at the firm's current size, brokers say.
The firm's lease on its current Midtown headquarters expires in several years.
Morgan Stanley, which won't finalize the deal until it completes due diligence on the building, declined to comment, as did officials at Citicorp.
The Citicorp group acquired the property through a prepackaged bankruptcy-law filing by a partnership led by developer David Solomon of Manhattan's Solomon Equities.
Mr. Solomon, a rising star of the 1980s development boom, also was the developer of the other building acquired by Morgan Stanley.
He lost both buildings after the office market collapsed.
Although the bank group, which includes Halifax, Nova Scotia-based Bank of Nova Scotia and Toronto-based Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, had hired Newmark & Co.
Real Estate Inc. to find tenants for the space, the New York-based leasing firm resigned when it became clear that Citicorp preferred to keep the space vacant to attract buyers.
"We were the leasing agent, and the objective was to sell," said Newmark Chief Executive Barry Gosin.
"Citibank felt that building values were going up, and I think they were right.
They felt a user of the space would be the best buyer."
The vacancy rate in Midtown is about 15%, but large blocks of space have become more scarce in the past year.
