A panel of medical experts declared that a bacterium is the underlying cause of most peptic ulcers and urged doctors to begin using antibiotics to treat infected ulcer patients.
The panel's recommendations would mark a drastic change in the way physicians treat peptic ulcers, which are present in four million Americans.
The panel's findings could greatly reduce treatment costs.
Now, most patients are given drugs that stop the production of stomach acid, and switching to antibiotics is likely to hurt sales of those drugs.
But Britain's Glaxo Holdings PLC, which makes Zantac, the world's biggest selling drug, and SmithKline Beecham PLC, which sells Tagamet, said they didn't expect overall sales to be down sharply, since both drugs are mostly used to treat severe heartburn and other nonulcer disorders.
However, the panel said research should be undertaken to see if patients who have other stomach conditions and are infected by the bacterium can be helped by antibiotics.
The panel of 15 medical experts was convened here by the National Institutes of Health to evaluate a decade of research and controversy over the role of the bacterium in ulcers.
After hearing a day and a half of testimony by ulcer researchers the panel yesterday issued a "consensus statement."
"All patients with gastric or duodenal ulcers who are infected with the bacterium should be treated with antimicrobials, regardless of whether they are suffering from the initial presentation of the disease or from a recurrence," the panel stated.
The panel said two weeks of antibiotic therapy should eradicate the ulcer-causing bacterium, called H. pylori, from the stomach and upper part of the small intestine and, thus, cure the patients of peptic-ulcer disease.
This reduces the chances of the ulcer recurring to less than 10%.
For those patients who have already been diagnosed with an ulcer, there are several diagnostics that might be used to see if they are infected with H. pylori, but not all are yet available.
Several kits for a blood test that laboratories can use to diagnose the infection are available, the panel said.
One part of the panel's statement may stir considerable controversy.
This involves which of several possible combinations of drugs doctors should use to treat ulcer patients infected with the bacterium.
During the panel's hearings researchers described the effectiveness of a half-dozen different combinations of antibiotics and ulcer-healing drugs in eradicating the bacterium.
At present, most peptic-ulcer patients are initially treated with drugs like Tagamet and Zantac, known as H-2 blockers, that stop stomach-acid production.
(Drugs and genetic factors also cause ulcers.)
These highly effective drugs speed the healing of ulcers, but if the patient stops taking them, he or she has a 50% to 80% chance of the ulcer recurring.
As a result, many ulcer patients must continue taking an H-2 blocker for years.
Eradicating H. pylori would end the patients' needs for long-term use of the H-2 blockers.
The panel heard one report on the economics of the new antibiotic therapy, presented by Amnon Sonnenberg, a gastroenterologist at the Medical College of Wisconsin in Milwaukee.
He noted that peptic-ulcer disease usually lasts about 15 years before usual treatments cure it.
The new antibiotic therapy, he estimated, would cost about $925 during this time, whereas 15 years of maintenance therapy with the H-2 blockers would cost more than $11,500.
Stomach surgery, which is done when ulcers bleed repeatedly, would cost almost $18,000.
H-2 blockers are a huge market, estimated at $5 billion world-wide.
Glaxo's Zantac had sales of $3.5 billion in the fiscal year ending last June, representing nearly half the company's sales.
SmithKline's Tagamet, the original H-2 blocker, represents another billion dollars in yearly sales.
But Glaxo and SmithKline representatives pointed out that most of their drugs' sales wouldn't be affected by any change in the treatment of ulcers.
Nonulcer treat ments, such as for severe heartburn, account for about 70% of Zantac's sales, a Glaxo spokeswoman said.
A SmithKline spokesman said less than 15% of Tagamet prescriptions would be affected by the suggested changes in ulcer treatment.
H-2 blockers would continue to be used along with antibiotics as an initial treatment for ulcers, and would be used as maintenance therapy in patients with complications, such as bleeding, the Glaxo spokeswoman said.
Glaxo is testing a product that combines Zantac and bismuth to see if it is effective against the bacte rium, she said.
The most effective combination of drugs, eradicating the bacterium from about 90% of patients, is the so-called triple therapy, consisting of bismuth subsalicylate (sold in the U.S. as Pepto-Bismol by Procter & Gamble Co.), plus metronidazole and either tetracycline or amoxicillin, the panel said.
The panel noted that another triple therapy eradicating the bacterium in 90% of patients included two antibiotics, amoxicillin and metronidazole, plus Glaxo's Zantac.
But the panel said triple combinations may be difficult for patients to take, since they involve taking several pills three or four times a day for two weeks.
An easier combination for the patients to use for two weeks, but which eradicates the bacterium from 80% of patients, is the antibiotic amoxicillin, taken four times a day, plus omeprazole taken twice a day.
The latter is an ulcer-healing drug developed by AB Astra of Sweden, which sells it as Losec in most parts of the world.
In the U.S. it is sold by Merck & Co., Whitehouse Station, N.J., as Prilosec.
The drug stops production of stomach acid but by a different means than the H-2 blockers.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Merck stock rose 37.5 cents, or 1.1%, to close at $34.875 a share.
Meanwhile, American depositary receipts of Glaxo fell 25 cents, or 1.3%, to close at $19.125, while American depositary shares of SmithKline rose 25 cents, or 0.8%, to close at $30.875 a share.
How rapidly doctors will begin using the new approach to ulcers is uncertain.
"Very few physicians are treating the infection today," possibly only 1% or 2% of doctors, estimated gastroenterologist Tadataka Yamada of the University of Michigan, who headed the expert panel.
Most of the drugs used in the new therapy are already on the market, but their manufacturers haven't yet received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to promote the use of the combinations for the treatment of infected ulcer patients.
A statement issued by Astra and Merck said that research on antibiotic-omeprazole treatment in duodenal ulcer patients "has been under way for some time in Europe and the U.S."
A spokesman for Abbott Laboratories, whose clarithromycin antibiotic is used in some of the combinations, said the company is now gathering patient data on the new treatment preparatory to applying for FDA approval.
Doctors, however, are free to prescribe the drugs for their ulcer patients, even if such use hasn't been approved by the FDA.
How soon they will switch to the therapy may well depend on how much publicity surrounds the panel's report.
At least one group, the American Gastroenterological Association's Foundation, said "detection and elimination" of the bacterium will be "the first target" of a new education program it's launching on digestive diseases.
In addition, the consensus statements issued by the NIH panels often are viewed as "standards of practice," and the panel's statement may add to the pressure on doctors to switch to the antibiotic therapy.
As for sales of Glaxo and SmithKline, the more immediate problem facing all H-2 blockers is the May patent expiration of Tagamet.
A generic Tagamet is a threat to Zantac and Merck's Pepcid, analysts said, because many physicians and managed-care organizations view all the drugs as interchangeable.
"The single most important issue for Zantac is the Tagamet patent expiration," said Alex Zisson, an analyst at Hambrecht & Quist.
The expert panel's recommendation "is a theoretical issue" with many unresolved questions, he added, and is of less immediate concern to investors.
Elyse Tanouye contributed to this article.
