Three top Belgian politicians, dubbed the "Three Guys" because they all have the same first name, resigned Friday amid a bribery scandal that has shaken the center-left coalition government.
The three senior Socialists are wanted for questioning by the examining magistrate in the affair.
Deputy Prime Minister Guy Coeme's own Socialist Party is at the center of the scandal, in which bribes allegedly were paid by an Italian company, Agusta, to secure a helicopter contract in 1988.
Mr. Coeme's resignation could ease pressure on the coalition, an uneasy mix of Socialist and Christian Democrat parties.
The president of the regional Walloon government and former Socialist party chief, Guy Spitaels, and one of his ministers, Guy Mathot, also resigned.
All have strongly denied wrongdoing in the affair.
Hong Kong legislators voted in favor of $216 million in interim financing for the colony's new airport, defying Chinese warnings against deciding funding issues alone.
The vote followed disclosures that lawmakers had offered to inject extra government funds as part of an overall airport financing proposal to China.
The $20.2 billion project is a major bone of contention between Britain and China, which regains control of the colony in 1997.
Beijing fears that the project, which is needed to replace the overburdened Kai Tak airport, will saddle the colony with debts after 1997 and argued that Britain and China should reach overall agreement on financing before work proceeds.
France's conservative Senate passed strict limits on artificial fertilization and genetic engineering, amid concern over possible abuse of rapid advances in artificial fertilization techniques.
The concerns arose following the birth of test-tube twins to a 59-year-old British woman and reports that a black woman in Italy received a white embryo.
The government argued that fertilization of aging women would be hazardous to the mother's health and unfair to children likely to be orphaned early.
If the lower house passes the bills, artificial fertilization will be limited to heterosexual and infertile couples of childbearing age who have been married or living together for at least two years.
About 10,000 doctors in Bangladesh government hospitals ended a nine-day strike that hospital officials said cost the lives of more than 100 patients.
The doctors returned to work after the government agreed to their demands for increased wages and job security in three months.
The Bangladesh Medical Association had threatened to spread the stoppage to private clinics, where it says about 5,000 of its members work.
Association leaders said they would strike again if the government failed to keep its promise.
European governments and companies are blaming each other for computer problems that are delaying plans to create a free-travel zone in Europe.
Attempts to tear down borders are being frustrated by obstacles to setting up a big computer network giving countries access to one another's police and immigration files.
SEMA, the French company overseeing the project, says governments have been slow to link their data banks.
But a German official says SEMA was responsible for that link.
Nine nations have agreed to a border-free zone: France, Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Italy, Spain, Greece and Portugal.
A new code of conduct from Britain's army forbids homosexuality and adultery, and discourages marriages between officers and lower ranks.
The Standards and Discipline Paper called adultery in the armed forces the "most serious form of social misconduct."
The code, which also covers issues such as alcoholism, bullying and racial and sex discrimination, discourages marriages across ranks, saying that such relationships undermine "a wellordered structure."
The army restated its view that homosexuality was not acceptable in the military.
Those who engage in homosexual practices are normally discharged from the British armed forces.
Taking control of a big state company in Lithuania requires ideas more than money under the country's new "Best Business Plan" privatization program.
The program allows savvy managers to acquire problem or highly indebted firms for little or no money, as long as they have a clever rescue plan.
The program, aimed at breaking a deadlock in the sell-off of some of the country's biggest and most troubled companies, currently is being tried on six pilot projects.
But at least 300 companies could eventually qualify.
Some politicians criticize the program as a giveaway, but Western advisers in Lithuania say the government slowly is winning broad support for the scheme.
The program is open to foreign and domestic investors.
Prospective buyers must have a business plan that shows how the new management will deal with costs of acquisition and restructuring.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Romania's railways will lay off 20,000 workers this year and mothball half their trains as part of a plan to make the system more viable. . . .
A Malaysian bus driver was fired after he refused to cut his nearly 6-inch fingernails.
