Scanning the packed crowd at her news conference, Tonya Harding spots a dapper Californian with a deep tan in the front row.
With a smile, she mouths her first public words of the Olympics: "I love you."
Fielding valentines from the sports world's most notorious woman is all in a day's networking for skating super-agent Michael Rosenberg.
Off the slopes and the ice, the Olympics is the world's biggest trade show and Mr. Rosenberg works it better than anyone, moving from handshake to handshake like a square-dancer in a high-stakes Virginia reel.
He sprints off to greet the U.S. Figure Skating Association's publicist: "Fantastic job -- hold out for another 10 days and you'll win a Pulitzer Prize!"
Here's former skating medalist Brian Orser, now a Canadian broadcaster: "Brian, don't forget the new super-sentimental favorite of ice-dance, Elizabeth Punsalan!
Do a number on her, would you!"
Across the street saunters new gold-medal skier Tommy Moe: "Tommy Moe, 'ray team!
All America's proud of you!"
Mr. Moe, a brand-new acquaintance, grins with surprise and says thanks.
Playing the crowds has yielded Mr. Rosenberg a glittering list of clients including 16-year-old Oksana Baiul, who is favored to slip into the Tonya-and-Nancy circus this week and steal a gold medal.
For years the list also included Ms. Harding herself, whom Mr. Rosenberg dropped last fall after a stormy rift but continues to defend in the media.
His top male skater, 1992 gold-medalist Viktor Petrenko, was a stunning disappointment here.
Now the agent is working the back corridors to sign the man who toppled him, Aleksei Urmanov of Russia, and the dashing Frenchman Philippe Candeloro who took the bronze.
"I'm hustling, I'm hustling," he says, puffing nervously on a cigarillo.
"Everyone thinks of this as entertainment, but think how much money's at stake!
It's business, it's big business."
Mr. Rosenberg is one of two agents who dominate the figs-biz, which was booming before Nancy Kerrigan got whacked and has since vaulted into the stratosphere.
His small agency in Palm Desert, Calif., represents 36 skaters and produces a roadshow starring many of them, World Cup Figure Skating Champions.
He competes with his mammoth rival International Management Group by promising his clients a huge dose of charm and attention.
"He has such a personal relationship with his skaters, you don't feel like a number in a company," says Ms. Punsalan, the ice dancer.
Just days before the Games, when Ms. Punsalan received the horrifying news of her father's murder, allegedly committed by her mentally ill brother, Mr. Rosenberg offered important support and handled all of the press calls.
A medal can bring a winner hundreds of thousands of dollars a year in shows and ads, and maybe millions now that figure skating is bigger than the Bobbitts.
Mr. Rosenberg pockets 15% and watches his roadshow sales soar.
A victory for Ms. Baiul -- "my jewel, my baby" -- could lift his tour's annual revenue to $10 million from $6 million, he says.
It would also bring hefty royalties from a deal he inked just this month for an Oksana Baiul line of skating clothes with Elite, currently a big maker of gymnastics outfits.
"They want to get involved with skating because of Tonya and Nancy," Mr. Rosenberg says.
He notes that a CBS profile shows the girlish Ukrainian skater in her bedroom with her teddy bear, giggling and naming her favorite food: "Snickers, Snickers, Snickers."
"If she wins I'll call Snickers -- and if they don't respond positively, Oksana's not going to be saying Snickers anymore," Mr. Rosenberg laughs.
Also waiting in the wings are possible deals for a book and a TV movie about the Ukrainian skater's dramatic rise after the death of her mother and the disappearance of her father.
"Everyone's interested in her -- if she wins the Olympics," he says.
"It's like going to the Kentucky Derby -- you have your horses and you sit in the stands and pray," he says.
In fact, Mr. Rosenberg doesn't sit much at the Olympics.
On the first night of the ice-dancing competition, he strides past his assigned seat in the Hamar Olympic Amphitheater, surveys the crowd, and finds the row he wants, directly behind the CBS broadcast booth.
Leaning on the booth, he banters with broadcasters Verne Lundquist and Tracy Wilson.
"Hey Verne, saw you on the cover of Forbes magazine with the $8 million contract I negotiated!" he says.
"Hey Michael, what's on your shoe!" guffaws Mr. Lundquist.
Across the rink, Mr. Rosenberg spots a large, glamorous woman in an enormous fur coat.
She blows him a slow theatrical kiss.
He blows a kiss back.
"That's Natalia Dubova, the most famous dance coach in Russia," he says.
Back at his seat, he has a new neighbor: former American skating superstar Dick Button, now a busy sportscaster and skating businessman.
They swap skating trivia questions, and then Mr. Rosenberg bounds away again for another smoke.
He is smiling when he returns.
"Philippe and I talked," he says, dropping his voice.
"Excellent, excellent."
Suddenly here comes one of the hottest celebrities: David Letterman's mother, Dorothy Mengering, on assignment for her son.
She sits down between Mr. Rosenberg and Mr. Button, trailing an ecstatic comedy writer.
"This is the greatest piece of luck ever," says the writer.
"I happen to have just received in the mail some Dave buttons.
So now Dave's mom gets to give Dick Button a Dave button."
As a cameraman films the immortal scene, Mr. Rosenberg leans over.
"David was the best man at a wedding at my home," he says.
"He was the most down-to-earth man."
Mr. Rosenberg landed his most famous client ever in 1991, after she won the American championships.
Only skating cognoscenti had heard of Ms. Harding, but it was a coup for Mr. Rosenberg.
He won't say much about what Ms. Harding was like as a client, but says they developed "irreconcilable differences towards her career plans."
Others say there were lots of anguishing days where Ms. Harding was unpredictable, missed airplanes, showed up late for appearances, and fought over money.
Many in the skating world thought it was a terrible black eye for Mr. Rosenberg when the two split -- especially after Ms. Harding triumphed at the U.S. championships in Detroit.
Now people say Mr. Rosenberg dodged a bullet: He would either have been suspected of knowing about the assault on Ms. Kerrigan, or accused of being an aloof agent who didn't intimately follow his client's affairs.
Back at the rink in Hamar, Mr. Rosenberg's clients Maya Usova and Aleksandr Zhulin are taking the ice.
"Here it comes, my stomach is getting tighter," he groans.
"I'm going to throw up.
I can't watch this."
He hides his eyes.
The judges post excellent scores and Mr. Rosenberg cheers.
"Were they gorgeous or were they gorgeous!"
He leans back in his chair, sighs deeply with relief, and leans over to Mr. Button to talk about TV rights.
