General Electric Co.
Chairman John F. Welch Jr. is anything but modest when he writes his annual-report letter, and this year is no exception.
In a euphoric treatise that touches on everything from peanuts to pizza, he reviews GE's progress toward three operating principles he calls "boundaryless," "speed" and "stretch."
GE, he says, is using those principles to build a work force with an "absolutely infinite capacity to improve everything."
From anyone else, such lofty rhetoric could be dismissed as hyperbole.
But Mr. Welch's record as chairman of GE for 13 years gives his management views high visibility, and they're copied frequently in business circles.
Mr. Welch, who writes his own shareholder letter and takes considerable pride in the exercise, tells shareholders that "stretch is a concept that would have produced smirks, if not laughter, in the GE of three or four years ago, because it essentially means using dreams to set business targets -- with no real idea of how to get there."
Indeed, he says, "if you do know how to get there, it's not a stretch target."
GE, he says, "used to timidly nudge the peanut along setting goals of moving from, say, 4.73 inventory turns to 4.91, or from 8.53% operating margin to 8.92%; and then indulge in time-consuming, high-level, bureaucratic negotiations to move the number a few hundredths one way or the other.
The point is -- it didn't matter."
Incremental goals, he says, "inspire or challenge no one, capture no imaginations.
We're aiming at 10 inventory turns, at 15% operating margins, and at the introduction of more new products in the next two years than we've developed in the last 10.
In a company that now rewards progress toward stretch goals, rather than punishing shortfalls, the setting of these goals, and quantum leaps toward them, are daily events."
Such targets, he says, "are making seemingly impossible goals exciting, bringing out the best from our teams; and the pizza-delivery people are getting rich as our people celebrate each milestone."
Concentrating on "speed," he says, means that new products are coming out "with drumbeat rapidity."
There's a new-product announcement from the appliances business "every 90 days -- unthinkable years ago.
The GE90, the world's most powerful commercial jet engine, was designed and built in one-half the normal time, by a boundaryless team.
Another team developed a breakthrough ultrasound innovation in less than a year and a half.
We designed and built a new AC locomotive in 18 months."
Such efforts, he writes, have meant significant gains in the way GE manages its assets.
"Focusing on the speed of our order-to-remittance cycle -- from time of order to when we get paid -- has increased our inventory turns 27% in two years, throwing off almost $2 billion in cash in the process.
Every single-digit improvement in inventory turns produces $1 billion in cash to reinvest for tomorrow."
The faster pace, he says, has freed up nearly five million square feet of manufacturing space in the past three years.
To a business like plastics, that has meant saving "nearly one-half billion dollars that would have been required for new capacity -- like getting a new plant, free."
Speed, he adds, "is allowing us to shift the center of gravity of the company rapidly toward the high-growth areas of the world, particularly in Asia.
Forty percent of our sales now come from outside the United States, up from 30% just five years ago.
GE's non-U.S. sales have grown at a compounded rate of almost 10% over the past five years."
The lighting business, which less than five years ago had 21% of its sales outside the U.S., today sells 38% in the non-U.S. global market.
Mr. Welch, says the "boundaryless" notion means internally "piercing the walls of 100-year-old fiefdoms and empires called finance, engineering, manufacturing, marketing, and gathering teams from all those functions in one room, with one shared coffee pot, one shared vision and one consuming passion -- to design the world's best jet engine, or ultrasound machine, or refrigerator."
Mr. Welch, once labeled the toughest boss in the country, repeats a theme that GE is looking for "leaders at every level who can energize, excite and coach rather than enervate, depress and control."
In some cases, he adds, "this means parting company with some impressive people -- Heisman Trophy candidates, to use an American football expression -- who won't block for others or play as part of a team."
The two quickest ways to part company with GE, he says, are "to commit an integrity violation, or to be a controlling, turf-defending, oppressive manager who can't change and who saps and squeezes people rather than excites and draws out their energy and creativity."
Ideas, he insists, are judged on "quality rather than the altitude of their origin.
The status-defining tie on a manager at a GE plant is now about as fashionable as a leisure suit."
