The new received wisdom about investing in bankruptcies is that if you get a chance to play, you can bet the juice is gone.
By that time, executives of strapped companies already have induced workouts favorable to them and their allies.
Only when the stocks are in friendly hands do they soar phoenix-like into the market.
Explain then, please, the behavior of Hills Stores, which was known before its February 1991 bankruptcy-court filing as Hills Department Stores.
The Canton, Mass.-based retailer, which operates discount department stores in small Northeastern towns, has been back on its feet since October, when it emerged from bankruptcy-law proceedings.
By all accounts, the company is set to deliver stellar financial results for the fiscal year ended Jan. 29.
Yet the stock can't get off the ground.
It's languishing at 19 3/8, a whisker shy of its $20 stated value in the work-out plan.
At that price, it looks downright cheap to some investors.
Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank, recently snapped up an 8.1% stake in Hills Stores from Westinghouse Credit Corp. of Pittsburgh, a lender to the retailer's ill-fated 1985 leveraged buyout.
Meanwhile, Fidelity Investments, the big Boston mutual-fund group, doubled its holdings earlier this year to about 16% of shares outstanding by buying most of the holdings of Apollo Advisors, a New York "vulture" investor in the bankruptcy.
What lures these savvy investors is cash flow, and Hills has plenty of it.
Cash flow -- or the amount of cash the business generates, after operating expenses, but before such expenses as interest payments, taxes and depreciation -- often is a better gauge of a reorganized company's prospects than its earnings.
"Large losses and other charges can skew reported earnings," says Jeffrey Wiegand of Robotti & Eng, a New York firm expert in special-situation investing.
"Often, the balance sheet has been restated so that book value is meaningless," adds Mr. Wiegand, who tracks stocks of former bankruptcy wards.
These days, Hills' stock is trading at four times the $135 million or so in cash flow it generated in the past fiscal year.
That's cheaper than current multiples of comparable discounters such as Caldor, or Bradlees, which haven't had the chance to revamp themselves under the generous shelter of bankruptcy.
And it's a steal compared to what investors are paying to bet on retailers still in bankruptcy court.
For instance, while shares of R.H. Macy don't trade publicly, its junk bonds do -- and they've been bid up to a lofty 13 times its current cash flow, and seven times next year's optimistic projections.
But retailers cannot live by cash flow alone -- especially discounters facing the likes of Wal-Mart.
That's been the hurdle facing Hills: Wal-Mart has been steadily encroaching on the discounter's terrain, especially in Pennsylvania, where Hills once ruled practically unchallenged.
Steamrolled by the Arkansas juggernaut during the past recession, the company's loss widened to $273.7 million in 1991.
To help Hills stage a comeback, creditors swept out management and brought in a new team led by Michael Bozic, former head of Sears Merchandise Group, a main division of the Chicago retailer.
Even though Hills still was mired in bankruptcy court, he set to work on an ambitious remodeling effort, despite howls from anxious creditors.
Those howls have since muted into contented purrs.
And no wonder.
Hills management overhauled its bland stores according to what management calls a "Wal-Mart formula,"and so far, the strategy has worked.
Sales at stores open more than a year, the yardstick by which retailers measure performance, rose a buoyant 10.2% in December from a year ago, and even stores pitted directly against Wal-Mart managed to eke out 7% sales growth.
Gone are Hills's arbitrary clusters of clothing, its masses of discounted brand goods.
Instead, the remodeled stores lure the company's predominantly female shoppers with bargain-priced health and beauty aids.
And new, streamlined aisles at the center of those stores are resplendent with discounted clothes, which account for a large part of sales.
Mr. Bozic, emboldened by his success, has even been expanding Hills's private label, American Spirit, which now encompasses not only apparel but bath accessories and garbage pails.
However, the facelift hasn't come cheap.
It has cost Hills about $75 million so far to redo half its stores -- about $700,000 per site.
But "it's been the perfect defensive strategy against Wal-Mart," says one happy shareholder.
One word of caution: Hills isn't for the faint-hearted.
The stock remains neglected by most Wall Street analysts, and volume is very thin.
While that adds to its attractiveness for some, it means investors should be prepared to hold for the longterm rather than go for a quick profit.
