The long-running trial of Tharman Shanmugaratnam, naughty economist for Singapore's Monetary Authority, and four other people has all the melodrama of a Perry Mason case.
Or at least it would if the alleged crime weren't about half as serious as jaywalking.
By pouring so much money and effort into this showy prosecution, Singapore's government seems to be just milking an opportunity.
It's sending the usual message to the media: You're here to serve the government, not report on it.
Mr. Shanmugaratnam is alleged to have let a visitor to his office catch a glimpse of Singapore's 1992 second-quarter growth estimate.
The leak, if it happened, was clearly inadvertent.
Yet now Mr. Shanmugaratnam, two private economists, a reporter, and the editor of the Business Times have all been hauled up under the Official Secrets Act.
The charges carry a maximum penalty of two years in jail.
Manu Bhaskaran, an economist for Crosby Securities, admits seeing the data but wasn't sure of its significance.
By the time the figure reached a reporter at the Business Times, its provenance seemed even more dubious.
So like any good journalist he called up the government for confirmation.
Paul Cheung, the government's chief statistician, wouldn't confirm the flash estimate but hinted that the time was ripe for a report tending to "hold down the rah-rahness" of the private sector.
Governments do have a legitimate concern about the handling of information that might affect share prices, of course, since an advance leak could give some traders an unfair advantage.
The best remedy is prompt and widespread disclosure.
In this event, the leak barely provoked a yawn from the stock market.
What's more, the government knew about the leak five days beforehand and still didn't try to prevent publication with a warning.
Nor does it now accuse any of the defendants of seeking to profit.
It's hard to escape the suspicion that the prosecution's motive is to discourage aggressive reporting and to warn officials to show reporters the door instantly if they begin asking interesting questions.
Singapore's attorney general is personally handling the case.
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong has commented that he can't run Singapore if it's "leaking all over the place."
Singapore is hardly leaking all over the place.
However, it does aspire to become a regional financial capital.
In other important capital markets, the information age is well advanced.
Traders in those places know that information can be properly assessed only if lots of people are competing to evaluate it.
It's hard to reconcile Singapore's capital market ambitions with its conflicting desire to treat bland statistical forecasts as "official secrets."
To be sure, such hang-ups are not totally absent elsewhere.
In America's strange debate over what pieces of information should be allowed to influence a company's share price, the words "your bunny has a good nose" became the basis of an insider-trading case.
China would like to become a modern economy, yet the official People's Daily recently editorialized in favor of not confusing people with too much information.
So perhaps Singapore differs mainly in moving with its usual forthrightness.
But in this age of instant communications, governments everywhere will have to come to terms with the truism that markets depend on information, and more and faster information will allow them to work better.
