For its annual senior managers' meeting, casino operator Aztar Corp. wanted a site that would be both cost-efficient and enjoyable.
So the company signed its executives up for a five-day Bahamian cruise on Royal Caribbean Cruise Line's Nordic Empress.
The jaunt, including everything from air fare to an awards banquet, cost about $1,035 per person, making it less expensive than most of the other meetings the company held in hotels situated on dry land.
These days, ostentation is largely out of fashion as firms seek to shun the image of corporate meetings as boondoggles.
"Everyone wants to go to Monte Carlo," says Aztar Chairman Paul Rubeli.
"I tell them that when our stock hits $30 a share, then we'll go."
(Aztar has been trading at about $7 a share.)
As Aztar's low-cost cruise indicates, companies are searching for less costly ways to make participants feel pampered.
While recent surveys indicate that companies are holding about as many meetings as they did a few years ago, they're sticking closer to home and haggling over costs and services.
Hotel and resort operators have had to adjust.
"We've seen meetings shortened, fewer attendees, a higher no-show factor," says Cody Plott, vice president of sales for Hyatt Hotels and Resorts.
"There's more pressure on us to be better operators."
The changes have filtered through to even the most luxurious resorts and urban hotels, though operators say demand for their high-end product will continue.
"Customers who sought the experience of our resorts in the '80s are still seeking it, but are more discreet or demanding more value," says Arthur Berg, director of marketing for the Four Seasons Resort Nevis in the Bahamas.
While the resort can cost $400 to $500 a night per attendee in peak winter season, rates can drop to $150 or $175 for those willing to show up during slower times.
Just as more companies are taking advantage of off-season rates, more are seeking out atypical locations.
The Four Seasons Resort and Club in Dallas relies on groups for 65% of its business; it offers golf, tennis and other upscale amenities, all 20 minutes from downtown.
A meeting in Dallas, says Jim Fitz-Gibbon, Four Seasons' regional vice president and general manager, isn't perceived as a posh getaway, but rather as a pleasant place to buckle down and work.
"Dallas isn't a traditional vacation location, which some might say is a negative, but it's perceived as an efficient destination."
In season, with all the extras, the resort costs about $300 a person a day.
The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Co., which for years has nurtured its image as host to the leisure class, has, for the past three years, been researching ways to get itself into the meetings business.
Too many planners and potential customers saw the luxury chain as intimidating, or beyond their means, despite a reputation for top-drawer service.
"We've been forced to become more market-driven rather than product-driven," says Jim DiChiara, vice president of sales and marketing for Ritz-Carlton.
Among other things, Ritz-Carlton is reaching out to planners with meetings packages priced to match those offered by its competitors.
With help from the research firm J.D. Power & Associates, the firm quizzes customers after their events to see how they fared.
"Customers' expectations of service haven't changed," says Mr. DiChiara, who notes that corporate-group business now accounts for about half the chain's business.
"Only what they expect to pay for it."
For meeting planners, cost-cutting extends beyond looking for efficient locations.
Cheaper airline tickets requiring a Saturday-night stay have made weekend meetings increasingly common, although they can be unpopular with employees.
"Our attendees work so hard during the week, we generally feel it's not appropriate to bring them away from the family" on weekends, says Mark Kustwan, director of conference planning for Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co.
To address such problems, hotels are increasingly teaming up with airlines to snare the meetings business.
Hyatt and American Airlines together offer Saturday-night rates for midweek meetings.
Several corporate clients say cost-saving tactics have already evolved into habit.
Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. in Novato, Calif., has made Saturday-night stays for meetings common, and planners bargain hard for multimeeting discounts at various hotels.
"Even if the entire economy changed favorably, we'd probably keep these types of guidelines in place," says David Kliman, director of travel management and corporate events who helps coordinate 150 meetings a year.
Still, Fireman's pays a little extra for the five or six meetings a year it holds for top-producing agents.
"They need to be led to feel we're looking after them and value their time," Mr. Kliman says.
"And we're taking them out of the office, where they're not producing revenues."
The cruise industry has clearly benefited from all the penny pinching.
Joyce Landry of Landry & Kling, a Miami-based firm that specializes in organizing corporate cruises, says that cruise lines have just recently begun making more boats available for meetings.
Now such carriers as Royal Caribbean and Carnival Cruise Lines are offering the shorter trips and special on-board facilities that meeting planners prefer.
"As we refurbish and build new ships, we're adding conference space because it's such a lucrative market for us," says Royal Caribbean's Lisa Lutoff-Perlo, director of incentive sales.
Most of the people who take business trips on boats are "first-time cruisers," she adds, which can translate into repeat leisure business.
But as every hospitality company knows, price and convenience aren't everything.
After trying the cruise-ship meeting experience, which won high marks for ambience and efficiency, Aztar moved back to shore and held its next managers' meeting in San Antonio, Texas.
"No one's going to get seasick there," Mr. Rubeli says.
