Appearing in Norway this week: Tonya Harding, Nancy Kerrigan and the world's largest paper clip.
The clip, seven meters (almost 23 feet) tall and weighing 1,328 pounds, was made by the first company to automate the manufacture of paper clips.
That feat was accomplished at the turn of the century near Lillehammer, in the town of Gjovik.
The clip is a testament to the Norwegian penchant for building big things.
Last year, an agricultural school in As said it knitted the world's biggest sweater.
Three years ago, students at the Norwegian School of Management built the world's biggest beer can.
In front of the Gjovik factory of O. Mustad & Son sits the world's biggest fish hook, which two years ago had attached to it the world's biggest fishing fly.
"It's symbolic of Norwegian creativity," says Anders Thomassen, sales and marketing manager of O. Mustad & Son, Norway's best-known paper clip manufacturer and maker of the giant clip.
"We're proud of it," says Kenneth Wathne, a student at the Norwegian School of Management.
"This is a thing for the common people," says his classmate, Cathrine Klouman.
During World War II, Norwegians wore paper clips on their lapels as a symbol of German resistance.
Making the world's largest paper clip was the idea of management school students in 1989.
That year marked the 90th anniversary of the invention of the paper clip by Johan Vaaler, a Norwegian from Lillehammer.
Mr. Vaaler is No. 5 among Unsung Inventors of Everyday Objects in "The Book of Lists."
Originally, the management school wanted a paper clip 10 meters high, but that wasn't technically feasible: too heavy.
Nor would the proportions have been right.
The steel tubing available was suitable only for a seven-meter clip.
"Anyhow, that was more than enough to establish a world record," says Mr. Thomassen.
The Guinness Book of Records listed the clip in its 1992 edition, along with the world's biggest yo-yo and the world's biggest matchstick.
But not everybody at the management school likes the clip, which is mounted in cement outside the main entrance.
Says Margrete Jaegar, a 28-year-old public relations consultant at the school who spearheaded the big clip movement, some people "say it makes us seem like secretaries and clerks instead of business students."
