There's a new way to save on the high cost of life insurance.
While people who want to whittle the cost of commissions when buying stocks and mutual funds can turn to discount brokerage firms and no-load mutual-fund companies, life-insurance buyers have had few options to reduce the commissions they pay.
Commissions on cash-value life insurance (which combines insurance protection with an investment component) are typically more than 100% of the first year's premium.
Consequently, the policies have zero "surrender value" in the early years, regardless of how many thousands of dollars in premiums you've paid in.
If you drop the policy in the early years, you walk away with little or nothing.
It has been possible to eliminate the traditional agents' commission by purchasing "low load" insurance directly from a handful of insurers or through fee-only financial planners.
But finding those companies isn't always easy, and many people don't need or can't afford to work with a planner.
Enter the Wholesale Insurance Network.
Yesterday, a Tampa, Fla., consortium of fee-only planners known as Fee for Service launched the subsidiary to provide a third way to buy low-load life insurance.
The network is a free telephone service that lines up callers with low-load insurance products, including universal life, whole life, first-to-die and survivorship life, as well as term life, annuities and disability income coverage.
Insurance buyers can call a toll-free line (800-808-5810), and, depending on their age, gender, the type of policy they want and the face amount of coverage they need, receive two quotes from among the 25 low-load policies offered by the 10 companies in the network.
The companies include Ameritas Life Insurance Corp., John Alden Life Insurance Co., Federal Home Life Insurance Co. and Security Benefit Life Insurance Co.
Shoppers can also mail or fax a proposal they've been given by an agent and receive quotes on competitive low-load policies.
Insurance shoppers who are interested in purchasing a policy through the service can then send in an application, which the service forwards to the insurer.
The insurer then contacts the buyer, arranges a medical exam, and, if all goes well, issues a policy.
There's no cost for this service.
Wholesale Insurance Network receives no commissions, and is paid a marketing expense allowance by companies whose policies it sells.
(Marketing allowances are the same regardless of whether you buy the policy through the network, with the help of a fee-only planner, or directly from the insurer).
The savings can be significant.
With agent-sold insurance, commissions and other fees paid to the agent by the insurer total an average of 165% of the first year's premium, says Keith Maurer, president and creator of the low-load buying service.
He says money paid to the selling agent generally consumes 10% to 15% of the second-year premium, and 7% or so of the premiums paid for the next 15 to 20 years.
In contrast, low-load policies have fees of 25% in the first year, and 2% to 3% thereafter.
This covers basic costs of underwriting, medical exams and homeoffice marketing expenses.
Low-load life insurance reduces not only the cost of buying insurance, but cuts the risk of losing your money if you cash out early.
According to the Life Insurance Marketing and Research Association, an industry trade group, a quarter of all policies lapse within two years; by the end of year five, more than half of all policyholders have called it quits.
"If you can't afford to pay your premiums, your policy lapses and you lose your money.
With low-load insurance, you get your money back," says Mr. Maurer.
Glenn Daily, a fee-only insurance adviser in New York, says another advantage of buying low-load insurance directly is to bypass pressure from agents.
Good life-insurance agents offer invaluable service and guidance.
But Mr. Daily says that the lure of commissions leads many to encourage people to buy coverage they don't need or to buy more expensive cash-value insurance when "term life" would be cheaper or enable the buyer to purchase more coverage for the same money.
Term-life insurance is pure insurance coverage without an investment component.
There are limitations to what the network can do.
It won't provide detailed advice.
"We hope people who call already have in mind the type of insurance they want, and the amount," says Mr. Maurer.
The service is intended for insurance buyers who "don't want to work with a planner, can't afford to, or are do-it-yourselfers."
At least initially, the service won't be much help to people who live in New York State.
None of the companies whose policies are available through the service is licensed in New York.
Consequently, New Yorkers who want low-load insurance must still look elsewhere.
The largest low-load insurer licensed in New York State is USAA Life Co., San Antonio, (800-531-8000).
Veritas (800-552-3553), a Houston company that distributes low-load policies from Ameritas in Lincoln, Neb., expects a New York license to be approved soon.
