When the Securities and Exchange Commission unveils its much-ballyhooed study on U.S. securities markets today, Arthur Levitt, its chairman, won't be around.
That speaks volumes more to Wall Street executives than the Market 2000 study itself.
They see the chairman distancing himself from a report that falls far short of offering the wholesale regulatory changes the exchanges are desperately seeking.
Indeed, some of the measures are downright loathsome to the exchanges.
For instance, the report suggests the agency loosen the rules governing the ability of companies to move from the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange to other markets.
Currently, a New York Stock Exchange-listed company that wants to change venue would have to get two-thirds of its shareholders to agree to the move.
The report suggests that a company's board of directors be allowed to make that decision, subject to review by the company's audit committee.
It also suggests that members of the New York Stock Exchange be free to trade listed stocks away from the Big Board after hours unless the exchanges offer an afterhours system.
Currently, members must trade these stocks in foreign markets.
The change would, in effect, circumvent Rule 390, which gives only specialist firms the right to make markets in stocks.
Overall, the Market 2000 study proposes that the SEC continue a flexible approach toward off-exchange trading systems but make them subject to detailed reporting and record-keeping requirements.
The New York Stock Exchange and others had wanted the SEC to go much further by imposing on the off-exchange trading systems the full panoply of regulations governing the exchanges.
"They are obviously still trying to get the exchanges to compete in a tennis match dressed for football," complains Carolyn B. Austin, president of the Midwest Stock Exchange specialist firm Dempsey & Co.
"You still have all these regulatory trappings around the exchanges and yet the over-the-counter markets are fairly light-footed."
"What the SEC staff is saying is that overall the markets work pretty well and so there is no need for radical change," says one person who was briefed on the report yesterday.
"However, they recognize the need for some changes to accommodate technological developments and changes in market practices."
Adds Ms. Austin: "My sense is Market 2000 may be a first step but they'll need a Market 2001 to fix anything."
An SEC spokeswoman denied that Mr. Levitt's conspicuous absence from today's planned presentation is any attempt to distance himself from the report.
Mr. Levitt "had a previous engagement which we wanted to keep and we all decided it was in the best interest of all parties to release it in late January," said the spokeswoman.
No one at the SEC would comment on the report before its release.
Commissioned two years ago by former SEC chairman Richard Breeden, Market 2000 is the SEC's first broad-reaching survey of the equity markets in more than 20 years.
From the start, the stock exchanges saw the study as a way to remedy some of the competitive disadvantages they have suffered in recent years as scantily-regulated off-exchange trading systems have proliferated.
Those off-exchange systems have sucked away millions of dollars of stock orders from the well-established, highly regulated exchange floors.
Even those proposals the exchanges favor aren't as strict as they would like.
The report reiterates the need for greater disclosure of payment for order flow, a practice in which brokers receive incentives from market makers for buy and sell orders for stocks.
The practice is already the subject of a rule proposed by the SEC.
The same proposal deals with so-called "soft dollar" payments, which include discounts on research reports, among other things.
The exchanges wanted payment for order flow banned.
Another recommendation that may be moot is one that would require the National Association of Securities Dealers to publicly display orders entered on SelectNet, the computerized trading system that allows NASD members to negotiate and execute transactions for Nasdaq-listed stocks.
Earlier this week, the NASD's board of governors voted to give nonmembers access to SelectNet through member firms.
The NASD action will have to be approved by the SEC after staff review.
Then there's the suggestion that the current system of pricing stocks in increments of one-eighth of a dollar, or 12.5 cents, be scrapped in favor of "decimalization."
The report recommends the adoption of a one-sixteenth of a dollar increment as a transitional step leading to decimal pricing, that is, increments of 10 cents.
As with similar sweeping reports, Market 2000 will reflect the staff's findings and recommendations, rather than the commission's.
"The commission doesn't endorse staff reports but it authorizes their publication," a spokesman said.
The commissioners "try as hard as possible to make it clear that it's the division that's reporting."
In this case, the market regulation division, headed by Brandon Becker, is releasing the report without fanfare, unlike the report on mutual funds released in May 1992 at a news conference led by then-chairman Mr. Breeden.
Staff recommendations in these reports typically contain a mix of suggestions, some of which require rule-making by the commission and some of which require legislation.
Other suggestions are up to the exchanges and Nasdaq to follow.
If commission rule-making is in order, the process is the same as if no report had been issued.
The commission will vote to propose a rule, collect comments and then vote on a final rule.
The process can take months.
CAROLINE B. AUSTIN is president of Dempsey & Co., a specialist firm on the Chicago Stock Exchange.
An article yesterday incorrectly referred to the Chicago Stock Exchange by its former name, the Midwest Stock Exchange.
(WSJ Jan. 28, 1994)
