Francis Mer, the chairman of Usinor Sacilor, is in the eye of a storm.
As Europe's long-protected steelmakers confront losses, recession and subsidized rivals, steel products are starting to pour in from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
With the rise of economic liberalism and free trade, brutal market forces are reshaping the rules.
Usinor yesterday reported an estimated 1993 loss of 5.8 billion French francs ($978.8 million), which was far worse than expected, and more than double the year-earlier loss of 2.4 billion francs.
This is the French state-owned group's third-consecutive yearly loss, and the company is forecasting a loss of two billion francs for the current year-if market conditions don't deteriorate further.
Consolidated revenue at Europe's biggest steelmaker fell 13% in 1993 to a preliminary 75.4 billion francs from 87 billion francs.
Not surprisingly, Mr. Mer, a 54-year-old alumnus of France's elite Ecole Polytechnique, feels irritated.
The dog-eat-dog steel business today has little in common with the old French ideal of a rational industrial environment shaped by state policy.
Mr. Mer, however, whose company is slated for privatization, says he doesn't fear fair competition: It's misguided government intervention -- and the lack of intervention where and when it's really needed -- that angers him.
Meanwhile, Usinor hasn't recently received an infusion of government money, unlike some of its major competitors such as Italy's state-owned Ilva SpA or Spain's Cia.
Siderurgica Integral, and the European Union is tipping the balance by allowing subsidies for some of its producers and refraining from limiting imports of steel products from Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States in the name of free trade.
"We don't have any problem in accepting the principle of free competition . . . on the only condition that such competition is between people playing more or less by the same rules," said Mr. Mer in a recent interview at the company's headquarters.
Just last month, the EU cleared 6.79 billion European Currency Units ($7.56 billion) in subsidies to a group of ailing state-owned steelmakers in Italy, Spain, Germany and Portugal, including Ilva and CSI.
By shielding these producers from the free-market sanction of bankruptcy, the move increases competitive pressure on beleaguered nonsubsidized producers such as Usinor or Thyssen AG, which last week reported a 994 million mark ($569.8 million) loss for fiscal 1993.
In addition, the EU is doing little to force subsidized producers to close down excess capacity.
But Usinor's big 1993 loss of about 2,900 francs -- a ton of steel produced -- could also force the government of French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur to make some tough decisions, analysts say: Either it'll have to let the steel company accelerate closures and lay off more workers -- an unpopular move in a country where unemployment is a political hot potato -- or Paris will have to give Usinor some sort of bailout -- which would land France in trouble with the European Commission's competition authorities.
"I don't believe they can stick it out." says Peter Fish, managing director of MEPS (Europe) Ltd., a consulting firm in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Fish says Usinor will be forced to start divesting more of its noncore activities, for example in the U.S., where Mr. Mer had embarked on an aggressive acquisition spree.
Usinor's losses also complicate the government's goal of privatizing the company.
Privatization had been expected as early as next year, when steel demand and prices are expected to recover.
But with continuing heavy losses and a heavy debt load, the company is ill prepared for a public offer.
Still, Mr. Mer has won high marks in the industry with his relentless efforts to restructure and modernize the steel giant, while investing heavily in research and development.
This year the company plans to reduce its operating costs by a whopping 1.5 billion francs.
If it survives its current woes, Usinor could well evolve into one of Europe's most competitive steelmakers, analysts say.
Competitive pressures are building up.
Fledgling exporters in Eastern Europe and in the former Soviet Union are adding pressures with their low production costs and weak currencies.
Steel exports from Eastern Europe and the C.I.S. to the 12-nation EU totaled about 3.5 million tons last year, the Brussels-based industry federation Eurofer estimates.
That's down from 4.3 million tons in 1992 -- a decline attributed to weak demand in Western Europe.
However, in the few, more robust segments of the steel market, Eastern European and C.I.S. producers gained market share last year, Eurofer says, indicating that exports are poised to boom once Western European demand recovers.
That's all the more worrisome, Mr. Mer says, because there are no world-wide rules governing the steel trade.
Steel products were removed from last year's Uruguay Round global trade accord under pressure from the U.S.
The move, which was opposed by the EU, means that steel is unlikely to be covered by normal trading rules anytime soon.
Mr. Mer frets that while the U.S. continues to protect its market with antidumping levies, the EU will be forced to accept increasing amounts of Eastern steel for the sake of economic integration.
For the European Commission, letting in imports from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union is a political imperative.
Though he doesn't call for protectionism, he adds that European producers deserve a transition period to adapt while the former Soviet bloc is incorporated into the world-trading system.
Today's chaotic business environment seriously complicates Mr. Mer's mission, which -- since he took the helm at Usinor in 1986 -- has been to absorb and restructure virtually all of the French steel industry under the Usinor umbrella.
The company was established in 1986 as part of a government bailout of the country's bankrupt steel industry.
It hasn't been an easy job.
Laying off thousands of workers and closing dozens of plants has cost Usinor dearly under France's generous job-protection laws.
Just during 1993, Usinor cut its employment by 21,000 to 68,000.
Last year Usinor, a key supplier of steel sheet to car makers, was hit by the plunge in European auto production.
Currency devaluations in Italy and Spain, which are major export markets for the French group, also hurt results.
The company, meanwhile, continues to be plagued by heavy restructuring and debt-servicing costs.
Usinor cut back its debt to around 25 billion francs last year from 29.5 billion francs in 1992.
But the debt-to-asset ratio nevertheless remained at a hefty 1.2 last year, compared with 1.24 in 1992 and 1.1 in 1991.
The company raised $205 million last year by floating part of its U.S. specialty-steel subsidiary on the U.S. stock market.
Much of the proceeds were used to repay debt, company officials say.
But whether there's scope for more windfalls is unclear, and some in the industry believe Usinor may be forced to turn to the French state for money.
In 1991, Usinor got a 2.5 billion franc cash injection from the French state-owned Bank Credit Lyonnais in return for a 9% stake.
(The bank also got a further 11% stake in the steelmaker from the French government.)
Mr. Mer, however, denies he has any plans to ask the government for more money.
