A sudden surge of Canadian-crop shipments to the U.S. is fueling a spat between neighbors.
Canadian wheat has grabbed a record 7% of U.S. consumption, figure U.S. trade groups, and Canadian barley, oats and other crops are also making big inroads.
As a result, the U.S. government is pressing Canada to impose an annual cap on its exports of wheat and barley to the U.S. market of 1.8 million metric tons.
A metric ton is equivalent to 2,204.62 pounds.
U.S. Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy and Canadian Agriculture Minister Ralph Goodale discussed the issue in Toronto a week ago, but failed to make much headway.
Canadian grain shipments to the U.S. climbed steadily for several years, then soared this winter in the wake of the crop disaster in the Midwest last year.
Record flooding reduced both the quantity and quality of the U.S. corn crop, which is mostly used to feed livestock.
That has created corn shortages in some states such as Wisconsin, and driven corn prices to levels high enough to attract foreign grain.
U.S. grain analysts expect an Agriculture Department report tomorrow to show that the U.S. corn supply on March 1 was about 31% smaller than on the year-earlier date.
U.S. traders are speculating that the quarterly government survey will find a stockpile of 3.95 billion bushels, compared with 5.68 billion bushels on the year-earlier date.
The tight corn supply in the U.S. is forcing many livestock producers to switch to low-grade wheat from Canada, which has a surplus in the wake of its own growing problems last year.
Low-quality Canadian wheat is showing up in cattle feedlots and other livestock operations as far south as Amarillo, Texas, and as far east as North Carolina, say U.S. farm groups.
Grain traders are divided over whether the influx of Canadian wheat has done much to depress U.S. wheat prices.
Slow U.S. wheat exports are probably more to blame for a lackluster market since February.
In trading at the Minneapolis Grain Exchange, the spring wheat contract for July delivery slipped two cents a bushel to settle at $3.325.
According to some traders, Canadian feed wheat might be more responsible for taking some steam out of the corn market in recent months.
Corn and soybean prices fell yesterday amid profit-taking.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for May delivery sank 1.5 cents a bushel to settle at $2.85.
The surge of Canadian wheat will subside some if U.S. corn growers manage to harvest a decent crop this year.
However, Canada is widely expected to expand its shipment to the U.S. of high-quality wheat and durum suitable for milling.
Canadian durum, which is used to make pasta products, accounts for more than 20% of U.S. consumption.
The explanation for that forecast depends on which side of the border you farm.
U.S. farm groups are complaining to Washington that Canada unfairly subsidizes the cost of exporting crops south.
The U.S. Agriculture Department recently reported that the Canadian Wheat Board, which is the government wheat marketing agency, appeared to sell 200,000 tons of low-quality feed wheat to Mexico in late January at a selling price below its costs.
Officials of the Canadian Wheat Board, however, attribute artificially high wheat prices in the U.S. for attracting foreign grain.
Canadian durum shipments to the U.S. have been increasing since the mid-1980s when the U.S. government started subsidizing exports of U.S. wheat to compete with subsidized European grain.
The subsidy battle has depressed international grain prices.
But U.S. domestic grain prices have remained comparatively high, according to Canadian officials, making the U.S. an attractive market.
The U.S. market has become a "huge magnet" for Canadian grain, said a spokesman for the Canadian Wheat Board.
The U.S. and the European Union have agreed to reduce their export subsidies by 36% in the 1995-2001 period.
For the next year at least, the Canadian Wheat Board expects the U.S. and the Europeans to continue their subsidy battle in the wheat market.
Canadian wheat shipments to the U.S. in the seven months ended Feb. 28 totaled 35.2 million bushels, a 36% increase from a year earlier, the Canadian Grain Commission reported Monday.
In the same period, Canadian barley shipments to the U.S. totaled 27.8 million bushels, up 500% from a year earlier.
ENERGY: May crude oil recovered a bit yesterday from Monday's steep drop, but traders were still edgy, waiting to see whether there was going to be further price erosion following the weekend meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in Geneva.
May crude on the New York Mercantile Exchange rose 24 cents to $14.32 a barrel yesterday after Monday's $1.05 a barrel plunge.
Prices also found some support from widespread expectation that weekly industry reports would show declines.
April gasoline also showed strength, tacking on 1.09 cents a gallon to finish at 44.40 cents.
April heating oil rose, as well, to 44.60 cents a gallon, up 0.84 cent.
