The Clinton administration proposed a new excise tax to combat abuses by tax-exempt public charities.
The proposal, backed by lawmakers of both parties, would hit insiders, such as officers and directors, who receive what the Internal Revenue Service would consider "excessive compensation" from the tax-exempt organization.
The plan also would penalize managers who approve the compensation.
The tax on insiders would sharply escalate if they didn't refund the so-called excess.
Leslie Samuels, assistant Treasury secretary for tax policy, told the House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee that the tax aims at "bad apples" who divert funds from charities for their own benefit.
He said the tax-exempt charitable community as a whole supports the plan, which also calls for more disclosure by tax-exempt organizations.
He said specific legislation will be sent to Capitol Hill soon, with an effective date of today.
The initiative addresses a problem that has plagued the IRS with increasing severity in recent years, as charitable organizations have grown in numbers and financial complexity.
The IRS and others have testified that some charities are being operated more for the benefit of insiders than their purported beneficiaries.
The diversion of charitable resources to the personal use of insiders has been detected in all types of charities, including public-service organizations, nonprofit hospitals and universities, televangelists and religious groups.
But the penalty for violating tax rules governing such organizations is revocation of tax-exempt status, a penalty so harsh that the IRS has been reluctant to invoke it unless the violation is severe.
IRS Commissioner Margaret Richardson has said intermediate sanctions would be helpful.
Under the Treasury's proposal, the excise tax would apply to any "excess benefit" provided to an insider by an organization exempt from taxation under section 501 (C)(3) or 501 (C)(4) of the Tax Code.
Insiders would include the organization's officers, directors and trustees, as well as those otherwise in a position to exercise substantial control over its affairs.
If the IRS determined a portion of an insider's compensation to be unreasonable, a tax of 25% would be levied on the excess benefit.
In addition, any manager who approved the compensation knowing it was unreasonable would be subject to a tax of 10% of the unreasonable benefit, to a maximum of $10,000.
Insiders would also have to repay the excess benefit, and if they didn't do so within a prescribed period they would be hit with a 200% tax.
The IRS could still revoke a charity's tax-exempt status, as well as impose the tax, in extreme cases.
Factors determining the reasonableness of compensation include the nature of the insider's duties, the person's background and experience, the time devoted to the organization, the size of the organization, and amounts paid by similar organizations.
Mr. Samuels said the proposal explicitly covers health-care organizations, including health maintenance organizations, that are tax-exempt under section 501 (C)(4) of the tax code.
He said the restructuring of the health-care market expected to result from health-care reform could provide greater opportunities for insiders to divert resources to their own benefit.
Oversight Subcommittee Chairman J. J. Pickle (D., Texas) endorsed the administration's plan and held out the prospect for quick congressional action.
Mr. Samuels said the proposal should be a serious deterrent to those who engage in abusive transactions.
He also said preliminary estimates are that it would raise about $65 million over five years.
