The U.S. trade battle with Japan eased somewhat as Japan reported that imports of computer chips rose and Washington waited for Tokyo to unveil market-opening initiatives.
Still, neither side is ready to declare a truce.
U.S. trade officials are preparing a thick report on foreign trade practices, due to be released next week, which will highlight Japanese trade barriers.
The U.S. could target those barriers for negotiations and, eventually, trade sanctions.
"It's a map for Japan," U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said in an interview.
"It's a road map for them to follow."
Mr. Kantor said Japan has to present a "bold and aggressive package" of trade initiatives by the end of the month if it wants the U.S. to resume negotiations over failed "framework" talks.
But Kiyohiko Nanao, economic minister at the Japanese embassy in Washington, warned against "unduly high expectations" concerning the package, and said only a portion of it may be ready by March 31.
In Tokyo, Japanese officials had some tough talk of their own.
Japan threatened to retaliate in a civil-aviation dispute with the U.S., an argument that took a turn for the worse last week when the U.S. withheld permission for a new Japan Airlines route to Honolulu with just two days' notice.
Transportation Ministry officials told Japanese reporters that Japan will accelerate its own review of seven trans-Pacific air routes widely used by U.S. carriers.
Implicit in the review is the threat that Japan could withhold approval of these routes.
Ministry officials couldn't be reached for a comment.
For the moment, though, the U.S. and Japan have backed away from confrontation on two important fronts.
Regarding semiconductors, Japan reported that the foreign share of its chip market topped 20% in 1993's fourth quarter.
The share was 20.7%, when calculated by the formula preferred by the U.S. government, and 22.1%, using the formula preferred by Japan.
The latter formula includes chips produced for internal consumption by such companies as International Business Machines Corp.
Figures for the value of chip sales weren't released.
And on medical equipment, the U.S. said it expects a speedy resolution of a dispute involving the sale of advanced medical devices in Japan.
U.S. officials had earlier said they planned to file an official complaint with the Japanese government over an alleged failure to promptly inform the U.S. about impending price controls on medical equipment.
On Friday, however, a spokesman at the U.S. embassy in Tokyo said the U.S. expects a "quiet" solution to this issue early this week.
In recent years, semiconductors have played a central role in U.S.-Japanese trade relations, producing a series of trade pacts seeking to ensure that foreign chip makers get at least 20% of the Japanese market.
Imports finally reached that goal in the fourth quarter of 1992, helping to convince the Clinton administration that it must insist on specific sales goals when negotiating with Japan.
That "results-oriented" approach guided the U.S. in its recent failed efforts to reach a broad trade pact with Japan.
But Japan has also turned the semiconductor pact to its purposes, saying U.S. demands amount to government-controlled, or "managed," trade.
Other countries in Asia and Europe have picked up on that line and have used it to attack the framework talks.
Now the U.S. no longer trumpets the semiconductor accord -- even though the philosophy behind the chip pact still animates U.S. policy.
Last year (after the 20% mark was reached in 1992's fourth quarter), Mr. Kantor held a news conference and said he wanted foreign chip sales in Japan to average 20% for the full year.
This year, after Japan hit the 20% number again in the 1993 fourth quarter, the U.S. simply put out a two-paragraph news release saying it was "concerned" that foreign chip makers don't have full access to the Japanese market.
In the interview, Mr. Kantor went out of his way to avoid naming any more numerical targets.
"The agreement doesn't say, beyond 20%, any particular number," he said.
From this and other actions, the U.S. is trying to assure Japan that Washington won't insist on specific sales goals in the framework talks.
During the failed negotiations, the U.S. position did contain such goals, but U.S. officials have subsequently said privately that they expected to bargain over them.
Japan, however, refused to discuss the numbers, fearing that would push Tokyo into setting some kind of sales target.
For its part, the Semiconductor Industry of America was ready to proclaim new semiconductor goals.
For all of 1993, the SIA said, foreign companies had 19.4% of the Japanese market, up 2.7 percentage points from 1992.
For this year, the SIA said, it wanted to see a market-share increase "comparable" to last year's.
That would indicate a 1994 target of about 22%.
U.S. companies account for about 85% of foreign semiconductor sales in Japan.
The U.S. industry has been upset because the increased foreign share in Japan for the fourth quarter follows three consecutive quarters of decline -- the share was 18.1% for the third quarter.
During emergency chip talks called by the U.S. earlier this year, Japan rebuffed U.S. calls for a rush chip-buying program by Japanese companies, saying that the fall in foreign share prior to the fourth quarter was part of the normal fluctuations of the market.
Japanese industry executives echoed that view over the weekend, and even hinted that they're still not convinced foreign companies are working hard enough for their share of the market.
While Japanese companies will continue cooperating with their foreign suppliers, "we also cannot ignore the need for further efforts by foreign suppliers to expand their business," said Hideko Yoshida, a Toshiba Corp. executive who heads the industry group charged with promoting use of foreign semiconductors.
The fluctuation in the market-share numbers suggests that Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry had a strong hand in the results.
For the past two years, the numbers have remained low in the first three quarters, only to surge in the politically sensitive fourth quarter.
To make matters odder, said Daryl Hatano, vice president of the SIA, Japanese sales of consumer electronics chips -- where foreign companies are weak -- should rise in the fourth quarter.
If anything, that should depress foreign share.
Japanese companies say the fluctuations from quarter to quarter represent both the growth rate of the Japanese market and individual companies.
But Mr. Hatano said that Japanese companies know quickly when third-quarter purchases slump, and can turn up their purchases.
"The Ministry of International Trade and Industry told us they encourage Japanese companies to buy more, and the Japanese companies did buy more," he said.
Officials at MITI have also been prominent in attacking U.S. negotiators for insisting on managed trade.
David P. Hamilton in Tokyo contributed to this article.
