In his Dec. 14 editorial-page piece "Pushing Democracy Is No Key to Prosperity," Robert J. Barro cited Freedom House data to make a number of judgments suggesting that democracy and economic growth are not closely related.
As an organization devoted to strengthening democracy, Freedom House takes the view that neither democracy nor authoritarianism offers an absolute guarantee of growth and prosperity.
However, there are values higher than growth at any price.
If a dictatorship achieves growth through slavery, genocide, democide, expansionism or warfare, we have a moral obligation to reject that.
Dictatorships tend to war against democracies and against each other, but democracies tend toward peace with each other.
The economic and human costs of such wars and conflicts deserve to be part of Prof. Barro's balance sheet.
Surely, the destructive record of dictatorships affects economic growth and property beyond their own borders.
Authoritarians often affect our bottom line.
A private business sector is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for democracy and freedom.
Several authoritarian Asian states have thriving business sectors, but are profoundly antidemocratic.
Eventually, such states may become democratic, but that is highly speculative.
There are plenty of other authoritarian countries that have poor economies that are no advertisement for Prof. Barro's thesis.
There is no guarantee that economies must continue to grow under authoritarianism or that they would cease to grow under democracy.
Prof. Gerald Scully of the University of Texas has provided convincing data to show that in the aggregate, over the long run, democracies outperform dictatorships economically.
Democracy's tendency to protect property rights and the rule of law boosts investor confidence by providing some sense of economic security.
This confidence is impossible where private property is tolerated as the subject of a dictator's whim and not secured through legally entrenched rights.
Without democratic checks on power, dictators behave in accordance with their own values alone.
Prof. Barro assumes that the authoritarian is benign.
However, dictatorships often accompany totally centralized economies that require harsh controls and Berlin Walls to maintain themselves.
Given the lack of countervailing political pressures under most dictatorships, nothing can stop the dictator, his family, friends, secret police and military from capturing the economy for themselves.
This corrodes growth and efficiency.
Many East European and African countries believe there is a relationship between democracy, market economics and growth.
Consequently, many nations have abandoned one-party systems and statist economies since 1989.
They won't all succeed with either political freedom or economic growth, but after the failures of the Communist model, none of them believes that authoritarianism will bring prosperity.
Joseph E. Ryan, Ph.D.
