To Michael B. Decker, being a successful business executive is a matter of rhyme and reason.
Mr. Decker, the No. 2 man at the real-estate firm Trammell Crow Co., is also a weekend poet whose work has appeared in the New Republic and has been accepted for the Paris Review.
Next Tuesday, Mr. Decker will have a reading at Southern Methodist University -- not the sort of venue you might expect to find a man steeped in income statements.
But Mr. Decker, who is Trammell Crow's chief operating officer and chief financial officer, says the two seemingly polar pursuits actually have a lot in common.
He says the ability to zero in on what's important is the key -- in prose as in personnel, in words as in work.
"Poetry makes you focus on what matters, and management really comes down to knowing what is important for people," Mr. Decker says.
More than just a hobby picked up on boring airplane flights, the 44-year-old Mr. Decker has been writing poetry since his Princeton days 25 years ago.
He studied at Oxford and continued writing, although he says he won't make a career of it like insurance executive Wallace Stevens or advertising copywriter James Dickey.
Now, Mr. Decker says, he tries to write every other day, "mixing and matching until the right things show up on a page."
But, he says, "lightning strikes" only about once a year.
Through his pursuit of poetry, Mr. Decker also hopes to remind employees not to pigeonhole workers by job titles.
"People are bundles of potential," he says.
"The more we can tap that energy, the more you get out of life, and the more balanced and enthused people are."
As for themes in his artistic work, Mr. Decker occasionally slips in businessmen in gray suits, not as positive or negative figures, but as people with problems to resolve.
More often, though, his poems revolve around water, which provides "connectivity" between things transient and permanent.
"I'm not sure I'd be as effective in business," he says, "if I didn't have the ability to look at things as pure as they are."
