Lazard Freres & Co. and Merrill Lynch & Co. have made significant changes in the management of their municipal-bond operations in the wake of a variety of federal, state and local investigations that began last May.
Lazard has quietly installed a new head of its public finance department, while Merrill has replaced two of the three managing directors who were put on administrative leave last year.
According to municipal-bond-finance officials, Lazard partner Michael Del Giudice was removed from his post as chief of Lazard's public finance department late last year.
Mr. Del Giudice, a former chief of staff for New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, is spending much of his time helping Lazard attorneys defend against allegations of wrongdoing by investigators in Louisiana, Boston, New York City and Washington, D.C., where Mr. Del Giudice testified before city council members on Tuesday.
Mr. Del Giudice was succeeded by John Tamagni, the partner who ran the department when Mr. Del Giudice first joined Lazard in 1985.
A Lazard spokesman declined to comment on management changes in the firm's municipal-bond business.
But Lazard insiders sought to downplay an industry perception that Mr. Del Giudice was demoted, saying he continues to function as a part-time investment banker.
But industry executives say Mr. Del Giudice fell out of favor because he was responsible for hiring a number of current and former Lazard employees whose actions in the municipal-bond business are under investigation.
Among those whom Mr. Del Giudice first brought to Lazard was Mark Ferber, the former head of Lazard's Boston office.
The Massachusetts inspector general has alleged that Lazard and Merrill had a secret fee-splitting arrangement that helped Merrill win business from a state agency that Lazard's Mr. Ferber was advising.
Both Merrill and Mr. Ferber have denied wrongdoing.
Their actions are being investigated by both the Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. Attorney's office in Boston.
Lazard is under close scrutiny by federal prosecutors in Boston, who recently sent subpoenas to about 50 other cities, including Los Angeles, Chicago and Indianapolis, where Lazard has acted as an adviser.
The District of Columbia also fired Lazard as its financial adviser last week, citing "a continuing cloud" over the firm as federal investigators look into whether Lazard and Merrill violated disclosure rules.
As reported, Lazard had a contract with Merrill to help develop the market for interest-rate swaps.
The contract provided for a flat fee, as well as fee-splitting, on certain transactions on which the two firms worked together.
Merrill paid Lazard $2.8 million in flat fees under the contract, which ended in 1992.
Lazard also is being investigated by a federal grand jury in Louisiana in connection with an allegedly secret commission-splitting arrangement that benefited First Commonwealth Securities, a politically connected firm based in New Orleans.
Lazard and CS First Boston Inc., which co-managed a $600 million bond sale, allegedly gave First Commonwealth about $240,000 to get business.
Mr. Ferber had no role in that sale, and Lazard has declined comment on the matter.
First Commonwealth representatives couldn't be reached for comment.
Meanwhile, a Merrill spokesman confirmed it has replaced two of the three executives suspended pending the completion of a federal inquiry into the sale of $2.9 billion in New Jersey Turnpike Authority Bonds.
The third executive's duties have been assumed by the head of Merrill's municipal-bond department.
David Anderson has been named acting head of Merrill's municipal-bond syndicate desk, succeeding Dennis Boyle.
Jeffrey Humber is head of Merrill's municipal business in the northeast, succeeding Dennis Baumrin.
Edward Sheridan, who has been director of Merrill's municipal-markets division since March 1992, has taken over the duties previously carried out by Marsha Eisenberg, head of Merrill's public finance group.
Mr. Boyle, Mr. Baumrin and Ms. Eisenberg remain on leave, and Merrill is continuing to pay their legal fees.
Federal prosecutors in Manhattan have been investigating Merrill's New Jersey dealings since last May.
Lazard seems to have been hurt much more than Merrill as a result of the municipal-bond inquiries.
According to the Bond Buyer, an industry publication, Merrill was the top senior manager of tax-exempt bonds last year, despite its involvement in several investigations.
However, Lazard, one of the top 10 underwriters in 1992, slipped in rank to No. 51 last year, according to the Bond Buyer.
Lazard also lost one of its most important municipal-bond bankers last week.
Frank Strom, a quantitative specialist, joined AIG Financial Products, a unit of New York-based American International Group Inc., this week.
And several Lazard bankers who were once big producers, including Richard Poirier Jr., have done little business since the investigations began, according to Lazard insiders.
