As social scientists explore the world of public policy ever more closely, they are discovering that Murphy's Law is not a joke but a dismaying truth.
When you try to use government to fix things, you don't get what you expect, you get muddles.
A good account of how this Law of Unintended Consequences works is given in "Debt and Taxes" (Random House, 337 pages, $25), a history of American fiscal policy by John H. Makin and Norman J. Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute.
The gist of their narrative is that practically all the main features of current-day American fiscal policy represent mistakes, miscalculations, and "inadvertent policy consequences."
Start with the so-called lesson of the Great Depression.
This proved that a capitalist economy was inherently self-destructive and needed the nurturing hand of government to keep it on an even keel, right?
Nonsense, say the authors.
The Depression was brought on by government's own "almost incredible steam of wrongheaded, harmful policy moves," they write, including the Fed's severe restriction of the money supply, the jacking up of tariffs, and the sharp increase of tax rates.
The Social Security system, which everyone now realizes has no social or economic justification in its present form, grew out of several follies.
One was Franklin Roosevelt's desire to set up a system "No damn politician can ever scrap."
To make his program immortal, he arranged the regressive financing that fosters the illusion that everyone has made "contributions" they are entitled to get back.
Then, in the 1970s, Congress and the president started competing over who could most sensitively adjust benefits for inflation.
Next, the idea of indexing Social Security benefits with an automatic cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) was proposed -- don't laugh -- as a way of holding down Social Security benefit increases.
But the COLA system employed a formula that overcorrected for inflation, and was adopted just before the nation plunged into the extreme inflation of the late 1970s.
What's the cause of all this mismanagement?
To some extent, it has been ignorance of elementary economic principles.
For example, the idea that taxes hurt the economy is an extremely recent perception.
In the 1930s, Roosevelt and Congress had no idea that cutting taxes might help them out of the Depression; their strategy was new taxes and higher tax rates (they raised the effective federal tax rate 700% between 1932 and 1939).
The first deliberate use of a tax cut to combat recession appears to have come in 1953, when Eisenhower was persuaded to accept one by his adviser Arthur Burns.
Another cause of policy dysfunction is confusion.
Modern government has apparently become a machine too complicated for human beings.
The authors illustrate this aimlessness by tracing the budget struggles of the early 1980s.
This, the reader will remember, was when the Reagan administration rolled up its sleeves to carry out its campaign pledge of a balanced budget in 1984 -- and got, instead, a tripling of the deficit to $175 billion.
David Stockman didn't believe tax cuts would pay for themselves, but thought he was going to get budget cuts to match them; Jack Kemp thought tax cuts would pay for themselves and that budget-cutting wasn't necessary; economic advisers Alan Greenspan and Martin Anderson predicted budget surpluses assuming no indexing of tax brackets; a shadowy female known as Rosy Scenario caressed many administration officials into a false sense of security with predictions of unrealistic 5% growth.
Over at the Federal Reserve, the money supply was being restrained, producing a recession that knocked all the projections into a cocked hat.
Even the overall size of the budget appears to respond to no deliberate cause or rational purpose.
According to the authors, it is mainly the unintended result of government buildup in war, coupled with a let's-spend-it-since-we-have-it impulse that takes over whenever politicians notice an extra dime -- or even a false projection of an extra dime -- in the Treasury.
Strangely, the authors ignore pressure-group politics and government's own progovernment propaganda machine as factors influencing the level of spending.
They also seem to ignore the underlying implications of their findings.
If government policy-making tends to produce messes, isn't the rational response to avoid using it, to de-emphasize it?
As Beltway loyalists, the authors can't bring themselves to question Washington's assumption of omnipotence.
They want us to soldier on with business-as-usual, and reject the idea that the system needs structural reform (term limits is rejected without explanation).
To demonstrate their faith in the system, they present their own shopping list of program modifications.
Their suggestions are no doubt sensible -- until you remember that every policy disaster in the past half-century started out as someone's sensible idea.
Mr. Payne, director of Lytton Research and Analysis in Sandpoint, Idaho, is the author of "Costly Returns; the Burdens of the U.S. Tax System."
