His wife thought he was crazy, rising before dawn on his day off just to see some French paintings.
Kazuhiro Arai, though, was a happy man: He was first in line for the opening of an exhibit of masterpieces assembled by an irascible, iconoclastic collector from Philadelphia named Albert C. Barnes.
"My wife doesn't understand.
These people understand," said Mr. Arai, a 43-year-old self-described salaryman, as he pointed at the 500-odd people snaking around Tokyo's National Museum of Western Art.
They were waiting for the doors to open on the only showing in Asia of "Great French Paintings From the Barnes Foundation."
"Where else but Tokyo," Barnes Foundation President Richard H. Glanton said a few days earlier, as he arrived for the swirl of festivities inaugurating the exhibition of impressionist, postimpressionist and modern French art, which runs through April 3.
Where else but Tokyo, indeed, would the largest newspaper -- the Yomiuri Shimbun, with a circulation of 14 million -- contribute $4.5 million to the foundation's gallery-renovation plans in exchange for hosting such a show?
It took a protracted court battle to get this far.
For Barnes, a chemist who made millions bottling an eye medicine, developed along with his passion for collecting an ornery disdain for the established art world.
Before he died in 1951, he stipulated that his masterworks would never leave the educational foundation he set up near Philadelphia.
But the foundation, nearly broke and saddled with a building badly in need of refurbishing, appealed to a Pennsylvania court to allow this one-time-only world tour.
Tokyo is the third -- and most profitable -- of the approved stops, along with the National Gallery of Art in Washington and the Musee d'Orsay in Paris.
In many ways, Tokyo may wind up being the most interesting, capturing a curious and deep infatuation in Japan with the paintings of Renoir, Cezanne and Matisse.
Not surprisingly, the arrival of the 80 Barnes paintings has been drenched in a marketing campaign designed to transform Barnes's most private collection into a must-see blockbuster show.
There are posters in subway trains, television commercials and the inevitable coffee mugs, T-shirts, scarves and calendars.
Yet the selling of the Barnes show has not been difficult.
Never mind that most Japanese have never heard of the late collector.
Just about anyone will tell you that Renoir is the most popular foreign artist in Japan, and impressionism the favorite style.
"We would do anything to see Renoir," said Nubuko Imamura, who along with her sister was one of the 8,000 who on opening day, Jan. 22, streamed through the museum's four galleries devoted to the lush, vibrant canvases from the Barnes.
The two sisters had taken a day off work, boarded a bullet train in their hometown of Hiroshima, and traveled for five hours just to see the show's 16 Renoirs.
"I've never seen so many beautiful things in one room," added her sister, Kyoko.
Why does Renoir hold such appeal in Japan?
"He's so warm and soft," one sister said.
"There is no Japanese painter who can paint women so softly, so beautifully," said the other.
"Japan's love affair with impressionism but total ignorance of Barnes is one of the most fascinating aspects of the whole show," says Shuichi Kato, the doyen of Japanese art historians.
To be sure, the paintings Barnes collected resonate differently in Tokyo than in Paris -- where the exhibition was in essence on home turf and drew 1.5 million visitors, the largest audience in French history.
"But the Barnes show raises different questions in Japan, like why is impressionism and then postimpressionism so popular?"
Mr. Kato asks.
The infatuation has several roots.
After the Meiji Restoration, when Japanese began venturing into Europe in the 1870s and '80s, impressionism was just beginning to appear in Paris as a challenge to the realistic style of the art academies.
"Impressionism marks the first time Japanese painters tried on a European style and European painters were influenced by Japanese style," says Mr. Kato.
Japanese painters, following the pattern of the engineers and bureaucrats who brought back what they learned in Europe, introduced their colleagues to Monet, Degas and Renoir.
They also began painting impressionist versions of Ginza street scenes and portraits of kimono-clad women.
By the early decades of the century, European impressionists had captured popular taste as well, and the infatuation has never cooled.
A large part of it, Mr. Kato says, was the subject matter: Pretty landscapes and domestic scenes made more sense to the Japanese than did Western historical or religious paintings.
The cachet of impressionism and postimpressionism took on a decidedly commercial cast during the heady, flush days of the late 1980s.
The appetite of Japanese investors for Renoirs, Monets, Cezannes and van Goghs sent the world's art prices soaring; records were regularly broken in Tokyo, London and New York.
At its height, when literally hundreds of Renoirs were snapped up by Japanese investors, some 45% of all impressionist paintings up for sale went to Japanese buyers.
The boom times are over, and the art market may have cooled here, but the current exhibition's organizers are hoping that people will still jump at this unique chance to see such key works as "The Models" by Seurat and "The Joy of Life" by Matisse.
Yomiuri Shimbun officials talk of attracting 600,000 visitors willing to pay 1,500 yen ($12.50) to see the show.
On the show's opening day, Kensuke Tanabe, an accomplished contemporary painter from Yokohama, found himself surrounded by works of Matisse he had long ago copied from books.
The irony continues, he noted: "Thanks to the Barnes collection we can see all these great paintings that Japanese investors couldn't get their hands on," he said.
Ms. Scott is a writer in Tokyo.
