The economic depression that led up to last week's decision to halve the value of the CFA African franc to 0.01 French franc was comparable in magnitude to the economic meltdown of the former Soviet Union, officials at international financial institutions say.
The adjustment was designed to correct a currency misalignment that had effectively priced the products of some of the world's poorest countries out of the world market.
And the financial pain that it is now causing will have been in vain if the governments in the CFA zone don't implement long-delayed fiscal, monetary and wage discipline, according to experts at the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
According to one internal report distributed prior to the devaluation, "If major policy reforms aren't implemented, the current depression, which is already in its eighth year, will continue for another five to 10 years."
The misalignment of the CFA franc, named after the Communaute Financiere Africaine, started in the mid-1980s and worsened steadily as France -- and the 14 CFA Zone governments -- first turned a blind eye to and then resisted an adjustment for political reasons.
The CFA franc is the common currency of Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Comores, Congo, the Ivory Coast, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo, all of which are former colonies of France or were under its influence.
The exchange rate had been unchanged since 1948 at 50 CFA francs to one French franc, making it the world's longest-lasting fixed parity.
Uncompetitive Commodities "These countries were suffocating in silence," observed a World Bank official who declined to be identified.
The relatively high-value CFA franc made their cocoa, coffee, lumber and minerals hopelessly uncompetitive compared with raw materials produced in neighboring countries.
Despite some timid attempts at internal economic adjustment, the Franc Zone economies sank increasingly deeper into depression.
By 1992, real gross national product per capita in the CFA Zone had slumped by more than 20% to $565 from the 1985 level of $721, taking into account a 3% annual population growth.
Over the 15 years through 1985, the Franc Zone had been a haven in which economies expanded at an average annual rate of between 1% and 2%, exports rose and inflation was moderate compared with neighboring countries.
But its competitiveness started to erode in 1985 because of the pincer effect of falling commodity prices and the appreciation of the French franc against the dollar.
The French unit has surged 79% against the dollar since the dollar's peak at the beginning of 1985.
Over the years, the IMF, the World Bank and many Western governments urged a devaluation.
But Franc Zone leaders were hostile to the idea because of the impact it would have on the living standards of civil servants and other elite members of society, who love their imports.
"It's not an exaggeration to say that the devaluation was resisted all these years because of the implications for the cost of Mercedes-Benz cars and French champagne," a World Bank expert said.
But when France's center-right coalition led by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur was elected in May 1993 and was faced with a gaping budget deficit, it decided the time had come to act.
IMF and World Bank teams are now hard at work in the Franc Zone countries, persuading governments to adopt painful measures that must accompany the devaluation.
France already has indicated it intends to write off the debt of the poorest Franc Zone countries and plans to give fast-disbursing aid to the neediest.
The IMF and the World Bank are assembling aid packages and are suggesting ways to strengthen economic institutions in the area.
