For a while, it seemed as if on-line service Genie had pulled a disappearing act.
Despite growing interest in on-line systems, Genie became an also-ran while America Online, CompuServe and Prodigy grabbed the spotlight.
Now, overshadowed by those larger rivals, Genie wants to use marketing magic and cast itself as a trendy alternative for hip computer users looking to have a good time on line.
"This is not your father's on-line service," proclaim Genie's splashy new magazine ads.
Touting on-line gossip and games, the advertisements promote General Electric Co.'s Genie as "the most fun you can have with your computer on."
There's just cause for an image makeover, according to on-line observers.
Last year America Online Inc.'s service passed Genie and joined H&R Block Inc.'s CompuServe and Prodigy as the industry's Big Three.
Prodigy is a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears Roebuck & Co.
While the overall industry steamed ahead, Genie treaded water, hampered by a reputation of being difficult to use and catering mostly to technically oriented subscribers.
Even one of its strengths -- a stable of glitzy interactive games pitting users against one another over the telephone lines -- contributed to an image that was, well, nerdy.
Genie hopes to turn those notions upside down by stressing entertainment, not information, as the main benefit of using a personal computer to hook up to an on-line service.
"We want to try to get across a sense of the service being fun," said John Barber, general manager of Genie.
"To some degree, our competition is cable television."
Genie marketing manager Chip Chiappone put it another way: "We're trying to show an attitude."
Genie officials said the service's low profile in the past year wasn't an accident.
Instead, they said, the service decided to refrain from targeting new subscribers while it addressed problems, including its difficult-to-use interface.
"Obviously to spend a lot of marketing dollars on a product that is not competitive is not a smart way to do business," Mr. Barber said.
During the next few months, Genie plans to offer a graphical interface program that lets members navigate around the service by using a computer mouse to point at colorful icons.
A version of the program compatible with Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh computers is to be released this month, while another version for systems using Microsoft Corp.'s Windows is slated for introduction in March.
Genie also will try to expand the appeal of its on-line games beyond a core of dedicated users.
The service offers "Air Warrior," an aerial combat simulation, along with other shoot-'em-up and role-playing games.
Genie's graphically oriented games resemble offerings from the ImagiNation Network, an on-line game venture of Sierra On-Line Inc. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
Unlike the tiny ImagiNation Network, though, Genie provides basic news, information and research services similar to those found on the Big Three services.
Steven Sieck, an analyst at Link Resources Corp. in New York, said the hidden gem of Genie's games could prove to be an important strategic asset.
"As this market broadens, the role of games and entertainment will be more and more a key driver," Mr. Sieck said.
"It's high time that Genie recognized that."
Genie won't disclose how many members it has.
Estimates put Genie's subscriber base at 400,000, with little growth in 1993.
That puts it in fourth place behind America Online, which recently announced that it passed the 600,000-user mark.
Mr. Barber was reluctant to declare the new advertisements a success after only a few weeks but did say Genie has observed an increase in new memberships.
Industry observers are less circumspect.
They say the eye-catching advertisements definitely are being noticed, although it is too early to project their eventual impact.
For now, the ads are limited to computer-oriented consumer publications.
"But we are in the process of looking at broadening it," Mr. Barber said.
If Genie succeeds in crafting a new image for itself, it should be able to prevent the gap between it and the Big Three from widening.
But don't look for an America Online-style surge in growth, Mr. Barber said.
"We're more concerned with what it takes to profitably grow," he said.
"America Online -- they've got major public relations out there for customers they don't really want."
America Online recently disclosed that its system was unable to handle a flood of new subscribers, and access to the service is being limited during peak hours.v
