The blue glow of the television draws Serbian soldiers to a corner of their dark and smoky barracks.
It is time for the evening news.
The Serbs are on the defensive, says the Muslim announcer broadcasting from the other side of the front line.
After withdrawing their heavy weapons from around Sarajevo under a NATO bombing threat, the Serbs capitulated to Russian pressure to open Tuzla airport for humanitarian flights.
The Americans have persuaded the Croats and Muslims to form a federation in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Now Washington, in a bid to preserve Bosnia, reverse the ethnic cleansing and gain overall peace, wants the Serbs to join in.
The soldiers howl in derision.
"Nonsense," says Sgt. Slobodan Radovanovic.
"Us joining the Muslims and Croats?
After two years of war?
After all the deaths?
It will never happen.
The sergeant switches the television to a channel showing Croatian music videos.
Then he announces his own news: All the diplomats and all the politicians can't put Bosnia back together again.
"We will keep our territories, we will have our state," he says.
"If they think a federation will bring peace, the best for us is to fight to the end."
The Serbs are indeed reeling under the concerted push from Washington and Russia to finally stop the Bosnian carnage.
They did buckle under when the North Atlantic Treaty Organization threatened to bomb their artillery around Sarajevo.
They yielded Tuzla airport to United Nations control and they say they are prepared to swap some land with the Muslims as demanded by international diplomats.
But a firm wall of resistance is building behind the Bosnian Serbs' front lines.
They are determined neither to surrender the state they have carved out in blood nor to be denied the victory they believe is theirs.
"Why did people die in a war if now we give away our land?" implores Milan Bogicevic, council president of Zvornik, a Serb-held city that the Muslims insist should belong to them.
"In negotiations, someone can say they will make concessions, give up territory.
But here on the ground, we say, `No way.'"
The road to peace -- extending the cease-fire in Sarajevo to all of this battle-scarred land -- literally must run along the potholed, two-lane Sarajevo-Belgrade highway, from the crippled Bosnian capital through the snow-covered mountains and hard-scrabble plains of Serb-controlled eastern Bosnia to Zvornik on the Drina River border with Serbia.
But it is 100 miles of road clogged with men in camouflage uniforms, rifles slung over their shoulders and pistols at their hips, vowing to keep fighting rather than lose what they have conquered.
In Sarajevo's Serbian barracks, the Muslims are constantly blamed for causing the war, while the Serbs pity themselves for their great suffering.
It is a view that stands in stark contrast to the almost-universal image of the Serbs as aggressors who provoked the breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991.
The Serbs are widely accused of having perpetrated atrocities in their campaign to ethnically cleanse parts of Bosnia they claim as their own.
They have attracted U.N. sanctions, loathing throughout the West and threats of military retaliation.
The soldiers here scoff at these foreign interventions, particularly the latest peace initiative.
The notion of a Muslim-Croat union after those two factions have hammered each other on the battlefields of central and southern Bosnia for so long is, they believe, unrealistic.
The true key to peace, they insist, is to recognize the results of the war and let Bosnia splinter, with the Serbs forming their own state.
"Nationalism is out of the bottle.
You can't go back in time," says Sgt. Radovanovic.
In essence, the recent diplomatic initiatives seek to erase the past two years of fighting and bring Bosnia's Muslims, Croats and Serbs back into a loosely stitched federation.
But that would also mean erasing the convictions of the Serb soldiers, which haven't eroded one bit since the first day of fighting.
"Time has shown that we can't live with the Muslims," says Sgt. Radovanovic.
"They wanted to go out of Yugoslavia and take our land with them."
If they want to go, they can, adds one of his soldiers.
"But we want to live together with other Serbs in Yugoslavia."
Beyond the barracks, civilian Serbs in Sarajevo share this attitude.
In a mortar-pocked apartment three blocks from the Miljacka River, which forms the Serb-Muslim boundary in this part of the city, Nikola Vuletic opens the shutters of his living-room window.
The 66-year-old judge points to an alcove where two other apartment houses meet.
"A good friend of ours was killed there," he laments.
"Muslim grenade."
He pulls the shutters closed, wary of snipers even during the cease-fire.
The judge's brother, Veljko, a 60-year-old mathematics professor at the nearby engineering college, comes for a visit.
The brothers, who have spent their lives in Sarajevo, say too much blood has flowed for the city, let alone Bosnia, to be whole again.
"It is possible to live together, but first we must divide," says Veljko Vuletic.
"We first must have a line that says this is mine and this is yours."
Even a U.N.-controlled "open city" wouldn't blur the mental divisions, he says.
"Today we are enemies.
How can we be friends tomorrow?"
A rabbit runs away from Bosnia toward Serbia.
Another rabbit stops him and asks why he is running.
"I heard that they are going to castrate all the oxen in Bosnia," he says.
"But you aren't an ox," says the second rabbit.
"No," says the first, "but I'm not so sure I can convince them that I'm not an ox."
Veljko Vuletic laughs sadly.
"I haven't killed anyone, not a single person," he says.
"But I'm not sure I can convince the Muslims that I'm not a killer."
From Nikola Vuletic's apartment, the road climbs a mountain range where the 1984 Olympic Games were held and leads to the village of Pale.
Once noted for its scenic views, Pale now is famous for its hard-line views.
"The history of all these peace negotiations has been a history of Serb concessions to the Muslims," says Jovan Zametica, the Bosnia Serb government spokesman.
"It is a bizarre war where the loser dictates the terms of peace.
Unless pressure is exerted on all sides, particularly on the Muslims, this war will continue."
Mr. Zametica, dressed in broad pinstripes, leans on the steps of the Panorama Hotel, where Serb politicians have set up their provisional capital.
He is awaiting the arrival of another U.N. delegation and another round of negotiations.
The Serbs, he says, will be "flexible."
But planning for a pan-Serbian state continues.
"This war has brought about new realities," the spokesman insists.
"At least 200,000 Serbs have been ethnically cleansed in central Bosnia.
They left under pressure.
Similarly, many Muslims have left their homes in eastern Bosnia.
A population exchange has taken place."
Serbia Last week , Bosnian Serbs sealed a monetary union with what remains of Yugoslavia -- the republics of Serbia and Montenegro.
The next step would be political union, the creation of a Greater Serbia.
"We've never tried to hide our desire to live in one state where all Serbs are together," says Mr. Zametica.
"Having fought for our own state, why would we go into a federation with Muslims and Croats now?"
This political thinking is infecting even popular culture.
Across Pale, the Bosnian Serbs' first television soap opera, called "Naked Life," is being filmed.
"It's about a life without luxuries," explains Slavko Milanovic, the director.
"It shows life in Pale: soldiers, refugees, lack of gasoline, NATO airplanes flying above."
"It's both a documentary and a comedy," adds scriptwriter Milan Secerovic.
"We make fun, but only about ourselves, about Serbs."
Leaving the mountains, the road straightens out on an open plain and arrives in Sokolac, which is packed with soldiers on leave during the recent lull in fighting.
With Muslims a small minority of the population before the war, this market town of 35,000 has been firmly in Serb control from the beginning.
So its men have gone elsewhere to fight.
"We are very good fighters from this area," says Capt. Djordjo Cajic, home for the first time in two years.
"We finish what we start."
The tall, 52-year-old officer has stood his ground on many of the major battlefields -- Sarajevo, Srebrenica, Gorazde, Zepa, Olovo -- and helped the Serbs come to control 70% of Bosnia.
Now, international negotiators are trying to reduce the Serb share to 50% and to put some of the big prizes in Muslim hands.
"The Muslims can make their demands, but we can't give our territory away," he says.
"The Muslims always want more.
They'll never stop until they take all of Bosnia from the Serbs.
But this is impossible.
We will never accept that."
In a week, Capt. Cajic and his men will head back to the front.
And there they will stay, he says, until the world gets the message.
"We have made our state," he says simply.
"Anyone who wants to live with us is welcome.
But for people who are our enemies, there is a courthouse and a jail."
And there he will be, too, to finish what has been started.
Before the war he was a clerk of a Sarajevo court, a job that awaits his return.
From Sokolac, the road winds through rich fields awaiting spring planting and past Radivoje Orashanin, who stands on the shoulder leaning over the engine of a big yellow truck.
The truck is full of bullet holes from the fighting that destroyed most of the buildings in Nova Kasaba, a village where Muslims outnumbered the Serbs before the war.
Today, there are only Serb refugees and stray dogs.
"The Muslims," says Mr. Orashanin, "are all in Srebrenica," the besieged enclave just over the hills.
The mechanic sends greetings to America, where his cousin lives in Chicago.
"Before the war I used to work on American machines, Caterpillars," he says proudly.
"My dream is to one day see the Grand Canyon."
And he sends a piece of advice: "It is better that Americans don't mix in our business."
Serbs, he says, won't tolerate a federation with Croats and Muslims, no matter how much pressure America exerts.
"Wishful thinking," he scoffs.
Besides, he says, Americans should be backing the Serbs.
"During World War II, we saved many American pilots shot down over Yugoslavia," he explains.
"We remember that.
Maybe Clinton forgets."
He turns back to the engine, complaining that the Serbs are alone in the world.
The truck will be running in a couple of days, he says; his nephew will use it to haul wood.
"I don't get paid for this," he adds.
"Not just because he is my relative.
But because one Serb helps another."
The Drina River appears around a bend, a beautiful blue-green stretch separating Bosnia and Serbia.
Zvornik, an industrial city, is a key crossing point, linking Serbs with Serbs.
Muslims were in a majority before the war, though Serbs dominated the surrounding area, and now Muslims insist it should be part of their state.
They say it is a key to peace.
On that the Serbs agree.
"When the Muslims accept that Zvornik is a Serbian town, that will be the end of the war," says Dragan Spasojevic, the manager of Zvornik's largest factory, which made ceramic fibers and detergent powder before the war.
"The Muslims already have industrial centers of Sarajevo, Tuzla, Zenica.
They have no reason to want Zvornik."
The main reason they do, he claims, is strategic: to cut the link between Serbs in Bosnia and Serbia, to foil the creation of a Greater Serbia.
"Zvornik is the crossroads of our territory," says Mr. Bogicevic, the city council president.
"The war has made ethnically clean areas.
Central Bosnia largely Muslim controlled is ethnically clean.
This area here is ethnically clean.
It is impossible to reverse this except through more war.
Only war could make it possible for the Muslims to come back here."
He takes a gulp of Serbia's version of Coca-Cola.
"My uncle fought against Croats and Muslims in World War II.
Now 50 years later I travel the same road, fighting the same people," he says.
"And if the world forces us to join Croats and Muslims in a federation, our children will also travel this road, fighting another war."
