Following Monday's earthquake, journalists from all over the country have been making what is becoming a regular "disaster visit" to California.
Fires, mud slides, unemployment lines, race riots, earthquakes -- what has happened to the state that once advertised itself to the world as "golden"?
There was Bryant Gumbel on "Today" wondering to California Gov. Pete Wilson if perhaps Los Angeles is a city cursed -- as in the Charlton Heston Bible movies.
Come to California and discover gold!
Come to California and get on "Wheel of Fortune"!
Come to California and become a movie star!
Come to California and bleach your hair, get a divorce, and change your name!
From its American beginnings, California was advertised by real-estate agents and businessmen as a comic destination.
In a nation that regarded land as the metaphor for possibility, California represented the extreme possibility of America, the last place to start anew.
Golden California was thus not created from the dark despair of foreign immigrants but from some native American ambition to re-create.
The most famous Californians have been "internal immigrants," from places like Brooklyn and Iowa and Oklahoma.
Lucille Ball, Walt Disney, the Joad family, Daryl F. Zanuck.
How could tragedy attach to such a place?
There were earthquakes and other natural calamities in California, but Californians chose to see in the rich soil and cloudless sky a benevolent Nature.
If today some Californians sense a biblical curse, in past decades California had written tragedy out of the state's script.
The American Protestant version of the place has been most glamorous for its comic faith in historical discontinuity and individualism.
(Regardless of who your parents were, or your past, you can be anything you want in California.)
Yet this comic vision is gradually darkening.
As early as the 1860s, when California was still mostly silent, some eccentric Californians were sounding a tragic intuition.
John Muir, the state's first environmentalist, stood on the Marin headlands, amid dripping pines, and announced that the American dream had reached a point of finitude (the coastline).
His message traveled west to east, back to the crowded cities of the East Coast: We have run out of land in California.
The American dream has limits.
But who was willing to listen?
Later, odd voices in California detected a darkness -- Los Angeles clothed in bright light and deep shadows, noir L.A.
The most distinctive literary genre of California in this century became the mystery novel.
(A crime has been committed in paradise -- who is the criminal?)
But the greater drama of California was still comic.
Californians had the two-car garage and four-lane freeway, requiring no tolls.
Then L.A. got too crowded and people started talking about North County, San Diego.
Or they headed into the desert.
For several generations, there was land enough in California, land for separate houses, separate patches of lawn, winking swimming pools, bigger and newer malls.
Only recently have Californians begun to speak of the crowd.
East Coast journalists who have been making their disaster visits have typically interviewed the blond divorcee who has had it with L.A. There's too much crime, too much traffic, too much pollution.
She's leaving -- she says this between drags on her cigarette -- leaving for Colorado or some place like that.
The irony, of course, is that while native Californians are talking about leaving, the state remains the destination of choice for foreign immigrants.
The irony is that the foreign-born are becoming the new optimists now.
They have been lured to California, as have Americans before them, by the lure of the Protestant promise of new beginnings.
As much as anyone, they are bewildered by the shabbiness of the state they confront.
The Korean grocery store owner remembers how, in the movies, everyone was blond and drove a convertible.
"The only people I've seen since I came to Los Angeles are brown and black," she says bemused.
But still the immigrants come, even as a sadness fills native-born Californians.
The new sadness: Do you know where I spent the Dia de los Muertos this past November?
(The Dia de los Muertos is the night when, traditionally, Indian Catholics in Mexico go to the cemetery and drink and eat amid family tombstones.)
This November, I was at the Palm Springs Museum, in the Annenberg Auditorium, on the Dia de los Muertos.
Palm Springs, traditionally, has been a place in California where people do not die; they "pass away."
And people don't get old in Palm Springs; they get a face lift.
But there we were, golden Californians, on Nov. 2, behaving very much like Mexican peasants, brooding over death.
The immigrants, meanwhile, are becoming the new Puritans of California.
They work all the time.
Asians are resented for working too hard at UCLA.
And at a time when Richard Gere has become California's most famous Buddhist, Spanish is becoming the new language of Protestantism in California.
The other day in Tijuana I met three Mexican evangelicals who told me they were headed north to convert California back to its Protestant roots.
Forty years ago, Octavio Paz, the great poet-essayist of Mexico, remarked in "The Labyrinth of Solitude" how much Los Angeles looked like a Mexican city.
Mr. Paz saw the Mexican face of L.A. in the city's "delight in decorations, carelessness and pomp, negligence, passion and reserve."
The Mexican city, he thought, must be at odds with the North American world of "precision and efficiency."
Forty years later, it seems to me, rather, the other way around.
Everywhere today there are Mexicans, crowded at bus stops, working in restaurants, in factories, gardening.
The Mexicans add a sobriety to this city, famous for leisure; the Mexicans are busy -- legally or illegally working.
There are times, indeed, they seem out of place in Los Angeles for working so hard in the golden state.
Immigrants will become the new movie stars of Los Angeles, and the new gangsters and the new cops.
The golden state will give way to something more dusty, a place more foreign than we had ever imagined California to be.
This week, Los Angeles seems so dusty and worn, old as only a city of busted new buildings can look.
The freeways are broken.
(The city's famous freedom is jeopardized.)
Two years ago, when black L.A. was in a rage after the verdicts in the Rodney King beating case, Latin American immigrants joined in the chaos.
As the crowds climbed in and out of the broken minimalls, I thought then to myself that L.A. looked like a Third World city.
Then, as now, after the Malibu fires and the lines of unemployed engineers, after the freeways have been damaged and the water turned impure, I think a Mexican sort of redemption awaits the shabby city.
Two years ago, golden L.A., the city famous as a noncity of separate suburbs and discrete freeway exits, was forced to realize -- in a night of terror -- that the city was whole.
The dangerous part of town was not, after all, so very distant from the safe part of town.
What happened to black kids in South Central implicated white kids in Santa Monica -- a Mexican knowledge.
Mexicans drink dark beer.
Mexican men sing when they get drunk.
Mexican men and women get up in the early morning and work, because they know that life is work.
And hard.
L.A. is becoming a working town, like Chicago or Seoul or Mexico City.
The new immigrants may inject an optimism into California, but never again will this state be able to resume its postwar glibness.
Los Angeles is discovering its tragic role.
L.A. is destined to become a city, and California is destined to become a state, where people are aware of one another (crowded together) and aware of limits and an unreliable Nature.
California is becoming very much the place the Spanish priests envisioned when, at the founding of the city of the angels, they came north from Mexico and brought with them images of a bleeding Christ and their consolation, community.
Mr. Rodriguez, an editor of the Pacific News Service, is the author of "Days of Obligation: An Argument With My Mexican Father" (Viking-Penguin).
