Pfizer Inc. reported surprisingly weak earnings and sales growth for the fourth quarter, an indication that even the strongest of drug companies is being overpowered by upheaval in the health-care industry.
Net income grew an anemic 3.6% to $288.9 million, or 90 cents a share, from $278.8 million, or 83 cents a share, a year earlier.
The 1992 period included a $15.3 million nonrecurring pretax gain.
The earnings growth was well below analysts expectations.
Sales rose just 2.2% to $1.99 billion from $1.95 billion.
Pfizer's stock dropped $5, or 7.4%, to $62.875.
Moreover, the disappointing results shook the entire drug group, pulling down share prices of other drug companies.
Especially hard hit was Schering-Plough Corp., which was also viewed as one of the companies best positioned to weather the industry's turmoil.
Its stock fell $1.875, or 2.8%, to $64.375.
"Since Pfizer was the first major drug company to report its results, investors began to question whether other companies would generate negative surprises," said Ronald Nordmann, an analyst at PaineWebber, noting he didn't believe the earnings disappointment portended surprises at other pharmaceuticals companies.
Until yesterday, analysts had viewed Pfizer as protected from the market pressure hitting other drug companies because its bevy of new products was expected to sustain the company's strong revenue growth.
The theory seemed to hold up in the past year as Pfizer continued to report strong earnings gains while profit growth of other drug companies sharply slowed.
Hemant Shah, an independent analyst, said, "This is a jolt because it shows the worst isn't behind us.
The worst is just beginning."
Peter G. Tombros, Pfizer vice president of investor relations, played down the results as an aberration caused by a negative currency impact and wholesaler buying patterns.
"We don't think it's indicative of what to expect for the future," he said.
Senior executives weren't available to comment.
Other analysts said they were inclined to believe the company's argument that the quarter's results don't reflect the start of a downward trend for Pfizer, but blamed the company for failing to provide better guidance to analysts.
They noted that per-share earnings from ongoing operations grew a respectable 15%, although growth was below analysts' consensus forecast of 22%.
Mr. Tombros said analysts didn't appear to have anticipated the currency effect, which reduced sales three percentage points.
Sales were also hurt by changes in a consumer health-care trade promotion and less buying by wholesalers, things that also apparently escaped analysts' attention.
Some analysts said they were surprised by sales declines in the hospital, animal health, consumer health care and food science businesses.
New product sales also were somehat below what analysts expected.
But the company countered that four of its newer pharmaceutical products generated an aggregate sales increase of 71%, driving total pharmaceutical sales up 6%.
Accounting for much of the shortfall in analyst expectations was an 11% decline in sales of the company's biggest product, Procardia XL, a heart drug.
A pivotal question surrounding Pfizer's outlook is whether "Procardia XL's decline was an aberration or more profound change," said D. Larry Smith, an analyst at Hambrecht & Quist in New York.
He noted that while sales were down, prescription trends were flat, bolstering the company's argument that wholesaler buying patterns were behind the decline.
Mr. Nordmann offered another explanation for Pfizer's disappointing results.
"I believe that Pfizer intentionally managed down earnings because they want to be politically correct in front of the initiation of congressional debate on the Clinton health-care package," he said, noting that William C. Steere, Pfizer chairman and chief executive, is chairman of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association.
A Pfizer spokesman denied Mr. Nordmann's theory, saying, "Pfizer doesn't manage its earnings.
Pfizer manages its business."
Mr. Shah believes the problems that affected Pfizer in the latest quarter will continue.
"The pharmaceutical market is deteriorating across the board," Mr. Shah added.
There's very little unit sales growth of prescription drugs, he said, and drug companies have to offer discounts of 10% to 25% to big managed-care buyers, who control a large and growing portion of the market.
Moreover, many of Pfizer's products, including some of its biggest, face strong competition from generic or other branded drugs, he said.
He predicted weak fourth-quarter results from other drug companies.
For the full year, Pfizer's net income fell 19% to $657.5 million, or $2.05 a share, on a sales increase of 3.4% to $7.48 billion.
The results included a $525 million restructuring charge reported in the third quarter.
