Industrial output continued to rise last month, but at a much slower pace than at the end of last year.
The government blamed the slowdown on wintry weather and the Los Angeles earthquake.
The Federal Reserve said industrial production increased 0.5% in January, after climbing 0.9% in December and 0.8% in November.
While that represents a significant slowing, January's growth is hardly anything to sneeze at.
If output were to increase at the same pace in each month of 1994, the rise for the full year would exceed 6% -- more than the 4.1% it climbed in 1993 and far more than most economists anticipate.
The weather did, however, cause big shifts in the makeup of production last month, shifts that aren't likely to be sustained.
As many households and employers struggled to stay warm, for instance, output at utilities surged 3.5%, compared with a 0.9% rise in December.
In addition, many factories were forced to close because of the weather and the earthquake.
Manufacturing production rose only 0.2% last month, compared with an average monthly gain of 0.9% in the last quarter of 1993.
Analysts said they expect the output mix to turn back around in coming months, as manufacturing activity continues to expand and the weather warms up.
Production of business equipment, led by computers, continued to surge in January, despite the weather.
"Capital investment is really supporting the whole industrial group," said Thomas Runiewicz, industrial economist for the WEFA Group in suburban Philadelphia.
Production of cars was also up at a good clip during January, though not as strong as in other recent months.
Because of the big increase in demand, utilities were using 90.1% of their capacity last month, up from 87.1% in December.
Capacity utilization at factories slipped a bit, while overall industry use moved up slightly to 83.1% from 82.9%.
Separately, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said updated seasonal-adjustment factors for the consumer price index will lessen the index's earlier tendency to show larger changes in the early months of the year and smaller changes later in the year.
However, the new factors, which were applied to revised 1993 data released yesterday, still produce larger increases in the beginning of the year than at the end, though to a lesser extent.
The changes didn't affect the 2.7% overall increase in consumer prices for the year.
The new factors will be used in the January price report to be released tomorrow and for the remainder of 1994.
The preceding five years of consumer price figures are also being revised.
Figures in the industrial production report have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here is a summary of the Federal Reserve Board's report on industrial production in January.
The figures are seasonally adjusted. the 1987 average.
