I'll admit it, I've been lost.
In fact I've been lost several times, though most of those times I was what the macho call just a little turned around.
Getting found just meant a longer walk than I'd expected.
But then there was the time I got really lost deep in the wilderness of South Dakota's Black Hills.
It was supposed to be a simple hike above camp, but I took a turn down the spine of the wrong ridge.
Then, a tumble sent my compass flying into the increasing darkness, but I wasn't worried.
Believing that camp was just below the next point, I walked on.
But rather than the warm glow of the lantern-lit tents, I saw nothing but an endless procession of steep, timbered hillsides for as far as my squinting eyes could see.
I sat in that one spot for two hours, shivering and cursing myself for not coming better prepared.
Finally a shout and the beam of a flashlight on an adjoining ridge led me to a friend who'd diagnosed my predicament.
The memories and fears of being "might as well sit down 'til somebody finds me" kind of lost will never be forgotten.
Thankfully, they also need never again be repeated.
No, I haven't hired a full-time guide, confined all of my trips to my backyard or taken lessons from some wilderness tribesman still in touch with the land.
Instead, I'm staying found by simply consulting an instrument that's no larger than a dollar candy bar.
Though the package may appear small and simple, the technology that's within a Global Positioning System is huge and literally out of this world.
"It all began as a Defense Department idea conceived in the '70s," said Rick Sill, vice president of sales, Magellan Systems Corp., San Dimas, Calif.
"They were looking for a world-wide navigational system that could tell our armed forces where they were or get them where they wanted to go, 24 hours a day."
According to Mr. Sill, whose company is a pioneer in the new technology, Congress agreed to the high-dollar funding if the private sector, as well as the military, could also benefit from the monumental investment.
Two dozen satellites were eventually launched to circle the globe in crisscrossing patterns that leave all portions of the planet covered at all times.
It's from these that all GPS units earn their keep.
"Basically all of the satellites are transmitting signals," said Mr. Sill.
"Whenever you turn on a {GPS} unit, it takes at least three sets of readings, triangulates them and figures out your exact location on the planet."
These units, which were a godsend in the flat brown sand monotony of Desert Storm, can be surprisingly exact.
"There are some units that can get you to within less than 10 meters {33 feet} anywhere in the world," said Mr. Sill.
"In some extreme cases we're talking accuracy within the millimeter range.
But in terms of general consumer use you're looking at within 100 meters.
That's pretty darn close. . . . people should be able to find whatever they've been looking for within that small of an area."
And cost has come down significantly in the past few years, making the units more affordable to consumers.
Once priced between $3,000 and $4,000, a good handheld unit now costs about $500.
In addition to Magellan, Panasonic Co. and Trimble Navigation make consumer units.
Most are available from outdoor catalogs such as Cabela's (1-800-237-4444) or Gander Mountain (1-800-558-9410).
Had I such an instrument on that wretched Dakota eve, getting back to camp would have been the easiest of tasks for a GPS.
"All you would do is take a reading at camp and the unit would have told you your exact longitude and latitude (sort of a global Second and Main)," said Mr. Sill, himself an avid GPS user.
"Then you could have labeled it, committed it to the unit's memory -- it can hold 100 such locations -- and then recalled it when it was time to head back."
The wondrous little screen on the unit would have displayed a small arrow to point me in the right direction.
In addition, it also displays elevation, traveling speed and approximate distance from camp.
Had I desired to make returning really easy, I could have set the unit to take automatic readings every 10 minutes.
When I had reached the farthest point of my trek, I could have punched a few keys and the unit would have traced the readings back to camp, as if it were following electronic breadcrumbs.
Such "get you back to where you came from" service can be invaluable when conditions are poor.
"We've heard from some very serious outdoorsmen, people who knew the area like the back of their hand, rave about the units," said Mr. Sill.
"They've been up on a mountain and had a dense fog or blinding snow come in all of a sudden and they couldn't see.
All they had to do was follow the GPS and they got back fine.
Without it they'd have spent the night up on the mountain."
GPS is also a great companion on days when everything is going well.
It remembers where you've been on every hike you leave in its memory.
So years later, it lets you retrace your exact steps to that pristine meadow or breathtaking mountaintop.
Hunters will also quickly be able to locate stands or prime ambush sights in the predawn darkness.
No matter what their field of interest, outdoorsmen will even be able to find places they've never seen.
A good topographical map plus a little figuring with a GPS could quickly lead someone to the crest of a distant ridge, a beaver pond or lake.
Information can also be shared much more easily than ever before.
"If you're in a wilderness area, like someplace in Yosemite, and come across something really special that you'd like friends to see, you can now tell them how to find it," said Mr. Sill.
"Rather than take them there yourself, all you have to do is call them, give them the coordinates and they'll find it.
You could even arrange to meet them there, coming in from two different directions.
A lot of people are having fun just trekking about with the units."
GPS units have also found their way into the hands of water adventurers in inland rowboats and roving open-water cruisers, who have found uses for the technology that go beyond just returning to port.
"I think you're going to see a dramatic increase in fishing success for the average fisherman because of GPS," said Mike Hayden, president and chief executive of the American Sport Fishing Association.
"I was just down in Florida and we were able to locate a structure {a known underwater habitat} 20 miles offshore.
The GPS got us within just 600 feet.
We located that particular structure, fished it and caught fish."
According to Mr. Hayden, weekend freshwater anglers will benefit from a GPS even in familiar waters.
Should they troll or drift over a productive spot, readings can be taken and later re-found.
Such technology also allows anglers to find such underwater hotspots at night or later in the year, through ice, when pack boots and parkas have replaced tennis shoes and T-shirts.
A widely respected and fanatical sportsman, Mr. Hayden noted that GPS units could even change the vocabulary of the outdoors.
"As the equipment spreads and the number of users increase, things could start to sound a little different around baitshops and coffeehouses," chuckled Mr. Hayden.
"Fishermen might simply say they caught a mess of fish over on some longitude and latitude location rather than the old standby descriptions."
Hopefully such lingo will work its way into camping as well.
Maybe then my companions will start referring to a particular Black Hills peak by its coordinates, rather than as "that silly little ridge above camp where Pearce got lost."
Mr. Pearce is an outdoors writer in Newton, Kan.
