Dallas -- When Samuel Barber's "Vanessa" premiered at the Met in 1958, it was already a period piece.
Last week, the Dallas Opera, in a co-production with the Washington Opera, gave the Pulitzer Prize-winning work a new hearing, under the superb musical direction of Steven Mercurio, and a visual facelift at the hands of stage director Michael Kahn and set designer Michael Yeargan.
Paradoxically, "Vanessa" now seems both more dated and more powerful.
With a libretto by Gian Carlo Menotti, Barber's tale of repression, endurance, and sacrifice is a dramatic and musical hodgepodge, which must have titillated and comforted its original audience in equal measure.
Its plot reduces to a fairytale nugget: An abandoned woman locks herself into a 20-year seclusion but finds happiness when her former lover's son comes and takes her away.
Vanessa lives in isolation with her mother, the old baroness, who has not spoken to her daughter since she ruined her life by shutting herself off from the world, and with her 20-year-old niece Erika, who mysteriously but conveniently seems to have no parents of her own.
The young man, named Anatol like his late father, comes to visit the fabled woman he has heard his father speak of.
On his first night he seduces and inevitably impregnates the niece, but when she demands to know whether he loves her, he replies, in the "modern" way: that he cannot promise anything eternal.
In a gesture of sacrifice she allows her enamored aunt to marry Anatol and to go off with him to Paris.
Having successfully aborted her child by rushing out into the wintry weather, Erika will remain in the country house, taking her aunt's place in the darkening hall.
"Now," she announces stoically, "it is my turn to wait," as the curtain falls.
Dramatically and musically the opera lives, like its heroine, in the past.
Set in a nameless northern country in 1905, vague with regard to specifics of character, motivation and plot, "Vanessa" also rings with the harmonies and melodic impulses of Puccini and Strauss, the two greatest 20th-century composers of music for the female voice.
Whatever its dramatic flaws and inconsistencies, the opera remains a singer's dream work, with famous set pieces, including Erika's first-scene aria "Must the winter come so soon," Vanessa's great greeting to her mysterious suitor, "Do not utter a word, Anatol," and the opera's concluding quintet.
Each of the four main characters gets several chances to shine individually and in ensemble.
Barber wrote the title role with Callas in mind, but the soprano, sensing that Erika was the greater part, declined, and, at the premiere, the cast (heard on the only recording of the opera) included Eleanor Steber as Vanessa, Rosalind Elias as the niece, Nicolai Gedda as Anatol and Giorgio Tozzi as the fatherly local doctor.
Steber set the standard for all subsequent performances.
In Dallas, Ashley Putnam had glamour and vocal power, but she lacked the tenderness that must be part of Vanessa's character.
Diction was a problem throughout much of the performance.
Whether this was due to the singers, the acoustical inequities of Dallas's grotesque Music Hall, or to the occasional linguistic peculiarities of Menotti's libretto, is uncertain.
Thank goodness for supertitles.
Callas was, as often, right: Erika can threaten to walk away with the show.
She is the one character who changes during the course of the drama.
The young mezzo Melanie Sonnenberg convincingly portrayed Erika's growth from ingenue to Wounded Woman to the reincarnation of her aunt with considerable persuasiveness.
Michael Rees Davis, no match for Nicolai Gedda, often manifested a strident tone, but in his love duet with Vanessa managed to persuade us as well as her of his passion.
Veteran Richard Stilwell sang the old doctor with tender mellowness.
Since one theme of the opera is historical repetition, it was appropriate that Rosalind Elias returned to do the old baroness, that stern "silent woman" who spends most of the opera sitting impassively and glaring menacingly at her younger relatives.
In some ways the most impressive performance was that of the American conductor Steven Mercurio, who transformed his orchestra into a strong symphonic ensemble and brought out those colors in the score that make it sound like a great tone poem.
Michael Kahn, artistic director of Washington's Shakespeare Theatre, devised a production that succeeded dramatically at every moment except one: Erika uncovering a portrait of the young, beautiful Vanessa.
Seeing the picture steels Erika in her decision to cede Anatol to her aunt, who has "for so little had to wait for so long."
But poorly placed, the picture was invisible to half the audience, who had to guess at Erika's provocation for her climactic decision.
Exactly four years ago, it looked as though the Dallas Opera was suffering from more than the economic doldrums wrought in the local economy.
With the retirement of longtime music director and co-founder Nicola Rescigno, the company found itself musically as well as financially in the red.
Texans thrive on adversity.
Today, under Plato Karayanis, the opera is financially solvent and in the midst of an artistic rebirth.
Graeme Jenkins assumes the position of music director next year.
"Vanessa" comes toward the end of an imaginatively daring season ("Flying Dutchman" rounds it out from Jan. 27 to Feb. 5), the highlights of which included Cecilia Bartoli in a clever, Magritte-inspired staging of the "The Barber of Seville" conducted by Richard Bonynge , and Francesca Zambello's stunning production of Leos Janacek's "Jenufa" with the radiantly expressive Renee Fleming.
Mr. Spiegelman writes about the arts from Dallas.
