Woodward & Lothrop Inc., the Washington, D.C., department-store chain owned by real estate magnate A. Alfred Taubman, filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code.
Saddled with more than $500 million in debt stemming from Mr. Taubman's purchase of the company and the later acquisition of John Wanamaker stores, the privately held chain -- known as Woodies to its patrons and suppliers -- had struggled with the threat of bankruptcy for several years in increasingly competitive markets.
But in recent months, Woodward & Lothrop was hampered by increasingly nervous suppliers that weren't delivering full shipments and were demanding prepayment for goods shipped, if they shipped at all.
The 113-year-old retailer filed yesterday in bankruptcy court in New York, along with its parent company, Woodward & Lothrop Holdings Inc.
In its filing, the retailer reported total assets of $608 million and total liabilities of $659 million.
Under Chapter 11, a company is protected from its creditors while it devises a plan to repay debt; it continues to operate.
Woodward & Lothrop operates 16 department stores in the Washington and Baltimore areas and owns John Wanamaker, which operates 15 department stores in the Philadelphia area.
Woodward & Lothrop also said Arnold H. Aronson, its chairman and chief executive since 1989, stepped down Friday.
He was succeeded by Robert B. Mang, 48 years old, who was president and chief operating officer.
Mr. Aronson yesterday said he had attempted a management-led buyout of the company in recent months with unnamed "financial partners" but that attempt was unsuccessful at reaching an agreement.
Mr. Aronson, a 59-year-old industry veteran who has headed other retail chains -- he was former chief executive of the Bullock's and Saks Fifth Avenue chains -- said it was his personal decision not to run the company if it filed for bankruptcy-law protection.
Though industry analysts and consultants had speculated Woodward & Lothrop would make a bankruptcy filing, the chain as late as Friday had said that bankruptcy was just one of several "options" for a highly leveraged chain that had built up burdensome debt from past acquisition costs.
Mr. Taubman, the Bloomfield Hills, Mich.-based real estate developer, is the chain's largest unsecured creditor in bankruptcy.
The company said Mr. Taubman has loaned the company $158 million over several years in the form of credit lines and has participated in bank credit lines of $55 million.
Woodward & Lothrop's debt began building when Mr. Taubman acquired Woodward & Lothrop in 1984 for $230 million, or $60.50 a share.
Two years later, Mr. Taubman through Woodies acquired John Wanamaker for $183 million from Carter Hawley Hale.
In 1988, there were published reports Mr. Taubman had put Woodies up for sale.
In an attempt to rejuvenate the chain, Mr. Taubman in 1989 installed new management, picking Mr. Aronson to head the chain, and started a capital-expenditure program for upgrading stores, spending $200 million over five years -- adding to the company's debt.
Woodward & Lothrop is owned by Taubman Investment Co., a private investment company owned by Mr. Taubman, but isn't connected to his Taubman Centers Inc., which owns interests in regional shopping malls.
In a statement yesterday, Mr. Taubman said that as the chain's operations improved in recent years, he had hoped the company would have been able to attract the capital necessary to restructure its debt.
He said he supported management's decision to file for bankruptcy-court protection and its plans to emerge from reorganization as soon as possible.
Mr. Taubman, chairman of Sotheby's Holdings Inc. and owner of other diverse businesses, added that the filing will not "affect my personal and other business interests, all of which are doing well."
Company executives describe the chain's operations as "healthy," its stores profitable, and the company producing a "positive cash flow" before interest payments.
For the fiscal year ended in January 1993, Woodward & Lothrop had total sales of $855 million and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of $38 million, a 37% increase from a year earlier.
Management expects sales and earnings in the current fiscal year to be about even with a year earlier.
Woodward's Mr. Mang noted that the chain was stuck with yearly interest expenses of more than $50 million.
Mr. Mang said the high interest payments and difficulty getting full shipments from skittish suppliers "put us in a very difficult position competitively."
The company said the bankruptcy filing will allow it to restructure its debt.
The merchant said business will continue as usual, and that no stores would be closed nor employees laid off because of the filing.
Several suppliers told the company yesterday that they will make shipments to the chain.
Woodward & Lothrop said it received commitments for $300 million in debtor-in-possession financing from New York based CIT Group, an asset-based lender.
DIP financing, which retailers typically obtain when operating under bankruptcy-law protection, should allow the chain to guarantee the payment for shipment of goods.
