Out of the rubble of World War II, the Japanese people worked and sacrificed for 45 years to build the world's second-richest nation.
They then turned around last weekend and thumbed their noses at the whole class of politicians who'd presided over this economic miracle.
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, a functional nobody until a few months ago, suddenly is more popular than Madonna.
The Tokyo stock market jumped a stunning 7.8% on the first trading day after his reform compromise passed.
These events are something that the rest of Asia will be inspecting closely, for they bear directly on the question of the hour: Can growth economics be divorced from democratization?
The short answer from Tokyo seems to be a resounding negative.
The longer answer requires an excursion into economic history, with the relevant precedent being another land of industrious souls, Britain in the 19th century.
Like Japan until last Saturday, the British elite had tied itself to interest groups whose idea of the public good was increasingly at odds with the thinking of the towns and emerging commercial classes.
Whatever their other merits, the existing batch of politicians had become a stumbling block to further growth, and it took a major revamping of the voting system to move them out of the way.
The parallel to Mr. Hosokawa's rejiggering of Japan's electoral system was the British Parliament's Great Reform of 1832.
It doubled at a stroke the number of urbanites entitled to vote, and did away with the notorious "rotten boroughs," which had allowed many a rural grandee to nominate and elect his own member of Parliament.
One lord of the manor regularly sent his retainers out in a rowboat to select a member for a district that had been submerged for centuries.
In similar fashion, Mr. Hosokawa's reforms are aimed at reducing the electoral clout of Japan's rice farmers, who effectively enjoy three times as much representation in the Diet as the average city dweller.
The reforms are also supposed to clip the wings of the shady fund-raisers who have long financed the campaigns of the Liberal Democratic Party.
Even though it was only a watered-down version that finally squeaked through, the pressure for change will persist.
Both sets of reforms tended to transfer power from protectionist interests to consumerist interests.
The British had thinkers like Richard Cobden and David Ricardo, who elaborated theories of free trade and comparative advantage to explain why this was good.
Ideas matter in times like these, not least because they help to focus resentment constructively.
Even so, the average 19th-century Brit didn't need a professor to explain why mercantilist legislation cut into his standard of living.
It was no accident that the enfranchisement of urban voters was soon followed by repeal of the Corn Laws, which had kept the price of bread high in order to fatten the purses of Britain's landed gentry.
The Japanese take justifiable pride in seeing the world fill up with Sonys and Toyotas and other excellent products from their workshops.
Yet Japanese consumers have every right to be discontented.
Traveling abroad in growing numbers, they have discovered that they do indeed live in rabbit hutches, at least compared with the residents of other industrialized countries, and pay higher prices for Sonys and Toyotas than foreigners do.
The electoral power of the rural districts does more than all the sanctimony spouted by the rice lobby to explain why Japanese housewives still shell out four times the world price for rice.
That's what comes of a political system tilted toward protecting producers from consumers.
True, the Japanese approach allowed some workers to land lifetime tenure at big companies, and it allowed Japan to rack up huge trade surpluses, which seemed to represent some kind of insurance against the world again shutting Japan off from raw materials.
These no doubt did much to appease the pervasive insecurity of the generation that survived the war and subsequent deprivation.
But having grown richer and more secure, the Japanese today are looking beyond mere security and beginning to seek the opportunity to live more fully.
When the psychology of a nation shifts in response to changing material circumstances, it's the job of the political system to accommodate evolving attitudes.
The old rascals must go and make way for new rascals who are more in tune with the times, even if it sometimes takes a political revolution to persuade the old crowd that its days are over.
Japan and Britain at least had democratic institutions in place when this challenge came.
Other Asian countries and leaders, especially those that still entertain the notion that their people can get rich without also getting the vote, ought to ponder the lesson.
