Did Lloyd's of London knowingly play down the risks of asbestos and pollution liability policies that it was underwriting in the 1980s, while steering new investors into these overtly risky insurance lines?
New evidence suggests it may have.
Much of the Lloyd's saga is known.
In the 1980s, as the insurer rapidly opened its once-exclusive market to new investors, or "names," thousands rushed in to get a piece of the action.
But instead of reaping rich premiums, the new names often found themselves blindsided by enormous claims from risky policies covering U.S. pollution and asbestos damages.
The tales of widespread financial ruin that followed are well documented.
What is less well known is that losses at Lloyd's, already totaling more than #5.5 billion ($8.2 billion) for the years 1988 to 1990, are poised to balloon, fed by still mounting asbestos and pollution claims.
As investors delve into the reasons for their crushing losses, there is growing evidence that Lloyd's insiders, the so-called working names -- investors, brokers, agents and underwriters -- had early warnings of the looming disaster, warnings they did not share with prospective investors.
In hindsight, the 1980s are beginning to look increasingly like an era when Lloyd's brought in new investors to take on hugely expensive risks from its more established names.
U.S. lawyers provided working names with evidence of the worsening asbestos situation more than a dozen years ago.
The Chicago firm of Lord Bissell & Brook, for example, recommended in a 1981 letter to Lloyd's "substantial reserve changes" because of "huge increases in the number of asbestos claims."
The letter added that eight to #11 million U.S. workers had been exposed to the insulation material, a suspected carcinogen.
A 1982 letter from London accountants Neville Russell to the manager of Lloyd's audit department held out the prospect of huge claims from asbestosis, concluding it was "unable to quantify Lloyd's final liability with a reasonable degree of accuracy."
Such opinions, and correspondence surrounding them, are only gradually seeping into the public domain -- and coming to the attention of those trying to understand their Lloyd's losses.
But some 17,000 current and former names have formed action groups to protect their interests, and an increasing number are resorting to legal action against their agents at Lloyd's, alleging negligence.
Parliament granted Lloyd's immunity from lawsuits in 1982, partly because of its reputation for effective self-regulation.
But investors are attempting to get a case heard in either a U.S. or European court.
The Writs Response Group, representing as many as 2,500 rebellious names, plans to seek a ruling from the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg that Lloyd's business practices violate European Union competition laws.
It was in asbestos, in particular, that long-established Lloyd's names seem to have steered away from insurance lines that were peddled aggressively to newcomers.
From 1984 to 1988, well after the first warnings from lawyers and accountants were received, market agents often ushered new investors directly into some of the riskiest of Lloyd's more than 200 syndicates, correspondence and litigation indicates.
The new names often could not get into the syndicates they desired, as these already were filled by established names, who make up about 20% of the current total of 18,000 names.
And in many cases, the loss-ridden names claim, they were persuaded by Lloyd's agents to join syndicates where the risks were never made clear.
Lloyd's officials say the new names were aware of the extra risks, accepted their unlimited liability and made money in earlier years.
For Lloyd's, the situation is likely to get worse before it gets better.
In its search for new capital, the insurance market opened up to corporate investors last year, attracting a relatively modest #1.5 billion in new money.
The rating concern Standard & Poor's Corp. has declined to rate Lloyd's as an investment, and U.S. investors in general have shied away.
Lloyd's has never had consolidated numbers for its liabilities, but Chatset, a London-based consultancy and publishing business, estimates that the market would need an additional #5 billion to #8.7 billion to close out existing claims, and that this gap is still growing.
Part of the problem is that as the riskiest policies sought more reinsurance, and brokers sliced off a percentage of reinsurance premiums, reserves for paying out claims were being continually diminished.
On top of that, "a lot of names are deciding to draw a line," refusing to pay or contesting claims on their assets, says Richard Slowe, a lawyer at S.J. Berwin & Co. who acts for these investors.
Thus, the market itself "is going to have to fund claims during this interregnum," Mr. Slowe adds.
Lloyd's Defends Itself Robin Jackson, Lloyd's market expert on asbestos, says accusations that insiders had better knowledge about asbestos liabilities aren't realistic.
If Lloyd's participants had really believed the worst early prognostications about asbestos produced in the 1970s and early 1980s, "we'd have closed down the industry and gone off and hit golf balls," he says.
As for the losses suffered by names, Mr. Jackson says: "We pay all our profits out, therefore we have to call our losses in."
The problem is that "names hadn't built up enough reserves," Mr. Jackson adds, indicating that more established names in risky syndicates have had years of good premium income.
In common with many at Lloyd's, he strongly criticizes the huge amounts of insurance that are being used to pay U.S. legal fees -- some say 30% to 40% of total claims are going to lawyers' fees -- in disputes about asbestos and pollution litigation.
One U.S. lawsuit, C.R. Leslie vs. Lloyd's of London, filed in state court in Houston in 1991, sheds some light on the claims of the newer names.
In the suit, Mr. Leslie, a Texas resident, states he signed an underwriting-agency agreement with a Lloyd's managing agency, R.W. Sturge.
That agency in 1976 and 1977 arranged for Mr. Leslie to participate in six of its syndicates and three others managed by R.H.M. Outhwaite and Posgate & Denby Agencies Ltd.
The Outhwaite syndicates "wrote reinsurance policies on asbestos and other long-term pollution risks which have suffered escalating losses," the lawsuit says.
Furthermore, several other syndicates that Mr. Leslie participated in have had huge but still unresolved losses, leaving him exposed to indefinite liabilities.
In briefs filed with the court, Mr. Leslie maintains he wasn't told that he could be saddled with such indefinite liabilities, and that such information was either "omitted or misrepresented" by Lloyd's and those who solicited his participation.
In his court filings, Mr. Leslie claims that "Lloyd's and Sturge also breached their fiduciary duties to him" when they included him in "outsider syndicates."
With Lloyd's approval, Sturge syndicates were transferring policies with extensive liability exposure into outsider syndicates, "thus insulating `insider' members of these Sturge syndicates from the same risks."
Both Lloyd's and Sturge deny claims in the suit; furthermore, Lloyd's has consistently maintained that British courts are the correct forum for such cases, but has thus far failed to get the U.S. suit dismissed.
To be sure, it isn't easy to sort out exactly who knew what and when.
Lloyd's, an anomaly in Britain's increasingly regulated financial system, is self-regulated and has few disclosure requirements.
Lloyd's view of its asbestos exposure is that there were credible competing theories about the extent of potential asbestos losses, thus many at Lloyd's discounted such worst-case scenarios.
Some, though, are cynical about Lloyd's practice of insuring asbestos and pollution risks while drawing in more investors.
"When you begin to talk about billions of dollars in judgments, honor and integrity go out of the window," says Eugene Anderson, a New York lawyer who has made a successful practice of pursuing asbestos claims in U.S. courts.
He says Lloyd's and its underwriters were "whistling past the cemetery," ignoring the true risks of asbestos and pollution.
