Saudi Arabia won't commit to a spring cut in its oil production despite weekend appeals from others in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
But it may not need to if world oil demand rises as expected.
More industry officials and analysts now look for some sort of recovery in petroleum prices later this year as reviving Western economies lead to greater use of petroleum.
Estimates of price increases expected in the second half range between $1 and $4 a barrel.
Such a promise provides little comfort for jittery OPEC ministers, however, with oil prices still hovering near five-year lows of $13 to $15 a barrel.
That is why Don Etiebet, Nigeria's oil minister, was in Saudi Arabia Saturday to plead with his counterpart, Hisham Nazer, for a 5% to 10% second-quarter cut in the kingdom's oil output of eight million barrels a day.
The Nigerian minister apparently went home yesterday empty-handed.
The only official Saudi word on the outcome of the weekend session came from the government press agency, which reported the ministers discussed the oil market situation and agreed "to continue consultations" until OPEC's March 25 meeting.
Much of the steep fall in petroleum prices has come since November when OPEC refused to reduce production for this year's first quarter.
If OPEC fails to reduce output for the traditionally sluggish second quarter, the price may fall further before any recovery begins, many analysts say.
"It could nosedive again around the OPEC meeting if the news is bad," said Victoria Hallstrom of Salomon Brothers.
Still, Salomon analysts are holding to an earlier forecast that West Texas Intermediate, or WTI, the U.S. benchmark crude, will average $16.50 a barrel this year.
Mr. Etiebet's visit to Saudi Arabia, the world's biggest oil producer, came after he and Abdullah Al-Attiyah, OPEC's president and Qatar's oil minister, jointly announced the urgent need of a major production cut for the second quarter.
Mr. Al-Attiyah also is touring other OPEC nations to prepare for the March 25 meeting.
Nigeria and Qatar are believed to be among the more frequent cheaters on OPEC production quotas, however.
And, except for Saudi Arabia, most oil nations, in or out of OPEC, are near capacity.
For the Saudis, according to a Persian Gulf source close to Saudi Arabia's policy makers, the bottom line is that the kingdom doesn't want to cut output now and doesn't want to discuss the issue.
"A lot can happen in the oil market in a month," he said.
OPEC can do little without the full support of the Saudis.
Leo Drollas, chief economist at London's Center for Global Energy Studies, estimated that a 5% cut in OPEC's production of 24.7 million barrels a day (some 1.2 million barrels a day, with Saudi Arabia accounting for one-third) could lift prices an average of $1 a barrel in the second quarter.
But oil demand, Mr. Drollas said, is increasing, and there would be price rises in the third and fourth quarters even if OPEC were at current output levels then.
That's in line with some other forecasts.
Cambridge Energy Research Associates expects fourth-quarter prices of $17 a barrel for WTI and an average of $15 for the seven crudes used by OPEC as a reference.
That would be well below year-ago prices, when WTI was near $21 a barrel, but some $2 a barrel higher than recent levels.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange Friday, where a crude similar to WTI is traded, the futures price for March delivery settled at $14.72 a barrel.
In OPEC so far this year, the reference price has averaged only $13.89 a barrel, down from $16.33 for 1993 and $18.44 for 1992.
