The Supreme Court gave U.S. agencies a broad shield against lawsuits seeking money damages based on alleged constitutional violations.
The unanimous decision specifically sheltered the government from potentially costly and time-consuming suits arising from the clean-up of the savings-and-loan industry.
The justices said that former executives of failed financial institutions may not sue regulatory agencies for firing them.
But while the case concerned the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., its reasoning will protect all U.S. agencies, including those that oversee other types of businesses.
The high court's decision would have been more important if it had come to the opposite conclusion.
But the justices reversed a ruling by a lone federal appeals court that had exposed federal agencies to liability on constitutional grounds.
They left open other avenues for suing the government, such as filing suit against individual officials.
Yesterday's decision stemmed from the failure of a California thrift, Fidelity Savings & Loan, which was put into federal receivership in 1982.
A federal regulator fired Fidelity's four top officials without giving them a chance to contest the decision.
One of the officials, John Meyer, sued the government, claiming that he had been deprived of his constitutional "property interest" in his job without being afforded "due process of law."
A jury found the government liable and awarded Mr. Meyer $130,000 for losses related to the firing.
In a decision issued in 1991, the federal appeals court in San Francisco affirmed the verdict, concluding that the government should have given Mr. Meyer "an opportunity to be heard."
The FDIC appealed that decision to the Supreme Court, which ruled for the agency.
Writing for the high court, Justice Clarence Thomas said the appellate court had improperly relied on a 1971 Supreme Court decision that allowed private suits against individual federal officials who have deliberately engaged in unconstitutional conduct.
For both logical and practical reasons, the 1971 case shouldn't be extended to permit suits against agencies, Justice Thomas said.
The 1971 decision was designed to deter law-enforcement agents and other officials from unconstitutional conduct, such as unjustified searches for criminal evidence.
If people could sue the agencies themselves, Justice Thomas reasoned, there would be no incentive to go after individual officials, and the deterrence effect would be lost.
As a practical matter, permitting suits directly against agencies would create "a potentially enormous financial burden on the federal government," he maintained.
It should be up to Congress, not the judiciary, he said, to expand federal liability in this fashion.
(FDIC vs. Meyer)
Separately, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that the federal Privacy Act precludes the disclosure of home addresses of federal employees to unions or others.
The case stems from requests by two union locals for addresses of Defense Department employees in bargaining units represented by the unions.
The unions wanted the addresses so that organizers could contact nonunion workers.
The Pentagon supplied the workers' names but insisted that under the Privacy Act, which applies only to federal employees, the addresses couldn't be disclosed.
The unions complained, and the Federal Labor Relations Authority, which handles such disputes, sided with them.
A federal appeals court upheld the authority's determination.
The Defense Department appealed, and the Supreme Court said that the appeals court had been wrong.
Writing for the majority, Justice Thomas said the lower court was improperly concerned about facilitating union representation.
He said that federal statutes and a 1989 Supreme Court precedent require courts to focus only on whether the privacy interest of nonunion workers is outweighed by any greater public understanding of government operations that would be achieved by disclosure of the disputed addresses.
Finding the public interest to be negligible, Justice Thomas said that the Defense Department had acted properly in withholding the addresses.
In an echo of his opinion in the FDIC case, he added that if the high court's conclusion places public-sector unions at a disadvantage compared with private-sector unions, it is up to Congress to correct the problem.
(Defense Department vs. Federal Labor Relations Authority.)
