The U.S. and 17 Asian-Pacific countries agreed to work together to assure the orderly financing of the $1 trillion that Asian nations plan to spend on power plants, highways, telecommunications and other infrastructure in the 1990s.
"Mobilizing the capital needed to finance high levels of private investment and infrastructure development presents a formidable challenge for the region," the 18 finance ministers said.
The gathering here of finance ministers was the first under the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and his deputy, Lawrence Summers, convened the meeting to engage China in an economic dialogue and to emphasize Asia's growing importance to world economy.
"More money is going to flow more rapidly over more space in this region over the next decade than at any time in the history of the world," a U.S. Treasury official said last week.
Infrastructure projects, and financing them, present major business opportunities for U.S. firms.
Mr. Bentsen said the ministers agreed to consult more often, particularly on financial market development and liberalization issues.
"We share a goal to keep up the growth and investment," he said.
Though the ministers agreed to meet again in 1995, some have resisted the U.S. attempt to make the gathering an annual event.
Japanese Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii told reporters that this "isn't a regular meeting, nor is this an institutionalized thing."
While some Asian officials are concerned that the U.S. will use APEC as a vehicle to dominate regional policymaking, the weekend session was by all accounts largely polite.
"Maybe as we get to know each other better, we'll start telling other people what to do.
But right now, everybody was on their best behavior," said Canadian Finance Minister Paul Martin.
Representing 18 Nations Finance ministers attending the APEC meeting came from Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, the Philippines and the U.S.
While differences remain over the pace of market development and deregulation, the APEC ministers stressed that improvements in the capacity to finance infrastructure projects are "necessary to address current. . . inefficiencies."
They endorsed further consultations to improve domestic banking, equity markets and, particularly, bond markets as a key source of financing for large projects.
The ministers talked about ways to avoid the pitfalls of financial deregulation.
Indonesian Finance Minister Mar'ie Muhammad said that "foreign capital can play a significant role in promoting the efficiency of domestic resources."
But he added that questions remain over "the type of private capital flows that should be welcomed" and what financial instruments should be encouraged and how they should be managed.
"Our open capital account leaves us susceptible to potential disruptions by speculative flows of 'hot' money," Mr. Muhammad said.
Abrupt movements of such funds can disrupt local economies.
Indonesia and others in the region "are increasingly concerned . . .," he added.
The APEC ministers asked finance ministry deputies and senior central bank officials to meet by early next year to review regional macroeconomic developments and to address issues regarding capital flows.
