The Securities and Exchange Commission, worried about hidden risks lurking in certain triple-A-rated mortgage securities, is investigating whether to tighten disclosure standards on such securities, known as cash-flow or "kitchen-sink" bonds.
Kitchen-sinkers -- so named because they contain almost everything but -- are offspring of collateralized mortgage obligations, which are backed by the interest and principal payments from pools of mortgage loans.
In essence, kitchen-sink bonds are created by lumping together risky, unwanted CMOs into a trust, and recycling the trust's cash flows into new securities that appear more appetizing.
Since May, Wall Street has sold about $4 billion of such kitchen-sinkers.
This is the first time the SEC has raised questions about the complex CMO market, which represents about $800 billion of securities outstanding.
The regulatory scrutiny has already had a chilling effect on new issuance of exotic types of CMOs.
For example, Bear, Stearns & Co. of New York, which underwrote more than two-thirds of the kitchen-sinkers outstanding, says it won't sell any more of them until the SEC completes its review.
"We look forward to an opportunity to continue discussions with the SEC, and will continue to work on a resolution prior to any further issuance," says Peter Cherasia, a senior managing director at Bear Stearns.
Among other things, the SEC inquiry aims to determine whether underwriters should provide buyers with more information about the types of hard-to-analyze CMOs that back kitchen-sinker trusts.
The agency also questions whether the kitchen-sinkers' triple-A ratings -- which measure the likelihood of investors' receiving specified amounts of cash flow, not the riskiness of the bonds -- might be misleading.
While the SEC has raised concerns about the appropriateness of kitchen-sinkers for small investors, underwriters say that's a moot point, since these securities haven't been sold to individuals.
The SEC won't comment about its meetings with underwriters and rating agencies, but people on Wall Street familiar with the discussions say the agency's interest may go beyond kitchen-sinkers.
In the course of a meeting two weeks ago between SEC officials and representatives from Fitch Investors Service, a New York rating agency, SEC officials also questioned the application of a triple-A rating to securities backed by "whole loans," or mortgages on commercial real estate and other big properties.
Senior SEC officials from the divisions of market regulation and corporate finance first began meeting with representatives from Wall Street firms in November, after reports in this newspaper raised doubts about investors' ability to analyze the complex securities.
Rep. Henry B. Gonzalez (D., Texas), chairman of the House Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs Committee, has echoed those concerns.
"I am afraid that these securities, like other derivatives, pile risk on top of risk," he says.
Currently, the SEC doesn't require underwriters of kitchen-sinker trusts to disclose where the recycled CMOs came from; what their characteristics are; who originally underwrote them; how the CMOs were priced when contributed to the trust; or the valuation method used.
One money manager with $2 billion invested in mortgage-backed securities says it would take him several hours on a high-speed computer to figure out how the kitchen-sinkers would react to changes in interest rates.
Despite their complexities, kitchen-sinkers enjoy more lenient disclosure requirements than normal bond offerings or public sales of stock.
That's because the CMOs that back them are derived from mortgages that are guaranteed by government-sponsored agencies such as the Federal National Mortgage Association and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.; as a result, kitchen-sinkers are deemed to be "government" securities, which exempts them from disclosure rules of the Securities Act of 1933.
The fact that many kitchen-sinkers have been blessed with a triple-A rating also worries regulators.
Senior SEC officials say investors may misunderstand what that rating represents, since the triple-A rating on these bonds has nothing to do with the safety of these investments, but only with the likelihood that investors will receive their cash flows as promised, as long as 30 years from now.
"The SEC wants to know how we do our analysis of cash flow," says Stephen Joynt, executive vice president of mortgage-backed securities at Fitch.
"We are trying to be responsive to them."
"The question is whether a rating can be limited" as narrowly as these ratings are, says Andrew Jones, an analyst at Duff & Phelps, which has rated many kitchen-sinkers.
Certainly, none of that seems to matter so far to investors, who remain dazzled by their fat yields of two percentage points over short-term floating-rate notes.
