The province of Ontario may face brownouts and blackouts this week as Ontario Hydro starts shutting down its 20 nuclear-power stations ahead of a possible strike by its 14,700 unionized workers.
Talks between the giant state-owned utility and the negotiating committee of the Power Workers' Union, which represents the employees, broke down late Saturday when a negotiating committee rejected the utility's final contract offer as "outrageous."
The union will be in a legal strike position at midnight March 31, when its current contract expires.
The two sides have been seeking to reach agreement on a new two-year pact, but remain far apart on issues such as job security and wage and benefit concessions sought by Hydro.
In anticipation of a strike, Hydro will begin to shut down its nuclear generating stations today, and last Friday notified large industrial customers and municipal utilities that they could face service interruptions as early as this week.
Hydro's 20 nuclear-generating stations provide about 11,500 megawatts of the 23,300-megawatt capacity of its system, a spokesman for the utility said.
He said the utility expects demand to average about 17,500 megawatts next week.
"We've been warned that we could see cuts by the middle of next week, if nothing is resolved" in the labor dispute, said Blair Peberdy, spokesman for Toronto Hydro, the province's largest municipal utility.
"If there are cuts, we could see blackouts of up to half an hour in different parts of the city throughout the day."
Only a handful of municipal electrical utilities or industrial users have access to electrical supplies apart from the Ontario Hydro system.
"All we have here is an emergency generator that provides limited amounts of power strictly for personal safety, such as illuminating exit signs," said Jim Hartford, a spokesman for Ford Motor Co. of Canada, 94% owned by Ford Motor Co., Dearborn, Mich.
Mr. Hartford says that interruptions in the power supply could force Ford to shut down operations at its Ontario plants if the blackouts are lengthy and sufficient warning isn't given.
In the past year, Hydro has eliminated 6,000 jobs and announced plans to close some of its generating stations due to excess capacity.
John Murphy, president of the union, says members want a commitment there will be no further layoffs in the two-year life of the contract.
Other issues include union representation on Hydro's board, and concessions on wages and benefits.
Mr. Murphy says 91% of employees voted in favor of a strike if an acceptable offer wasn't received by today.
