Ameritech Corp. will form a joint venture with a Canadian company to bring the interactive age to the halls of government, aiming eventually to let people register cars and apply for marriage licenses with the click of a button.
The venture hopes to develop services that will, over time, let computer users across the U.S. use phone lines to get easy, quick access to an array of computerized information at all levels of government.
The first services are expected to be available by this summer.
Although they won't yet offer the ability to execute transactions, more sophisticated services are planned for year end.
Eventually, Ameritech hopes to sell its services nationwide, moving into major markets including Los Angeles and New York, after starting out with government offices in its own five-state service area in the Midwest.
Ameritech, the Chicago-based regional telephone company, will bankroll the new venture with British Columbia Systems Corp., a government-owned information-services company based in Vancouver.
The new company, called Ameritech Information Access Ltd., is scheduled to be unveiled today.
A number of government databases are available over the Internet, and some companies already offer access to government listings limited to one area or state.
But Ameritech is one of the first so far to undertake the enormous challenge of setting up a national service covering every city, county and state entity, as well as federal offices.
"We've not found anybody with anything quite like it," said Lana Porter, an Ameritech vice president and general manager of the new company.
For good reason, perhaps.
Trying to work with the hundreds of government offices will be complicated at best.
Ameritech has begun talks with a few outlets but has yet to sign its first deal.
And there continues to be resistance to paying for public information that is free to anyone who doesn't mind taking the time to ferret it out manually.
"A lot of people don't like the idea of paying for public information, even though it might be a lot easier" to pay a fee and get it electronically, said Peter Krasilovsky, a senior analyst with Arlen Communications Inc., a Bethesda, Md.-based research company.
Ameritech's new on-line services, to be sold and priced by individual government offices, would make existing government databases available to anyone with a personal computer and a modem.
Ameritech would receive a per-transaction fee and assist in marketing.
The new services are being built around a software program developed by British Columbia Systems which has been used successfully in British Columbia to offer ready access to local real estate listings.
