Users of the America Online computer service will soon have access to an old-fashioned kind of chip -- the potato chip.
America Online Inc. in Vienna, Va., said it will team up with Shoppers Express Inc. to allow subscribers to order snacks, groceries and drugs via computer by the spring.
The move, which could give reclusive personal-computer users yet another reason to avoid the great outdoors, comes despite America Online's several failed attempts to link PC users to perishables.
Subscribers in mostly urban markets will be able to place orders for same-day delivery.
Shoppers Express, which already provides phone and fax ordering to nearly 40 retail chains including Safeway Inc. and Winn-Dixie Stores Inc., will process the order and deliver it for what amounts to a hefty tip -- a fee of $5 to $10.
Users will punch in their ZIP Code, and Shoppers Express will determine the retail market to service the delivery.
In the past, large-scale shopping services have failed because of high costs and customers' unwillingness to give up "the touch, the feel, the smell" of buying a bag of barbecue chips or a cut of beef, says Brian Ek, spokesman for an American Online rival, Prodigy Services Co., a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co.
Prodigy operated a grocery-shopping service for three years, shutting it down in 1991.
Maintaining the databases and updating price changes on a weekly basis "was very manpower-intensive," Mr. Ek explains.
But industry officials expect fewer problems with the new service.
Shoppers Express, rather than America Online, will maintain the database, and the Bethesda, Md., shop-at-home company won't bother to enter price changes on a weekly basis.
In fact, Shoppers Express won't offer prices at all.
The company says its fax and phone orders have grown although customers can't get prices.
Customers are "much more service-conscious than price conscious," says Kara Kernan, vice president of Shoppers Express.
But, she adds, "If it's an issue, we will put in an estimated cost per item."
Users of the service will have to pick their tomatoes on faith: America Online's new listings will offer up words only.
No pictures.
