Diann Roffe-Steinrotter won the women's super-giant slalom, giving the surprising U.S. a perfect record of two gold medals in the two Olympic Alpine ski races run so far.
In a surprise, Svetlana Gladischeva of Russia took the silver -- the first Olympic Alpine ski medal for her country or its predecessor, the Soviet Union, since 1956.
Isole Kostner of Italy won the bronze.
Ms. Roffe-Steinrotter, who shared the 1992 Olympic giant slalom silver medal with Austria's Anita Wachter, was first down the twisting, course and finished in 1 minute, 22.15 seconds.
Katja Seizinger of Germany caught an edge, turned backward and slid past a gate.
She did not finish.
Lyubov Egorova of Russia won the gold medal in the women's five-kilometer classical-style cross-country race, beating Manuela Di Centa of Italy by 19.5 seconds.
Ms. Egorova, the cross-country ski queen of the 1992 Olympics with three gold and two silver medals, clocked 14 minutes, 08.8 seconds after leading most of the way.
It was her second medal of these Games.
On Sunday, Ms. Di Centa won the 15K freestyle gold while Ms. Egorova took the silver.
The bronze went to Finland's Marja-Liisa Kirvesniemi.
Ekaterina Gordeeva and Sergei Grinkov won the gold medal in pairs figure skating, beating fellow Russians Natalia Mishkutienok and Artur Dmitriev.
Ms. Gordeeva and Mr. Grinkov, the 1988 gold medalists who returned to Olympic competition from the pro ranks, drew a perfect 6.0 for artistic impression from the Russian judge, despite two mistakes by Mr. Grinkov on jumps.
The rest of their artistic impression marks were 5.9s.
Skating right before Ms. Gordeeva and Mr. Grinkov, Ms. Mishkutienok and Mr. Dmitriev skated an almost flawless program, but the marks for the 1992 Olympic champions ranged from 5.6 to 5.9.
Canada's Isabelle Brasseur and Lloyd Eisler, the reigning world champions, took the bronze medal, matching the bronze they won in Albertville.
Gerda Weissensteiner of Italy took the first-day lead in the women's luge competition.
Her two-run total was 1 minute, 37.630 seconds -- 0.252 faster than 1992 bronze medalist Susi Erdmann of Germany.
Andrea Tagwerker of Austria was third, an additional 0.236 behind.
Cammy Myler of the U.S., eighth after the first run, had problems on her second.
She bounced off one wall and had to put a foot down.
She finished the day 11th.
There are two more runs today.
Defending champions Donna Weinbrecht of the U.S. and Edgar Grospiron of France advanced to the Olympic finals of the freestyle skiing moguls.
Ms. Weinbrecht placed 6th among 16 qualifiers in the women's competition, while Mr. Grospiron was second in the men's elimination round.
All qualifiers start from scratch in the finals, scheduled for today.
American Liz McIntyre finished with both the fastest time and most points.
Norway's Stine Lise Hattestad, the only person to beat Ms. Weinbrecht in World Cup action this season, placed second.
In men's qualifying, Jean-Luc Brassard of Canada was first, ahead of Mr. Grospiron and Russia's Sergei Choupletsov.
The U.S. scored two late goals, again, to gain a tie, this time a 3-3 deadlock with the Slovakia team.
The U.S. scored two late goals in its first game to tie the French.
Slovakia also has two ties.
Canada beat France 3-1 to go to 2-0.
France is 0-1-1.
And Sweden beat Italy 4-1 to go to 1-0-1 and drop Italy to 0-2.
