In a sweeping cost-cutting move, R.H. Macy & Co. began dismissing executives and staff members of its San Francisco-based Macy's West unit.
The dismissals involve at least 415 employees of the division, which includes 31 Macy's department stores and 20 Bullock's department stores.
There could be several hundred more positions eliminated through dismissals and attrition.
The layoffs, according to employees given packets outlining their dismissals, include at least 100 "selling-floor" executives ranging from sales managers -- who are essentially entry-level junior executives -- on up through various executive levels.
The packets also said that about 45 junior and senior executives in Macy's West office operations were being laid off.
Apparently, the firings don't involve any sales people at the Macy stores.
But the dismissals also include a wide range of store staffers, such as those who work in alterations, security, window display, as well as stock people, gift wrappers, fitting-room checkers, and those who work in bridal registry.
Still more job reductions are expected through attrition, but it's unclear how large that reduction would be.
It is also unclear whether similar reductions are planned for Macy's East division, which includes 59 department stores, including the company flagship at Herald Square in New York.
The firings aren't related to damage to Macy stores in the Los Angeles earthquake, but are part of the company's five-year business plan that the retailer is using to restore its financial strength while it operates under Chapter 11 federal bankruptcy protection against creditors.
While the company has systematically been trimming its work force, this is considered by far the largest single reduction.
Macy's New York-based corporate executives couldn't be reached for comment last night, and calls to Michael Steinberg, chairman of Macy's West unit, weren't returned.
Macy filed for bankruptcy protection in 1992, and currently owes creditors about $6 billion.
Under Myron E. Ullman, chairman, the chain has been successfully slashing away at its once plush operations.
The layoffs came as Macy was beginning to tally damage related to the earthquake.
Macy said it will have to completely or partly rebuild two Bullock's department stores and one I. Magnin store in the Los Angeles area as a result of last week's earthquake.
Bullock's at Northridge Fashion Center, near the quake's epicenter, will have to be demolished and rebuilt at a cost estimated at more than $25 million.
The Sherman Oaks Bullock's store, the flagship of that Los Angeles-based chain, was heavily damaged and will take at least six months to rebuild.
The store had been extensively remodeled during the past two years and had the second-highest annual sales volume of any Bullock's outlet.
Bullock's stores affected by the quake contribute about $100 million of Macy's total $6.5 billion in annual sales.
Macy said it expects its rebuilding costs and any losses incurred due to the quake to be covered largely by insurance.
But the problems could be a distraction for Macy as the retailer attempts to produce a reorganization plan for creditors in coming months.
The company also faces uncertainty over the plans of Federated Department Stores Inc., which is now a Macy creditor and wants to merge with it.
Other retailers also suffered damage.
Investcorp's Saks Fifth Avenue permanently closed its Woodland Hills store.
May Department Stores Co. said six of its Robinsons-May stores are closed but would be "back up in a reasonably short period of time."
J.C. Penney Co. said its store at the Northridge mall will have to be rebuilt and may reopen by spring 1995.
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. said its Northridge Broadway store may be rebuilt and that three other stores remained closed.
