Senate Commerce Committee Chairman Ernest F. Hollings (D., S.C.) raised concerns about a Clinton administration proposal to let telephone and cable companies that provide two-way video-transmission services opt for streamlined regulation.
Commerce Secretary Ron Brown argued for the plan during testimony before the Commerce Committee.
Mr. Brown suggested adding the proposal to a sweeping telecommunications bill Sen. Hollings and others introduced earlier this month.
Sen. Hollings said he viewed the proposal as optional and asserted that companies shouldn't be allowed to choose how they will be regulated.
He also suggested that the plan wouldn't have much immediate impact since it probably will take many years before companies build such high-capacity networks.
Nonetheless, Sen. Hollings held out the possibility that a revised version of the administration plan might end up in the telecommunications bill, which stands a good chance of passage this year.
Sen. Hollings said the committee will hold a series of hearings on the bill; the measure, sponsored by a majority of committee members, is expected to pass the committee by early summer and could come up for a full Senate vote quickly after that.
The administration's plan would establish a new Title VII to the Communications Act for companies that offer two-way, video transmission services for at least 20% of their subscribers in a state.
Companies providing such services could opt to be regulated under Title VII, and services delivered over those networks -- video, conversations, data or other transmissions -- would get streamlined treatment.
The idea is to avoid conflicting or duplicative regulations.
On balance, Mr. Brown supported the Hollings bill, while suggesting several changes.
One of the biggest involves hurdles the regional Bell companies would have to jump before being allowed to provide long-distance services.
Sen. Hollings would require that the Baby Bells must prove, among other things, that they face actual competition in providing local telephone service before entering the long-distance market.
Mr. Brown urged requiring reviews by both the Federal Communications Commission and Justice Department, an approach consistent with legislation pending in the House.
He said, for instance, that before letting a Baby Bell provide long-distance service, Justice Department officials would have to find that the company would pose "no substantial possibility of harm" to the long-distance market.
FCC Chairman Reed Hundt also broadly endorsed the Hollings bill.
In testimony, he said it "embodies a vision of a new era of innovation and growth for what may be the most important sector of our economy in the next century."
