Burger King ended one of the most torturous advertising-account reviews in recent memory by awarding the creative portion of its estimated $150 million to $160 million account to the Ammirati & Puris agency in New York.
In tapping Ammirati, Burger King becomes one of the largest advertisers yet to select a midsize, creatively focused agency over larger competitors.
Yet after having unceremoniously stripped its previous agency, the giant D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, of creative responsibilities last fall, Burger King made the unusual decision of keeping its local marketing and media-buying parts of its account at D'Arcy.
Unaffected in the shift is Burger King's advertising to children, which remains at Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising.
Madison Avenue will watch this new marriage closely, because both the client and the agency have had prickly relationships with their partners in the past.
Ammirati has been known to drop clients, including BMW, and prides itself on its small roster of big-spending, blue-chip clients.
Burger King has had five main agencies since the mid-1970s, not including Ammirati.
The high turnover rate is partly the result of several unsuccessful campaigns, including the "Where's Herb?" promotion, which is considered one of the biggest failures in advertising history.
"Too often in the past we bought a great commercial or a great idea that didn't have an extended life," said Paul Clayton, Burger King vice president of marketing and part of a new management team installed at the Grand Metropolitan unit under its new chairman, James B. Adamson.
Mr. Clayton said the client listened to the contenders' ideas about strategy as much if not more closely than it did to their creative ideas.
"We knew from looking at their client lists that they could all do great work.
With Ammirati, there was a little extra chemistry."
In landing the account, Ammirati bested at least a dozen competitors.
Contenders in the final round of the creative pitch included Interpublic Group's Lowe & Partners/SMS, whose most recent wins have included the big Diet Coke account, and Euro RSCG's Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer, which creates ads for MCI and Volvo.
In addition to D'Arcy, the contenders for the media portion were WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather and the media-buying service DeWitt Media.
The creative contenders put together dozens of different speculative ads, for which they were compensated $75,000 each, according to participants in the pitch.
Martin Puris, Ammirati & Puris's urbane chief executive officer, said late yesterday that he was delighted to have the account and felt ready to sink his teeth into it and a Whopper dinner.
"I'm going to eat a Whopper every Tuesday night," he said.
For Ammirati's creative director, Helayne Spivak, the win is a vindication, marking her first major new business win since abruptly vacating a high-profile job at Young & Rubicam last fall.
And for Ammirati, the win is a hefty windfall, increasing the agency's billings to as much as $580 million from about $420 million.
Its client roster includes MasterCard International, Aetna Life & Casualty and the UPS delivery service.
Now it is faced with a daunting mission: to create an ad campaign with which Burger King can begin a sorely needed turnaround in sales and image.
Agency executives sometimes observe that it is easier to create good advertising for No. 2 brands, pointing to Pepsi-Cola and the long-distance service MCI as prime examples of No. 2 brands that make inroads through the sheer force of advertising.
That, however, hasn't been the case for Burger King in quite some time.
Burger King's ad campaigns have ranged from the heart-tugging "Burger King Town," created by WPP's J. Walter Thompson, to the embarrassing Herb the Nerd fiasco, also from Thompson.
Other efforts were practically incomprehensible, such as Ayer's "We do it like you'd do it," or just plain annoying, such as the "BK TeeVee" campaign, the last effort from D'Arcy before losing the campaign in October.
Burger King has since expressed interest in resurrecting the "Have It Your Way" campaign of the mid-1970s, created by the BBDO agency.
Whatever the creative approach, Mr. Clayton said that all three finalist agencies had agreed on one thing: the need to broaden the chain's appeal beyond its traditional consumer target, males age 18 to 24.
Domestic sales at Burger King were up a scant 3% to $5.46 billion in 1993, according to estimates from Technomic Inc., a restaurant-marketing consultancy in Chicago.
McDonald's, meanwhile, saw sales rise 7%, to $14.19 billion, Technomic says, while sales at Wendy's International, the No. 3 chain, were up 6.3% to $3.66 billion.
In 1992, the most recent year in which domestic market-share figures are available, Burger King's share slipped to 16.2% from 16.6% of the $32.8 billion hamburger business, while McDonald's and Wendy's saw their shares increase.
Ron Paul, Technomic president, said Burger King's fickle nature is partly to blame.
"The lack of focused and successful marketing has contributed to their problems," he said.
On the other hand, Wendy's success is partly attributable to its advertising starring founder Dave Thomas.
"It's been a huge boost to franchisee morale and given them an image," Mr. Paul said.
Ad Notes. . . .
OSCAR RATINGS: The 66th annual Academy Awards telecast on the ABC network Monday night drew 31.1% of the nation's 94.2 million TV households, on a par with last year's 31.2%.
About 78 million people watched the show this year, one million fewer than last, because there were fewer viewers in front of each set, ABC estimated.
ABC is a unit of Capital Cities/ABC.
WHO'S NEWS: Burson-Marsteller, the public relations firm, named James B. Lindheim to the post of world-wide chairman and elected him to be a member of the board at the closely held parent company, Young & Rubicam.
Mr. Lindheim succeeds James H. Dowling, who is "stepping down," Burson said in a statement, adding that he and the firm are "in discussion regarding his future plans."
