Fort Worth, Texas -- Anyone worried about the disappearance of a serious nonspecialist audience for art should come to Fort Worth's Kimbell Museum.
"Ludovico Carracci: 1555-1619" (through April 3) is the kind of exhibit connoisseurs dream about, but it has also attracted crowds of Sunday strollers, even on weekdays.
A truncated version of a show from Bologna's Pinacoteca Nazionale, it literally opens viewers' eyes to a Renaissance master whose star has been in decline for much of the past two centuries.
It also encourages a historical re-evaluation of the Carracci (Ludovico and his younger cousins Agostino and Annibale).
Together, they make a bridge between the mannerism of Correggio and Parmagianino, and subsequent Baroque painters like Guercino and Guido Reni.
The Carracci opened an academy in Bologna in 1582.
Annibale drifted to Rome in the mid '90s, but his older cousin stayed put at home.
Rebelling against, but never entirely rejecting, the overwrought refinements of their Mannerist predecessors, and absorbing the examples of such Venetian near-contemporaries as Tintoretto and Veronese (especially in their dramatic renderings, their brushwork, above all their palette of colors), they paved the way for the brutal realism of Caravaggio as well as for the drama of the high baroque, with its distortions of classical Renaissance perspective.
What makes Ludovico especially fascinating is the way he worked in several styles virtually simultaneously.
Although his very last work has been accused of strange and awkward self-indulgence (originally attributed to failing eyesight), it's in fact extremely difficult to chart anything like a conventional "progress" in his style.
The austerely depicted devotional details in his early "Annunciation" (1583) are repeated in the folk-like charm and dreamy nocturnal delicacy of the 1598 "Return from Egypt," which shows none of the dramatic urgency of some of Ludovico's other paintings.
Many of these, such as "The Conversion of St. Paul" (1587), were produced simultaneously with the quieter, sweeter pictures.
The stormy chiaroscuro, feverish halted action and convoluted postures in this painting (or in the 1589 "Flagellation") suggest the influence of Caravaggio.
Then one looks at the date and realizes that an influence, if such existed, had to work the other way around.
Caravaggio may have seen Ludovico's work on his way to Rome at this time, and learned from him how to manipulate the expressive dimensions of light and shade.
Ludovico, with his interest in Venetian paintings, turns out to have been the real creator of 17th-century realism.
Whereas Annibale redefined the terms for large-scale narrative painting, Ludovico was more interested in careful, often naturalistic observation.
(The towers of Bologna appear in both "The Annunciation" and the great "Madonna of the Bargellini Family.")
But he also produced pictures of extraordinary dramatic power, canvasses densely filled with details.
The late "St. Sebastian Thrown into the Cloaca" depicts the saint's final end rather than the more conventional image of him pierced by the arrows later removed by St. Irene (a vignette that forms the subject of a new acquisition at the Kimbell by Georges de La Tour).
Ludovico paints Sebastian's last night thick and black.
The shapes -- aside from the illuminated body of the dead saint -- are twisted and hard to make out.
In an equally dramatic but fully illuminated version of another unusual subject, "The Martyrdom of St. Margaret" (1616), Ludovico chose to stress not the saint's death but the prior moment in which she hears a heavenly voice granting absolution to her unwilling executioner, whom we see from behind, his unbalanced posture signalling spiritual upheaval.
Ludovico absorbed and transmuted the achievement of many older masters.
Italian critics were quick to praise his combination of Michelangelo's excellence of "design" with Correggio's "color" in "The Madonna of the Scalzi."
Even more surprising is his reworking of a theme extremely rare during this period but often seen in Northern art -- the "throne of grace" -- which he renders in a 1591 "Trinity with the Dead Christ."
Here the space contains only bodies, of God the Father, the dead son, four angels, a shadowy female (perhaps the Virgin) and, above God's head, the dove.
The picture is crowded not only with figures but with a thick application of paint.
God's bejeweled gown balances the other, mostly muted coloration.
The dead Christ seems to be supported somewhere midway between his Father's lap and the clouds that prop him from beneath.
As in "The Martyrdom of St. Peter Thomas," Ludovico manages to suggest both weight and lightness, sinking and elevation, simultaneously.
The Kimbell's exhibit of 34 paintings affirms the upward estimation of the Carracci, one that began with the 1959 Bologna exhibit of 17th-century Emilian painting and continued in the 1986-87 blockbuster entitled "The Age of Correggio and the Carracci," which came from Bologna to the Metropolitan in New York and the National Gallery in Washington.
It also extends the Kimbell's tradition of small didactic shows during the past decade, especially those on Renaissance and early modern subjects, such as Ribera, Cavallino, early Poussin, Reni, and, within the past year alone, Bassano and Tiepolo.
Two separate visits to Louis Kahn's 1972 architectural masterpiece revealed a steady stream of visitors, neither so many as to disturb any viewer's patience or line of vision, nor so few that one might suspect the show was playing for the benefit of art scholars alone.
Populism and elitism seem to go hand-in-hand in the heart of Texas.
Mr. Spiegelman is the editor of the Southwest Review and reports on the arts from Texas.
