It used to be that Lani Guinier had two important things going for her: a taste for intellectual adventure (not so common in the academy) and the courage of her convictions.
She had interesting, out-of-the-mainstream, arguably undemocratic ideas, and she said what she thought.
But the straight talk is now fudge.
Like the administration she couldn't join as assistant attorney general for civil rights, she's all into spin.
Ideas that were once provocative have been prettily repackaged as all-American, run-of-the-mill democratic notions.
It's an odd play for respectability, for if she has nothing distinctive to say, there's really no point in reading her work.
Thus, in "The Tyranny of the Majority" (Martin Kessler Books/Free Press, 324 pages, $24.95), the new Guinier talks of simply wanting "more democracy."
Her aim, she says, is "democratic fair play."
The rules by which we're governed should both "reward those who win" and remain "acceptable to those who lose."
What's so scary about that?
Ms. Guinier complains that her unexceptional ideas have been horribly distorted.
The press, she charges, conducted an "hysterical assault."
The (presumably gullible) president was bamboozled -- his mind poisoned by enemies on the right.
Those enemies convinced the president to "get personal," calling her ideas "antidemocratic" and "difficult to defend."
How could that happen to someone so "deeply committed to consensus"?
It is a convenient but extremely far-fetched story.
The "hysterical" press included the editors of the New York Times and The New Republic, columnist David Broder, and Legal Times analyst Stuart Taylor.
Even before her nomination was withdrawn, a number of Democrats in Congress (Sens. Joseph Biden and Patrick Leahy, for instance) had expressed misgivings about her ideas.
Were her detractors unfair?
Readers with the patience to wade through her murky prose can now partially judge the charge of willful distortion for themselves.
Chapters one and seven, the introduction and epilogue, are the fancy new wrapping.
But those in between convey a sense of the old, allegedly antidemocratic stuff.
They are substantially edited and thus cleaned up versions of the law-review articles that both liberal and conservative critics found so troubling.
Ms. Guinier's main point (as the title indicates) is the tyranny of the American majority, by which she means the white majority.
Blacks, in her view, are politically powerless.
They are a "pariah group: systematic losers in the political marketplace."
Her solution: discard majority rule, what she calls the "illegitimate" system in which those who are "outvoted . . . don't count."
Substitute a variety of rules that give minority voters and minority legislators proportionate power.
In this way, she thinks, the majority and the minority would both prevail.
Why should some people win and others lose?
In fact, why not adopt, Ms. Guinier asks, a grown-up version of "taking turns"?
She draws an analogy.
If a group of children can't agree on what to play -- tag or hide-and-seek -- they need not let the majority rule.
They can do both, in turn.
Public policy can work the same way, Ms. Guinier suggests.
It's a ludicrous idea that she got from her four-year-old son.
Can opposing sides on the welfare question both have their way?
Do they take turns: first more benefits and then none at all?
And why are such arrangements necessary?
Ms. Guinier depicts a permanently hostile, tyrannical white majority and blacks with barely a foot in the political door and no mechanisms for holding whites to account.
It's her most persistent point: them against us.
Whites vs. blacks.
Thus black officeholders who depend on white votes are "inauthentic" -- contaminated by their white support.
Real blacks are "politically, psychologically and culturally black."
As she says in a footnote, blacks elected, for instance, from majority-white jurisdictions trim their sails; thus, they are inauthentically moderate.
Black radicals count as black; black centrists don't.
Ms. Guinier's picture of whites as all alike and still implacably hostile to blacks is pure fantasy.
But then there is much that is bizarre in her work.
For instance, she enlists "the writings of James Madison and other founding members of our Republic" in support of her views on majority-rule.
But the few quotations that she plucks from Madison and Hamilton run completely counter to the central thrust of their work.
The Federalist papers were a brief for a strong and energetic central government -- not for "taking turns."
Ms. Guinier's views are closer to that of the slave-owners' advocate, John C. Calhoun, who proposed giving the slaveholding states (an embattled minority) the power to veto federal legislation to which they objected.
Both Ms. Guinier and her supporters believe she was owed at least a congressional hearing in which to air her views.
But such hearings were never an entitlement, and if she was "silenced" then, she has had plenty of subsequent opportunity to explain herself.
In fact, her problem is not "censorship" (her word), but self-censorship.
She prides herself, she says, on her "unflinching candor," but she has chosen to sanitize her own work.
To what end?
Certainly not to further the forthright debate she claims she desperately wants.
Ms. Thernstrom is the author of "Whose Votes Count?
Affirmative Action and Minority Voting Rights" (Harvard University Press).
