The travel industry used to look on American Express as a sleeping giant.
Now it regards the company as a 10-ton gorilla.
"People realize American Express is a very serious competitor, but it's time they realize it on a visceral level," says Ivan M. Schaeffer, president of Woodside Travel Trust in Bethesda, Md.
To underscore his point, Mr. Schaeffer sliced up his own American Express card last year before a room full of Woodside executives.
Travel-industry complaints about American Express Co. stem in part from its huge travel-agent business.
While much of the company's $14.2 billion in annual revenue still comes from charge cards and traveler's checks, American Express has, through acquisitions, become the nation's largest travel agency, with more than twice the volume of its nearest competitor.
The company says it sold $8 billion of airline, hotel, car-rental and cruise bookings last year, 10% to 12% of which it netted in commissions.
It has almost doubled its sales volume in the past six years and vows to continue the heated pace.
Many in the industry say they are less worried about American Express's sheer size than the seeming overlap between its travel and charge-card businesses.
Tensions have arisen, for example, over the discounted travel rates that American Express Platinum Card members receive.
Rival agents resent having to go through American Express to make the booking.
American Express corporate charge cards generate reams of travel data on everything from a client's favorite carrier to its most frequented destinations.
That data can be used by American Express when it bids for a company's travel account.
American Express can also make simultaneous bids for a company's travel and card business, as it did last year when it won a $36 million air-travel account, plus a charge account, from W.R. Grace & Co.
American Express now has 68 of the Fortune 100 as travel clients.
Of these, all but one use the charge card.
Alexander Anolik, a San Francisco travel lawyer who has filed complaints with the Justice Department accusing American Express of unfair trade practices, says, "They're the most dangerous entity in the travel industry."
American Express officials say they play by the rules and argue that the biggest winners are their clients, who benefit from the company's massive purchasing power and its technological sophistication.
The company's standing in the travel industry is high, officials say, pointing to an American Express-sponsored survey that asked 14,000 agencies which credit-card company provides them the best overall service.
American Express was ranked first, receiving 39% of the votes.
Executives also note that the company spends millions each year promoting the travel industry.
"For 20 or 30 years, they said we were a sleeping giant, and now that we're not asleep, they say we're cheating," says Roger H. Ballou, president of the Travel Related Services Group.
Even though American Express's travel and credit-card operations are both under Mr. Ballou's purview, the businesses are run independently, officials say, and corporate-card information isn't used to bid on travel accounts without a client'a explicit approval.
These executives say they want to avoid angering rival agencies who could encourage their own clients to pay their bills with a Visa or MasterCard.
American Express has been selling traveler's checks for about 100 years but didn't become a major player in the travel-agency business until the 1980s, when the commercial travel market boomed and mega-agencies emerged.
Rival agencies have claimed that American Express's growth in this business was at least partially motivated by a desire to protect its charge card: No airline, for example, can refuse to accept the American Express card if American Express can put travelers on other airlines.
Mr. Ballou says American Express's travel-agent business is profitable and that its return on equity is greater than the card business.
(The company doesn't break out agency earnings separately.)
"If it doesn't return a profit, we walk away" from agency acquisitions, Mr. Ballou says.
But the agency business clearly helps American Express's other operations.
At a minimum it can help sell corporate accounts by offering streamlined billing to companies that sign up for both services.
Airlines, hotels, rental-car companies and cruise lines have their own complaints with American Express.
They, like all merchants, pay American Express a transaction fee every time a card is used for payment, and the fee is typically higher than what Visa, MasterCard and other card companies charge.
Some travel executives fear their bargaining power vis-a-vis the American Express fee could be diminished by their reliance on American Express agents to sell their product.
Consider what happened to Carnival Cruise Lines.
Four years ago, it stopped accepting the American Express charge card.
The fees were twice as high as other credit cards, it said, and cost Carnival an extra $1 million a year.
American Express travel agencies promptly dropped Carnival as a preferred supplier, cut back on Carnival sales and, at a convention for American Express agents, showed a slide of a burning Carnival brochure.
"I was less than pleased," says Carnival's president, Robert H. Dickinson.
(American Express officials confirm the incident.)
Airline executives say that American Express is a tough but fair negotiator, and the company delivers what it promises.
But they say their relationship with American Express can be expensive.
Because its agents sell so much travel, American Express is able to cut favorable deals for its customers -- and as its travel business grows, it will continue to do so.
American Express says its agency clout is overstated, noting that it accounts for only about 6% of all U.S. travel sales.
"I can't bludgeon American Airlines into doing a damn thing, even if I were inclined," Mr. Ballou says.
He says he had no choice but to drop Carnival as a preferred supplier after the liner dropped the card.
"Why should I put clients on their cruise when they don't support our product?"
Mr. Ballou asks.
Even American Express's harshest critics betray an envy for the way the company juggles its bag of businesses.
"It's unfair for them to sell charge cards, then use them to compete for my client," says Harold Stevens, president of Stevens Travel Management in New York.
"But if I were American Express, I'd do the same thing, plus more."
