For years, Arab states have told the U.S. that if Israel would just reconcile with the Palestinians, all Arab-Israeli problems could be solved.
Israel took a giant step when it signed an accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization; now it is the Arabs' turn.
The clearest way for the Arab world to signal its readiness to bolster Middle East peace talks would be to formally ease its boycott of Israel.
The secretary general of the Arab League recently promised U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown that the boycott will be on the agenda when the group holds its regular ministerial meeting in Cairo next month.
But several Arab diplomats say the League isn't likely to relax the boycott, even though doing so no longer would require a heroic effort.
Several major holes already have been poked in the boycott.
Morocco has open economic links with Israel.
Clandestine trade between Israelis and Arabs is estimated to total $500 million yearly, according to Benjamin Gaon, president and chief executive of Koor Industries, Israel's largest conglomerate.
And Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, thankful to the U.S. for helping save them from Saddam Hussein, unofficially ignore the so-called secondary boycott under which Arab states blackball U.S. companies that do business in Israel.
U.S. officials say these steps aren't enough, especially in view of the move toward reconciliation between Israel and the Palestinians.
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, under siege from hardliners at home, won't be able to make the compromises needed to win peace with his Arab neighbors unless he can show Israeli voters some tangible benefits of peace.
Lifting at least the secondary boycott would give Israel an economic boost, removing the concerns some multinational companies have about doing business there.
It would provide a psychological lift as well.
Even for Arab governments, the theoretical reasons for maintaining the embargo are rapidly being overtaken by practical reasons to eliminate it.
The U.S. is trying to encourage private investment in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip to bolster the Palestinian governing body that will function there following the planned Israeli withdrawal.
But many companies won't make investments without the assurances that can be provided only by official elimination of the boycott rules.
Senior U.S. officials repeatedly have told PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat that ending the boycott would be in the economic interest of Palestinians.
His response has been that he understands the connection but can't call for an end to the boycott until the Israeli-Palestinian agreement, signed last Sept. 13, is implemented.
Two weeks ago, though, during an international economic gathering in Davos, Switzerland, Mr. Arafat joined in the applause when a U.S. official called for ending the boycott.
U.S. officials aren't sure whether the enigmatic Mr. Arafat was signaling a change of position, or just wasn't paying attention to the speaker.
Meanwhile, pressure is mounting from the U.S. Congress.
The Senate recently approved an amendment that would prohibit the sale of defense items to countries that ask U.S. companies to cooperate with the boycott.
(U.S. companies already are prohibited from cooperating with the boycott.)
The measure does have a loophole.
The White House could waive it for reasons of national interest or security.
Still, it could be awkward for the Clinton administration to take advantage of the loophole.
Says a senior U.S. official: "We can't completely ignore the concerns of the Congress, especially in circumstances where we support the objectives of the legislation."
Nobody expects the Arab League next month to revoke its primary boycott and free Arab governments to do business directly with Israel.
That step, and diplomatic recognition of Israel, are concessions that will be held for future negotiations.
But the time has come to end at least the secondary boycott.
American impatience for such a move is increasing.
"Talk has been quite cheap on this issue, and action quite dear," says Rep. Charles Schumer, a New York Democrat and strong Israel supporter.
