This plan represents the federal government's biggest fiscal gamble since Ronald Reagan simultaneously cut taxes and increased defense spending.
CBO didn't put it that way, of course.
The explosive warning is buried in a chapter demurely titled "Other Considerations" under the unwieldy heading "The Effects and Sustainability of Controls on the Rate of Growth of Premiums."
But it's there nonetheless -- and taxpayers should view it as a big red flag.
The CBO report estimates that over the next six years the Clinton plan would cost the government $130 billion more than the White House says.
But that assumes Mr. Clinton's caps on the growth in health-care spending hold.
If they don't, the cost to taxpayers will be substantially more.
The fundamental question about the Clinton plan, the one that most troubles several of Mr. Clinton's economic advisers, is: Will those caps hold?
Reading between the lines, CBO suggests they won't, but the report explicitly says only that the caps are likely to create "immense pressure and considerable tension" in society and the health-care system.
Pressed by Republican Sen. John Danforth of Missouri to elaborate, CBO Director Robert Reischauer ducked.
"The real issue," he said, "is whether the institutional and political structure of the nation can withstand those pressures.
And we have no ability to judge that."
The White House estimates that health-insurance premiums employers pay for their workers will rise 9% annually in coming years if there is no health-care reform.
Mr. Clinton proposes a law to cut that rate of increase in half.
He describes this as a "backstop" in case "managed competition" fails to slow the growth in health costs.
CBO figures the caps are about the only thing in the Clinton plan that will actually work to slow the growth of health-care spending.
It accepts them because Mr. Clinton would write a law with teeth to enforce them.
But laws last only as long as Congress and the public support them.
"If the reliance is placed on premium caps . . .," says Sen. Danforth, "it's the political problem of having the will to stick with those caps."
CBO predicts that the first problems will surface when Mr. Clinton's new National Health Board sets different premiums for different regions to reflect existing differences in health costs.
Boston's premium could easily be twice the one set for El Paso, Texas.
Americans tolerate wide regional disparities in private markets, but such disparities are hard to justify when determined by government.
That's why Social Security benefits are the same across the country despite differing living costs.
The pressure to spend more money will likely grow in the second year when the board sets growth rates for different regions, and the congressman from El Paso discovers that even though premiums there are lower than in Boston, they might be allowed to rise only by the same percentage.
And if the regional caps survive that battle, there's still the substantial risk that the spending caps in and of themselves will provoke enough hospital closings, disgruntled doctors, long waiting times and horror stories to force Congress to raise them.
Lifting the caps would cost taxpayers billions of dollars a year in additional subsidies to low-wage workers and small companies.
How much?
Lewin VHI, a health consulting firm in Fairfax, Va., estimates that if the Congress decides that cutting the annual growth of health costs from the currently projected 9% to roughly 4 1/2% is too tough and settles for a 6 3/4% growth rate, the government will have to spend an additional $17 billion annually by the year 2000 on health-care subsidies.
That equals the Justice Department's annual budget.
Congress will have three choices if the caps come under attack, as the CBO predicts they will.
It can hang tough, which will mean angry doctors, infuriated hospitals and enraged constituents who will say they are being denied the health care they were promised.
It can lift the caps, and pay for that with higher taxes or spending cuts somewhere else.
Or it can lift the caps and let the deficit widen.
But, as CBO warns, there isn't any free lunch.
The Congressional Budget Office may be wrong.
Mr. Clinton and Ira Magaziner, the architect of his health plan, may be correct when they argue that their "managed competition" will squeeze out waste and slow the increase of rising costs without producing unsustainable pressures.
But the fiscal risks they propose to take are enormous, and they give no hint where they would get the money to pay for their error if they are wrong.
