When Bobby Ray Inman went home to Texas a decade ago, reporters in Austin put on a show in which the cast sang, "Bobby Ray, Superstar/Are you the messiah that they say you are?"
After the show, Adm. Inman asked for the crown worn by the "Bobby Ray" character.
Today, many in Washington are wearing red faces and wondering how someone who appeared "bizarre," as one senator put it, in a televised news conference could have come so close to becoming defense secretary, overseeing the world's most powerful military arsenal.
The key to Adm. Inman's rise, and to his startling fall, lies in his reputation in Washington.
Adm. Inman's renown made him larger than life, exempting him from the usual scrutiny.
But when that carefully burnished reputation began to get smudged en route to a job that would have capped off an already distinguished string of government posts, Adm. Inman exited via a performance earlier this week that even he now concedes was odd.
He showed hair-trigger sensitivity to even the smallest slights, and attacked his critics with the same sort of unsubstantiated charges that he accused them of using against him.
If Adm. Inman put too much stock in his reputation, so did the Washington establishment.
His aura of brilliance dazzled the White House, members of Congress and the press, which fairly gushed over his nomination.
Democrat Sen. Joseph Biden of Delaware called him "the most quality guy in the federal government."
That Adm. Inman went so far toward confirmation with so little scrutiny raises questions about how people advance in Washington, and about whether the political insiders who were so quick to bless his nomination really knew him -- or just his reputation.
Left bewildered are supporters such as Mississippi Sen. Trent Lott.
"I gave it a ringing endorsement," the Republican senator said of Adm. Inman's nomination.
"Now I am embarrassed that I joined the chorus that said, `This is the man.'
Were we supposed to kiss his ring?"
But if the Inman tale exposes Washington's susceptibility to the blinding power of reputation, it also highlights a vulnerability in the Clinton administration -- namely, its tendency to overvalue IQ and credentials and undervalue stamina and common sense.
In Adm. Inman, the president had a man with a sterling reputation and bipartisan support, the ingredients for a quick political fix at a time when Mr. Clinton's foreign-policy team was wobbling.
Even Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and critic of Mr. Clinton on a variety of military questions, issued a blessing immediately after the president named the retired naval officer.
The choice also shows the continuing clout of Mr. Clinton's old friends: It was Strobe Talbott, the president's Oxford housemate, who first urged Mr. Clinton to pick Adm. Inman, touting the intelligence expert at a late-November meeting also attended by Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty, former Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman William Crowe and Vice President Al Gore, who also voiced support for Mr. Inman.
Adm. Crowe suggested a few businessmen, says one person familiar with the meeting, but "there wasn't any great interest because Strobe had done such a good job of selling Bobby."
Ultimately, it was President Clinton's considerable persuasive powers, plus some nudging from Secretary of State Warren Christopher, that persuaded a reluctant Adm. Inman to take the job.
And Mr. Talbott, recently nominated to be deputy secretary of state, talked to Mr. Inman about how the revamped national security team would work.
Mr. Talbott yesterday declined to discuss the situation.
Yet early in the process, Adm. Inman indicated a fundamental ambivalence about taking the job.
He told the White House that he only wanted to be a part-time Washingtonian.
He said he would take a condo in Washington, but keep his homes in Texas and Colorado, spending many weekends there.
The administration evidently missed the signal.
When he learned two weeks ago from "three different sources" that his confirmation hearings wouldn't be a coronation, Mr. Inman was crushed.
He feared some Republican senators wanted to "rough me up a little, dirty me up a bit," he said in an interview yesterday.
Taking a hint, it appeared, from New York Times columnist William Safire, Adm. Inman felt the lawmakers might portray the former deputy director of central intelligence under President Reagan as someone who leaked information to the press and had undercut his boss, William Casey.
But most of all, the saga of Bobby Inman's career is a story of how a reputation can be built in Washington through adroit handling of members of Congress and the media -- among them Mr. Talbott, who was a Time magazine columnist before joining the State Department, and who knew Mr. Inman from those days and from meetings at the Aspen Institute, a foreign-policy think tank.
Washington, after all, is a city that turns on reputation.
While power in other parts of the country might be measured by wealth, lineage or the size of corporate coffers, the nation's capital tends to measure people by perception.
To be seen as bright or powerful is, to a degree, to be bright and powerful.
That is partly because Washington runs on another intangible: information.
And as head of the National Security Agency under President Carter, the nation's global electronic-eavesdropping agency, Mr. Inman possessed an insider's view of the world.
In the coinage of Washington, he was rich.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Adm. Inman moved from anonymity to build a reputation in Washington that was almost unparalleled.
After decades of quietly laboring in military intelligence, he became the intelligence community's liaison with both Congress and the Washington media.
John F. Lehman Jr., President Reagan's Navy secretary, recalls watching him build confidants on both sides of the aisle in Congress.
"He was always honest, so people confided in him," says Mr. Lehman.
"It enabled him to put together fuller pictures than anybody else, whether it was Washington intrigues or Kremlin intrigues.
When I was in government, I talked to him a lot, mainly to get advice."
The admiral's advice often went into political matters far beyond defense- or intelligence-related issues.
"He was constantly buzzing around like a honeybee piecing together pictures of what was going on," adds Mr. Lehman.
"The reason Inman had so much staying power with so many different people is that people over time found he generally came up with the right answers and he was not loath to share it."
Congressional oversight of the intelligence community led to some leaks.
To plug them, or at least to limit the damage they caused, Mr. Inman was assigned to talk to reporters and their editors.
Among the people Mr. Inman came to know were some of Washington's best-known reporters such as the Washington Post's Bob Woodward and free-lance investigator Seymour Hersh.
Indeed, Adm. Inman has been helpful to reporters for The Wall Street Journal, too.
Beyond that, many Washington reporters can remember encounters with Mr. Inman in which he was helpful and candid, volunteering his home telephone number if any further information was needed.
It was the journalistic equivalent of a dream date.
Mr. Inman was seemingly tireless in his cultivation of Capitol Hill.
Once, when he was testifying before Rep. Joseph Addabbo, the New York Democrat interrupted to say he didn't understand the intelligence gibberish that Mr. Inman was using.
Mr. Inman then took an hour to painstakingly explain his point.
After he finished, Rep. Addabbo told his defense-appropriations subcommittee that Mr. Inman could have anything he needed.
Mr. Inman's critics, most of whom didn't surface until after his recent implosion, take a less benign view of Mr. Inman's rise.
Angelo Codevilla, a former Senate aide and currently a Hoover Institution fellow, says Mr. Inman's tactic was to flatter members of Congress and let them in on secrets.
"Inman's flattery is straightforward: `Few could understand this but you . . .'
Such words and a string of tips . . . were enough to convince most of Inman's contacts, liberal and conservative, that they were fellow geniuses."
Another foe, William Wisecarver, a former counsel to the Senate Armed Services Committee, says, "Inman is a perfect example of what we've been seeing in Washington, people who . . . move up the ladder on the backs of others -- and then they get to the top of the ladder and there's no one else to blame."
But those voices weren't heard on Dec. 16, when Mr. Inman was nominated to be defense secretary.
Indeed, aside from GOP Rep. John Kasich of Ohio, who worried aloud that Mr. Inman was a leaker and a manipulator, the nomination was greeted with glowing reviews.
Sen. Nunn all but confirmed Mr. Inman the day of the announcement.
Yesterday, Sen. Nunn declined to comment.
From there, the spin cycle went into high gear.
Republican Sens. John McCain of Arizona and William Cohen of Maine both called him "brilliant," as did much of the rest of political Washington.
Democratic Sen. Carl Levin of Michigan and former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney pronounced the choice "excellent."
Reporters reached even higher for new superlatives.
ABC White House correspondent Brit Hume, for example, noted Mr. Inman's "glittering military credentials."
Amid the hosannas, one dissenting voice spoke out.
When he was introduced in the Rose Garden, virtually the first words out of Adm. Inman's mouth were, "I am an imperfect human being."
He went on to discuss his ambivalence about the job.
In the following weeks, his feet grew colder.
After a lifetime of operating behind the scenes and controlling the flow of information, the nominee found himself the focus of media reports beyond his control, and the subject of rumors about his business dealings and personal life.
The experience only confirmed what his gut -- and his wife -- were telling him: that he really didn't want the job.
What's more, Adm. Inman went from once sitting atop the world's most sophisticated intelligence apparatus to waiting in Austin and often hearing disturbing -- but not necessarily accurate -- intimations of trouble in Washington.
White House and Pentagon aides, knowing that Adm. Inman had been selected partly because of his excellent relations with Congress, planned to defer to him on handling Capitol Hill.
But he failed to reach out to old friends in the Senate, such as Sen. McCain, whose father once had been Adm. Inman's commander.
The nominee was pained and surprised by the few critical comments written about him, mainly by Mr. Safire of the Times.
"I have no recollection of him ever being attacked by anyone," says Sen. McCain.
"That's the treatment he always got before."
Adm. Inman says that he had been criticized before, most notably by "Safire and his clique of supporters."
But this time, he concluded, he would face "a daily diet of this."
He told the White House on Jan. 6 that he was pulling out, but in deference to the president's loss of his mother and travels in Europe, held off making it public until this week.
Even Adm. Inman concedes that his performance this week was strange.
"Would I do it a lot differently?" he asks.
"Yes, but it's been done."
He says his main regret is that he didn't say earlier that he wasn't truly interested.
"I let two things get confused," he concludes.
"I responded to the president saying he needs me.
And I forgot how much I've changed in the last 10 years."
Others are less restrained.
Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, whom Adm. Inman cited as a reason for bowing out, says, "You kind of wonder how they picked this person.
Seems to me that maybe the president or somebody who recommended him to the president should have had a little closer look."
But even Mr. Dole had greeted the nomination by saying Adm. Inman was "a good selection."
Many friends were left bewildered.
Retired Army Maj. Gen. Edward Atkeson, who has known Mr. Inman since they roomed together as young officers in Europe in 1953, says, "It certainly wasn't the Bobby Inman I'd seen before.
It was a new person.
He shot himself in the foot."
At the White House, aides stand by Adm. Inman, even though stunned by his public meltdown.
"This man served his country for 30 years and doesn't deserve to be judged on one press conference," says White House counselor David Gergen.
Chief of Staff McLarty echoes that view, saying, "He is a person of distinction . . . .
He served four or five presidents, an admiral in the Navy -- his record really speaks for himself."
In Austin, life is calming down for Adm. Inman.
"One thing I can say, as I relax," he said yesterday, "is that I can rest comfortably that no president is ever again going to ask me to be in the Cabinet."
David Rogers and John J. Fialka contributed to this article.
