Democrats in Congress are seriously considering a compromise plan that would exempt small businesses from the Clinton administration's proposed requirement that employers help pay for their workers' health insurance.
For small businesses, the idea instead would be to put the burden of securing coverage on employees, an approach favored by moderate Republicans.
Officials in Congress and the Clinton administration are reluctant to embrace the hybrid scheme publicly, but the idea has won increased attention as House and Senate committee chairmen seek to find votes to achieve the president's goal of universal health coverage.
Small-business opposition to the so-called employer mandate is a major worry for conservative and moderate Democrats, whose support is crucial to the party leadership in the House.
Moreover, by moving toward the "individual mandate" approach favored by many Senate Republicans, the alternative could fortify relations with GOP moderates who are under pressure from the political right to resist any compromise.
As Congress returned from its February recess, Mr. Clinton hosted a White House dinner last night with senior Republican and Democratic senators in the health-care debate.
Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole brought with him a mix of moderates and conservatives -- including Sens. Bob Packwood of Oregon and John Chafee of Rhode Island, both members of the Senate Finance Committee and important swing votes.
Mr. Chafee, the leader of the Republican health task force in the Senate, is one of the most prominent advocates of an individual mandate.
Critics say his plan, without some guaranteed employer contribution, would lack the resources to fully subsidize working-class families and make health insurance truly affordable.
The Clinton plan, which would require all employers to pay 80% of the cost of their workers' basic health-insurance costs, has been criticized for imposing too great a burden on small business.
While it would provide subsidies to hard-pressed employers, opponents argue that the costs are huge, and that aid would be more effective if given directly to individuals in the form of subsidies or tax credits.
The hybrid-type approach being discussed by Democrats appears akin to an alternative put forward in December by Michael Moore, a health-policy analyst at the Jackson Hole Group, a Wyoming-based think tank.
Under Dr. Moore's approach, companies with more than 100 workers would be subject to an employer mandate, albeit a milder one than proposed by the president.
Businesses with 100 or fewer workers would be exempt; those companies' workers would be required to buy their own health insurance, and would qualify for tax credits to reduce the cost.
It would be difficult for Republicans to make any concession on the employer mandate.
"I've tried hard to never say never," said Mr. Chafee last night.
"It's too early to get into any compromises."
He said the hybrid plan "would not fly at this time."
Still, the discussions reflect a recognition among Democrats that major elements of the president's plan face difficulty.
The president's allies are beginning to look for alternative approaches to blunt the opposition.
Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce health subcommittee, was uncertain last night if he would begin drafting a bill as scheduled next week.
None of the rival camps appears to have a working majority in the panel.
Even on panels where liberal Democrats are in clear control, the outcome mightn't be to the administration's liking.
The House Ways and Means health subcommittee, which is scheduled to begin drafting its version of a health-reform bill Tuesday, is considering such measures as a payroll tax and a government rate-setting system.
Rep. Pete Stark (D., Calif.), the subcommittee chairman, is pushing a "Medicare for all" setup, which would extend to all citizens the health coverage the government now provides the elderly.
Mr. Stark has been holding meetings with the Democratic members of his panel in hopes of forging a consensus on the major issues.
From the outset, Democrats have identified the employer mandate as the most difficult -- and important -- test for the president's plan.
Other provisions can be easily shed to win votes, but without some type of mandate, proponents question if the administration can ever achieve its promise of universal coverage.
Fear of being attacked for raising taxes is a major reason why the president proposed such a large 80% mandate on employers.
One alternative source of financing -- embraced by Sen. Chafee -- would be to limit the current individual income-tax exclusion for health benenfits.
Unions have long resisted that proposal because it would expose workers to added taxes unless they accept lower-cost health benefits.
But the added tax burden would be greatest for higher-income households, who benefit most from the tax break today, and tax analysts say the provision is more progressive than an alternative tax scheme incorporated in a rival plan sponsored by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.).
