MCI Communications Corp., looking to offer a seamless North American communications service, will build a long-distance network in Mexico with Grupo Financiero Banamex-Accival (Banacci), Mexico's largest financial group.
The companies valued the joint venture to build a long-distance network and deliver voice, data and video services in Mexico at $1 billion, of which MCI will invest $450 million for a 45% stake.
But they said the investment could go much higher as service is expanded throughout Mexico.
The $6 billion Mexican long-distance phone market is expected to ignite as the Mexican government opens the market to competitors by 1996 and the North American Free Trade Agreement increases traffic between the U.S. and Mexico.
In its continuing battle to wrest international traffic from American Telephone & Telegraph Co., MCI has now positioned itself to offer services from arctic Canada to the Yucatan peninsula by using carriers in those countries as its partners.
"We'll provide a unified communications infrastructure for the entire continent," said MCI Chairman Bert C. Roberts Jr.
Initially the advanced fiber-optic system will link business customers in three of Mexico's largest cities -- Mexico City, Guadalajara and Monterrey.
By 1999, it will blanket Mexico, said Fernando Quiros, executive vice president at Banacci.
MCI and Banacci must still get a license from the Mexican government to provide long-distance service, a seemingly insignificant hurdle given Banacci's clout within Mexico and the government's determination to improve services.
The bigger obstacle may be overcoming the entrenched monopoly Telefonos de Mexico.
While its rickety system has generated a plethora of bad jokes about Mexican phone service, Telmex has begun a $30 billion rebuilding effort aimed at delivering connections instead of busy signals -- and all under the close supervision of its foreign partners Southwestern Bell Corp., the giant San Antonio-based regional Bell company, and France Telecom, France's national carrier.
The MCI-Banacci alliance will probably push Telmex into a closer customer-sharing arrangement with AT&T.
"You can bank on that to happen before the flowers bloom this year," said Jack B. Grubman, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
Added Andrew Jay Friedman, an analyst at Mexican broker Vector: Telmex "has to speed up a joint venture announcement with an American company," lest its investors become skittish.
An AT&T spokesman would only say that "AT&T is already providing the most comprehensive range of services in North America."
MCI, an old hand at upending monopolies after years of battling AT&T, envisions Mexican business and residential customers using MCI-like services.
While businesses are the first targets, eventually "you might even see an Amigos y Familia" service, said Eugene Eidenberg, executive vice president and chief of MCI's international group, referring to MCI's highly successful "Friends & Family" discount consumer plan.
For leverage the partners will use Banacci's huge market position (110,000 large business customers and two million retail banking clients) to lure converts to their services.
And MCI can tap into the Banamex private microwave and satellite network through which clients electronically transfer funds and use automated teller machines.
MCI, which recently launched a $20 billion network expansion plan, is linked operationally with Stentor, the long-distance carrier run by the Canadian phone companies, including Bell Canada.
And MCI has bonded with U.K. giant British Telecommunications PLC, which plans to spend $4.3 billion for a 20% stake in the Washington, D.C., carrier.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Telmex American depositary shares closed at $68.50, down $1.25.
Craig Torres in Mexico City contributed to this article.
