In news that sent its shares sharply higher, Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it discovered the three-dimensional atomic structure of a key enzyme involved in causing the common cold.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading Friday, Agouron shares increased 15%, closing at $14.75, up $2.25.
Preliminary news of the breakthrough, along with the announcement of new financing, has driven shares up 53% during the past two weeks.
The biotechnology concern said the finding -- after two-and-a-half years of work -- provides a "detailed framework" for the development of drugs to treat or prevent common upper respiratory infections.
Using X-ray crystallography, researchers solve the molecular structure of the enzyme, so that an atom-by-atom design of drugs to fight it can be created.
The antiviral drugs would block the enzyme, rhinovirus 3C protease, and inhibit replication of the virus, the company said.
Such drugs could prevent infections in healthy people exposed to the virus and minimize the intensity and duration of symptoms in people already infected.
Four years ago, similar techniques were used to solve the structure of HIV, the virus causing AIDS, and several drugs are in late clinical trials.
"This shows what an important event that was," said Peter Johnson, president and chief executive officer, in an interview.
There are hundreds of strains of rhinovirus, he said, but there is very little structural variation between them.
Initially, the company will try to design drugs to treat infections in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, such as emphysema and chronic bronchitis.
These people are far more at risk from the virus than common cold sufferers.
"This doesn't mean they have a drug," says Jim McCamant, editor of Medical Technology Stock Letter.
"It means they know what to look for.
But I would think a reasonable target for when the drugs could be in clinical trials is about two to three years," said Mr. McCamant, who has recommended Agouron.
Another analyst bullish on Agouron, Ed Hurwitz of Smith Barney, said revenue from a drug based on Agouron's finding could be years away, but added that any such drug would be "a blockbuster."
The drug development will be paid for as part of an agreement announced two weeks ago with Japan Tobacco Inc., which has a 2% stake in the company.
Japan Tobacco would double its maximum investment in Agouron to more than $56 million, if certain targets are reached.
Japan Tobacco receives the right to negotiate for a license to market such drugs in Asia.
It would provide funding for research to design compounds to inactivate protease enzymes known to be required for replication of three rhinoviruses, and also hepatitis C and herpes.
Agouron said it has retained all worldwide rights to antirhinoviral drugs to be generated by the program, and said it won't disclose the actual locations of the atoms in the enzyme because they are proprietary to Agouron.
There is one exception: Last December, it provided a set of coordinates for the enzyme (with a slightly lower level of resolution) to Eli Lilly & Co. in exchange for all commercial rights to a broad class of anti-HIV agents.
"We put a competitor in business, but we're used to competing, and we received some very important HIV compounds, which are farther along," said Mr. Johnson.
"We essentially bought them out."
Lilly and Agouron had collaborated on the research of the HIV compounds in a five-year agreement that ended last year.
Agouron has several drugs for the treatment of cancer and HIV already in clinical trials, but has no products on the market so far.
