Yesterday was a dark day for the Beluga Whale Committee, for Atlantic Bluefin Tuna Research, and for the Zebra Mussel research community.
In his quest for something -- anything -- to eliminate from the federal budget, President Clinton is proposing to eliminate scores of tiny programs all across the government.
Although the dollar amounts in the $1.5 trillion budget are tiny, a look at the Commerce Department's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, where the president is proposing to eliminate more than 40 programs, suggests that the trims may make up in piquancy what they lack in size.
For example, the budget raises this question: Where can an ousted Samoan meteorologist find work?
That was the concern preoccupying Akapo Akapo, who with his seven fellow National Weather Service staffers have their very own line item in the dread "Illustrative listing of programmatic terminations and reductions" pages in the president's federal budget.
"This is the first I've heard about cuts. . . .
News, you know, travels slowly to here," says the 46-year-old Mr. Akapo as he checks barometric pressure at his tiny Weather Service station in lush, tropical Samoa.
"I guess it's the unemployment line for me.
Oh boy, I've got to call my wife."
Then there are those 10-foot-wide buoys off the California coast that cost about $100,000 a year to keep in barnacles.
Federal budget cutters have been trying to sink them since the mid-1980s, but as quickly as they disappeared from one part of the budget they would show up in another, thanks to intercession by Congress; California fishermen and boaters who troll near the buoys' two sites off the coasts of Santa Cruz and Los Angeles say the information on weather and currents supplied by the gizmo-loaded bobbers is invaluable.
At various times, the buoys hid in budgets for the Coast Guard and the Department of the Interior, before showing up in NOAA's budget sometime in the late 1980s.
But that may be their last safe port.
When Capt. Craig Nelson, of NOAA's National Ocean Service, saw the proposed federal budget yesterday morning, he immediately called a colleague at the National Weather Service.
"I said, `There's got to be some way to save them -- you got any room in your budget?'" says Capt. Nelson, already feeling separation anxiety.
"He said, `It doesn't look good.'"
One problem with agencies like NOAA, says Capt. Nelson, is a wealth of line-item funding and programs with weird names.
"Some of it just jumps out" at a budget cutter, he says.
That's the case with the Zebra Mussel and Bluefin Tuna programs, both of which are targeted for extinction.
It's also the case with the Beluga Whale Committee.
The group has received $200,000 a year for the past five years or so, says Tamra Faris, a fisheries biologist at the Alaska regional office of NOAA, which has helped run the program.
Most of the money actually ends up with the Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission, which speaks at whaling conferences in favor of its right to fish the whales for subsistence.
Their opponents -- environmentalists who don't think the whales should be hunted for any reason -- have the added weapon of a battle cry: "Baby Beluga," a cuddly ode to the white whales by Raffi, folk-singing star for America's two-year-old set.
"Sure, my kids have listened to the song, but people need to understand the issues are broader than that," says Ms. Faris tersely.
The Mystic Maritime Education and Research Center, at the restored Seaport in Mystic, Conn., has 387 historic boats in a huge, abandoned velvet mill, where a "leaky roof and miserable conditions has caused some damage, though it's not a crisis -- yet," says Chris Cox, who helps run a corporation that manages the Seaport.
The problem is that $1 million a year in federal funds to help turn the old mill into a museum have been slated for cutoff.
"We're just in the middle of renovation, we can't stop now," says Mr. Cox, who adds that Seaport officials are hoping Connecticut's congressional delegation will not allow "these unconscionable cuts."
Then there is the Wind Profiler Demonstration Network, which has enjoyed annual funding of $4.4 million over the past few years to build 32 ground-based devices that measure atmospheric winds from 1,500 to 15,000 feet above the Earth's surface.
Up there the political constituency is thin, but some pilots have found such data useful -- especially in avoiding strong headwinds that eat up fuel.
In fact, there were hopes that this pilot program would be expanded -- until yesterday's chill wind.
Though National Weather Service spokesman Frank Lepore says the data collected by the devices went to a government research center in Boulder, Colo., no layoffs are expected if the program is actually terminated.
Ozone research is hot, Mr. Lepore observes, and the Wind Profiler staffers might well move over to that.
As for the fate of the devices themselves -- which look like six-foot-tall bedsprings, "I'm not sure what we'll do," Mr. Lepore says.
"I just can't take any more stuff in my house."
