To a less confident executive, the idea of changing the habits of milk drinkers in the U.S. may seem like an impossible task.
But for Calisto Tanzi, chairman of Parmalat SpA, the venture is just a logical extension of an already ambitious expansion plan.
"Americans are very practical," says Mr. Tanzi, pouring a glass of milk in his office here.
"We think they have to respond -- just like the rest of the world."
With a long-lasting milk that doesn't need to be refrigerated before opening, Parmalat is launching an attack on the U.S. milk market.
The milk, which is heat-treated and lasts for up to six months on the shelf, tastes the same as refrigerated milk, according to taste tests Parmalat conducted in the U.S.
It's been available for only a few months in U.S. supermarkets so it's too early to judge the product's success, the company says.
Mr. Tanzi says he figures that if most European countries have adapted to long-life milk, Americans certainly can, as long as the taste matches what they're used to.
He says that in France, ultra high temperature milk, or UHT, has taken over 95% of the milk market.
UHT also dominates the market in Spain, where it has an 80% market share, and Belgium, with 90%.
UHT is less popular in the U.K., but commands about 55% of milk sales in Germany and Italy.
In the U.S. there's virtually no market -- yet.
"The day we're the leader in UHT and it takes America we'll be immense," says Domenico Barili, Parmalat's managing director, anticipating that the company will reap the benefits of being the first firm to seriously market the product in the U.S.
The company plans to expand its presence in international markets and in Italy, though it has no plans to market its product elsewhere in Western Europe.
Parmalat has bought four U.S. milk manufacturers since 1992 and has been on a shopping spree in Hungary and in Latin America, where sales now account for about a quarter of the group's total revenue.
Negotiations are under way to develop business in Mexico and China.
Because of its aggressive acquisitions, Parmalat -- which also makes fruit juice, yogurt, snacks, and pasta -- is reporting rapid growth.
Yesterday, Mr. Barili said that 1993 preliminary figures show total sales rose to 2.845 trillion lire ($1.69 billion) from 1.637 trillion lire in 1992.
Operating profit in 1993 rose to 251 billion lire from 206 billion lire in 1992, Mr. Barili said.
"The really big sales jump will be from 1993 to 1994," when 1993 acquisitions begin paying off and sales should reach 3.8 trillion lire to four trillion lire, he adds.
Mr. Barili says the company's return on sales fell about 9% in 1993 because of the flurry of acquisitions.
He says: "1993 was a year of great change; in 1994 we'll make fewer acquisitions."
Most of the acquisitions in the past two years have been in Latin America and the U.S.
Financial analysts agree that it may be time to slow down, though they say a capital increase last July alleviated debt.
The holding company, Parmalat Finanziaria SpA, which is 51%-owned by Mr. Tanzi's family and 49% listed on the Milan Stock Exchange, raised 427 billion lire through a rights issue.
The company used half the money to consolidate its position and buy out the 21% of the main operating company, Parmalat SpA, that it didn't own; the rest was used to pay down debt.
Kleinwort Benson Securities Ltd., analysts Fiona Marshall and Enrico Ponzone say they expect 1993 net debt of 700 billion lire even after the capital increase, representing a debt-to-equity ratio "of around 55%."
They say that for 1994, "against a background of falling interest rates, 55% gearing should be quite manageable."
Mr. Tanzi is used to growing fast.
He founded Parmalat in 1961 from the proceeds of selling a family prosciutto business in Parma.
Parmalat was created on the idea that milk could be transformed from a local farm commodity into a big international business.
Parmalat rose to fame in Europe by sponsoring Formula One racers Niki Lauda and Nelson Piquet.
Later, Mr. Tanzi bought the Parma soccer team, which has had several victories in recent years.
Analysts say Parmalat's stock is a long-term buy.
That's partly because food is a noncyclical business that performs well even in tough times and it's the only pure food stock on the Milan Stock Exchange.
Parmalat's share price doubled in 1993, and has risen 15% so far this year.
