As South Africa prepares for its first multiracial elections in April, blacks are making inroads into the country's corporate boardrooms, too.
In what is being called "black empowerment," consortia of black investors are snapping up control of previously white-dominated companies as South Africa strives to create economic, as well as political, democracy.
The trend -- which began last year when a group led by Nthato Motlana, Nelson Mandela's physician, acquired 10% of insurer Metropolitan Life -- is gathering steam as the transfer of political power nears.
Since January, Dr. Motlana has also led a black investment group that acquired a majority stake in the Sowetan, a newspaper.
And black interests also have acquired controlling shares in the Prima merchant bank and insurance company African Life.
South Africa's Weekly Mail & Guardian comments: "Black is beautiful in business this year."
To many, the trend toward creating what some call "black-chip" companies controlled by blacks is a logical effort to correct the imbalances of the past and give blacks an economic stake in the country's future.
Many businessmen argue that these transactions are vital to help cement adherence by the long-disenfranchised black community to the market economy.
"It's untenable that white business is big business and that black business is people selling bananas on the street corner," says Doug Band, chief executive officer of Argus Group, the sellers of the Sowetan.
"There will be a lot of deals and partnerships bringing in black investors."
But the trend is controversial.
Buyers are accused of tokenism; sellers are viewed as opportunists.
"Quite frankly, it's largely a situation in which persons who have a certain amount of political clout are using money they don't have to acquire businesses they probably won't run," says Steven Friedman, director of the Center for Policy Studies.
The controversy reflects a quandary surrounding these transactions.
How can blacks expand their economic muscle when apartheid has deprived them of the means to build up capital to do so?
And when they manage to leapfrog obstacles -- obtaining soft loans that can be repaid with dividends from their investments, for example -- they're accused of getting favors because of their race or political connections.
"It's a Catch-22," says Frank Kilbourn, manager of corporate finance at Standard Merchant Bank, which has been active in the black empowerment trend.
"If you don't want to be accused of tokenism, you don't do anything that isn't strictly commercial.
And since they don't have capital, if you don't want to do something that isn't strictly commercial, you end up doing nothing.
You have to find ways to cross the bridge from nonparticipation to capitalism."
A look at the Sowetan and African Life transactions shows different ways of crossing this bridge.
Though its name bespeaks Soweto, the sprawling black township outside Johannesburg that was at the forefront of the struggle against apartheid, and its readership is 99% black, the Sowetan was long 100%-owned by the white Argus Group.
Ever since South Africa began its dramatic transformation four years ago, Argus had been looking at ways of getting black shareholders in the Sowetan to counter African National Congress charges of excessive media concentration in white hands.
"If we hadn't come up with a solution involving black ownership of the Sowetan, there would have been a point when our investment would have been in jeopardy," admits Mr. Band.
But Argus's efforts long foundered on the lack of black capital.
The breakthrough came late last year when Dr. Motlana and partners gained a 20% stake in a newly set up cellular telephone venture.
That stake, valued at about 100 million rand ($29.4 million), is to be financed in part by a soft loan from the Industrial Development Corp. and in part by banks and other partners.
Dr. Motlana's group, Prosper Africa Group, then swapped with Argus part of its cellular stake for an indirect 52% stake in the Sowetan.
Argus retains 43% and the Sowetan's staff will hold 5%.
Though the transaction gives black interests control of the country's largest daily newspaper, with a circulation of about 225,000, the deal has run into a lot of criticism.
Critics note that Dr. Motlana has gained control without putting up his own money, and that Argus still retains a major role.
Argus's motivations are also questioned.
"Argus wanted to get rid of a hassle and still look good by saying it's black empowerment," says Aggrey Klaaste, the Sowetan's black editor in chief.
And while he says that black ownership is a psychological boost, Mr. Klaaste says "empowerment means buying the whole thing and having it in your hands, and that won't happen for a long time."
But Dr. Motlana retorts that "we have no money, so there's going to be a great need, in order to even the economic playing field, that blacks have access to grant financing."
And he says he plans to spread the wealth by floating shares in Prosper Africa shortly.
He says that apartheid has also deprived blacks of many essential skills, so "it would be commercial suicide for us to try and go it alone."
Adds Rory Wilson, the Sowetan's general manager: "Would the critics have preferred that the white community continue to own this lock, stock and barrel?"
Like the Sowetan, African Life caters essentially to the black market, and its owners, Southern Life, had also long been seeking unsuccessfully to bring in black shareholders to facilitate its expansion.
But board member Donald Ncube managed to assemble a group of black investors that has agreed to acquire 51% of the company for 160 million rand.
Southern Life will retain a 25% stake, and the remainder is already held by the staff and stock market investors.
Rather than look for concessionary financing, Mr. Ncube went to black organizations that control money and assets but are outside the traditional financial markets.
They include trade unions, church groups, trusts and stokvels, or community pools of money that were set up to allow blacks to get around the lack of bank financing.
Analysts and businessmen say this transaction marks a breakthrough in black empowerment because it brings existing black capital into the mainstream economy.
The investor group represents a broad segment of the working black population, which should give African Life a competitive edge.
"This is a new sort of alliance between business and the black community that I'd like to think is a strategic coup," says Adrian Arnott, African Life's outgoing chairman.
