Your Dec. 29 Politics & Policy article described how Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. gets its way in Washington through subtle lobbying tactics.
The administration's decision to mandate an expanded market for ethanol is a proposed rule-making that must undergo the scrutiny of a public hearing and comment period followed by judicial review before determining the extent, need or legality of a final rule.
Given the far-reaching economic, environmental and legal issues surrounding the proposal -- and the growing bipartisan opposition to its implementation -- its fate is by no means certain.
While the rule-making could be seen as a big victory for ethanol producers, it actually represents the latest in several recent developments that reveal ethanol's prolonged, multimillion-dollar free ride.
For years, ethanol has received a federal tax subsidy -- currently 54 cents to 64 cents per gallon, costing taxpayers about a half-billion dollars a year.
This tremendous federal tax break is sweetened in some states where ethanol enjoys a 10 cent to 50 cent additional tax break.
These subsidies were anticompetitive enough, but now a mandated market?
The folly of this type of market interference has sent a wake-up call to all those that have worked in the past to keep a level competitive playing field for gasoline additives, alternative fuels, or any other markets.
The legislative climate is also changing.
The past spring, for example, the ethanol industry lost a major Senate floor fight to win an exemption from the president's energy/transportation tax.
Sen. Bill Bradley, who along with Sen. Malcolm Wallop led the effort to defeat the exemption, was quoted as saying that it was "outrageous to consider an exemption for ethanol when its subsidy is already greater than the total selling price of other fuels."
Last month, Rep. Henry Waxman and Sen. Joe Lieberman gathered 100 congressional signatures for a letter to the president forcefully objecting to ethanol's efforts to undermine provisions of the Clean Air Act by seeking an environmental waiver from emissions standards.
The letter argued that such an exception would increase smog in the nation's most polluted cities.
There are a number of reasons why the ethanol mandate is a bad idea -- such as its potential to deplete the Highway Trust Fund, to increase gasoline cost to consumers, and to hurt economically vital natural-gas markets.
Topping this list though has to be the general absurdity of giving government subsidies and now mandated markets to a multimillion-dollar company controlling nearly 70% of an industry.
In the meantime, environmental groups and representatives of the natural-gas-based methanol/MTBE and oil industries, and other promising alternative fuels will continue to press for a policy of government neutrality that allows each fuel to compete on its own merits.
Raymond A. Lewis
