One of these days a money manager is going to name his cat Midcap.
These stocks are fast becoming portfolio managers' pets.
A midcap is simply a middle-sized stock, generally valued in the market at $250 million to $1 billion (though a few analysts extend midcaps to $3 billion.)
"Cap" is shorthand for market capitalization, the total market value of a company's shares.
Midcaps combine much of the sizzle of small-stock returns with a dash of bigstock safety, studies suggest.
Indeed, so far this year midcaps are outperforming the behemoths, just as they did during the past two years.
Standard & Poor's Midcap index rose close to 1% for the year through Friday while big-stock indexes were roughly flat and small stocks rose more than 2%.
Not tempted yet?
Consider the results when Claudia Mott and Michele C. Eschert of Prudential Securities, in cooperation with the University of Chicago's Center for Research in Security Prices, studied performance for 1926 to 1992.
The researchers put the largest 20% of stocks into a large-cap group, the next 30% into the midcap group, and deemed the rest small-cap.
Midcaps produced an average compound annual return of 11.3%, bounding ahead of the 9.7% for large caps.
Small-cap stocks did even better, at 11.7%, but were much riskier, meaning they had a much greater tendency to zigzag in price.
(Ms. Mott points out that small caps are also more expensive for investors to trade.)
So, which midcap stocks look attractive now?
The accompanying table shows some in the $250 million to $1 billion range that look good statistically.
Money managers caution that there's work to do before snapping up a stock that looks good on a computer screen.
Tables like this should be considered a starting point for analysis, they warn.
A handful of market professionals were asked what midcap stock they would buy now, if they could buy only one.
David Katz of Matrix Asset Management would choose A.T. Cross, a Lincoln, R.I., pen maker.
It was an investor favorite for most of the 1980s.
But then the stock sank, from a 1989 peak of 41 to yesterday's 14 1/2, up 1/8.
"Management got very fat and happy," says Mr. Katz.
Cross wasn't alert to intensifying competition from rival pen makers such as Mont Blanc and Waterman, which gobbled up high-end business, he says.
Nor did Cross control costs well.
But "the company finally got shocked" into what Mr. Katz sees as a turnaround in progress.
It has cut costs, grown more competitive and supplemented its traditional thin gift pen with a new Townsend brand pen with a wider girth.
Meantime, Cross shareholders enjoy a 4.4% dividend yield, which Mr. Katz regards as secure.
Seth Glickenhaus, head of Glickenhaus & Co., a New York money-management firm, likes Statesman Group, a Des Moines, Iowa, insurance company that specializes in tax-deferred annuities.
The stock was off 1/8 at 11 1/8 yesterday, which Mr. Glickenhaus considers a steal.
He figures Statesman, which earned $1.39 a share last year, will earn $1.65 this year, not counting trading profits.
The stock is languishing not far above book value, even though the company roughly doubled its premium volume last year to more than $1 billion.
Why has the stock been weak?
Mr. Glickenhaus blames a lack of an analytical following, plus general weakness among insurance stocks as interest rates have risen lately.
In Mr. Glickenhaus's eyes, Statesman annuities aren't an especially good deal for the consumer.
But he says Statesman's crack sales force has no trouble selling the product.
That sales force, he says, might well be coveted by other companies that could acquire Statesman.
Statesman management has indicated the company would be for sale at the right price, but that price is far higher than today's.
Mark Boyar, head of Boyar Asset Management, is comfortable with U.S. Shoe, a market laggard for years.
He says pressure from institutional shareholders will force U.S. Shoe to split up its divisions the way Sears Roebuck did.
Just as with Sears, he says, a reluctant management will eventually find that the sum of the parts will be much more than the market currently pays for the whole.
U.S. Shoe should be split into three parts, he says: LensCrafters (which produces eyeglasses, often in an hour), the shoe division (whose brands include Capezio, Easy Spirit, Pappagallo and Selby) and the retail division (notably the 735-store women's apparel chain Casual Corner).
A proposal to do just that is being pushed by Alfred Kingsley of Greenway Partners, a New York firm that holds some two million U.S. Shoe shares.
The California Public Employees' Retirement System is also pushing for some sort of shake-up, Mr. Boyar says.
In the meantime, he says, a turnaround is already underway, aided by cost-cutting.
If the Greenway proposal goes through, he believes the stock, which traded at 16 1/4 yesterday, would move into the 20s, ultimately to 30 or more.
Brett Brubaker, president of Abraham & Sons in Chicago, favors Rollins Environmental Services, a hazardous-waste disposal company that has seen its own stock value incinerated.
The stock sold for more than 20 in the late 1980s, but traded yesterday at 5.
"They have been losing money," says Mr. Brubaker.
"But the worst is probably behind them."
He says Rollins is still one of the leading companies in its field, and has almost no long-term debt.
This is a chance, he says, for investors to get "a high-quality company at the lowest valuations of the last 10 years."
The hazardous-waste disposal business "is starting to pick up" with the economy, says Mr. Brubaker.
And "there are some changes going on in Washington that should help them."
Charles Biderman, editor of Market Trim Tabs, a stock-market newsletter in Santa Rosa, Calif., likes Cabot Oil & Gas, which he says excels in getting the biggest possible additions to reserves for each dollar it spends on exploration.
Cabot is mainly a natural-gas company, and just agreed to boost its gas reserves substantially by acquiring a subsidiary of Washington Energy.
Cabot closed yesterday at 21, a very high multiple of the company's earnings, but a reasonable multiple of cash flow, according to Mr. Biderman.
Business inventories in January slipped less than 0.1% from December's low level, falling to $872.90 billion from $873.07 billion, the Commerce Department said.
Low inventories often mean companies are ordering more to replace what has been sold.
This translates into increased production and economic growth.
The inventory-to-sales ratio continued around 10-year lows.
The ratio -- the number of months it would take to deplete stockpiles at the current sales pace -- rose to 1.43 from December's revised 1.42.
The ratio increased because of somewhat slower sales of durable goods, such as autos and refrigerators.
Sales of nondurables, such as food and clothing, which typically lag behind durables during recoveries, improved.
It is "a fairly bullish report for the future," said Donald Ratajczak, director of Georgia State University's economic forecasting center.
Despite the cold weather in the Northeast and the earthquake in Los Angeles, sales remained strong and inventories lean.
"The economy is not taking off like a rocket, but there's good growth," said Kurt Karl of the WEFA Group in suburban Philadelphia.
"There's nothing to worry about but nothing to write to grandma about."
The figures are adjusted for seasonal changes.
Here is a summary of the Commerce Department's report on business inventories and sales in January.
The figures are in billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted:
