INCREASED CONCERN about drinking-water quality is creating a flood of demand for cheap and simple filtration devices.
While one of the most popular is made by Brita USA, a unit of big consumer-products maker Clorox, small manufacturers dominate the industry.
Many expect sales to skyrocket in 1994, building on last year's strong growth.
About 15% of U.S. households use the devices, up from 4% in 1992, according to the Home Water Report, a newsletter in Chincoteague Island, Va.
Innova Pure Water in Clearwater, Fla., anticipates sales of about $3 million for the fiscal year ending June 30, up from $900,000 last year.
Innova makes a small carafe that filters tap water for a suggested retail price of $6.
"Consumers are realizing there are alternatives to bottled water, and filtered water systems are becoming much more popular," says Joseph Nohren, Innova's executive vice president.
The devices also are a growing product category for Pollenex, says Phil Gyori, a spokesman for the Kansas City, Mo., maker of faucet filters.
"Everybody's been scratching their heads for a long time saying this should be big.
Now, it's finally starting to pick up speed."
Mr. Gyori says sales of Pollenex's $25 filters rose 30% last year.
The privately held company, which declines to disclose figures, expects stronger growth this year, he adds.
Caldera Environmental, a Chicago filter maker, says 1993 filter sales at its Sterling Air & Water unit rose to $4.5 million, from $1 million in 1992.
Caldera officials think tastes will become more sophisticated over the next few years.
"We're hoping that as consumers become more comfortable with simpler filtration systems, they'll think about using more elaborate systems for the entire home," says Dawn Van Zant, a spokeswoman.
ENTREPRENEURS complain that increased telemarketing abuses make it harder for legitimate catalog start-ups to get merchant accounts from companies that issue or process credit cards.
"There is a lot of truth to that," says John Elliot, chief executive officer of Card Establishment Services, a big credit-card processor in Melville, N.Y.
"But the problem with mail order is that we're effectively asked to give the merchant the money without seeing whether the customers get the goods."
Owners of small catalog companies say credit-card companies have become too defensive.
"You would think we were in the business of trucking nitroglycerine across the trans-Alaska highway, given how afraid of us they were," says Daniel Rothmel, founder of Golden California Catalog in Los Angeles.
Though the state is a partner and investor in the company, Mr. Rothmel says he tried for several months to get a credit-card account before launching his catalog business three months ago.
It sells gifts and souvenir items with a California theme.
Mr. Rothmel finally landed an account with Litle & Co., a Salem, N.H., processor specializing in catalog firms and direct-mail start-ups.
Other entrepreneurs say establishing an account can be unnecessarily difficult.
"Credit-card companies all told me that if you're a new mail-order business, we don't want to talk to you," says Jean Hill, owner of Amara Kosher Meats in New York.
Ms. Hill, who started her mail-order food company a year ago, says she spent three years looking for a company before a consultant steered her toward Litle.
"These credit-card companies just want to reap the benefits of fees but don't take the risk of helping a small business get started," she adds.
Litle and DMGT in Nashua, N.H., which also handles small catalog accounts, say a start-up gets the accounts faster when it can provide a well-developed business plan and has strong financial backing and management experience.
SMALL BUSINESSES are getting more advice on negotiating the confusing world of outsourcing.
With big corporations increasingly contracting out everything from data processing to janitorial work, outsourcing arrangements can become thorny for small vendors.
"Outsourcing programs are thrown together haphazardly, and many of the small businesses that become involved with them get burned," says Joseph Bissett, president of ConServe, a Wayne, Pa., company that brokers arrangements between small and large companies.
Small concerns often don't get adequate support from the larger companies, and terms of deals often are cloudy, he adds.
Mr. Bissett says ConServ's business has grown dramatically over the last six months because more small businesses have had problems finding satisfactory outsourcing contracts.
He says small companies should make sure contracts are exclusive, are longer than a year and have well-defined commission or payment terms.
Others also are making a bigger push to assist small firms.
Coopers & Lybrand, the large New York consulting group, has brokered outsourcing arrangements between big and small concerns for the past 18 months.
And in April, the nonprofit Outsourcing Institute opened in New York in response to what it says was frustration among corporate managers seeking more outsourcing vendors of all sizes.
The institute charges vendors $2,200 a year for a listing in an outsourcing guide, a newsletter and seminar discounts.
COMPANIES WITH revenue of $100 million or less paid their CEOs an average salary of $143,900 last year, only 3.3% more than 1992 according to a recent survey of 735 such firms by consultants Ernst & Young in New York. . . .
All in the family?
About 24% of the owners of family-owned enterprises do not want to transfer the business to a relative, according to a recent survey by the Gallup Organization.
