In an apparent effort to ease growing U.S.-Japan trade friction, Japan is expected to clear the way for Chrysler Corp. to sharply boost exports of Jeep Cherokees to Japan.
As a result, Chrysler hopes to more than double exports to Japan of U.S.-made right-hand-drive Jeep Cherokee sport-utility vehicles this year, to 10,000 units.
Hideaki Mukaiyama, a vice minister in Japan's ministry of transportation, tomorrow is expected to present Chrysler a "type certificate" covering the Cherokees.
That means the ministry certifies in advance as road-worthy all Cherokees that Chrysler intends to import, rather than requiring that each individual vehicle be inspected.
This will remove a major nontariff barrier to Chrysler sales in Japan.
The Cherokee accounts for the bulk of Chrysler's sales there and is one of the most popular U.S.-built Big Three products sold in Japan.
"This was granted to us on very short notice and is a direct result of U.S. trade pressure," said Peter C. Badore, general manager for Chrysler's Asia/Pacific operations.
Japanese officials confirmed that Mr. Mukaiyama traveled to Detroit to make the presentation but declined to comment further.
Japan-U.S. trade relations have been frayed as talks between the two countries broke down.
Last week, President Clinton renewed a tough trade measure called Super 301, which allows the U.S. to impose sanctions against countries it considers unfair trading partners.
The renewal was aimed squarely at the Japanese.
But Japan has been taking a variety of steps aimed at easing trade tensions.
For instance, on the day that President Clinton announced the Super 301 renewal, Toyota Motor Corp.
Chairman Shoichiro Toyoda said his company would be willing to accept nonbinding targets for purchases of U.S. auto parts.
U.S. negotiators have been seeking binding targets and said isolated actions such as the Toyota offer and the Chrysler "type certificate" don't go far enough.
The regulatory easing by Japan comes as the strong yen and years of cost-cutting by Detroit have transformed the U.S. into a significant auto exporter.
Chrysler, together with General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co., has been gearing up to try to sell more cars in Japan.
For years, Detroit has complained bitterly that Japanese regulatory roadblocks made selling cars there difficult.
Japan always countered that Detroit wasn't making a serious effort to sell reasonably priced, right-hand-drive vehicles that matched Japanese tastes.
But in 1992, Chrysler introduced a right-hand-drive Cherokee, the first right-hand-drive U.S. export to be sold in Japan in years, and in 1993, it cut prices on the vehicle substantially.
Last year, Chrysler's Cherokee sales in Japan hit 4,000 units, as the auto maker took advantage of the strong yen to chop the price of the top-of-the-line Cherokee to 3.7 million yen ($34,972) from 5.3 million yen.
It also introduced a base version for 2.9 million yen.
About 75% of the vehicles are sold through Honda Motor Corp.'s dealer network, where they undercut Japanese-made Isuzu Troopers, also sold by Honda, but for 3.2 million yen.
Chrysler also sells in Japan through Seibu Motor Sales' dealer network.
In the first two months of 1994, Chrysler sold 1,741 Cherokees, but nonetheless, after each sale, a car salesman had to drive the Cherokee to a local land transport office of the transportation ministry and take the vehicle through what amounted to a four-hour inspection.
"Imagine if the salesman who sold you a car had to take four-to-five hours of his time at the secretary of state's office," said Chrysler's Mr. Badore, "including in some cases a two-hour drive each way."
The "type certificate" will help boost Cherokee sales further and will allow the company to cut prices.
The company is planning price cuts and a dealer-incentive program to encourage more dealers to stock Cherokees, so that customers can test-drive the vehicles more easily.
Over the next few years, the auto maker plans to develop right-hand-drive versions of the Grand Cherokee; the next-generation Cherokee, due in 1997; the Neon; and its minivan.
Most, if not all, those vehicles will be sold in Japan.
The Chrysler "type certificate" isn't a first for a U.S. auto maker.
GM has certificates allowing it to export two Cadillac models and the Pontiac Grand Am.
But those are low-volume, left-hand-drive products, and the bulk of GM's sales are European-made Opels, not U.S. exports.
Similarly, the bulk of Ford's Japan sales are Mazdas with a Ford badge.
Last year, Chrysler sold 5,699 North American-built vehicles in Japan, including the 4,000 Cherokees; Ford sold 5,111; and GM sold 8,525.
