Trade relations between the U.S. and Japan appear to be heading for a momentary period of calm following the resolution of a dispute over cellular telephones and the expected easing of tensions over semiconductor-market access.
Officials from both sides of the semiconductor battle said they expect figures for the 1993 fourth quarter to show that foreign companies' share of the Japanese chip market rose to about 20%.
In bilateral chip negotiations, the U.S. has long sought a 20% foreign share in Japan.
The two governments are expected to release the fourth-quarter market-share figures, which could deviate from the officials' estimates by a few tenths of a percentage point, as early as Thursday.
That will come on the heels of an agreement the U.S. and Japan reached on Saturday to resolve a tense dispute involving Motorola Inc.
The company asserted that the Japanese cellular carrier IDO Corp., in violation of a 1989 U.S.-Japan trade agreement, dragged its heels in expanding its Motorola-style cellular network.
Under the new accord, IDO will accelerate construction of its Motorola-style system to meet U.S. demands and will curb development of a rival cellular network it operates.
The U.S. and Japanese governments will both certify IDO's progress in a quarterly review.
The cellular agreement and the semiconductor figures, while good news for U.S. companies, also represent something of a quandary for U.S. trade policy.
Since bilateral trade talks collapsed in mid-February, the U.S. has sought to keep the pressure on Japan to come back to the table using cases such as the Motorola cellular dispute.
The recent encouraging signs, however, "make it harder for the Clinton administration to keep the kettle on boil," said Linn Williams, a former deputy U.S. trade representative.
The Motorola case provided a clear symbol of unfair trading practices, he said, and attracted support from the public and other trade partners.
In contrast, the issues in the "framework" trade talks between the U.S. and Japan are less clear, and, among other trading partners, support for the U.S. goal of numerical import targets is "near zero," Mr. Williams said.
U.S. officials said the two sides haven't done anything on the framework talks since Feb. 11, when the negotiations broke off.
While U.S. officials caution that the Motorola deal isn't a harbinger of progress in the broader talks, they said the U.S. will take the same type of "results-oriented approach" used in the cellular talks.
The cellular-phone agreement changed the tenor of U.S. rhetoric.
During his weekly radio address, President Clinton held up the accord as an example of how the U.S. and Japan can "work together to open up jobs in America by opening up markets in Japan."
Earlier, in Tokyo, U.S. Ambassador Walter Mondale said the pact shows how the two sides can "work together to achieve real market access in Japan."
For his part, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor qualified any optimism over the effect of the agreement with a double negative.
"It's not unhelpful," he ventured, over the click of cameras at a hastily called Saturday afternoon news briefing.
When asked whether the accord showed that a "tough" policy works, he said that "the word `tough' is so overused."
But he later said with some sarcasm, "I've never been known for a light touch."
With the Motorola case solved and the threat of sanctions eliminated on this issue, Japanese officials are hoping that U.S. pressure will decrease.
"With the solution of this issue, I think it will alleviate many of the concerns and criticisms that have been aimed at Japan," said an official at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
But future disputes are already in sight.
Clinton administration officials are eyeing the release of the National Trade Estimates Report at the end of March as an opportunity to hit the Japanese.
That report will outline allegedly unfair trading practices, and Japan is expected to be singled out.
"Although there is not a bazooka ready to go off, there will be ample opportunity to put pressure on Japan," insisted Jeffrey Garten, Commerce undersecretary for international trade, in an interview.
A U.S. official said the U.S. won't be releasing "a horror a week" to press its case, but said there are a few areas U.S. officials have identified as problem-ridden, among them, glass, wood products and government procurement.
Moreover, President Clinton recently renewed the trade measure called Super 301, which allows the U.S. to impose sanctions on countries it considers to be engaging in unfair trade practices.
But any movement on Super 301 is months off.
The U.S. isn't slated to identify any practices until September, and even then sanctions wouldn't be imposed immediately.
The cellular-phone agreement gives a hint of the kind of solutions the U.S. and Japan might find on other disputes.
Critics charge that U.S. officials haven't clearly laid out what they want when they talk about "quantitative measurements."
U.S. officials say they don't want the kind of market-share targets that are in the semiconductor pact, but rather terms that lay out how the Japanese market should be opened, for example, the way the cellular-phone pact details how many base stations and channels Motorola should get.
Regarding semiconductors, the increase in foreign share that is expected to be reported for the fourth quarter would follow three consecutive quarters of decline, a situation that has alarmed the U.S. industry.
A fourth-quarter share of about 20% wouldn't be enough to bring the average level for all of 1993 to 20%, U.S. industry officials said, but they said it probably would be enough to ease pressure.
The foreign share was 18.1% in the third quarter, down from a high of 20.2% in the 1992 fourth quarter.
U.S. and Japanese semiconductor officials attributed the expected rise in 1993's fourth quarter to increased sales of foreign chips in Japan at a time that the overall market shrank.
There is some uncertainty over the estimates for overall market share because the two governments don't disclose how they calculate the size of the overall market.
Alan Wolff, a lawyer for the Semiconductor Industry Association, a trade group of U.S. makers, said: "There may be a temporary relaxation in the tension, erroneously, I think," with a fourth-quarter bounce in market share.
Government and industry officials from both sides are to meet next week in Hawaii to chart ways to resolve their dispute.
The U.S. said it will be watching Japan's stance there to decide how tough to be.
Japanese officials said that Japan will continue its efforts to introduce unilateral market-opening measures.
Although some government officials have said some of those steps may be delayed until early summer, others insist that a package will be ready by the end of March.
Japanese officials maintain that they will reject numerical import targets, although some prominent politicians and businessmen have begun calling for "nonbinding" targets.
