Investors bid small-company stocks to marginal gains despite continuing concerns about the direction of interest rates.
Traders said a cautionary approach before today's release of February consumer prices, and Friday's "triple witching" session, in which stock futures and options expire, played a role in limiting stock-price advances yesterday.
The Russell 2000 Index of small-capitalization issues added 0.67 point, or 0.25%, to end at 266.86.
Its high for the day was 267.08.
Nasdaq stocks surged higher on some mild strength among technology leaders.
The Nasdaq Composite Index gained 0.72 point, or 0.09%, to 793.52, although it had risen nearly 3 points early yesterday.
Among big technology stocks, Intel Corp., Microsoft Corp. and Applied Materials Inc. all gained at least a point.
Gainers outperformed Nasdaq losers, 1,608 to 1,464.
Traders said recent jitters over interest rates and inflation continued to deflate volume.
Nasdaq National Market volume totaled 263,066,800 shares with overall volume climbing to 303,080,000.
On Monday, national market volume was a more anemic 224,810,800 shares and total volume was 265,502,100.
According to Larry Kinney, head of over-the-counter trading at SoundView Financial Corp., although some profit-taking kicked in during the late afternoon, optimism over first-quarter earnings is helping to attract buyers.
Encouraging inflation data yesterday helped soothe the bond market.
The government said its February Producer Price Index increased by 0.5%.
But the "core" rate of wholesale inflation, which excludes the food and energy sectors, rose by only 0.1%.
It was the second piece of news that ignited bonds, sending the long bond up more than 7/8 point, with its yield falling back to 6.87%.
But while smaller issues took some comfort from solid government securities, large, cyclical issues hesitated in front of today's key inflation report.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell more than 13 points.
Analysts expect the inflation data to be benign, which is good for the market as a whole, but which could offer particular opportunities to smaller stocks.
"A moderate-growth economy with little inflation and low rates is very good for this group of stocks," said Sandra Shrewsbury, manager of the Piper Jaffray Emerging Growth Fund.
Ms. Shrewsbury cites the "niches" small companies occupy and their "nimbleness."
Although she sees continued volatility in the group, the stocks offer "great benefits over the long term."
Smaller issues, as measured by the Russell 2000, had a better year in 1993, than did the components of the Dow industrials.
Shares of Biogen fell 3, or 7%, to 38 1/2.
A total of 1.9 million shares in the Cambridge, Mass., biotechnology company changed hands against average daily turnover of 707,000.
A spokeswoman said there is no corporate news to explain yesterday's weakness in the company's shares, but the activity may be linked to a recent scientific presentation.
As reported, the company presented data Monday on its lead product Hirulog at an American College of Cardiology meeting in Atlanta.
When the data first became available via a scientific abstract at the beginning of the month, several biotechnology analysts expressed disappointment with the lack of conclusiveness.
Analysts faulted the study for failing to demonstrate the cardiovascular drug's usefulness in preventing death, nonfatal heart attack and rapid clinical deterioration.
No analysts were immediately available to discuss the data.
Among movers yesterday, new issue NN Ball & Roller, Erwin, Texas, rose to 16, above its offering price late Monday of $14 a share.
The maker of precision steel balls and rollers said proceeds will be used to repay debt, fund a dividend of undistributed earnings to current stockholders and fund general corporate purposes.
TSX, an El Paso, Texas, distributor of electronics, surged 1 3/4 to 7 3/4 on the American Stock Exchange.
After the close Monday, the company said Tele-Communications has acquired 2,109,000 newly issued TSX shares, representing a 49% stake.
Sayett Group improved 1 to 6.
The Pittsford, N.Y., concern said it has formed a new venture with ISI Holding to make and sell wearable computers with a head-mounted miniature display for various commercial and Department of Defense operations.
Good earnings pushed Natural Wonders, Union City, Calif., up 2 3/8 to 8 3/8.
The operator of retail stores said its fourth-quarter net income was $1.06 in the latest period, up from 80 cents a year earlier.
The latest earnings surpassed Wall Street's expectations by two cents a share.
Gentex bounced 1 3/4 higher to 25 1/4.
The Zeeland, Mich., maker of products that use electro-optical technology, said its first-quarter earnings and revenue are "on track" to meet, or possibly exceed, the consensus of analyst estimates, which is 20 cents a share.
In other earnings news, Books-A-Million chalked up 2 1/2 to 21 1/4.
The Birmingham, Ala., operator of book and greeting-card stores said its fourth-quarter earnings rose to 46 cents a share on more shares from 37 cents a year earlier.
Standard Commercial jumped 1 1/2 to 17 5/8 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The Wilson, N.C., tobacco and wool processor benefited from a Prudential Securities Inc. upgrade to "buy" from "hold."
Big Board-traded GranCare jumped 1 7/8 to 21.
Kidder, Peabody & Co. analyst Joel Ray raised his rating on the Culver City, Calif., operator of health-care facilities to "strong buy" from "attractive long term."
On the losing side, CMC Industries tumbled 3 5/8 to 6 1/8.
After the close Monday, the Memphis, Tenn., telecommunications concern said it expects third-quarter and fourth-quarter operating earnings to fall below analysts' forecasts, saying it had been "advised by a major customer of a production reschedule" of one of its products.
CMC Industries went public in December at $9 a share.
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, based in Tarrytown, N.Y., tumbled 4 3/8 to 8 3/4.
The company said it plans to modify and extend its multicenter phase III clinical study of the safety and efficacy of ciliary neurotrophic factor, or CNTF, to treat Lou Gehrig's disease.
Cato declined 1 7/8 to 17 5/8.
The Charlotte, N.C., operator of women's apparel specialty stores said its fourth-quarter net income fell to 17 cents a share from 19 cents in the year-ago period.
NN BALL & ROLLER Inc. is based in Erwin, Tenn.
In yesterday's Small Stock Focus column, it was incorrectly reported that the company's headquarters are in Erwin, Texas.
