Rogers Communications Inc. delayed its plan to make a multibillion-dollar bid to acquire Maclean Hunter Ltd., citing "uncertainties" related to a block of the target company's stock indirectly held by Maclean Hunter.
Maclean Hunter, meanwhile, said it is talking to several possible buyers "about many parts of Maclean Hunter."
Ronald Osborne, president and chief executive officer, declined to name them, or say if the cable television and publishing company has discussed an outright takeover by a company other than Rogers.
Rogers Communications had been expected to announce terms of an offer after a board meeting Friday.
Earlier last week, Rogers had said it planned to make an offer for Maclean in a bid to control a third of the Canadian cable television market.
At the time, Rogers, which also has interests in telecommunications, said it wouldn't offer to buy the 36.3 million shares, or 17% stake, indirectly held by Maclean Hunter.
At current market prices, a purchase of all Maclean Hunter stock, including those 36.3 million shares and the 14.9 million shares Rogers can purchase from its own president, Edward Rogers, would have a value of about 3.68 billion Canadian dollars (US$2.77 billion).
If Rogers doesn't buy the 36.3 million shares, the rest of Maclean Hunter would be valued at C$3.04 billion.
Rogers, whose board Friday "approved in principle a strategic merger" with Maclean, said it will apply to the Ontario Securities Commission for confirmation that it can proceed with a bid for Maclean Hunter without offering to buy the 36.3 million shares.
Commission Chairman Ed Waitzer said a hearing is likely, but he didn't know how long it would last.
Maclean Hunter has held the shares indirectly through a subsidiary since the mid-1970s, when a former controlling shareholder, Donald Hunter, set up the arrangement to add "stability" in the event of a takeover bid, said Mr. Osborne.
The arrangement cannot prevent a takeover.
It was intended to buy time for Maclean Hunter's management and directors to explore options, Mr. Osborne said.
Rogers Communications Vice Chairman Philip Lind wouldn't say if the company would still bid for Maclean Hunter if it isn't allowed to exclude the shares.
He wouldn't elaborate on why Rogers won't proceed under current circumstances.
But one person familiar with the situation said Rogers is reluctant partly because it is worried that it could be stuck with a sizable capital gains tax bill on the shares.
Such a bill could cover gains since the shares were first put in the hands of the Maclean Hunter unit.
Maclean Hunter's stock price has jumped C$3.75 or 27% to C$17.50 in heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange since Rogers' plans were first announced Wednesday, while Rogers' shares have skidded C$2.375, or 11%, to C$19.875. Analysts said investors are speculating that other companies might bid for Maclean Hunter, but added that the list is short.
Any challenger for Maclean Hunter would need to have deep pockets and be Canadian because of regulations.
Some of the potential suitors for Maclean Hunter mentioned by analysts include Power Corp. of Canada, a media concern flush with cash, and BCE Inc., a holding company that owns Bell Canada, the country's largest telephone company.
Spokesmen for Power Corp. and BCE declined to comment.
Analysts also suggested Seagram Co., a beverage concern with a minority stake in media giant Time Warner Inc.
Officials of those companies weren't available for comment.
A few companies, including Montreal media concern Quebecor Inc. and Toronto newspaper concern Hollinger Inc. said they would consider buying some media assets.
Rogers Communications Friday reported a fourth-quarter loss of C$163.3 million, or C$1.02 a share, including some one-time charges, compared with a loss of C$70.2 million, or 47 Canadian cents a share, in the year-earlier period.
Its operating profit, however, more than tripled, mostly due to cost-cutting.
Revenue also rose 11% to C$355.9 million from C$320.7 million.
The company had C$2.8 billion in long-term debt as of Dec. 31.
Two credit-rating agencies said Friday they are reviewing their ratings on Rogers Communications in light of the debt the company would take in an acquisition.
