Gold futures prices leaped higher on a sharp break in bond and stock markets and in reaction to the assassination of Mexico's leading presidential candidate.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was up $4.50 to $391.90 an ounce, while the actively traded May silver futures contract rose 9.3 cents to $5.745 an ounce.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, platinum for April delivery was up $4 to $408.10 an ounce.
Gold had been the laggard in a recent precious-metals market rally led by the strength of silver prices, but political and financial turmoil yesterday served to bring new life to the gold market, analysts said.
The assassination of Luis Donaldo Colosio, the ruling party's presidential candidate in Mexico, set the tone for gold's strong performance, sparking a wave of buying in overseas markets while U.S. markets were closed Wednesday night.
"In this kind of political chaos scenario, there seems to be a lot of movement away from North American assets," says William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"That type of environment works in favor of gold."
When U.S. financial markets opened yesterday, bond prices fell precipitously, as did the Dow Jones Industrial Average, prompting a movement of some investor money into gold futures, analysts said.
As the gold-trading session wore on, the April contract price rose above the $390-an-ounce level and remained there; gold had tried and failed in recent weeks to penetrate the $390 barrier.
"That $390 level is a key chart point," said Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man.
"Staying above it allowed gold to provide price leadership after being the laggard for the past three months."
The Knight Ridder-Commodity Research Bureau index of commodity prices remained above the psychologically important 230 level yesterday, also adding support to precious-metals prices, Mr. Demler said.
Silver has been strongest among precious metals lately because of strong options-related buying, Mr. O'Neill said.
"It's called `delta hedging,'" he said.
"Options writers are hedging their own risks, as silver prices rise, by buying futures contracts."
Such buying, Mr. O'Neill said, may not last.
"I think we have some more upside potential in silver," he added, "but I think the market will be subject to a very large correction when the aggressive options-related buying slows down."
ENERGY: Crude oil and product futures prices ended higher yesterday, on slightly increased hopes that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries would cut its second-quarter production quotas.
But the gains were relatively modest, as most players remained skeptical that the group would be able to make the tough decisions needed to lower output.
Traders said several OPEC delegations expressed support for a production cut as they arrived for the OPEC meeting in Geneva, which officially starts today.
But the market is awaiting word from the Saudis, who are seen as opposing a move to reduce output.
Traders predicted that until the Saudis reveal their position on whether or not to cut OPEC's current output ceiling of 24.52 million barrels a day, prices will continue to trade within a tight range.
Traders generally believe that if OPEC fails to lower its quota, prices are likely to fall, as supplies of crude outpace demand during the second quarter.
LIVESTOCK & MEATS: Pork-belly futures prices rose on strength in the cash market.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, pork bellies for May delivery were up .80 cent to 58.40 cents a pound.
"Seasonally, cash belly prices tend to rise at this time of year," said Dan Vaught, livestock analyst for A.G. Edwards & Sons, St. Louis.
"They have risen this week, to the lower 50s from the upper 40s last week."
Traders also are awaiting the contents of a U.S. Agriculture Department hogs-and-pigs report, which is scheduled to be released after trading today.
Among other things, the report will estimate probable supplies of pork bellies and other pork products in the immediate future and over the long-term, Mr. Vaught said.
Pork bellies are uncured bacon.
