Business groups hailed the Postal Service's proposal to raise mailing rates by 10.3% instead of an even larger increase that was under consideration.
But their support showed signs of splintering and postal officials said they probably will request another increase within two years.
Groups representing community newspapers and photo-mailing services said yesterday they're unhappy with some of the proposed rates.
Such opposition, along with likely outcries from consumer groups, could spur the Postal Rate Commission to challenge the justification for various rates and scotch the Postal Service's hopes for pain-free approval of its proposal.
Under the Postal Service's plan, the price of mailing a one-ounce first-class letter would rise next year to 32 cents from 29 cents.
Postcards would cost 21 cents instead of 19 cents, Priority Mail would start at $3.20 instead of $2.90, and Express Mail would start at $10.95 instead of $8.35.
Large mailers have supported the rate increases because the Postal Service had considered even greater increases, and because bulk-mailing costs generally would rise no more than the cost of sending a single stamped letter.
"Everybody absorbs the same percentage hit.
We don't take advantage of consumers, and consumers don't take advantage of us," says Arthur B. Sackler, director of the Mailers Council, a group of large businesses and associations.
In the past, rate increases have fallen on businesses more than individual mailers, and consumer advocates will push for the same treatment this time.
Consumer advocate Ralph Nader, who has fought past rate increases, said, "It continues the unfair burden on residential and other first-class users, to subsize commercial bulk mailers."
Postal Service officials denied the service's board of governors was favoring business users when it voted 6-0 late Monday to request the increase.
They said the new rates would raise an average consumer's postage costs by just $8 or $9 a year.
Still, Marcus Smith, publisher of Postal World, a Rockville, Md., newsletter, said the independent Postal Rate Commission probably will question the across-the-board increase.
He said that if the commission starts making changes "it will probably cause a lot of divisiveness among the mailers."
Ed Gleiman, chairman of the Postal Rate Commission, said the five-member panel isn't leaning one way or the other, but added that it wasn't created to "rubber-stamp everything sent over to it."
In 1991, the Postal Rate Commission granted a four-cent increase for first-class mail.
Members of the Postal Service's board, which had requested a five-cent boost, tried to overrule the commission, but couldn't get the unanimous vote needed to do so.
Yesterday, Postmaster General Marvin Runyon said the 10.3% increase was the smallest Postal Service request in 25 years, and was two percentage points lower than the inflation rate since 1991.
The Postal Service touted support from businesses such as Time Warner Inc. and groups such as the Direct Marketing Association.
But the National Newspaper Association, which represents 4,200 small newspapers, said it will fight the plan because second-class mailing rates within counties would rise 36%.
And a newly formed group called the Priority Mailers Association said it's unhappy with the rates because, according to the group, Priority Mail is already overpriced.
Nonprofit mailers of publications, such as National Geographic magazine, would bear a 17% rate increase under the plan.
Neal Denton, executive director of the Alliance for Non-Profit Mailers, said members were prepared for an even higher increase.
Still, he said they're concerned about the next increase, too.
"This is a rate case that will only last a year and a half at the most," he said.
