They may not realize it, but more and more Americans are getting their drinking water from French companies.
And we aren't talking about Evian or Perrier -- we're talking about household water, straight from the tap.
Two big French municipal-services companies have jumped into the enormous business of providing water and sewer services in the U.S., a business long dominated by sleepy government bureaucracies.
They don't import water, they simply manage U.S. waterworks.
They are driving down fees paid by municipal governments, giving U.S. competitors fits and sparking criticism.
They could become the dominant players in a business that one day could generate billions of dollars in annual revenue.
The French today operate government-owned water or sewer facilities across the U.S., from Newark, N.J., to Pikeville, Ky., and Burbank, Calif.
In November, a French-led group won one of the biggest municipal contracts yet offered to outside bidders, to provide sewer service in Indianapolis.
Currently, the two competitive French companies -- Cie. Generale des Eaux and Lyonnaise des Eaux-Dumez SA -- are vying for a multimillion-dollar contract to supply drinking water to Jefferson Parish, La., just outside New Orleans.
That battle has plunged them into the swampy vagaries of Louisiana politics, but the French seem happy to be there.
They see a potential bonanza in the U.S. market, where more and more cash-strapped localities are hiring companies to perform public services.
The French are in a particularly strong position.
Most U.S. competitors are small and limited, because, unlike in France, most U.S. governments have kept such work for themselves.
The French "have an engineering and operating background that the American companies don't have," says Michael Stayton, Indianapolis public works director.
"The U.S. companies just are playing catch-up right now."
Of the seven biggest competitors for these kind of contracts in the U.S. today, four are wholly or partly owned by the French or the British.
In Indianapolis, all four finalists for the work were foreign-led -- two French, two British.
Conquering the U.S. market is part of a global plan for the two French groups, which are fighting for world-wide dominance of the arcane municipal-services market.
They have fought over contracts from Buenos Aires to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, some worth more than $1 billion in revenue each.
In the U.S., about 20% of drinking water and perhaps 2% of waste water are handled by regulated private-sector companies.
The rest is handled by governments, and they are starting to contract it out -- a business valued at perhaps $500 million in annual fees today.
But federal regulations require increasingly costly water treatment and federal officials are urging cash-strapped localities to consider private "partnerships."
Patrick Moffitt, president of U.S. Water Inc., a wholly owned unit of Britain's North West Water Group PLC, says the potential market exceeds $30 billion a year in operating fees.
Some U.S. companies complain that the French are doing business below cost to squelch competition; officials at the two French companies insist they aim to make a profit in the U.S., albeit thin.
By automating services, cutting staff and reorganizing, they insist, they can operate local facilities as much as 40% cheaper than local governments can.
Don Evans, president of a U.S. competitor, Operations Management International Inc., a unit of closely held engineering firm CH2M Hill Ltd., has complained to federal-government officials and members of Congress that the French are cutting prices below their real costs, but says he has gotten little sympathy.
"From the government's standpoint, if the French are willing to send capital over, why not?" he says.
"They the French intend to be long-term players."
The French groups have had to learn to play local politics and deal with angry local-water department employees worried about losing their jobs.
In Jefferson Parish, where the French are the two private-sector finalists, company officials from each group have made political contributions to key local-government leaders.
"We weren't involved in the political process at all in that community and it may have been a mistake," says Mr. Evans of Operations Management, whose company was eliminated early on.
He says it is common in the municipal-services business world-wide to develop ties to government officials by entertaining and making political donations.
The chairman of the Jefferson Parish council, Robert Evans, acknowledges receiving political contributions, but says they don't affect his decisions.
He says the parish has privatized other services to save money, and that it narrowed its choice for the drinking-water contract to the French companies because they are "the cream of the crop."
But Wayne Koffskey, the water department's chief chemist, has led an employee revolt.
He says Generale des Eaux's Houston-based unit, Professional Services Group Inc., has lost business in cities such as Biloxi, Miss., and Porterville, Calif., because of disagreements with local officials about issues such as maintenance.
PSG President Michael Stump says the company has lost some contracts, but that in most cases, PSG -- today the largest contract water-services company in the U.S. -- simply was outbid.
In Burbank in 1986, he says, PSG lost a contract because of poor performance, and he says PSG has "changed a lot since then."
(Burbank's waste water now is handled by a U.S. affiliate of Lyonnaise des Eaux).
Mr. Evans of the Jefferson Parish council says local controversy has become so heated that it's uncertain if the water privatization will be approved.
Officials in Indianapolis, however, say they looked carefully at the French companies' track records and found that successes outweighed any complaints.
Consultants had told Indianapolis officials to expect as much as a 22% cost savings by privatizing wastewater treatment; both French companies offered nearly 45% savings, says Mayor Stephen Goldsmith.
Lyonnaise des Eaux got the nod, after allying itself with an Indiana company that already provides drinking water to the city.
The French concern, which tends to operate in the U.S. through joint ventures with U.S. companies, promised to set up an international training center in Indianapolis, hire some of the laid-off local workers, use its local venture as a base for other regional business and invest 5% of its local profits in the local economy.
Some government experts say more and more local governments eventually won't just hire companies to run local services, but will ask them to build, own and renovate water and waste-treatment plants.
That would create more opportunities for the French companies, which are big enough to absorb high investment costs and spend money on research.
Generale des Eaux, for example, posted the franc-equivalent of about $25 billion in 1992 revenue, only one-fourth of which was related to water.
Lyonnaise des Eaux reported about $12.5 billion in 1992 revenue.
Operations Management's Mr. Evans likes to joke that his company's $60 million in 1993 revenue, including water and other municipal services, could get lost in his French rival's year-end accounting adjustments.
