Jason Simon is an art curator obsessed with gambling.
He's fascinated by pool, blackjack and poker (seven-card stud, hi-lo, and Texas hold 'em are the names of his games).
He can tell you who invented the roulette wheel (it likely was Blaise Pascal, the 17th-century philosopher who made a notorious wager backing religious faith over atheism-nothing to lose, EVERYTHING to gain) and insists that prehistoric man sat in caves throwing bones in an Alley Oop version of craps.
So earnest and infectious is Mr. Simon's belief in the beauty of play that he has managed to convince the owners of a medium- to high-stakes poker club in Manhattan to let him curate an art show there.
The Mayfair Club is as unlikely a spot for a contemporary art exhibit as can be found in New York City.
Billing itself as a "membership-based establishment specializing in cards," it's the kind of place you would expect to be illegal and underground.
It isn't.
Players pay $100 a year to join and a nightly fee, seven days a week and as late as dawn, to get into the action -- the fee depends on the stakes of the game, and it can cost as much as $10,000 to ante up.
The house takes no part of the gambling handle, there's no alcohol sold on the premises and no cash on the tables.
The club is clean and well-lighted and even advertises in this newspaper.
Now it has opened its doors to art enthusiasts, hosting Jason Simon's "Mayfair Show," which is not for members only.
The show, featuring art with gambling-related themes, is open to the public from 7 p.m.to 4 a.m., every day through Feb. 12, with some of the art on view during more normal hours at the American Fine Arts Co. gallery in SoHo (22 Wooster St.).
The bulk of the Mayfair Show, consisting of paintings, prints, photographs and drawings, is displayed throughout the poker club's three gaming rooms and the lounge in its headquarters at 51 E. 25th St. Mayfair members have taken this in their stride: players barely look up from their cards when art mavens come to gawk at pictures or at the tables.
It's peculiar, viewing art in a room in which dozens of people are intently focused on a game of chance, clicking their chips and communicating in a virtual secret language.
While the players murmur about "flops" and "the turn" and "the river," the Mayfair staff noiselessly serves them plates of food on tableside trays, or delivers coffee or cigarettes.
In that environment, "the art is not the first thing that strikes you," Mr. Simon himself admits.
"It's a sotto voce presence."
Mr. Simon, who attended the Whitney Museum's independent study program and teaches at Sarah Lawrence College, is well-versed in psychoanalytic and sociological theories of gambling.
He has rounded up artwork that illustrates what he sees as the shared concerns of artists and gamblers, the most obvious being their existence outside mainstream society and the ever-present possibility of financial ruin.
Mr. Simon even is interested in the function of gambling clubs and casinos as small, private economies, a notion based on Robert Reich's writings.
The Mayfair Show includes black-and-white silkscreen prints by Ashley Bickerton, which incorporate "good" and "evil" images resembling playing-card suits; paintings by David Smith, who uses methods of shuffling images to determine the design of his work; and paintings by the Austrian Hans Weigand, himself a player of high-stakes blackjack.
Also in the show are a painting by Adam Simon on a page from the Daily Racing Form and Moyra Davey's huge photographs of details from $50 and $100 bills.
An exhibition catalogue features the transcript of a dialogue between a psychoanalyst and a gambler on the subject of bluffing.
To complete the circuit, by exhibiting the gambling world in the bosom of the art world, Mr. Simon has installed the work of Mayfair Club member Melissa Hayden at American Fine Arts.
Ms. Hayden is a photographer who became a competitive card player in the course of taking a series of pictures of professional poker champions.
Her subjects include poker legends Doyle Brunson, two-time winner of the World Series of Poker -- held each year in Las Vegas with the winner taking a pot of about $1 million -- and author of "The Super System of Poker," the Bible of Texas hold 'em; and Sailor Roberts, another World Series winner.
Ms. Hayden also has created an installation of 120 Polaroid photos showing, she says, the way "life imitates poker and poker imitates life."
For all the hifalutin theory behind the Mayfair Show, it sprang from a simple impulse of aesthetic generosity, a desire to give Mayfair members something pleasant to look at in the rooms where they spend so much time.
When Mr. Simon began hanging around the Mayfair about two years ago, playing in the "baby" hold 'em games, he noticed that the club's walls were unadorned.
"The first thing you were struck with was, this is a barren, clinical environment.
It's not a kind space," says Mr. Simon.
"As a curator, I thought I could make it a little more hospitable to the people who stood to lose huge amounts of money there."
So he approached club owners Frank and Mary Lou Kavaler (she's a retired art teacher) about hanging a show there, and they liked the idea.
"We have trouble covering the walls," Mr. Kavaler says.
"And these people should be exposed to other things."
Mr. Kavaler's hopes of awakening a love of contemporary art in the Mayfair members seem unlikely to be realized, however.
When asked what they think about the art, their response is largely negative.
A disclaimer has been posted next to one of the Ashley Bickertons ever since some members took offense at swastika images in the print.
But the reaction of Mayfair Club member Kenny Engels may be more typical of the players, whose games, after all, demand undivided concentration.
"I think the art is cool," Mr. Engels says.
"But I have to admit I didn't even notice it until it had been up for two weeks."
Ms. Woods is a copy editor at Dow Jones News Service in New York.
