American International Group Inc., the country's biggest commercial insurance company, would pay a smaller tax than other big insurers under the Clinton administration's proposed Superfund changes.
The difference arises because AIG wrote less insurance for businesses in the 1970s and early 1980s than it does currently.
Because of the way the proposed tax is structured, insurers with older policies would bear more of the financial burden for Superfund cleanups.
This disparity, while obviously supported by AIG, is just one of several objections that the insurance industry has raised with the proposed Superfund reforms.
Last week, the industry's main lobbying group, the American Insurance Association, voted to fight the tax, calling it unfair.
The Superfund plan also has received mixed reviews from environmentalists and members of Congress.
The White House proposal calls for the insurance industry to pay $3.1 billion over five years through a new tax.
The money would go into a trust fund that polluters could tap for partial payment of their hazardous-waste cleanup costs.
The tax on insurance companies would be based on how much commercial insurance it writes.
The plan tries to recognize that companies that wrote a lot of business insurance in the past -- when the sites were polluted -- have more liability than those that had written less.
So the revenue formula calls for 70% of the money to come from a tax assessed against certain business insurance premiums collected from 1971 to 1985.
The rest would be based on premiums written from 1986 to the present.
Such companies as Aetna Life & Casualty Co., Travelers Inc., Cigna Corp. and ITT Corp.'s Hartford Insurance unit dominated the business in the 1970s and early 1980s.
They would pay more than AIG, which didn't emerge as the top business insurer until the mid-1980s.
According to Standard & Poor's Corp., AIG was only the 19th largest writer of general liability insurance policies -- a standard form of business insurance -- in 1970 but rose to No. 1 by 1984.
Travelers, meanwhile, dropped to 8th place by 1987 from third place in 1970.
The American Insurance Association says the distinction between old and new premiums is unfair.
The administration assumes that it can accurately measure which insurance companies are most liable, but the trade group says that changes in company ownership and other factors make that goal impossible.
It adds that the tax formula also would put companies with a heavier tax burden at a competitive disadvantage to those that have less of a burden.
"This is the wrong way to go about it," said John Arlington, senior counsel for the trade group.
The group would prefer that the tax be based entirely on how much business a company currently writes.
AIG is not a member of the American Insurance Association.
The company has done its own lobbying on Superfund.
And for the last five years, it has been pushing more aggressively than the rest of the industry for reform.
AIG Chairman Maurice Greenberg said earlier this week that it is "perfectly logical" that insurance companies with more exposure should pay more, adding that the trade group's position "would be amusing if it weren't so serious."
He said that how the tax is assessed is less significant than the fact that the administration's reform plan is fundamentally flawed.
His main objection is how the administration's proposal fails to take litigation out of the cleanup process.
Under the current system, polluters and insurance companies spend more money in court deciding who should pay for remediation than they do on cleanup itself.
"The whole plan is flawed with respect to liability," Mr. Greenberg said.
Superfund reform is one of the most pressing issues in the property and casualty insurance business.
Unless the system is changed, the insurance industry could wind up paying $100 billion or more to pay claims and legal bills related to cleaning up Superfund sites, according to Tillinghast, an actuarial consulting firm.
The insurance industry says the administration plan would do little to ease its burden because, under the plan, polluters would be given a choice of whether to tap an insurance-industry-financed trust fund to pay part of their cleanup costs or seek payment the same way they do now, which is by suing insurance companies to get payment under their old insurance policies.
