All he wanted was to start a tiny airline.
Just four planes ferrying people on the cheap from Baltimore to Boston and Atlanta.
For a wealthy entrepreneur with his experience, that shouldn't have been too difficult.
But he isn't just any entrepreneur.
He is Frank Lorenzo, one of the most despised men -- by some parties -- in aviation history.
And thanks to his modest proposal, he has once again come under scathing attack by labor unions, some former colleagues and even officials in the federal government.
Any day now, the Department of Transportation is expected to weigh in with a decision that may bar Mr. Lorenzo from launching the airline he once proposed calling Friendship Airlines.
Already, a Transportation Department administrative law judge has come down against him in a preliminary ruling, saying that Mr. Lorenzo may have the cash, but he doesn't have the skills and isn't likely to play by the rules.
Now Mr. Lorenzo is making one last effort to change the government's mind.
Today, he is expected to announce that two new investors have joined him in ATX Inc., his airline-venture company, diluting his stake to well below 50% from 74%.
Though the investors haven't been identified, people close to Mr. Lorenzo say one is a former high-ranking New York Democratic official and the other is an investment group based in New York.
Clearly, Mr. Lorenzo hopes that by slashing his ownership, he will make his proposed little airline palatable, at last, to his foes.
It's a gamble, though, and one that hasn't paid off for others.
If he sells a majority stake, Mr. Lorenzo and his group may have to undergo another so-called fitness review by the Transportation Department, says Samuel Podberesky, a department lawyer.
And if the department finds that "he isn't fit," Mr. Podberesky says, "then selling a controlling interest isn't going to solve the problem."
That Mr. Lorenzo's opponents arrayed themselves in such force against him shows how the enmity against him just won't die.
His union foes mobilized no fewer than 57 members of Congress against him, and even briefly considered bringing up a 1992 drunken-driving arrest to cloud his name.
The charged fight has opened old wounds and inflicted new ones, in a bitter episode that began unfolding last summer behind the doors of a stuffy hearing room in the bowels of the Transportation Department's quarters near Capitol Hill.
Mr. Lorenzo, of course, made his name as the steely, union-busting chief of the now-defunct Texas Air Corp., parent of Continental and Eastern airlines.
He has twice taken airlines into bankruptcy, and his unyielding demands for labor concessions prompted a bruising 1989 strike at Eastern that proved fatal to the airline.
He shows no signs of backing down in this latest face-off either: "We're exactly the kind of people the Transportation Department should be attracting," contends the slim, angular 53-year-old executive.
"I've become the unions' whipping boy."
Airline unions thought they were rid of Mr. Lorenzo in August 1990, when he stepped down from Continental Holdings, the successor company to Texas Air, and sold his shares to Scandinavian Airlines System Inc. for more than $20 million.
As part of the deal, he agreed to stay out of the airline business for seven years.
He set up Houston-based Savoy Capital Inc., a venture-capital firm, and announced plans to invest in start-up firms in other fields.
But Mr. Lorenzo just couldn't stay away.
In January 1993, he paid $5 million to settle with Continental creditors who claimed he had sold his shares to SAS at too high a price; as part of the settlement, the non-compete clause was scrapped.
Mr. Lorenzo apparently had been preparing for this day for quite a while.
In April 1991, he had incorporated a shell company, ATX, in Delaware; he currently owns 57.7% and trusts for his children hold 16.3%.
By late 1992, Mr. Lorenzo had hired three former Continental executives, who did research showing a niche for a cut-rate airline on the East Coast.
At the start of 1993, just before the non-compete clause was killed, he brought in Stephen J. Kolski, former president of Continental's commuter carrier.
To officially open up shop as an airline again, Mr. Lorenzo had to pass muster with the Transportation Department, which judges the fitness of anyone who wants to start a carrier.
In a bid to smooth the way and appease potential critics, Mr. Kolski immediately embarked on a damage-control mission by seeking out Mr. Lorenzo's toughest foes, the unions representing airline pilots and mechanics.
Mr. Lorenzo's front man could get through doors Mr. Lorenzo himself would have had slammed in his face.
A balding, bearish man who looks like the Notre Dame football player he once was, Mr. Kolski first arranged a meeting with Randolph Babbitt, the president of the powerful Air Line Pilots Association.
The two men hadn't met before, but they knew of each other; Mr. Kolski had been a vice president of Eastern in the 1980s under Mr. Lorenzo, when Mr. Babbitt was a captain flying A300 jetliners there.
On a frigid Tuesday last February, the two men chatted amicably in the union president's office, filled with models of union-represented carriers, including two from Eastern.
Sitting in front of a wall adorned with framed, now-worthless Eastern stock certificates, Mr. Kolski described the concept of Friendship Airlines, which would fly two daily round trips from Baltimore to Atlanta and to Boston.
He needed pilots, he said.
But there was something the union might want to know: Friendship's biggest shareholder was Frank Lorenzo.
Mr. Lorenzo didn't want to be at odds with the union any more, Mr. Kolski said.
Couldn't it forgive and forget?
What happened next soured any prospect of the two sides reconciling -- though the sides offer very different versions of what transpired.
According to Mr. Babbitt, the union had nothing against Mr. Kolski, but Mr. Lorenzo was another matter.
"You're entering this with an albatross you've tied around your own neck," Mr. Babbitt says he told Mr. Kolski.
But as Mr. Kolski tells it, Mr. Babbitt never said the union would oppose a Lorenzo airline.
He claims Mr. Babbitt instead urged him to hide Mr. Lorenzo's ownership, a federal crime.
He says Mr. Babbitt then offered him a list of out-of-work pilots.
In any case, a day later, the pilots union declared its opposition to Mr. Lorenzo's re-entry into the airline industry -- even though Mr. Lorenzo hadn't yet announced his plans himself.
The union's press release minced no words: "He is the very embodiment of evil."
Mr. Kolski pressed on, trying to set up a meeting with the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, which represents mechanics and baggage handlers.
He was rebuffed.
At the same time, Messrs. Lorenzo and Kolski began courting state politicians.
They talked with Maryland economic-development officials about getting tax incentives.
They dined with Gov. Donald Schaefer just before Valentine's Day.
The governor was amenable, Mr. Kolski says.
"We need the business, we want the business.
We want to be helpful," Mr. Kolski says a state economic-development official told him.
But a Maryland state legislator, who also happened to be an officer of the machinists union, learned of the talks.
The well-organized union urged its Maryland members to begin a letter-writing campaign to state legislators -- and the legislators ultimately passed a resolution opposing use of state funds for Friendship.
Similar lobbying took place on Capitol Hill.
By the time Friendship applied to the Transportation Department for an operating certificate, 57 House members had written to Secretary Federico Pena urging him to reject it.
Spurred by this flurry of antagonism, and with the benefit of hindsight, the department took the unusual step of ordering a formal investigation into Friendship.
A public hearing before an administrative law judge was set for June.
Mr. Lorenzo said he welcomed the hearing.
But ire against his union foes surfaced at an April luncheon of the Aero Club in Washington, at which Secretary Pena was to make his first speech to the airline industry.
As a late-arriving Mr. Lorenzo walked by the pilots union's table in a crowded hotel ballroom, he paused and stuck his nose in the air.
"I thought I smelled something," he said, in a voice loud enough for Mr. Babbitt and other union officials to hear.
Mr. Lorenzo says he was joking.
In his years battling labor in the 1980s, Mr. Lorenzo had paid big money for lawyers and lobbyists to keep his airlines flying.
But this time, he hadn't bothered.
He didn't think he needed the help: A Bush administration appointee had told him his venture was such a sure thing it probably didn't even need a lawyer, Mr. Lorenzo says.
His union foes had other ideas.
The pilots and machinists reassembled the team of lawyers and consultants that had opposed Mr. Lorenzo in the 1980s.
Some had worked together for more than a decade, and knew each other so well that they didn't need many planning sessions.
"It's almost like shorthand," says John Sullivan, a partner with the law firm of Guerrieri, Edmond & James, which represents the machinists union.
In one strategy session, a union official suggested a personal attack: The union had learned of a drunken-driving arrest of Mr. Lorenzo in August 1992 in Houston, in which he failed an agility test and was brought in to the police station.
(Mr. Lorenzo pleaded no contest and was given two years of probation.)
One pilots-union official argued that since pilots convicted of drunken driving can lose their flying licenses, Mr. Lorenzo should be held to the same standard.
But everyone else resisted.
"There were enough reasons to oppose him on business reasons not to bring his personal life into it," Mr. Babbitt says.
Over at the Lorenzo camp, meanwhile, problems were cropping up at every turn.
In May, Mr. Lorenzo was forced to drop the Friendship Airlines name because United owned the rights to it.
He also dropped the easygoing regulatory attorney he had retained when he thought his company would be a shoo-in, replacing him with feisty Robert Beckman of Beckman, Kirstein & Murphy in Washington.
Mr. Beckman peppered the Transportation Department with extra filings.
He opposed what he viewed as onerous document requests.
He objected to an order that Mr. Lorenzo produce copies of every lawsuit filed against him -- a requirement involving hundreds of thousands of pages and so many lawsuits that the Lorenzo camp can't even provide an exact number.
The administrative law judge ultimately would find that ATX's failure to hand over the documents promptly showed the company wasn't inclined to comply with federal requirements.
The first days of the hearings took place in late June, during Washington's stifling summer, and the drab hearing room wasn't well air-conditioned.
With seats for only a few dozen spectators, it was packed.
Mr. Lorenzo got off to a bad start.
He shed his suit jacket and draped it over the back of the witness chair, to the astonishment of the buttoned-up courtroom crowd.
Judge Robert L. Barton told him to put the jacket back on, and Mr. Lorenzo sheepishly complied.
The rest of the hearing didn't go much better for Mr. Lorenzo.
The pilots union collected a long list of maintenance violations at Eastern when Mr. Lorenzo controlled the carrier, and described labor agreements he had refused to sign.
The machinists union persuaded former Continental chief executive D. Joseph Corr to testify.
As one of nine Continental presidents in as many years, Mr. Corr described Mr. Lorenzo's day-to-day management style as "dishonest," "inattentive to matters of safety," "disruptive" and "generally unqualified."
He called his former boss a "single bagger" when it came to safety: "Some grocery stores, when you go in to get your groceries, they give you just a single bag.
Other grocery stores that you go to, they give you a double bag."
Mr. Lorenzo, he testified, belonged to the former category.
Mr. Lorenzo says he fired Mr. Corr in 1989 for incompetence, and contends the former executive lied to ingratiate himself with unions, which are looking for chief executives at airlines in which they hold stakes.
"He's a disgruntled employee," Mr. Lorenzo says.
All this testimony fell on willing earsthose of federal regulators who had had their first run-ins with Mr. Lorenzo during the 1980s.
Transportation Department analysts sifted through 90 boxes of old documents dating back to Mr. Lorenzo's days controlling Eastern, Continental and Continental Express.
To Mr. Podberesky of the Transportation Department's public counsel office, the new evidence showed Mr. Lorenzo couldn't claim, as he had during the hearings, that he wasn't involved in day-to-day operations at his old airlines when problems arose.
"He was involved from day one to the last day," the Transportation Department lawyer says.
"He didn't fix it.
From our vantage point, someone's got to be held accountable."
Mr. Lorenzo can't appeal the Transportation Department ruling until Secretary Pena issues a final decision.
But he has already assembled the legal team to do just that, and says he will take his case to the federal appeals court in Washington if the ruling comes down against him.
He has also retained a well-connected public-relations firm, Dilenschneider & Co., whose chairman, Robert Dilenschneider, was chief executive of powerhouse firm Hill & Knowlton.
Under his tenure there, that firm took on controversial clients such as the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops in its antiabortion campaign and Bank of Credit & Commerce International in the midst of its financial scandal.
Looking back now, Messrs. Lorenzo and Kolski contend the Transportation Department was opposed to their application from the start and was looking for reasons to reject it.
"Who represented the public in all this?" asks Mr. Kolski.
Flyers seeking cheap fares in the Northeast, he adds, aren't likely to get them.
But the Baltimore market ATX planned to serve has become the East Coast's low-fare mecca.
Southwest Airlines added Baltimore to its route structure in September, setting off a price war among carriers including USAir and Continental Airlines.
Mr. Lorenzo, battling for so long to start up his airline in Baltimore, may have missed his opportunity.
Maryland Aviation Administrator Ted Mathieson says he hasn't heard from Mr. Lorenzo's group since last June.
Now, he says, he hears rumors that ATX might be looking to base its operations in Philadelphia instead.
Mr. Lorenzo, through a spokesman, confirms that he is interested in Philadelphia, as well as in Boston and New York.
Says Mr. Mathieson: "The picture has changed a lot from where we were a year ago."
Daniel Pearl contributed to this article.
A RESOLUTION opposing the use of state funds to attract an airline venture headed by Frank Lorenzo to Baltimore/Washington Airport failed to pass the Maryland House of Delegates.
A Jan. 25 page-one article incorrectly reported that the legislative body passed that resolution.
(WSJ Feb. 22, 1994)
