The market for stock in real-estate investment trusts has bounced back from a year-end slump, rescuing a number of private developers who had been forced to postpone plans to take their companies public.
For the week ended March 2, investors poured $113 million into the seven real-estate mutual funds tracked by AMG Data Services, more than double the highest previous weekly investment in the two years the firm has been tracking it.
"I've been buried in cash," said Barry Greenfield, whose $550 million Fidelity Real Estate Fund took in $100 million for the two weeks ended March 2, before leveling off the following week.
In order to invest the avalanche of new money without driving up the price of specific stocks, he said, he bought into more companies than he might otherwise have done.
Mr. Greenfield's fund notched a 5.75% return for the first two months of 1994, the highest of all Fidelity's domestic equity funds.
After falling 0.6% in December, prices of equity REITs jumped 2.3% in January and 3.9% in February.
Analysts attribute the year-end slump to the attempt by Wall Street underwriters in December to market more than $3 billion of REIT shares in initial public offerings.
At year end, faced with the glut of new offerings, shopping-center developers Macerich Co. of Los Angeles; Glimcher Realty Trust of Columbus, Ohio; JP Realty Inc. of Salt Lake City; and Prime Retail Inc. of Baltimore; as well as Youngstown, Ohio, mall developer DeBartolo Realty Corp., all postponed their IPOs.
Capital Apartment Properties Inc. of Rockville, Md., opted for a private sale to Apollo Real Estate Investment Fund of New York.
This year, however, JP Realty, Glimcher Realty, Macerich, and Prime all returned to the market and went public, and DeBartolo is widely expected to follow suit soon.
Fund managers and real-estate analysts say the activity demonstrates that investors view real-estate securities as a good hedge against the inflation that some fear is on the horizon.
When there is inflation, real-estate companies can raise their rental rates to compensate.
In addition, said some fund managers and analysts, the REIT market's recovery debunks the theory that rising interest rates would cause shares of real-estate investment trusts to plunge in value.
Some real-estate experts argued last year that investors were snapping up shares in new REIT offerings only because the 7%-plus dividend yields were better than diminishing yields on such fixed-rate investments as certificates of deposit and government bonds.
If rates were to rise, they contended, REIT investors would flee the market for more-secure CDs and bonds.
The REIT market's performance this year -- in the face of rising short-term and long-term interest rates -- "is the final nail in the coffin of the argument that high interest rates would kill REITs," said Jon Fosheim, a REIT analyst with Green Street Advisors, who pointed out that REITs also did well in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when interest rates were high.
"I've never believed that REITs were interest-rate sensitive," said Martin Cohen, whose $250 million Cohen & Steers Realty Shares Inc. mutual fund took in about $35 million for the week ended March 2, according to AMG.
"I think the world finally woke up to the fact that they aren't."
He noted that the asset value of his fund rose every day in the three weeks after the Federal Reserve raised the federal funds rate (the rate on overnight loans between banks) on Feb. 4.
Mr. Greenfield even made the contrary argument: "If interest rates go up, that's bullish for REITS."
Higher rates, he maintained, signal a growing economy, which will help diminish the excess inventory of commercial real estate, and finally, cause rents to rise.
There are now more than a dozen new REITS in registration for IPOs, and many more said to be in the pipelines of investment banks.
Nevertheless, last fall's slump leaves market experts doubtful that there will be a repeat of last year's frenzy of new offerings.
"The next wave isn't going to be as overheated and crazy as in 1993," said Mr. Greenfield.
