If there were a Good Housekeeping award for the best-swept corporate offices, General Electric Co. would have to be a top contender.
But then again, it might not -- for missing some nooks and crannies.
To respond to the Justice Department's price-fixing investigation, GE has had to collect internal documents, "sweeping" in legal parlance, from its labyrinthine operations around the globe.
Two dozen GE lawyers and auditors have rummaged through desks, credenzas and computers, gathering more than 300,000 pages of documents.
Despite the massive sweep of offices, some swept twice and even four times, at least one important document is still missing.
It is a "briefing paper" prepared by Edward Russell, the fired GE executive whose charges of price-fixing in industrial diamonds led to the Justice Department's indictment of GE last week.
Mr. Russell maintained that the document, which he gave to his boss, contained his price-fixing warnings.
Before Mr. Russell dropped his lawsuit against GE last week in a settlement, GE tried to prove that there was no such warning in the briefing paper.
But the problem was that GE couldn't produce it to prove it, and Mr. Russell, for some peculiar reasons, hadn't kept a copy himself.
The document was last seen when Glen Hiner, Mr. Russell's boss, put it in his trip file on his way to meet with De Beers officials in London.
"I think the paper was in my folder.
The folder was in my briefcase.
I never had the folder out during the meeting," Mr. Hiner, the former head of GE Plastics who is now chairman of Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., told the court.
"To the best of my knowledge," he said about the document, "that's where it is in the trip file."
The file ended up in the custody of Mr. Hiner's secretary when he returned to Pittsfield, Mass., the headquarters of GE Plastics.
When GE auditors began to sweep offices in response to a government subpoena in May 1992, Louise Koval, the secretary, pulled the file, a manila folder.
The briefing paper wasn't in the file, she testified.
The elusive document was at the center of Mr. Russell's lawsuit against GE.
The Justice Department wanted it, too.
"Finding the paper was a top priority," said David McCalpin of GE's corporate audit staff in testimony.
He said the search for the document took the audit staff not only to Worthington, Ohio, the base of GE's diamond operations, and Pittsfield, where Mr. Russell gave the briefing paper to Mr. Hiner, but to GE's headquarters in Fairfield, Conn., and to other operations, including Parkersburg, W.Va.; Frankfurt; Paris; Brussels; London; Singapore; and Tokyo.
In Worthington, three auditors went through file drawers, file cabinets, bookshelves, desk tops and computers of 34 people in late May and early June working 16 to 18 hours a day.
All they found was a draft of the paper "on the bottom of the stack of just miscellaneous loose papers" in the desk drawer of Steve Palovchik, a sales manager.
The draft, dated Sept. 4, didn't have the sort of strong antitrust warning that Mr. Russell claimed was in the final draft.
As far as Mr. Russell is concerned, having settled his suit with GE, the document is a moot issue now.
