Northrop Corp. offered to sweeten its bid for Grumman Corp. to $62 a share if Grumman abandons today's sealed-bid auction of the company and adopts new bidding rules.
But Grumman responded that its directors intend to continue with today's auction as planned, and hoped to receive "the best and highest offers" from both Northrop and rival bidder Martin Marietta Corp.
Grumman, which has said it designed its auction to assure "a prompt and orderly close" to the bidding, still plans to announce a winner at 9 a.m. EST Monday, after spending the three-day weekend completing an acquisition agreement.
The Bethpage, N.Y., defense contractor's response to Northrop didn't make any reference to Northrop's promise of a new offer, valued at $2.11 billion and topping Northrop's current $60-a-share offer at $2.04 billion.
The offer had been aimed at goading Grumman into canceling the 5 p.m. EST deadline for receiving final bids, under a bidding structure Northrop Chairman Kent Kresa had vehemently opposed.
In a letter to the Grumman board yesterday, Mr. Kresa said his offer of a $62-a-share bid would expire three hours before Grumman's auction deadline.
Upon expiration, he said, the $60 Northrop offer would remain in force.
Northrop made its higher offer contingent on Grumman's acceptance of a substitute bidding plan, which would instead allow Northrop or Martin Marietta 24 hours to top the open, public bids submitted by the other.
Mr. Kresa said Northrop is "unable to accept the rules and procedures set forth" in the Grumman auction, although a spokesman for the maker of the B-2 bomber and components for other aerospace projects declined to say whether that meant Northrop won't submit a bid today under any circumstances.
After Grumman said it would proceed with today's auction, Northrop responded that it is "continuing to review our options," and is sorry Grumman "elected not to have an open and public bidding process."
Mr. Kresa had argued in his letter that "both bidders should have a reasonable opportunity to respond to each bid by the other."
For its part, Martin Marietta has remained largely silent about its bidding plans, suggesting to some on Wall Street that the company will take advantage of Northrop's opposition to the bidding procedure by making an offer only moderately higher than the $62 Northrop has proposed offering.
One person familiar with the bidding said, "If Martin Marietta wants to win, they have the balance sheet to win."
But he and others suggested that Martin Marietta, a Bethesda, Md., company that has grown by acquisition into one of the largest U.S. defense contractors, has tended to avoid high-priced bidding wars.
Northrop may be smaller, this person added, but it has been unusually aggressive in pursuing Grumman.
Martin Marietta's last offer was the $55-a-share, or $1.93 billion, bid that was included in its March 7 acquisition agreement with Grumman.
Northrop's $60-a-share bid came three days later.
Before Grumman indicated it wouldn't accept Northrop's terms for the $62-a-share offer, an adviser to trustees of the Grumman Employee Investment Plan said he favored dropping the auction process to accept the Northrop bid.
The plan, controlled by three trustees who are Grumman executives, represents about a 33% interest in Grumman.
"It's a high-risk strategy to gamble the couple dollars that Northrop has just put on the table," said Wilbur Ross, the trustees' adviser.
Mr. Ross said he would like Grumman to throw open the bidding process along the lines suggested by Northrop.
"We feel a preference for a free and open-bid process than a closed one," he said.
After hearing that Grumman had rejected Northrop's plan, Mr. Ross added, "I hope they realize the new floor is $62," and added that the action could suggest that Grumman management knows "there is some showstopper bid coming" from Martin Marietta.
During a day of confusing letter exchanges between Northrop and Grumman, Grumman shares rose 50 cents in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, to close at $63.875.
Northrop shares were unchanged at $40.875, while Martin Marietta shares fell 12.5 cents to close at $45.
Northrop, angered because the deal with Martin Marietta was struck after Grumman suddenly ended a year of talks with Northrop, had sharply challenged the auction procedure as perpetuating an "unlevel playing field" that favors bids from Martin Marietta.
Mr. Kresa, in what some saw as groundwork for possible legal action, also argued that setting a deadline for final offers deprived Grumman shareholders of the benefits of continued bidding.
In yesterday's letter, Mr. Kresa further objected to Grumman auction procedures "that would allow Grumman and its advisers a period of more than three days to deal with any bids from Northrop or Martin Marietta, in complete secrecy, and with a commitment from Northrop not to increase its bid after that date."
Before Mr. Kresa made his proposals to the Grumman board yesterday, Grumman's chairman, Renso L. Caporali, had sought in his own letter to Mr. Kresa to keep Northrop involved in the auction process by arguing that it offers "the best assurance of a fair and orderly procedure."
Mr. Caporali said he feared that without a deadline, the bidding mightn't "conclude in the very near future."
Defense-industry watchers have suggested that Grumman, in an industry sensitive to congressional oversight, wants to avoid a repeat of the expensive, drawn-out fight in which Viacom Inc. defeated QVC Inc. to buy Paramount Communications Inc.
Traders were mixed on what the conditional $62-a-share offer from Northrop meant for the bidding process.
The increase of $2 a share suggested to some that Northrop is nearing its limit.
"The positive aspect is that your floor is $62," said one trader.
"The downside is this might be it."
But Mr. Kresa's letter suggested to others that his company is prepared to top a higher bid from Martin Marietta -- even challenging the auction process by making an offer after the deadline.
"We don't see the harm in a bid process where one bidder knows what the other is saying," this trader said.
Greg Steinmetz in New York contributed to this article.
