Before White House associate counsel William Kennedy III became a Clinton gatekeeper on ethical issues, he had a hidden problem of his own: unpaid taxes owed on a nanny's wages.
But he disclosed it to only one person in the Clinton camp -- Vincent Foster, the deputy White House counsel who died July 20, White House officials said yesterday.
Mr. Kennedy, former managing partner of Rose Law Firm, failed to pay more than $1,300 in Social Security taxes for a part-time nanny in Little Rock, Ark., in 1992, according to people familiar with the matter.
Mr. Kennedy's role in the violation was concealed from the Internal Revenue Service -- and possibly from FBI background checkers -- early last year when the delinquent taxes were paid under his wife's previous married name.
Mr. Kennedy had a Little Rock accounting firm pay the back taxes totaling $1,352.52, rather than pay it himself with a personal check, according to the same people.
The use of Mrs. Kennedy's previous name -- Leslie Gail McRae -- isn't illegal and doesn't trouble the IRS, but it raises the question of whether Mr. Kennedy, in his eagerness as a presidential appointee to appear ethically beyond reproach, was trying to deceive those who were checking into his background.
The FBI often asks the IRS to run tax checks on prospective presidential appointees.
Mr. Kennedy's duties include participating in the vetting of appointees to determine if they have ethical problems or conflicts of interest that might embarrass the administration.
Mr. Kennedy couldn't be reached for comment.
But Mark Gearan, White House communications director, said that Mr. Kennedy disclosed the nanny problem "to Mr. Foster in a preliminary interview" before he came to Washington.
The Kennedys, who are in the midst of divorce proceedings, have two young children.
They employed a nanny two to four days a week for child care in 1992.
The nanny was paid $8,840 in wages, but Social Security payments weren't paid quarterly as required by the IRS, according to people familiar with the matter.
Before starting work at the White House in February 1993, Mr. Gearan said, Mr. Kennedy paid the 1992 taxes as well as penalties for the first three quarters; the fourth-quarter payment was made on time.
The White House has taken the position that prospective appointees with nanny or housekeeper problems shouldn't be barred if they pay up delinquent taxes and stop employing illegal aliens, Mr. Gearan said.
Phillip Cox, Mr. Kennedy's accountant and a partner in Delloite & Touche's Little Rock office, wouldn't comment about the back taxes or firm's role in the matter.
"Those are the affairs of Mr. Kennedy," he said.
"It would be inappropriate for me to comment."
Mr. Kennedy was one of Rose Law Firm's big guns, earning more than $587,000 in 1992, according to his financial disclosure report.
His clients included Stephens Inc., the Little Rock-based securities firm, and Beverly Enterprises, a major nursing-home company.
He has been dogged by controversy since he came to Washington along with three Rose colleagues: Mr. Foster, Hillary Rodham Clinton and former Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating several Arkansas investors, including Mr. Kennedy's uncle, in connection with possible insider trading in Arctic Alaska Fisheries Corp. stock shortly before Tyson Foods Inc. disclosed in June 1992 an agreement to acquire the seafood company.
Arkansas-based Tyson was represented by the Rose firm; Mr. Kennedy said that he didn't work on the acquisition and that he doesn't know anything about the "circumstances" of his uncle's trading.
Last July, Mr. Kennedy was reprimanded by the White House for "inappropriate" contacts with the FBI during a controversy over the White House travel office.
The contacts "risked creating the perception" that the FBI was being improperly pressured, according to a report on an internal inquiry into the matter.
