EXECUTIVES PUT a personal stamp on speech preparation.
Frank Gratzer, head of business markets at Bell Communications Research Corp., brings peppermints and water to each speech, but consumes neither.
"It's important for me to know that they're there," he says.
Philippe Kahn, head of Borland International, reads about great speeches and orators.
His role model: physicist Richard Feynman, who turned dull topics into interesting talks.
Wilfred Corrigan, chief executive of LSI Logic Corp., writes his speeches on yellow legal tablets, but rarely refers to the text during the talk.
His Milpitas, Calif., company hires a consultant to help executives iron the "ums and ahs" out of their talks.
Humor is a must, but be careful, says Bradford Smith III, secretary-treasurer of AW Computer Systems Inc., Mount Laurel, N.J. "Poke fun at yourself," he says, "but never at the audience."
SALES PEOPLE TAKE a variety of companions on bonus trips.
Top producers long have been encouraged to take spouses on trips awarded for meeting sales goals.
Now some companies hone policies to account for different partners.
Next year, Xerox Corp. will include "significant others" on its President's Club trip.
Unum Corp., Portland, Maine, requires companions to be at least 21 years old and partners in meaningful relationships, defined as playing a "significant role" in employees' "business success."
Still, most companies take a hands-off attitude.
At Digital Equipment Corp., which has no restrictions, some winners bring their mothers.
"About 99%" of companions on trips sponsored by Pre-Paid Legal Services Inc., Ada, Okla., are spouses.
At BeautiControl Inc., Dallas, winners can bring "whomever they like."
A BATTLE ROYAL BREWS over a plan to tighten workplace health and safety laws.
The Labor Department backs a Capitol Hill plan that would force companies with 11 or more workers to set up employee-safety teams.
The bill also would boost criminal penalties for safety violations and extend safety laws to public employees.
Unions laud the bill sponsored by Sen. Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts and Rep. William Ford of Michigan, both Democrats.
But business rages that it was duped by the White House.
"There's been no good faith on their part, no acknowledgment of our concerns," seethes Pete Lunnie of the National Association of Manufacturers.
After meetings with executives, government officials "sure as hell ignored everything we had to say," he complains.
Labor Policy Association President Jeffrey McGuiness says, "It looks like {Clintonites} want to go to war."
Labor Secretary Robert Reich is set to testify next month on the bill, which backers hope to move this spring despite Republican opposition.
THINK YOUR JOB'S TOUGH?
More than a third of all emergency-room nurses are assaulted on the job each year, and nearly 20% have considered quitting because of violence, says Pennsylvania State University assistant professor Beverly Saxton Mahoney, a former emergency-room nurse.
Her study of 1,209 registered nurses showed that 64% reported at least one physical assault in their careers.
FAT-TRIMMING SKEPTICS: Nearly two-thirds of benefits experts think the Clinton health-care plan won't lower administrative costs, according to a survey by the International Society of Certified Employee Benefit Specialists.
They split over whether the White House plan is too generous, with about 40% saying it is, and the same number saying it is just right.
WANTED: SERIOUS ADVICE ONLY.
The Glass Ceiling Commission, a Labor Department-led panel, plans hearings in Los Angeles, Cleveland and New York to hear success stories of advancement for women and minorities.
"We know the sob stories," says executive director Joyce Miller.
"Now we want constructive suggestions."
EMPLOYERS' FINANCIAL HEALTH may be better explained in pension reports.
The Labor Department seeks public comment on improving pension-plan disclosure.
Most information sent to retirement-plan participants "has not changed since the 1970s," when the Employee Retirement Income Security Act was written, says Olena Berg, assistant labor secretary.
One hot-button: whether an underfunded plan should be forced to tell employees all the gory details.
Business groups concede that information provided to current and future retirees could use an overhaul.
But the government could "really increase the burdens" on companies "without effectively communicating what you want to communicate," says Lynn Dudley of the Association of Private Pension and Welfare Plans.
"There's a fine line between educating {people} and frightening them."
Much information already exists, but retirees don't receive it, pension experts say.
Comments must be submitted to the Labor Department by Feb. 25.
THE CHECKOFF: The perfect Valentine's Day gift?
New York businessman Sy Gru creates a wallet-sized guide of "actions that constitute sexual harassment" and how to avoid them. . . .
Working Woman magazine proposes the humiliation approach to fight harassment: Install X-rated software on offenders' computers, then turn the monitors so anyone looking in the door can see the display.
