Faster wage increases and a slowdown in benefit costs produced a 3.5% increase in average worker compensation last year, matching the 1992 increase which was the lowest in a decade.
The Labor Department figures suggest that labor cost inflation is well under control.
Increases in compensation costs have been slowing since 1988.
Wages and salaries, meantime, are finally picking up momentum after slowing in growth since 1989.
Wages rose 3.1% last year following a rise of only 2.7% in 1992.
The 1993 increase was still small, but topped last year's inflation rate of 2.7%.
Service-producing and nonmanufacturing industries showed the biggest wage gains.
"We are past bottom in hourly wages," said Donald Ratajczak, head of the Economic Forecasting Center at Georgia State University.
Finally, the figures suggest that benefit costs, driven mainly by health care, are continuing to moderate.
Companies are resisting benefit increases to hold down costs, while at the same time the health-care industry, under fire from the Clinton administration, is looking for ways to control prices.
Benefit costs were up 4.6% for the year after rising 5.3% in 1992.
These costs have slowed the most at the state and local government level.
The rise in private-sector benefit costs also slowed.
Analysts said yesterday that the news for employers in terms of compensation costs is probably about as good as it is going to get.
The labor market is likely to continue getting better as the economy improves, and that will help keep wages firm.
Also, while health-care costs have been moderating, analysts predict they will continue to rise faster than the inflation rate.
"Health care is a very labor-intensive sector and it's hard to hold costs down," said Washington economic consultant Joel Popkin.
Compensation costs rose 0.8% in the fourth quarter, the same as in the third period.
Wages and salaries rose 0.7% in the fourth quarter, compared with a 0.8% rise in the third quarter and benefit costs rose 1.0% following a 0.9% increase in the previous quarter.
Quarterly figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
