Spain's Justice Ministry said it has asked the chief public prosecutor to investigate reports that the Kuwait Investment Office in Spain made illegal payments to politicians during the Persian Gulf War.
The Spanish newspaper El Pais reported over the weekend that Grupo Torras SA, KIO's Spanish holding company, paid some $300 million to Spanish and other foreign politicians between 1990 and 1992 in an effort to win their support during the war.
The newspaper also reported that Torras executives diverted another 20 billion pesetas ($141.9 million) to bank accounts in Switzerland and London during the same period.
Of this amount, seven billion pesetas was allegedly channeled into private accounts, the paper said.
The Justice Ministry's pledge to investigate the El Pais allegations contrasts sharply with the government's apparent reluctance to probe accusations of corruption in the past, and was welcomed by Spain's leading political parties.
A legal suit brought by the KIO against seven former Torras executives was rejected four times by a Madrid high court judge last year because fraudulent mismanagement -- the principal crime alleged in the suit -- isn't included in Spain's penal code.
Those rejections provoked sharp criticism of what has long been perceived as a lax judicial system.
However, a group of high court judges ruled last month that the KIO should be allowed to begin legal proceedings against its former executives, who allegedly diverted or lost more than 100 billion pesetas of Kuwaiti investments in Spain between 1986 and 1992.
The case against the former executives is scheduled to begin March 18 in Madrid.
A spokesman for the KIO in Madrid said the office didn't believe that Torras paid commissions to Spanish and other politicians during the war, but rather that it channeled money into the personal bank accounts of its former executives.
But, the spokesman added, the KIO is prepared to investigate the allegations that illegal commissions were paid to politicians, even if an inquiry embroiled high-level Kuwaiti government officials.
In a statement, Javier de la Rosa, the former deputy chairman of Torras, denied El Pais's charges.
He acknowledged that Torras, at the Kuwaiti government's instructions, channeled funds from Spain to London and Switzerland to help finance the war effort against Iraq, which invaded Kuwait in August 1990.
Switzerland and Spain were among the few countries that refrained from freezing Kuwait's foreign assets during the war, which made them important financial centers for the KIO, he said.
Mr. de la Rosa said that El Pais based its article on a report that was written in 1992 "with the scarce information that existed then and which subsequent events have made obsolete."
El Pais also cited legal sources that said a probe in London, where the KIO filed a lawsuit last April against 22 former executives, had discovered that another $150 million had been diverted illegally to private accounts during the war.
A spokeswoman at the KIO office in London said she was unable to comment on the allegations made in the El Pais story.
