Gitano Group Inc.'s directors voted to put the company up for sale after one of its biggest customers, Wal-Mart Stores Inc., refused to continue to do business with the apparel marketer, which recently pleaded guilty to violations of U.S. Customs laws.
Late yesterday, Gitano said that it received notification that a "principal customer" could no longer do business with Gitano because of the customs violations; Gitano declined to identify the retailer.
But a Wal-Mart spokeswoman confirmed that that company is the retailer in question.
Gitano said that Wal-Mart and Kmart Corp. represented about 75% of Gitano's sales in 1993.
Trading in Gitano shares was halted prior to the statement.
The shares were quoted at $2 on volume of 219,200 shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
In Bentonville, Ark., a Wal-Mart spokeswoman said: "Wal-Mart has a strict standard for vendor partners," referring to an agreement that vendors are required to sign, which includes policies regarding the importation of merchandise.
She added: "We have dropped other vendors who were in violation with our agreement and we have no other choice but to discontinue business with Gitano.
It was a tough decision for us because Gitano has been a big part of our business."
As reported last December, Gitano and three of its former top executives agreed to plead guilty to felony charges in connection with a scheme designed to circumvent import-quota restrictions on $2.76 million of blouses imported by the company in 1991 and 1992.
In a statement yesterday, Robert E. Gregory, Jr., Gitano's chairman and chief executive officer, said: "It is unfortunate that the efforts of the new management team to rebuild the company have been undermined by the events which occurred in 1991 and 1992 under Gitano's prior management and which do not relate to Gitano today under its current management."
He said that a sale of Gitano is "the best means to serve the interests of our company's constituents."
Gitano, which markets blue jeans and budget apparel to mass merchandisers, had a loss of $48.7 million, or $3.05 a share, on revenue of $301.9 million in the first nine months of last year.
Gitano has been laboring to revive its faltering business after years of overexpansion and manufacturing problems.
After closing certain divisions and downsizing its business, Gitano announced last fall that it would cease manufacturing apparel.
Instead, Gitano planned to sell its marketing services and its Gitano label to retailers who would in turn be responsible for manufacturing the merchandise.
That news was initially met with skepticism by officials from several mass merchants, including Wal-Mart, who said that they wouldn't necessarily be willing to manufacture their own Gitano-label apparel.
Gitano said it is "in the process of hiring" Kurt Salmon Associates, apparel consultants, to help it find a buyer.
Mr. Gregory said that Gitano hopes to complete a sale of the company "as soon as possible to avoid any interruption of the $500 million in retail volume" that Gitano expects for 1994.
Mr. Gregory said that Gitano's brand name and its organization "hold considerable value," and should help the company "attract strong interest from potential purchasers."
He added, "However, in light of current circumstances, it is unlikely that a sale of Gitano will realize an amount in excess of the $130 million Gitano owes to its secured lenders."
Last November, Gitano said it expected its loss for the year 1993 to range from $55 million to $60 million, compared with a 1992 loss of $237.9 million.
Reflecting the closing or sale of several of its divisions, Gitano's third-quarter sales dropped nearly 68% to $76.1 million, down from $236.1 million a year earlier.
