Romeo J. Ventres and Anthony S. D'Amato had been good friends and professional allies for more than three decades as they helped each other climb the executive ranks at Borden Inc.
Of disparate personalities and management styles, the two engineers joined Borden in the late 1950s and worked together in the company's chemical division.
When Mr. Ventres was out of work in 1979, Mr. D'Amato was instrumental in bringing him back.
When Mr. Ventres prepared to retire as Borden's chief executive in 1991, he convinced the board that his protege was the ideal successor.
Now, both men are gone, and the company has never been in worse shape.
Mr. Ventres, 69 years old, quietly resigned earlier this month from the company's board, amid mounting criticism of his tenure.
Four weeks earlier, Mr. D'Amato, 63, had been ousted as chief executive after clashing with some directors who wanted to sell the entire company.
In less than two months, the two men who shaped the company over the past decade -- and were at the helm during its decline -- have left.
Once prominent, Borden is seemingly invisible these days, with little advertising and marketing and a hodgepodge of small products.
Sales and profits in every major division are declining.
It has shed thousands of workers, slashed its dividend by 75% and, since 1989, taken $1.5 billion in restructuring charges -- a huge sum for a company with $7.14 billion in 1992 sales.
In the third-quarter, the company posted its ninth consecutive quarterly decline in operating earnings.
Borden's stock, which peaked in 1991 at $38.75, closed yesterday at $15.
Borden won't comment on its past strategy or on the departed executives.
A new management team is in place, led by Ervin R. Shames, 53, who is a former executive of Philip Morris Cos.'
Kraft General Foods unit and Borden's first CEO with a broad food-marketing background.
But with more than $2 billion in debt -- $900 million coming due within a year -- Borden finds its options limited as it seeks to unwind its past strategy.
Although Mr. D'Amato has come under public fire recently, Mr. Ventres was largely responsible for that strategy.
He dreamed of transforming Borden from a sleepy conglomerate into a major food marketer.
He pursued his vision relentlessly, spending nearly $2 billion on 91 acquisitions between 1986 and 1991 to accumulate such brands as Laura Scudder's potato chips, Steero bouillon and Krazy Glue.
By the time Mr. D'Amato took over in 1991, the company was having problems digesting them all.
Although Mr. Ventres and Mr. D'Amato had developed a collegial friendship over the years, their styles differed sharply.
A shy man with a grandfatherly demeanor, Mr. Ventres had an abiding faith in Borden's top managers and gave them free rein, former colleagues say.
Mr. D'Amato, who is blunt and peppers his conversation with profanity, prided himself on his deep involvement in Borden's operations, an approach that alienated some top managers and rankled his former mentor.
"Ventres was a dreamer," says John Casey, vice chairman of Wendy's International Inc., who worked for 11 years in Borden's chemical business.
"He has an ability to dream up things, but he relied on other people to put them into effect."
Neither Mr. Ventres nor Mr. D'Amato will comment on their years at Borden, their relationship or their future plans.
Under Mr. D'Amato's contract, which was amended by the board just six months before he was asked to resign, the former CEO will receive $900,000 annually through 1997.
As for Mr. Ventres, Borden paid him annual consulting fees of $250,000 after his retirement, in addition to his $28,000 annual compensation as a director.
Although Borden was never a highflying company, it was far more profitable before Mr. Ventres's tenure.
Founded in 1857 by Gail Borden Jr., a former Texas newspaperman, the company sold condensed milk during the Civil War.
It later diversified into chemicals and acquired food brands such as Cracker Jack and ReaLemon in the 1960s.
To ease the earnings swings caused by shifting chemical prices, Eugene J. Sullivan, a former chemical salesman and Mr. Ventres's predecessor, began moving Borden further into consumer products.
"It wasn't a great company, but it was a very profitable company," says Nomi Ghez, a Goldman, Sachs & Co. analyst.
"They had no pretensions at the time."
Soon after he became CEO in November 1986, Mr. Ventres sped up the acquisition program.
Former Borden executives say he pressed senior managers to move quickly.
They say the company sometimes spent as little as two weeks conducting due diligence before agreeing to acquisitions.
"We were hurriedly buying companies for the sake of buying companies," says Han Kim, a 20-year Borden veteran who resigned last month.
Mr. Kim says he recommended against the company's 1986 purchase of Fisher Cheese Co., maker of artificial-cheese products.
But in Borden's rush to boost its grocery business, top executives ignored his advice, says Mr. Kim.
Today, supermarket sales of many Fisher brands are declining rapidly.
By design, most of the acquisitions were small to medium-size brands, such as Quinlan pretzels and American Original clam products.
The strategy: Growth would come by simply marketing the regional brands beyond their home turf.
Consolidating manufacturing and distribution would make Borden the low-cost producer of its far-flung product lines and give it more clout in the marketplace.
Large acquisitions didn't pay, Mr. Ventres said at the time, because they often included businesses Borden didn't want, and consolidating them could hurt morale.
For the most part, Wall Street and the financial press bought into Mr. Ventres's dream.
Largely because of the many acquisitions, the company's sales grew 54% between 1985 and 1988.
Earnings increased 61%, the most rapid growth in the company's history.
What's more, regional marketing -- tailoring products to local tastes -- was a hot strategy among major food companies.
In speeches, Mr. Ventres liked to quote a 1987 article in Fortune magazine that referred to Borden as "a consumer products brute."
But while Mr. Ventres raced to expand Borden's food portfolio, critics say the company ignored some of the well-known names it already owned.
The company sold fancy ice cream under its Lady Borden brand for decades, but missed out on the 1980s boom in super-premium ice-cream.
And while food-industry rivals spun out a host of line extensions, Borden never successfully developed new products under many of its strongest brand names.
Mr. Ventres was also considered too hands-off by some critics, who thought he should have brought in more aggressive managers.
Former executives say he left the execution of his ambitious strategy largely to Borden's top managers, many of whom had been at the company for more than 20 years.
He rarely got involved in day-to-day operations, spending most of his time in Borden's small Park Avenue offices in New York, far from the hub of the company's operations in Columbus, Ohio.
Yet Mr. Ventres thought Borden's senior management was so indispensable that in 1989 he cooked up a quirky antitakeover strategy.
The plan, which has since been repealed by the board, called for Borden's top 25 executives to quit if shareholders didn't receive "fair market value" in a takeover -- or if any member of the top management team was fired or demoted.
Executive recruiters were less than impressed with Mr. Ventres's new-fangled idea.
"It was a joke," says Tony Reynes, partner at Tesar-Reynes Inc. in Chicago.
"I don't think most people regarded some of Borden's people in high esteem."
As the economy began to slow in the late 1980s, the cracks in Borden's strategy began to show.
Mounting competition from private-label products and a consumer focus on price have made it difficult for many marketers of national brands to raise prices.
And Borden's vast collection of tiny brand names in disparate categories made any cohesive marketing program difficult and expensive.
"The world was going global and Borden was still a long way from being national," says John McMillin, an analyst with Prudential Securities Inc.
"In retrospect, they bought the junk."
By the time Mr. D'Amato became chief executive in November 1991, the company was ailing.
By the end of 1991, Borden's sales had declined 5% from the previous year, and net income had fallen 19%.
Mr. D'Amato began scrambling to consolidate the far-flung purchasing, distribution and manufacturing systems.
The strategy also meant a greater centralization of management.
Mr. D'Amato, associates say, was proud of his involvement in the day-to-day operations.
Although his home is in Massachusetts and Borden's corporate offices are in New York, Mr. D'Amato often spent several days each week at the Columbus operations hub reviewing everything from the strategy for marketing cheese products to managers' progress in meshing the computer systems.
"Tony went into the field," says Peter Cusack, an executive recruiter who spent six years at Borden.
"He kept very close tabs on what was going on everywhere."
He also became deeply involved in efforts to better market the company's many brands.
Mr. D'Amato led a widely panned move to revive the company's best-known but faded symbol, Elsie the Cow, as the centerpiece of an ambitious advertising campaign for dairy products.
He also hoped to unite some of the company's diverse products under the company's tepid slogan, "If it's Borden -- it's got to be good."
Former executives say Mr. Ventres considered the efforts a waste of money.
Mr. D'Amato's close scrutiny quickly ruffled the feathers of senior managers at Columbus operations, who had operated with a free hand for years.
Executives in food divisions complain that he showed little faith in their experience or abilities, relying instead on outside consultants -- or managers from Borden's chemical business.
People close to the two men say Mr. D'Amato also began to alienate Mr. Ventres soon after succeeding him.
Those close to Mr. Ventres say he disapproved of Mr. D'Amato's public criticism of the company.
Mr. D'Amato didn't hold back: During a speech to analysts in September 1992, he said, "Borden goes to market every day with a fragmented, out-of-date organization that is not up to the increasing pressures of today's economy."
It wasn't until the first-quarter of 1993 that Mr. D'Amato, realizing the magnitude of Borden's problems, began to consider getting rid of some of the businesses he had been trying to consolidate.
He also began looking outside for experienced food marketers.
In February, Jon G. Hettinger, president of Borden's grocery-products division, resigned, quickly followed by the heads of Borden's dairy and pasta businesses.
Mr. D'Amato also began to wrestle with Borden's Laura Scudder's snack-food line, which remains the most striking example of how Borden spiraled out of control.
Acquired in 1987 for nearly $100 million, it was one of the strongest regional potato-chip brands in the country, with the No. 2 spot in the huge California market.
But some current and former executives say Laura Scudder's was a disaster from the start.
In Borden's eagerness to make the acquisition, its due diligence had failed to uncover major union problems that prompted Borden to close all of Laura Scudder's California plants about a year after the purchase.
Borden began using a more efficient plant in Salt Lake City, only to find that it couldn't deliver the product over the Sierra Nevada without incurring high costs and a lot of broken potato chips.
The quality problems, coupled with growing competition, eroded Laura Scudder's market share so much that even heavy discounting couldn't erase the decline.
In May, Borden sold Laura Scudder's to another regional company for about $15 million.
All told, the fiasco cost Borden nearly $150 million.
Shareholders grew restive.
At the annual meeting last April, directors found themselves under attack.
While Mr. Ventres sat mute, staring at the table in front of him, a steady stream of shareholders went to the microphone and accused him of, as at least one put it, "destroying" the company.
Some urged him to resign.
"This is a casebook example of a tame, incompetent board of directors failing to do its job properly," William Steiner, an investor who bought Borden stock at $33, recalls saying.
"These ruinous policies and rotten acquisitions should have been prevented."
Despite the criticism of Mr. Ventres's acquisition spree and Mr. D'Amato's slow-moving consolidation efforts, the board, in June, amended Mr. D'Amato's employment contract for five years and promised to pay him $900,000 a year if he was dismissed.
About that time, Borden recruited Mr. Shames to head its food operations.
In addition to making Mr. Shames president, Mr. D'Amato offered him a compensation package that exceeded those of Borden's other top executives, including his own.
With Mr. Shames, Mr. D'Amato accelerated his examination of Borden's myriad businesses.
Mr. D'Amato also brought in teams of management consultants and financial advisers, including Booz, Allen & Hamilton Inc. , New England Consulting Group and First Boston Corp., to help him evaluate the businesses.
But the incursion of consultants, along with fears about changes in the executive suite, all but paralyzed Borden's management.
Morale reached new lows at Columbus.
Rumors circulated.
Some managers say they were too distracted to focus on running their businesses.
The last straw may have been the deterioration of Borden's $1.25 billion pasta business, once the gem of its food portfolio.
The company had assembled a number of strong regional brands such as Prince and Pennsylvania Dutch brands, becoming the No. 1 marketer of brand-name pastas in the U.S.
Yet by last November, the pasta business was losing market share, and Hershey Foods Corp. was threatening to become the market leader.
Partly to blame: a flawed strategy, begun under Mr. Ventres, to transform Borden's bestselling Creamette pasta into a national brand.
By doing so, Borden undercut its own strong regional brands, and also placed Creamette in direct competition with popular local brands.
In October, the board's independent directors began to meet with merger lawyer Martin Lipton to try to devise a solution for Borden's difficulties.
Mr. Lipton, who was originally retained by Borden, presented the idea of selling the entire company, according to people familiar with the situation.
Mr. D'Amato said it wasn't the right time, given Borden's weak condition.
On Nov. 30, Mr. D'Amato presented to the board the recommendations of his months-long analysis: Sell off the flagging U.S. snack-food business and some niche grocery brands and take a $650 million after-tax charge against fourth-quarter earnings.
People close to the board say some directors became convinced he would try to block efforts to sell the company.
The directors, who had been horrified by presentations made by Booz Allen describing the condition of Borden's businesses, also found Mr. D'Amato's plan unpalatable because it fell far short of what Wall Street was expecting and included what would be the fourth restructuring charge in five years.
On Dec. 9, the independent directors met and voted to request Mr. D'Amato's resignation.
Associates say Mr. D'Amato was sorely disappointed that Mr. Ventres didn't defend him while he still sat on the board.
Mr. Ventres, meanwhile, speaks bitterly of his former protege.
These days, the former friends don't talk to each other.
In the end, the efforts to sell the company proved futile.
Hanson PLC and RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. emerged briefly as possible bidders, but talks broke down before Christmas.
A number of other possible buyers, including Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. and Nestle SA, looked over Borden's portfolio but passed, according to people close to the company.
On Jan. 5, Borden's board, realizing its limited options after the possibility of selling the company appeared distant, approved a restructuring plan.
It was almost identical to the one Mr. D'Amato had presented just a month earlier.
The company's bylaws provide for a board of nine directors.
Messrs. D'Amato and Ventres left the company in the past two months.
Another director, Theodore Cooper, chairman and chief executive of Upjohn Co., died in April.
Mr. Shames was elected to the board in June.
-- Robert P. Luciano, director since 1989; chairman and chief executive of Schering-Plough Corp.
-- Frederick E. Hennig, director since 1990; president and chief operating officer of Woolworth Corp.
-- Wilbert J. LeMelle, director since 1987; president of Phelps-Stokes Fund, an educational foundation.
-- H. Barclay Morley, director since 1992; former chairman and chief executive officer of Stauffer Chemical Co.
-- Patricia Carry Stewart, director since 1976; former vice president of the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation, a charitable organization.
-- Frank J. Tasco, director since 1988; Borden's chairman since Mr. D'Amato's departure.
Former chairman and chief executive of Marsh & McLennan Cos.
-- Ervin R. Shames, director since 1993; Borden's president and chief executive officer.
-- R.J. Ventres, director since 1985; former Borden chairman and chief executive.
Resigned Jan. 7.
-- Anthony S. D'Amato, director since 1990; former Borden chairman and chief executive.
Resigned Dec. 9.
