WHILE THE nation watched the mostly white Winter Olympics last month, 2,000 black skiers took to the slopes at a Colorado resort, setting local records by their very presence.
"The NBS is the largest group we've ever had," says Kristen Kopplin, spokeswoman for Copper Mountain, the resort that also hosted the National Brotherhood of Skiers two years ago.
"They represent a $2 million influx into our community, so it's been a community effort to get them back," she says.
That included adding black models to Copper Mountain's brochures and making a $15,000 donation to support NBS's mission: helping minority skiers make the U.S. Olympic team.
The NBS numbers 14,000 skiers; half are well-heeled professionals, says spokesman Bob Bradshaw.
When the group met in Vail last year, some 6,000 skiers attended and pumped $6 million to $10 million into the local economy.
Next year it will gather at Steamboat Springs.
NBS meetings have attracted job recruiters including drug maker Sterling Winthrop, one of the Chicago-based group's few corporate sponsors.
"But the bottom line is we don't have a single ski-industry sponsor," says Mr. Bradshaw, who consults on marketing skiing to African-Americans.
"I don't think any ski club has a major sponsor," says David Ingemie of Ski Industries America, which represents ski-equipment makers.
The industry focuses on marketing in ski magazines and retail outlets.
However, "getting a black skier to win an Olympic medal or a World Cup race would really set things off," Mr. Ingemie says.
THE AVERAGE non-Hispanic family gets one direct-mail pitch a day; the average Hispanic home gets one every two weeks, trade officials say.
But marketers say the paper chase may soon catch up to Spanish-speaking homes.
The surge in Hispanic consumers has barely affected the direct-marketing business because there are so few mailing lists of Hispanic names available for sale, says Beatriz Mallory, co-founder of DMA Directo, a section of the Direct Marketing Association, N.Y., devoted to Hispanic marketing.
"It's a Catch-22 -- if no one is mailing, there are no responses to generate lists; anyone trying something new has had to build a list from scratch."
The breakthrough came in 1989, when the Spanish television network Univision made the names and addresses of one million entrants of a sweepstakes promotion available to marketers, says Rick Blume of Database Management, New York.
Direct marketers of other products then did their own mailings and built new lists.
Still, there are only 50 such specific lists, as opposed to 25,000 general lists.
That makes it harder for Teresa Iglesias to reach the target market for her bilingual Ninos catalog of Spanish-language entertainment for children.
She targets affluent second-generation and third-generation Hispanic parents who fear their children may become disengaged from their heritage.
Ms. Iglesias, based in Ann Arbor, Mich., expects her efforts to build a 200,000-name list will pay off in loyal customers.
While most direct-mail pitches are quickly tossed out, in Hispanic homes "it's such a novelty that when they get something, they tend to keep it," Ms. Mallory says.
SOME UNLIKELY computer technicians are emerging from a basement deep in the 'hood of East Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Basement Recordings started teaching youngsters digital-recording technology in 1989 as a community service.
Now it puts about 1,000 people a year through free six-week courses in digital audio, video and graphics technologies.
Students include grade-schoolers, grandmothers, high school dropouts, educators and professional musicians.
Basement's exhibitions at local colleges draw thousands of eager participants, "faces you'd never see at a personal computer expo," says Basement General Manager Augustin Hinkson.
In return for a basement full of expensive hardware and software, Basement gives donors like Yamaha Corp. of America detailed quarterly reports on how students use the equipment.
"We need to expose as many people as possible to the idea of music creation and to be focused on the needs of the people who buy our products," says Yamaha corporate planner Steven Thatcher.
Basement introduces novices to technology by tailoring it to them, says founder Trevor John, a Columbia University-trained engineer.
Its motto: "The impossible is only mediocre down here."
"Computers offer the black community the opportunity to publish without the huge capital required," says Brian Heuckroth of Adobe Systems, which gives Basement video and graphics software.
"We're trying to make it easier for people who aren't classically trained -- that's where we'll get substantial growth."
AFRICAN IMMIGRANTS are now the best educated group in Britain, reports the spring issue of the Journal of Blacks in Higher Education.
There are about 130,000 African immigrants in Britain; census data show that 26% exceed the U.S. equivalent of over one year of college, compared with 13% of all whites.
Africans in Britain are twice as likely as whites to be professionals.
African immigrants are a tiny British minority -- only 0.2% of the population -- but the publication says the data "put a solid nail in the coffin" of theories of black intellectual inferiority. . . .
HispanData, a national Hispanic resume referral service, seeks resumes of "seasoned" Hispanic professionals and midlevel executives.
The database service is run by Hispanic Business magazine, based in Santa Barbara, Calif., which says Nafta is increasing demand for managers with bilingual and bicultural skills.
