Forget the fundamentals.
Politics is driving the stock market these days.
As stock investors unhappily discovered last week, their usual concerns about such things as the economy and earnings can pale to insignificance when a political leader is suddenly assassinated or when tensions flare up between two nations.
Instead of focusing on the basics, investors zero in on the crisis du jour and, in a panicked moment, dump stocks.
That's why hours after Mexico's leading presidential candidate was murdered, stock and bond prices plunged, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbling 48.37 points to 3821.09 in the worst one-day sell-off in almost a month.
The selling continued Friday, taking the industrial average down 46.36 points to 3774.73, its first close below 3800 since Jan. 5.
Certainly there are plenty of political concerns to worry investors.
Here at home, Whitewater plagues the Clinton administration.
Outside our own borders, Mexico faces a potential crisis, Russia seems leaderless, North Korea is rattling sabers and China is exchanging harsh words with the U.S. over human rights, trade and the Korean problem.
But analysts argue that just because there's a lot of tension in the world these days doesn't mean investors should necessarily avoid stocks.
"Just like with stocks, one has to be selective with one's crises," says Thomas McManus, a stock strategist at Morgan Stanley.
Stock analysts say that although stocks dived last week on news of the assassination in Mexico, they believe that the Mexican situation is easily one of the most manageable crises lurking on the landscape.
"It's an unspeakably awful tragedy, but the Mexican political and economic infrastructure will withstand this," says Stefan Abrams, director of equity strategy of Trust Co. of the West.
Friday Rebound Indeed, after plunging Thursday on news of the murder, American depositary receipts of Mexican companies bounced back Friday, with Telefonos de Mexico, the bellwether Mexican telephone stock, leading the way.
It gained 2 3/8 to 62 1/2; Grupo Financiero Serfin, a financial services concern, 1 1/4 to 26 1/4 and Grupo Tribasa, a construction company, 1 5/8 to 29.
Rather than getting nervous about a country just south of the border, stock analysts say investors would be better off fretting about far-flung nations such as Russia and North Korea.
They also ought to spend some time being mindful of a home-grown tinderbox: the Whitewater affair.
"The implosion of the former Soviet Union and a Watergate-type scandal would be very bad for U.S. stocks," says Scott Black, president of Delphi Management, a Boston-based money management firm.
Mr. Black says the main reason Russia is so worrisome is that it still has a sizable nuclear-weapons arsenal.
Should the Old Guard return to power, many of the assumptions that the U.S. has made about the peace dividend will be swept out the door, hindering America's budget-deficit-cutting process and probably pressuring the bond market.
Higher interest rates, in turn, will make stocks less attractive.
Of course, serious troubles in Russia will likely hurt the European stock and bond markets even worse and may even provide a little support to U.S. financial markets as investors seek the shelter of the U.S. dollar.
No doubt one attractive area of investment will be defense stocks.
Mr. Black thinks stocks like Loral, Raytheon and Lockheed probably will rise if Russia's troubles start mounting and investors begin to fear that the U.S. will have to rev up its defense capabilities.
Whitewater is another matter altogether, says Mr. Black.
If President Clinton's troubles worsen, Mr. Black and other analysts suggest that there isn't any haven for investors in the U.S. stock market.
"If there really is credibility to Rep. Leach's claims, eroding confidence in the administration and the president will not be good for stock prices," says Mr. McManus of Morgan Stanley.
Studies have shown that the president's approval rating and the performance of the stock market are positively correlated so that when confidence in the president wanes, stock prices also weaken.
Mr. McManus cautions, however, that investors shouldn't be single-minded about dodging political crises.
"If you are always worried about these potential hot spots, the risk is that you will never be fully invested," he says.
Of course, there are some stock analysts like Charles Clough at Merrill Lynch who think that potentially grave problems even in important nations like Russia ultimately don't matter to U.S. investors.
"We lost Gorbachev over a weekend once and that didn't hurt stocks," Mr. Clough says.
"Russia today is an economy that isn't in any position to support any kind of military adventurism," he adds.
"The idea of re-establishing the Cold War borders on absurdity."
Mr. Clough contends that international crises are simply an excuse to sell stocks.
He argues that what has really been hurting the stock market lately is the sharp rise in interest rates.
Indeed, Friday's big drop in the industrial average was accompanied by heavy selling in the bond market, which drove the yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond to 7.01% from 6.95% Thursday.
For the savvy investors, turmoil in the markets can create buying opportunities.
For instance, last week, as Latin American markets retreated on the news from Mexico, Mr. Clough was advising investors to pour money into those markets, particularly Brazil, Argentina and Mexico.
He also is high on economically sensitive stocks that have lost some of their value in the past few days.
Topping his buying list at the moment are stocks as Deere, the machinery concern; Ford, the car maker, and Lafarge and Southdown, two cement producers.
Stocks plunged for the second straight day as long-term bond yields topped 7% for the first time in 10 months.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average skidded 46.36, or 1.2%, to 3774.73-its lowest close since Jan. 3, the first trading day of this year.
The industrial average had lost 48 points on Thursday.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock lost 3.77 to 460.58 and the Nasdaq Composite index slid 3.23 to 783.45.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange dwindled to 249,533,000 shares from 303,742,000 shares Thursday.
For the second consecutive day, economically sensitive stocks were among the hardest hit.
Big losers in the industrial average included Aluminum Co. of America, down 2 to 76 1/4; General Motors, 1 1/2 to 56 7/8 and International Paper, 1 1/8 to 68 3/8.
International Business Machines was another major depressant on the industrials.
It was weak for a fourth straight day, losing 2 3/8 to 54.
Big Blue's chairman, Louis V. Gerstner, offered a sober forecast for the computer maker at a strategy briefing late Thursday for Wall Street analysts.
UAL, the parent of United Airlines, surged 7 3/4 to 131 1/2.
The company agreed to terms of an employee-led buyout.
UAL's jump was enough to lift the Dow Jones Transportation Average, which rallied 8.83, or 0.52%, to 1714.86.
The Dow Jones Utilities Average, though, skidded 1.91, or 0.94%, to 202.15, a 23-month low.
Blockbuster Entertainment gained 1 1/8 to 27 1/4.
PaineWebber raised its investment rating on the shares to "buy."
The securities concern had rated Blockbuster "attractive."
Tobacco stocks were mixed after The Wall Street Journal reported that the Clinton administration is set to propose airquality rules that would severely limit smoking at work and at bars and restaurants.
Philip Morris slipped 3/4 to 51 1/2, American Brands eased 1/8 to 30 7/8 and RJR Nabisco added 1/8 to 6 3/8.
Hershey Foods dropped 1 to 46.
The confectionary concern said that it expects net income for the first quarter to be below the 71 cents-a-share operating earnings of a year ago.
Dave Pettit contributed to this article.
