A debate has broken out in Russian diamond circles over how to make the best use of one of the nation's greatest sources of wealth.
The highly secretive Russian diamond industry has to decide whether it would be best served by continuing to sell nearly all of its rough gem-quality diamonds through South Africa-based De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., or by taking a more independent approach.
The dispute lies behind a recent outflow of Russian rough diamonds that has sparked accusations of dumping and strained Moscow's relations with De Beers.
It also has drawn diamond merchants to Moscow in search of new business.
Russia's decision ultimately could rock world diamond markets.
"De Beers is absolutely dominant, although not all alone," said Chaim Even-Zohar, a diamond expert who publishes an influential industry magazine in Tel Aviv.
"But they can't dictate as in the past, and Moscow is a good example of that."
Russia is under contract to funnel to De Beers 95% of its uncut diamonds until mid-1995.
The remainder can be sold independently, subject to restrictions on prices, volume and selling sites.
Some Russian diamond officials say that the terms of that contract should be renegotiated.
At the same time, Russia needs cash, and government officials have said Russia might seek foreign loans using stockpiled uncut diamonds as collateral.
The idea of collateralizing stockpiled diamonds has brought Russian officials about a dozen proposals from foreign diamond merchants on how to market Russia's diamonds in the future.
Some of these offers hinge on raising loans for a fee, others in exchange for access to a share of Russia's uncut diamonds.
Whoever could arrange such an agreement would stand to gain millions of dollars, plus a foothold in the Russian diamond industry, which accounts for a quarter of the world's rough-diamond production.
One confidential proposal made to the government in December came from New York-based Lazare Kaplan International, a diamond merchant that has been doing business in Russia for more than 20 years.
It suggests raising $3.3 billion in 10-year loans, probably from the U.S. government, and proposes a 1.5% fee for Lazare Kaplan.
The concept would allow De Beers to continue its exclusive Russian purchases.
The proposal doesn't explain how Lazare Kaplan would go about securing such funds from the U.S. government or multilateral organizations, which don't generally make collateralized loans, nor does it guarantee that it could do so.
But it says that initial approaches have been made.
The proposal is being taken seriously, in part because the chairman of the company, Maurice Tempelsman, is well-known for his connections to the politically prominent Kennedy family and President Clinton.
Russian officials are familiar with stories of the U.S. president's relaxing aboard the Tempelsman yacht last summer in Massachusetts, with former First Lady Jacqueline Onassis.
"With its diamond production levels, geological reserves, stockpiles and cutting facilities, Russia's diamond industry stands central both internationally and within the Russian economy," says Lazare Kaplan International spokesman Robert Kasmire.
"Decisions concerning that . . . industry's future are among the most important and appropriate to be made by the Russian government."
Such a proposal could support the status quo and assure De Beers of another decade's hold over the Russian market.
De Beers's deputy general manager in Moscow, Alan Campbell, said De Beers itself had "nothing to do with the proposal."
Other possibilities would wean Russia from De Beers's exclusive marketing -- by seeking nonexclusive rights to buy part of Russia's uncut-diamond supply in exchange for a commercial loan collateralized by the diamond stockpile, or by advocating that Russia funnel more of its rough product to its own polishing industry in order to sell the more expensive polished gems itself.
(The latter idea wouldn't contravene De Beers's contract, which doesn't cover polished gems.)
"I had a dream that someday we would polish Russian rough with Russian workers in a joint partnership with the Russians in Russia, and today it is a reality," says Josef Kaszirer, head of Antwerp, Belgium-based Kaszirer Diamonds.
Mr. Kaszirer used to be one of De Beers's favored buyers, but says he was excluded in 1992 after he set up a joint venture with Russia to develop the domestic polishing industry.
De Beers controls more than 80% of the world's rough-diamond market.
Diamond producers who work with De Beers generally agree to sell all of their diamonds through the South African concern under a system known as "single-channel marketing."
De Beers mixes diamonds from around the world into assortments for buyers and releases only as many as it calculates won't disrupt prices.
Producers agree to accept a quota of world sales as their share of the market-26%, in Russia's case -- which De Beers promises to buy.
The system has served to keep the diamond market steady through numerous recessions, satisfying many suppliers and middlemen.
But as a result, the De Beers cartel has had the upper hand in diamond-development policy in producing countries.
Russia has largely managed to avoid the temptation of selling off masses of its diamonds for a quick infusion of cash.
Last year it earned at least $1.5 billion from diamond exports, including $1.14 billion from rough gems sold through De Beers and the rest from sales of industrial and polished diamonds.
"Russian diamond authorities have always been very prudent and understand the need to play their role in keeping the market stable," De Beers's Mr. Campbell said.
But now, diamond officials are split over whether working through De Beers is still in Russia's best interests.
One of the two key structures dealing with rough diamonds in Russia is the state-controlled joint-stock company Almazy-Rossii-Sakha.
It has responsibility for exporting rough Russian diamonds and favors sticking with De Beers.
But officials at Komdragmet, the state committee for precious metals and stones that controls the nation's diamond stockpiles, say that Russia may do better by exporting a greater proportion of its uncut diamonds itself and by funneling more to its polishing industry.
"De Beers developed a brilliant scheme, but as with any system, it becomes outdated, physically and morally," said Komdragmet Deputy Chairman Leonid Guryevich.
"Our goal isn't to change relations with De Beers; it's to determine the optimal level, from the point of view of hard-currency earnings, of what to do with our raw materials."
