U.S. auto makers have raised their already optimistic plans for first-quarter production, as Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. begin building new models.
The auto makers now expect to build 1.84 million passenger cars, up 3.2% from the 1.78 million cars planned just a month ago.
Planned output for minivans, sportutility vehicles and light trucks remains roughly at 1.43 million vehicles.
Altogether, companies building vehicles in the U.S. plan to produce 3,275,129 vehicles in the first quarter, up 20% from 2,726,379 a year earlier, industry experts say.
Auto analysts say the surge in planned output signals that the auto makers expect the industrywide sales recovery to strengthen.
The result: Auto analysts forecast continued strengthening of profits at Ford, Chrysler and General Motors Corp.
The production increase is steeper than the jump in sales, which in the past three months has been running at about 12% over the previous year.
That reflects both a continuing shift of production to the U.S. from abroad, and optimism that sales will continue to rise.
"We are looking at a huge surge here," said David Bradley, an auto analyst with J.P. Morgan Securities.
But he said he's concerned that strong growth, as evidenced by January's 14% jump in vehicle sales over year-earlier levels, could strain Detroit's production capacity.
And, he added, a shortage of key vehicles could give the troubled Japanese auto makers the edge they need to regain market share lost to the Big Three.
Some car dealers are already complaining they can't keep certain popular models in stock.
But John Casesa, Wertheim Schroder & Co.'s auto analyst, said the industry can easily handle additional growth in capacity.
Most suppliers and manufacturers are planning for even higher production in 1995.
"What's remarkable is that we are seeing such strong production relatively early in the sales cycle," Mr. Casesa said.
The biggest production increases are coming from Detroit.
Both Chrysler and Ford are concentrating on improving productivity in existing assembly plants to increase capacity.
In addition, the auto makers are adding capacity without putting up any huge cash outlays for new assembly plants.
Ford, for example, will add several thousand vehicles to its production schedule this year with the Windstar minivan.
The new minivan will be built in the assembly plant that used to build the Tempo/Topaz cars.
GM said its planned output may surpass its own forecasts if it can successfully boost production to compensate for time lost because of heavy snow last month.
One reason for the strong growth in auto production is that the average U.S. car is now 8.4 years old, the highest average age since the Korean War, said Bill Wilson, an economist with Comerica Bank in Detroit who tracks the automotive industry.
A fleet of older cars, combined with strong fourth-quarter economic growth nationally and rising consumer confidence, leads to heavy expectations of new cars sales.
The "precipitous increase" in vehicle scrappage will continue to create strong demand for new vehicles, Mr. Wilson said.
Last year, a record 13 million vehicles were scrapped and in 1994, an additional 13.3 million vehicles will be taken off the road, Mr. Wilson predicts.
New car dealers had a 65-day supply of inventory at the end of December, according to Ward's Automotive Reports, a trade publication, a level that's considered ideal by the industry.
This week Chrysler is shutting down its Belvidere, Ill., plant, where it assembles subcompact Neons, because of a problem with a key computer control part.
