In "Master of the Game" (Simon & Schuster, 395 pages, $25) Connie Bruck's new book about the late Steven J. Ross, his attorney and confidante Arthur Liman sums him up aptly: "the last great pasha of American business."
In a remarkable rag-trade to riches story, Mr. Ross rose from a garment industry slacks salesman to the operator of a chain of funeral homes and parking lots, and ultimately to the helm of Time Warner Inc., now the world's largest entertainment company.
Though always dogged by allegations of financial chicanery and links to organized crime, he was the original Teflon executive, basking in his reputation as a shrewd dealmaker and brilliant visionary.
He used the corporate treasury to finance his lavish lifestyle, spreading the wealth amongst a cadre of loyal executives and Hollywood figures who truly believed Mr. Ross was the company.
Ms. Bruck artfully reconstructs Mr. Ross's rise, which started when he married into the family that owned the funeral business.
She paints colorful portraits of the rogues he surrounded himself with in his early days as a card-counting gambler and raconteur, among them Jay Emmett, his high-living best friend who, along with faithful accountant Solomon Weiss, took the rap for the Westchester Premier Theater kickback scandal in the early 1980s.
Like the prosecutors who called Mr. Ross "the real culprit" in the Westchester case, Ms. Bruck tries valiantly to prove that was the case, without success.
Mr. Weiss, who was sentenced to five years community service and fined, appears to be prepared to take the truth to his grave and Mr. Ross has already taken it to his.
The book drags a bit as Ms. Bruck reconstructs minute details of the huge cash-skimming fraud, but she does establish the groundwork for a pattern which was to continue for the rest of Mr. Ross's life: He was always able to weasel out of trouble.
Or as one associate said: "He was always insulated; you could never trace it up."
"Master of the Game" is at its most compelling when Ms. Bruck explores the way Mr. Ross lived his life, conducted his personal affairs, and catapulted himself into the big leagues after the canny purchase of Warner Bros.-Seven Arts.
Though she clearly admires his considerable talents, she was not taken in by them.
At once charming, solicitous and funny, he could also be remote, ruthless and duplicitous, and on the way up the ladder he abandoned or hurt as many people as he helped.
His relentless pursuit of glitz and glamour colored all his dealings; as Ms. Bruck points out, many of his business decisions were disastrous and his actual management skills questionable.
Take the debacle at Atari, the video-game business that became Warner's biggest profitmaker in the early 1980s before mismanagement brought it crashing down.
Mr. Ross, in his classic strategy of giving managers broad autonomy, had virtually no controls at the company, and ignored or denied the signs of impending disaster (he did, however, manage to unload a huge amount of stock not long before it tanked on Atari's massive losses).
Even as the video-game business was heading for a freefall, Mr. Ross gave Steven Spielberg an astonishing $23 million for the video game rights to his movie "E.T.," a gamble that helped put the final nail in Atari's coffin.
It was through such gestures that Mr. Ross built the loyalty and admiration of Mr. Spielberg and Barbra Streisand, who was only too happy to take his lavish gifts of art and furniture, according to Ms. Bruck.
For himself and his team, Mr. Ross and his shadowy adviser Oded Aboodi designed the most generous compensation system in American business, including a fleet of planes that would fly Mr. Spielberg's dogs cross-country.
Ms. Bruck pulls no punches.
She portrays Mr. Liman, the attorney, as a toadying sycophant so blinded by loyalty to Mr. Ross that he was "more cohort than counsel," bending the law to near-breaking point to protect Mr. Ross from answering for any number of breaches of fiduciary duty to shareholders.
And she does not paint a pretty picture of Mr. Ross's high-handed, rapacious third wife Courtney Sale, describing the bond between them as a shared "dedication to the acquisition of material objects . . ."
Perhaps feeling it only fair to let Mr. Ross's fans have their due, Ms. Bruck spends an inordinate amount of time describing the paeans delivered at his funeral and memorial services.
But she always brings the reader back to her basic point: that Mr. Ross usually bought such fealty at the expense of his shareholders.
The only executive who ever challenged Mr. Ross's freespending ways and his laissez-faire management was Chris-Craft Chairman Herbert Siegel, who bought a big stake in Warner as a "white knight" when Rupert Murdoch was making a run at it.
Mr. Siegel's efforts to clean up Warner's troubled operations and cut costs and perks nearly drove Mr. Ross crazy; the two ended their association after a bitter corporate feud.
As former Senator Abraham Ribicoff, a Chris-Craft-designated director of Warner who finally resigned in disgust put it in a deposition: "You have a person who has exceeded his power with the greatest of arrogance and you have a bunch of myrmidons on that board completely manipulated by Steve Ross."
Mr. Ross's crowning glory was Warner's merger with Time Inc. which, even though Time acquired Warner, left Mr. Ross in charge, and wealthier than ever.
Ms. Bruck, who covered the Time Warner merger and its aftermath for The New Yorker, won Mr. Ross's cooperation for the book largely on the strength of those articles, which portrayed him as a near-genius and made the Time executives look bumbling and venal.
Ms. Bruck appears to be making a career of profiling controversial business figures who bend all the rules to their own ends; her last book, "The Predator's Ball," followed the career of financier Michael Milken.
Unlike Mr. Milken, Mr. Ross was never convicted of anything, but as Ms. Bruck points out in this book, they were kindred spirits.
After Mr. Liman introduced them in mid-1982, she says, they "developed an enormous mutual admiration" and the two attempted to engineer a leveraged buyout of Warner.
Ultimately, Mr. Ross couldn't beat the odds on the final crap game; at the peak of his power, he was felled by complications of surgery for prostate cancer -- ironically the same disease Mr. Milken is being treated for.
In the end, Ms. Bruck's judgment of Mr. Ross is that the myth he created for himself kept people from seeing the reality: For all his mastery of the game, Mr. Ross was finally playing only for himself.
Ms. Landro is a senior editor in charge of the Journal's media and marketing coverage.
