USAir Group indicated to analysts that it has enough cash to get through the end of the year, even without concessions from its unions.
As a result, the struggling airline, which earlier this week forecast a wider loss for the year, faces an uphill battle in trying to convince its unions to make concessions and may have to give workers an equity stake.
Still, the fact that USAir has to quell investors' fears underscores its vulnerability in the tumultuous airline industry.
In a teleconference with analysts yesterday, Seth Schofield, USAir's chairman and chief executive, said the airline has roughly $370 million in cash, $300 million in bank credit and $140 million in receivables.
Analysts generally agreed that that would be enough to sustain the carrier for the rest of the year, despite the company's forecast that its 1994 loss would exceed its $350 million loss in 1993.
But some analysts expressed frustration over an apparent lack of urgency at the airline, which didn't explain in the teleconference how it plans to proceed in talks with the unions.
"They were basically saying, `Yeah, we know we have to do something, but we don't know what, or how, or when or why.'
It made me very nervous," said Raymond E. Neidl, an analyst with Furman Selz.
When asked about the analysts' reading on USAir's outlook, a spokesman for the Arlington, Va.-based airline said, "We have nearly a billion dollars in liquidity.
Right now, our overriding goal is to get costs down."
USAir shares rose 25 cents to close at $9.25 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
USAir has been unable to stem its mounting losses because of fare cuts it launched last month to stay competitive with lower-cost rivals that have made inroads on its important East Coast routes.
But the powerful pilots union, feeling that management squandered previous givebacks, indicated it plans to ask for some consideration in return for any new concessions, perhaps stock or board representation.
Although USAir hasn't set a deadline for labor-group action, leaders of the four unions are scheduled to meet next Tuesday in Washington, D.C., to begin formulating a response.
A spokesman for the pilots union indicated that an equity-for-concession transaction, similar to those employed in the past year by Northwest Airlines and Trans World Airlines is under consideration.
But, he added, there have been no serious discussions about that option.
With costs per seat mile, a key airline-industry measurement, running about 11 cents, USAir's expenses are considerably higher than low-cost leader Southwest Airlines, which operates at about seven cents a mile.
USAir told the labor groups it has set a target of slicing its costs to about 10 cents a mile, or roughly 9%, but left it to the unions to propose specific cutbacks.
Even the measures the company has launched aren't being implemented quickly enough, some industry specialists said.
They particularly cite the carrier's Project High Ground, which aims to streamline airport procedures to turn planes around more quickly.
It effectively mimics some of the best tactics of Southwest Airlines, allowing USAir to compete more effectively on short-flight routes, but the program won't be fully implemented until the end of the year.
"Nobody's acting in a survival mode over there," said Ernest Arvai, a New Hampshire-based airline consultant.
A USAir spokesman said the program is "already on the fast track" but that the airline doesn't want to rush its development.
The pace of development of the High Ground program also irritated USAir's pilots union, and that has repercussions for the current concession talks.
In 1992, the pilots, among other employees, agreed to grant USAir more-flexible work rules that allowed the pilots to fly longer at no extra cost.
But the pilots have said that the company wasted opportunities to schedule them more often and expand flight operations.
That, in addition to about $170 million in wage reductions the unions previously agreed to, has made the unions skittish about new concessions.
"We want to work with management," said the spokesman for the Air Line Pilots Association.
"But we're not just going to give them a blank check.
If they want something, we're going to want something in return."
Among things union officials would consider, he said, are stock in USAir, and a greater say in the management of the company, including representation on the board.
