Robert Kuok Hock Nien has a made a career of planting hotels in places others shun.
Now the Malaysian-Chinese tycoon's Shangri-La chain is reaping the rewards.
Shangri-La Asia Ltd., a holding company for Mr. Kuok's hotels in China and Hong Kong, has traded as high as $12.30 Hong Kong dollars (US$1.59) a share since its offering in June at $4.90.
The company, 59%-owned by the family-controlled Kuok Group, is expected to report in March that net income surged about 70% in 1993.
Analysts see further sharp gains in the next few years for Shangri-La, which trades on Hong Kong's stock exchange.
Aides to Mr. Kuok say his hotel operations elsewhere in the Asian-Pacific region also are profitable and expanding, but his boldest ambitions are in China.
In December, Shangri-La issued US$259 million in convertible bonds to finance 11 projects in China, bringing the chain's hotel portfolio there to at least 18 by 1998.
However, "these hotels are just a drop in the bucket," said Pho Ba Quan, Shangri-La's chairman.
"Mr. Kuok has said he wants to build 100 hotels in his lifetime in China."
Mr. Kuok, 70 years old, is aiming high.
Shangri-La, created a decade ago, rivals such long-established Asian luxury-hotel chains as Mandarin Oriental International Ltd. and Hongkong & Shanghai Hotels Ltd.
It has expanded aggressively in both China and the Philippines in recent years, while some other Asian chains played it safe by investing in U.S. and European properties.
Mr. Kuok's biggest venture in China dates to 1984, when he agreed to build China World Trade Centre in Beijing, a US$510 million hotel, apartment and commercial complex.
During the suppression in 1989 of Chinese pro-democracy demonstrations, several windows of the complex were shattered.
The crackdown sent many investors and tourists scurrying.
But Mr. Kuok "continued to invest in the dark days," said Nick Peacock, head of investment research at Schroders Asia Ltd.
Today many companies would like to invest there, he said, "but you can't just walk into China."
Mr. Kuok has an edge because few can match his contacts.
Those connections -- cultivated through his interests in commodities, shipping, media and hotels -- help him obtain choice sites and joint-venture partners, industry executives say.
Meanwhile, Mandarin Oriental and Hongkong & Shanghai Hotels are still searching for opportunities in China.
A decade ago, Hongkong & Shanghai had a lead.
In 1982, it became the first international hotel company to manage a joint-venture hotel in China, taking on the Jianguo Hotel, Beijing.
But it relinquished management in 1987 -- and that of the Garden Hotel, Guangzhou, in 1990 -- because contracts expired.
Currently, the firm operates only one hotel in China, the Palace in Beijing, in which it has a 20% stake.
It pulled out of the 647-room Portman Hotel, part of the Shanghai Centre commercial and residential project, in 1990 after nearly four years of involvement, citing "an honest divergence of philosophy."
Shangri-La International Ltd., the Kuok Group's hotel-management company, stepped into the breach, taking over management of the Portman.
(Shangri-La Asia acquired a 20% stake in the entire complex in December 1992.)
Now the Portman Shangri-La, with adjoining apartments and commercial space, is one of Shangri-La Asia's most profitable operations in China.
The costs of expanding in China led to losses in 1990 and 1991 at Shangri-La Asia, but the company recorded 1992 profit of HK$222.4 million (US$28.8 million).
For 1993, the company has said it expects earnings of at least HK$365 million.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd (Asia) Ltd. forecasts that growth will average 30% annually this year and next.
Mr. Kuok also moved into the Philippines even as turmoil there made other investors skittish.
In 1989, Kuok Group interests and Kuok Philippine Properties Inc., which is listed locally, began the US$63 million Edsa Plaza Hotel in Manila and clinched financing to build the US$118 million Shangri-La Manila.
International Finance Corp., a World Bank affiliate, made a US$20 million loan to the Shangri-La Manila project and led a syndication to raise another US$30 million in commercial-bank loans.
It also assisted other projects.
The investments apparently are paying off.
Occupancy at the 703-room Shangri-La Manila has hovered at 70% to 80% since its April opening.
Despite his eagerness to expand the chain, Mr. Kuok has backed away from some deals.
In 1987, aides say, he pulled out of a project in Seoul, South Korea, because of what he saw as fickle behavior on the part of the joint-venture partner.
In 1992, he decided not to proceed with two projects in Beijing for similar reasons.
"If it doesn't feel right, he'll just walk away from it," said James Kaplan, a Hong Kong-based hotel consultant.
Shangri-La also has stuck with a policy of charging premium room rates.
The cheapest published rate is US$170 at the Portman Shangri-La and US$275 at the Island Shangri-La in Hong Kong, though there are seasonal and corporate discounts.
When Mr. Quan met fund managers in Europe and the U.S. recently, he says they were surprised to hear that the weak economies there have "hardly had any impact on us."
Asian travelers account for more than half the chain's clientele and are often bigger spenders than Western customers.
While a Westerner might dine alone at the hotel coffee shop, Mr. Quan said, "the Asian guy will invite his friends and business colleagues and have a big Chinese dinner, drinking expensive cognac instead of beer."
But Randolph Guthrie, former managing director of Shangri-La International, which manages the chain's hotels, worries that service might be suffering as the chain balloons.
Mr. Guthrie, now managing director of Forte Grand Hotels in Britain, said he left Shangri-La in March after 10 years because he was at odds with a new "more practical approach" to running the hotels.
Mr. Guthrie, who calls Mr. Kuok "a visionary and an absolute genius," recalled that the tycoon used to inspect the decor of guest rooms and the food in hotel kitchens.
But Mr. Guthrie said that in recent years Mr. Kuok increasingly left day-to-day operations to financial wizards rather than innkeepers.
However, a Shangri-La official rejected that idea.
"I certainly don't think the standards have slipped," he sniffed, adding that Mr. Kuok has "the ability to remain involved and delegate at the same time."
